NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCIAL PATENTING IN EUROPE
Bronwyn H. Hall
Grid Thoma
Salvatore Torrisi
Working Paper 14714
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14714

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2009

We are very grateful to Dietmar Harhoff for providing us with updated EPO patent data for this revision
of the paper. The paper has also benefited considerably from comments by John Duffy, Dietmar Harhoff,
Robert Hunt, Anne Layne-Farrar, Jonathan Squires, Otto Toivanen, participants in the Bank of Finland-CEPR
Conference in Helsinki (October 2008) and the AEA Conference in Tokyo (December 2008). The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Bronwyn H. Hall, Grid Thoma, and Salvatore Torrisi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Patenting in Europe
Bronwyn H. Hall, Grid Thoma, and Salvatore Torrisi
NBER Working Paper No. 14714
February 2009, Revised November 2009
JEL No. G20,L86,O31,O34
ABSTRACT
We take a first look at financial patents at the European Patent Office (EPO). As is the case at the US
Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), the number of financial patents in Europe has increased significantly
in parallel with significant changes in payment and financial systems. Scholars have argued that financial
patents, like other business methods patents, have low value and are owned for strategic reasons rather
than for protecting real inventions. We find that established firms in non-financial sectors with diversified
patent portfolios own a large share of financial patents at the EPO. However, new specialized technology
providers in the financial area also hold a number of such patents. Decisions on the financial patent
applications take longer and they are more likely to be refused by the patent office, suggesting greater
uncertainty over validity than for other patents. They are also more likely to be opposed, which is consistent
with the fact that their other economic value indicators are higher.

Bronwyn H. Hall
Dept. of Economics
549 Evans Hall
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
bhhall@nber.org
Grid Thoma
University of Camerino, Camerino and
CESPRI, Bocconi University
Via Sarfatti 25
20136
Milano, Italy
grid.thoma@unibocconi.it

Salvatore Torrisi
CESPRI, Bocconi University and
Department of Management
University of Bologna
Via Capo di Lucca 34
40126 Bologna, Italy
torrisi@unibo.it

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

Financial Patenting in Europe
1. Introduction
The advent and fast growth of the Internet economy has been accompanied by innovation
in traditional forms of financial payments. These changes have been propelled on the one hand
by the emergence of new commercial relations conveyed through the Internet which require new
and secure modes of payments – e.g. digital market places and e-commerce. On the other hand,
traditional markets and industries have experienced the diffusion of new business practices
within their procurement and marketing activities (Tufano, 2003; Lerner, 2004).
The potential benign impact of innovation in the payment and financial systems is very
high and extends well beyond the banking sector. It is worth remembering that changes in the
short term payment and financial systems were at the base – among others – of the commercial
revolution in Europe during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries (Rosenberg and Birdzell, 1986).
The relationship between the development of an economy’s financial structure - financial
instruments, markets and institutions - and economic growth in the modern economy is well
documented in the literature (Levine, 1997). More recently, scholars have suggested that
innovation in payment and financial systems has some of the features of a General Purpose
Technology (GPT) (Hall, 2007). GPTs are technologies characterized by use in a wide range of
sectors, the need for complementary investment when adopted, and scope for productivity
enhancement in diverse sectors of the economy, leading to increasing returns on both the supply
and demand side (Bresnahan and Trajtenberg, 1995).
Here as in most areas, the strengthening of patent coverage can have both positive and
negative effects. On the one hand, it can increase the incentive to devote resources to inventive
activity. On the other hand, it may discourage or raise the cost of combining and recombining of
inventions to make new products and processes, in particular in cumulative innovations such as
GPTs and technologies that are part of a standard setting process (see, among others, Scotchmer,
1996; Cohen and Lemley, 2002; Lemley, 2007). These considerations are of particular relevance
for financial patents and software and business methods in general (Hall, 2003), due to the
importance of standards for technologies enabling web-based interactions and financial
transactions, whether conducted via the web or over other telecommunications networks.
2

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

Patenting in this area has increased significantly in the last two decades. According to
evidence documented by Hall (2007), 5,393 patents were issued by the United States Patent and
Trademark Office (USPTO) in Class 705 (Data Processing: Financial, Business Practice,
Management, or Cost/Price Determination) during the decade 1995-2004, corresponding to
approximately 2,918 patentees. Patenting in this class accelerated after the key decisions taken
by the Courts of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (CAFC) in 1998 which removed most of the
exceptions to the patentability of software and other business methods ‘as such’, that is, methods
that are independent of a particular physical embodiment (State Street v. Signature Financial
Group 1998, ATT v. Excel Communications 1998). Such patents have proved particularly
contentious and subject to litigation, especially those related to financial innovations. For
example, Lerner (2006) reported a litigation rate on financial patents twenty-seven times larger
than the rate found by Lanjouw and Schankerman (2001) for a sample of all patents.
Even in the U.S., the question of exactly what types of software or business methods may
be patented remains controversial. Recently, prompted by a series of Supreme Court decisions,
the CAFC decided to reconsider the question of patentable subject matter by scheduling an en
banc hearing (before all judges of the Court) to consider an appeal in re Bilski.1 A decision
issued on October 30, 2008. This decision is viewed as restricting business method and financial
patenting at the USPTO to some extent (Managing Intellectual Property, 31 October 2008). In
particular, the court found that if an invention relates to a "pure" business method that is not
limited to performance on a computer and produces only abstract results such as manipulation of
documents, information, or data, it is not patentable subject matter. Moreover the USPTO has
already issued clarifying guidelines with respect to business methods (May 15, 2008) and a
reform of the patent system is debated at the US Congress.
At the EPO the treatment of software and intangible business methods is different, with
these inventions excluded “as such” from patentable subject matter according to the European
Patent Convention (Article 52). Nevertheless, when we analyzed a large dataset of EPO patents,
we found an increasing number of what appeared to be software-related patents during the 1990s

1

Bernard Bilski’s patent application for an invention relating to a method for hedging commodity price risk
was rejected by the USPTO as relating to an abstract idea without practical application. The applicants have then
appealed to the CAFC.

3

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

(Hall, Thoma and Torrisi, 2007). This suggests that, despite the different legal environment,
barriers to patenting on software and intangible business methods may have fallen somewhat in
Europe as well. This process has been reinforced by some conflicting decisions at the various
national European courts and the European Court of Justice. An attempt to clarify EPO practice
is currently underway (Managing Intellectual Property, 24 October 2008).
Another notable difference between the two patent systems, US and European, concerns
the process for post-grant validity challenges. The US system has two main ways to challenge
validity: ex-parte re-examination available to anyone, and litigation over validity, which can only
be initiated by a party that has been accused of infringement.2 The EPO system relies on an inter
partes opposition system which allows third parties to actively provide evidence of prior art that
may have been missed during the examination process. Oppositions can be filed by any party at
the EPO within 9 months after the patent is granted; in practice they are generally filed on the
last eligible day. The input provided by third-party oppositions complement the pre-grant search
process conducted by the EPO, especially in new subject matter areas such as software and
business methods, where information on prior art is not easily accessible to patent examiners
(Janis, 1997; Hall, 2003). As in the U.S., opposition may or may not be followed by litigation,
but in this case, the jurisdiction shifts to national courts rather than being European-wide, which
makes it a somewhat less attractive option for invalidating a patent.
In the USPTO context the heterogeneity of the actors involved in financial patents can be
seen along a number of dimensions (Hall 2007). About 20 per cent of the patentees are alliances
or R&D consortia of financial firms, suggesting the importance of the standards setting process
in payment and financial systems. Other patentees are older and larger firms active in nonfinancial and non-software sectors such as oil and gas or machinery. Newer patentees are
typically small firms and only three of them – E-Trade, eBay, and Verisign – have more than one
billion dollars of revenue annually by 2005. Another dimension of heterogeneity is the
importance of financial patents relatively to the overall portfolio of the patentee: only 0.7% of
patents in this class are granted to firms that specialize in financial patenting, whereas the
remaining patents are held by large patentees that operate in a number of other sectors such as

2

There is also an inter-partes re-examination system that was introduced in 1999, but until very recently, it
has been rarely used.

4

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

Exxon Mobil, Chevron, NCR, Lockheed Martin, Diebold, etc. This picture is quite similar to that
of software-related patents, a large proportion of which are held by non-software firms. The
small share of patents held by financial institutions in the US is at odds with the importance of
these institutions in the creation of financial innovations (Tufano, 2003). Moreover, patent
holding firms specialized in licensing and litigating patent awards are the most frequent plaintiffs
in patent litigations whereas financial innovators (investment banks, trading exchanges and other
financial institutions) are mostly involved as defendants (Lerner, 2006).
Based on this body of evidence, scholars have raised concern about the growing number
of financial and business method patents whose average quality is considered low because of the
limited examination capacity of the US patent office, the lack of prior art databases (both patent
and non-patent literature), and a declining severity of the non-obviousness test in court decisions.
Several authors have then suggested that the standard of patentability should be raised especially
in subject matters like software and business methods (Barton, 2000; Dreyfuss, 2001; Lunney,
2001; Bessen and Meurer, 2008; Hall, 2007). The CAFC decision in light of the Bilski case and
the USPTO clarifying guidelines with respect to business methods may prelude to future
potential changes in the patenting rules which add further uncertainty to the uncertainty arising
from the ambiguous claims and unclear definition of the boundaries of financial patents and
other business method patents. This ambiguity may slowdown the investments on innovation
because of hold-up problems that are especially important in the case of sequential innovations, a
high risk of involuntary infringement and high litigation costs (Hunt, 2008; Bessen and Meurer,
2008).
Following on the results for the U.S., in this paper we look at the ways in which firms in
Europe are dealing with the increase of financial patenting, given the differences they face in
patentability in their home markets. The differences between US and European patenting
systems – such as (possibly) more thorough search of prior art, the exclusion of software and
business methods ‘as such’ from the patentable subject matter, and the opposition system – offer
a fertile ground for examining the ways in which firm patenting strategy reacts to different
institutional incentives.
In this context, the following exploratory questions drive our empirical research.

5

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

1. How can we define financial patents at the EPO and how many are issued, given the
definition?
2. Which firms obtain financial patents? What are their characteristics - sector, size, age,
listed vs. non listed, the size of their patent portfolio?
3. Do non-financial firms own a large share of these patents, as in the United States?
4. How do financial patents differ from other patents in their scope, citation of patent and
non-patent literature, forward and backward citations, family size, and other
characteristics?
5. Are European firms patenting financial innovations at the USPTO? How many also
succeed at the EPO? That is, what is the pattern of equivalents?
Our paper contributes to the literature on the economics and management of patents in
ways discussed below. First, while a growing body of evidence has focused on business method
patents in the US system, the analysis of business methods patents in Europe is still in its infancy
(e.g., Wagner, 2008). Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to focus on
financial patents in the European context. Looking at financial patenting in particular is
important because business methods encompass a highly heterogeneous set of technological and
‘intellectual’ innovations. When aggregating such different types of innovations one runs the risk
of overlooking important peculiarities of innovation and patenting strategy in the financial
sector.
Second, the patent literature distinguishes between patent quality and economic value or
importance of patents. Patent quality refers to the statutory definition of a patentable invention –
novelty, non-obviousness and usefulness (or the production of a technical effect). Moreover, to
be patentable an application must disclose sufficient information about the invention. The
economic value of a patent depends on the expected profits accruing to its owner. Earlier studies
have found that litigation and opposition are correlated with various indicators of patent value or
importance (Harhoff et al., 2003; Lerner, 2006; Harhoff and Reitzig, 2004). Therefore, we
estimate probit models for the probability of a decision by the EPO conditional on an application,
a grant conditional on a decision, and an oppositions conditional on a grant that are similar to
those in the literature, but focusing on our sample of financial patents.

6

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the background literature and sets
out some research hypotheses. Section 3 describes the data while Section 4 reports the results of
the empirical analysis that compares financial patents to other patents and Section 5 presents an
analysis of the outcomes at the EPO for financial patent applications. Section 6 concludes.

2. Background and hypotheses
To understand the quality and value of financial patents we need to clarify the
peculiarities of financial innovations and to link these peculiarities to the economics of patenting.
The main social function of the patent system is to increase private incentives for innovation by
granting temporary monopoly power to inventors. In return for exclusivity, the patent owner is
required to make the invention public rather than keeping it secret. In principle then the potential
negative consequences for efficiency in the market for products due to the temporary monopoly
are counterbalanced by the disclosure of information about the innovation.
Thus in theory the patent system yields several social benefits: providing greater
incentives for R&D and diffusion of innovation, reducing the entry barriers faced by innovative
startups with limited complementary assets, and increasing the efficiency in the market for
intellectual property (Arora, Fosfuri, and Gambardella, 2001 and 2007). There are corresponding
social costs in the form of the transactional and other costs patents may impose on those who
wish to build on earlier inventions or combine several together in a new innovation. This
problem is particularly important in technological areas characterized by cumulative, sequential
innovations (Hall, 2003, among others). Moreover, patents favour an excessive fragmentation of
intellectual property and increasing transaction costs due to enforcement and litigation (Heller
and Eisenberg, 1998; Ziedonis, 2004). Finally, in industries characterized by strong network
externalities and the requirements for standards, patents reinforce the monopoly power of the
winners and may reduce future innovation.
The extension of patent coverage to business methods and software in the US system has
raised concern that the imbalance between the benefits and costs of the patent system may be
unfavourable in this technological area. “If it has been a policy experiment, could we determine
today that it was successful? Probably not” (Hunt, 2008: 1). One may ask, however, whether the
alleged imbalance between costs and benefits of patents is specific to this particular technology.

7

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

To help to answer this question with reference to financial patents we have to note some
important differences between innovation in financial services and manufacturing.
First, historically legal protection of financial innovations has been particularly weak
relative to manufacturing. Trade secret has been the primary legal instrument to protect financial
innovations but, unlike software, the use of trade secrets has become more difficult over time
because the regulation of the financial sector has required a rising level of product and process
transparency (Duffy and Squires, 2008). Moreover, financial institutions are subject to detailed
scrutiny by public regulatory agencies and this may distract resources from innovation,
especially for younger, small financial firms (Lerner, 2004). The weak appropriability regime
and the use of the internet favour a rapid diffusion and imitation of financial innovations by
competitors. This weakens the incentives for innovation especially in sectors like insurance
where innovators bear the costs of developing a new product and obtaining the regulatory
approvals but cannot prevent competitors from imitating its innovations very quickly (Hunt,
2008). In general, however, the lack of legal protection has not prevented the introduction of
important product innovations (such as a multitude of financial instruments) and process
innovations (such as trading platforms and pricing algorithms) in the financial industry, similar
to the situation in the software industry prior to 1994/1995 (Torrisi 1998). The history of this
industry clearly shows that ‘the creation of new financial products and processes has been an
ongoing part of economies for at least the past four centuries, if not longer.’ (Tufano, 1989: 312).
Second, financial services are characterized by network externalities and strong demands
for standardization. For instance, for financial exchanges and payment cards both attractiveness
and efficiency (cost) depend on the number of users of the service. In other financial services,
such as paper checks and automated clearinghouses, network externalities arise from
interoperability, which is achieved by standard setting (e.g., standardized message formats).
Standardization and compatibility between products typically give rise to strong market power
for the owner of the standard. Patents can reinforce network effects and induce the accumulation
of large patent portfolios for cross licensing purposes. In turn, this raises entry barriers and may
hamper innovative entrants. Many financial innovations also require collaboration among
financial institutions, for example, in syndications of innovative securities or standard setting for
secure communication and transaction exchanges, implying a need to share access to patented
inventions. In financial markets an innovator’s success often relies on the existence of different
8

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

versions of the innovation developed by competitors. These derivative, complementary
innovations are important to “share the risk, increase market depth, liquidity, and price
transparency” (Kumar and Turnbull, 2008: 2013). By patenting an innovation with a high
potential for sequential innovations, a first-mover then can hamper market growth. Patents may
hinder competitors from investing in co-specialized assets because of the hold-up risk (Kumar
and Turnbull, 2008). By the same token, financial innovators who bear significant up-front costs
to develop co-inventions compatible with an industry standard may be discouraged by the cost of
licensing in the necessary patents. In the case of litigation for patent infringement with a patentholding company, the innovator finds it necessary to settle at relatively high cost because of their
sunk R&D costs and the costs of abandoning a standard that is already established. Litigation
risk can therefore reduce investment in new standards (Hunt, 2008).
Finally, financial patents, like other business method patents, are often characterized by
high uncertainty about enforceability. This is due to a number of factors. First is the absence of
good non-patent prior art databases. Prior to the State Street v. Signature Financial decision in
1998 business method patent applications were very rare at the USPTO, so that there was little
prior art on financial methods in the patent databases. In addition, most business method
inventions have a practical nature and can be realized without much written documentation or are
simply a known and used process transferred to the internet (Hunt, 2001; Wagner, 2008).
Another reason for uncertainty arises from the use of ambiguous claims in patent applications
which make it difficult to determine the boundaries of property rights for business methods and
financial innovations. The importance of this problem for business method patents in general is
emphasized by the fact that appeals over claims definition in this area are over six times more
likely to occur compared with patents in general (Bessen and Meurer, 2008). Uncertainty over
patent validity reduces the incentives to invest in innovation for both the patent holder and for
the developers of competing inventions. These effects are strengthened in the presence of
cumulative innovation like that in software and financial services. The inventors of subsequent,
cumulative inventions may be discouraged by previous inventions that are covered by patents of
uncertain validity - because they are obvious or have an indeterminate breadth.
This theoretical and empirical literature overall does not provide clear-cut evidence about
the quality and economic importance of financial patents. However, various scholars have raised
concerns about the lowering of barriers to business method and financial patents in the US
9

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

institutional context. We wonder whether the evolution of the US patent system has produced
any substantial effects on the application and granting of financial patents at the EPO, although
the differences between the two systems remain significant. More precisely, our critical review
of the literature on financial patents leads to a set of testable hypotheses that we present below.
The literature suggests that compared with other patents, financial patents are
characterized by a higher level of uncertainty arising from the difficulty of establishing the
novelty of financial inventions relative to prior art and the ambiguity of their claims. This
uncertainty should affect both the application process and the post-grant litigation. An additional
source of uncertainty for financial patent applications filed at the EPO arises from art. 52 of the
EPC which excludes business methods and software ‘as such’ from patentable subject matters.
Examination of financial patents at the EPO then is likely to be particularly complex since
examiners have to distinguish pure business methods, which are not patentable, from patentable
financial inventions. We expect then the likelihood that we observe a larger grant lag or a
rejection is larger for a financial patent than for another patent with identical quality or value
characteristics, such as the number of citations received by other patents. These considerations
lead to the following two hypotheses:
Hypothesis 1a. Ceteris paribus, financial patent applications should have longer
decision lags than patent applications in other technological areas.
Hypothesis 1b. Ceteris paribus, financial patent applications should have a lower
probability of grant than patent applications in other technological areas.
The literature also suggests that the extension of patent coverage to subject matter where
patents are difficult to define and to enforce gives rise to large litigation costs. Previous empirical
evidence based on US patents suggests that financial patents, like other business method patents,
are a case in point (Lerner, 2006). As mentioned before, the opposition system at the EPO is an
important instrument for first-instance challenges to the validity of granted patents. As Harhoff
and Reitzig (2004) have noted, this instrument offers a ‘fast and inexpensive resolution of legal
disputes’ (p. 445).3 Working on patents data in biotech and pharmaceuticals, Harhoff and Reitzig
have found that opposition rates are particularly high in new technical areas, such as special
areas of biotechnology (p. 457). Their results are in line with the predictions of the theory of
3

Harhoff and Reitzig (2004) estimate that an opposition case typically costs each party between 15 and 25
thousand euros – only a very small part of which is accounted for by opposition fees (p. 450).

10

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

legal disputes and settlement (see Cooter and Rubinfeld, 1989 for a survey). Looking at the
oppositions filed to the EPO we ask whether the probability that a financial patent is opposed is
larger than the probability for non-financial patents of similar quality or value. The uncertainty
and claim ambiguity that characterize business method patents in general and the limitations to
patentability of business methods “as such” in Europe suggest that financial patents that have
been granted should be litigated more often than other patents. More precisely, we test the
following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 2. Ceteris paribus, the probability that a financial patent is opposed is
greater than that for patents in other technological areas.

Thus far we have focused on the differences between financial patents and other patents,
controlling for the quality or importance of patents. One may also ask, however, whether and
how quality affects the examination outcome and the post-grant opposition probability in the
case of financial patents.
Various studies have demonstrated that the outcome of the examination process (grant,
refusal to issue, or withdrawal by the applicant) is only an imperfect measure of the quality or
economic importance of a patent (e.g., Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2004b; Hall, Jaffe and
Trajtenberg, 2005). And, as discussed before, several scholars have cast doubt on the quality of
financial patents granted by the USPTO.4 To better understand financial patenting at the EPO we
need to look at more precise indicators of quality and importance of patents. Earlier studies have
proposed several measures such as the number of inventors, the number of backward and
forward citations, the number of claims and family size or the number of patent systems
worldwide where patent protection is sought for the same invention. The empirical evidence
shows that all these indicators, to various degrees, are associated with the importance or
economic value of patents (e.g., Harhoff et al. 1999; Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg, 2005; Lerner,
1994). Other studies have also found that a linear combination of these indicators can serve as a

4

The term patent quality does not have a universally accepted definition, but we use it to mean an
application that is more likely to satisfy the novelty, non-obviousness, and subject matter restrictions, and whose
validity and ability to withstand subsequent challenges is therefore more certain (see Hall 2003 for a discussion).

11

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

proxy for the economic value of patents (Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2004b; Hall, Thoma and
Torrisi, 2007; Gambardella, Harhoff and Verspagen, 2008).
Finding measures of patent “quality” is somewhat more difficult. For example, references
to prior patent art (backward citations) can be a somewhat ambiguous such measure. Some
scholars have suggested that large numbers of citations to others reveal that a particular invention
is likely to be more derivative in nature and, therefore, of limited importance (Lanjouw and
Schankerman 2004a). However, a large number of backward citations may also indicate a novel
combination of existing ideas. This is probably the reason why Harhoff et al. (1999) have found
that backward citations are positively correlated with patent value. A more precise indicator is
provided by the number of X-type and Y-type citations that are references to prior art potentially
challenging the novelty claims of the patent.5
The lack of documented prior art and the uncertainty surrounding financial patents may
make it difficult for EPO examiners to identify patents which provide a significant, non-obvious
contribution to prior art. This suggests the possibility that financial patents may be granted that
are of low quality (lack novelty or are obvious). Such patents are also likely to be of low value,
social or economic. We expect that, despite the difficulties mentioned before, the traditional
severity of the EPO examination system (see, e.g., Quillen, Webster, and Eichmann, 2002) and
the EPC restrictions on business method patentability help patent examiners to distinguish
important patents (e.g., patents that will receive many citations), from patents that provide a
modest contribution to prior art (e.g., the patent cites prior art potentially challenging its novelty
claims).6 Moreover, we expect that the number of claims, a proxy for patent complexity (Harhoff
and Reitzig, 2004), will slow the patent office decision and reduce the likelihood of grant. These
considerations lead to the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 3. Ceteris paribus, financial patents are less likely to be granted if
they have fewer citations received, contain a large number of claims, or have
several overlapping claims with earlier patents (many XY-type backward
citations).
5

It is important to note that at the EPO, references to the patent and non-patent literature (scientific
publications) are assigned by the examiner, not by the applicant. X-type citations refer to patents containing claims
that overlap with claims in the patent under examination. Y-type citations refer to patent applications containing
claims that combined with other claims overlap with claims in the patent examined.
6

That is, the patent has backward citations classified as X-type or Y-type by the EPO.

12

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

Our final hypothesis concerns the probability that a financial patent will be challenged by
an opposer after it is issued. The theory of legal disputes suggests that patent oppositions are
likely to occur under conditions of high uncertainty and imperfect information. This is one
reason why we expect that the complexity and problematic enforceability of financial patents
relative to other patents make them more likely to be opposed.7 However, the theory of legal
disputes and their resolutions also argues that valuable patents will be litigated more frequently
because there is more at stake (Cooter and Rubinfeld, 1989 for a survey).
Empirical studies on US patents (Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2001, 2004a,b), US
financial patents (Lerner, 2006) and EPO patents in biotech and pharmaceuticals (Harhoff and
Reitzig, 2004) have found evidence on the association between the value of patents and
litigation. All of these studies found that citations received (a proxy for value) are positively
associated with litigation. However the findings using backward citations (a proxy for the quality
of disclosure or for the crowdedness of the technological space) vary considerably. Lanjouw and
Schankerman (2004a) finds that backward citations per claim are negatively associated with
litigation probability, whereas Lanjouw and Schankerman (2004b) finds that other value
measures are positively correlated with litigation. However, Lerner (2006) found that backward
citations in financial patents are positively associated with litigation. Harhoff and Reitzig (2004)
provide a potential resolution of this conundrum using EPO patents, where it is possible to
distinguish among the types of citations made. They found that it is the citations to patent
literature that potentially challenge the novelty claims of the patent (X-type citations) and not the
other backward citations which predict opposition. This finding suggests that more incremental
(less valuable) patents or patents with a technologically close competitor are more likely to be
opposed
The probability of litigation in the US has also been found to increase with the number of
claims both for all patents (Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2004a) and for financial patents (Lerner,
2006). The economic interpretation of claims is quite controversial. It is unclear whether they are
a measure of patent complexity (Harhoff and Reitzig, 2004) or a proxy for potential profitability

7

Later in the paper we do find that the opposition probability for financial patents is significantly higher
than that for other patents (9 per cent versus 6.5 per cent, without correcting for the overall decline in opposition
probability during the period; the correction would increase the difference slightly).

13

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

(Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2004b), or, most likely, a combination of both. In any case, we
expect the number of claims to be related to opposition.
Finally, the potential economic value of an invention will determine the applicant’s
willingness to file for a patent in multiple jurisdictions, because doing so involves substantial
expenditure (not just the patent office fees, but also the costs of attorneys, translation fees, etc.).
For this reason, and beginning with the work of Putnam (1996), the number of patent
applications that share the same priority date as the patent in question (the family size) is a
frequently used proxy for patent value (Harhoff, Scherer and Vopel, 2003; Harhoff and Reitzig,
2004).
These considerations lead to the following two hypotheses:
Hypothesis 4a. Ceteris paribus, more valuable financial patents (that is, those
with more forward citations or a larger family size) are more likely to be opposed.
Hypothesis 4b. Ceteris paribus, more controversial financial patents (those with
more claims or more XY-type backward citations) are more likely to be opposed.
The above concludes the presentation of our hypotheses. In order to test them, we need to
identify financial patent applications at the EPO, and a corresponding sample of non-financial
patents for comparison. This task is described in the next section of the paper.

3. Data
3.1

Defining Financial Patents
As in the case of software or business method patents (Hall and MacGarvie 2007; Hall,

Thoma and Torrisi, 2007; Hall 2003; Bakels et al. 2008), identifying financial patents precisely
(with no Type I or II error) is difficult. To some extent, the difficulty lies in the fact that we do
not have a precise definition of what we mean by a financial patent, although we are fairly sure
we can tell one when we see it. The most important IPCs in which the patents we identify as
financial may be found are described as “complete banking systems,” “mechanisms activated by
other than coins …..to actuate vending, etc ….by credit card,” “office automation or
reservations,” “finance, e.g., banking, etc.”, “payment schemes,” but also by more generic terms
such as “Digital computing or data processing equipment.” Many, but not all, of these patents are
associated with payment systems, cash machines, or vending machines, but some are more

14

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

related to innovation in financial instruments. As can be seen in Appendix A, we found it
essential to use keywords to restrict any set of patents identified using simply technology classes.
Duffy and Squires (2008) have examined a sample of recently granted USPTO patents
classified in the USPC class 705/35.8 They found that only a few of these patents are about
sophisticated trading mechanisms, valuation metrics or innovative financial products. The
innovations described are all relevant to the financial industry but they are not pure financial
innovations. Moreover, among the patents closely connected with finance, only a few disclosed
‘cutting edge financial engineering … cognizable as a significant development in financial
theory’ (Duffy and Squires, 2008: 26). Their evidence suggests that it may be important to
develop robust definitions to identify financial patents in the US and European patent offices.
We begin such an exploration here, but are aware that there is room for further work in this area.
Our investigation explores three different methods of choosing such patents: A) EPO
equivalents of USPTO patents in certain finance-related class/subclass combinations;9 B) EPO
patents in a set of IPC/ECLA finance-related classifications; and C) EPO patents in technology
classes where “pure play” financial firms patent. Financial patents at the EPO seem to be
scattered among a large number of classes and there was relatively little overlap across the three
sets. Therefore we used the union of the three sets as our definition, but at the same time we
restricted the sample to those with one of eight specific keywords in the title or abstract:
transaction, financial, credit, payment, money, debit card, portfolio, and wallet. After dropping a
few observations due to missing applicant information, this yielded a sample of 3,298 patents
with priority year between 1978 and 2005, about 4 per cent of the initial 87,719 patents in the
union of sets A, B, and C. The details of the patent selection algorithm are given in the appendix
A.
The analysis in the next section of the paper is based on a comparison of financial patents
with all other patents. To form the comparison group of all patents we took a random one per
cent sample of the EPO database (excluding financial patents), obtaining 18,523 patents. The

8
Class 705 is “Data processing: financial, business practice, management, or cost/price determination” and
subclass 35 is “Finance (e.g., banking, investment or credit)”.
9

Although this clearly biases the selection toward firms operating in the United States, because we use the
union of this criterion with the other two (Sets B and C), we expect the bias to be small.

15

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

relatively large size of the sample ensured that the sampling variability of the comparison group
was rather small.

3.2

Variable definitions
Outcome of the examination process - Patent applications are subject to an examination

process that can lead to the following outcomes: refusal of the application, withdrawal of the
application or a patent grant. Knowing whether a decision has been reached for a patent
application provides useful information about the complexity and uncertainty of the examination
process. The literature often refers to the outcomes of patent applications at the EPO (refusal,
grant, and withdrawal) as indicators of patent quality or eligibility of a financial invention for
patenting. In addition, applicant practice is often to withdraw an application when it becomes
clear that it will be rejected, so the distinction between refusal and withdrawal is blurred
(Lazaridis and van Pottelsberghe, 2007). We generated two dummy variables if a decision has
been taken and if a patent has been granted conditional on decision, respectively.
Opposition - Oppositions can be filed at the EPO within nine months from the granting
date and it is quite inexpensive compared to litigation in the courts. We constructed a binary
variable which takes the value 1 if a patent has been opposed.
Independent variables describing the prior art base
By prior art base, we mean the knowledge on which the invention described in the patent
relies, as indicated by the various types of citation to earlier patents and non-patent literature.
The variables analyzed are listed and described more precisely below.
-

Total cites to the non-patent literature in the patent document, which has been shown to
be related to the closeness to “science” and patent value (e.g., Meyer, 1999).

-

Total backward cites (to other patents) in the patent document. Contrasting evidence
exists regarding backward citations. On the one hand a higher number of citations may
indicate that the patent relies on a broader knowledge base and hence is more important;
on the other hand, it may suggest that the patent is more derivative in its nature or that it
is in a crowded technological area and so has narrow breadth.

16

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

-

January 2009

XY backward cites in the patent document. At the EPO the task of the examiner consists
not only in the identification of patent documents that can be considered prior art for a
given patent application, but also in the classification of the prior art patent(s) by degree
of importance to that patent application. The categories X and Y signal that at least one
claim of the patent application overlaps completely or partially with at least one claim of
the prior art patent(s).

-

XY backward cites per inventor.

-

The average age of the backward citations (citation lags) in months, an indicator of the
rate of technical change in the area of the invention.

Independent variables related to patent “value” or “importance”
-

Family size (the number of patents internationally that share the same priority). Economic
value is related to the willingness of the patentee to pay the various fees involved in
taking out a patent on the same invention in multiple jurisdictions.

-

Number of designated states for the patent at the EPO (the number of EPC nation-states
in which the applicant can request coverage when the patent issues).

-

PCT route. This is a dummy that signals whether the applicant has filed an international
application to extend patent protection beyond the EPC member states.

-

Number of technology classes (IPCs) in which the patent was classified by the EPO; this
is often considered a measure of breadth or scope. The number of technological classes
has been shown to be an indicator of technological “quality” similar to the number of
citations by Lerner (1994). However, as noted by Guellec and Pottelsberghe de la Potterie
(2000), this variable may be also a measure of ambiguity reflecting the difficulty of the
examiner in locating the invention in the technological space.

-

The number of forward cites received by the patent or its equivalents during the first three
years (from PATSTAT). This is a measure of the technological importance of the
innovation.

-

A continuation dummy if the patent had at least one divisional at the EPO that shared the
same priority; because divisionals occur when a patent describes more than one
invention, this may also be an indicator of a broader or more valuable patent.
17

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

-

January 2009

A composite value index based on family size, forward citations and the number of IPC
classes at the 8-digit level, described in Hall, Thoma and Torrisi (2007). They show that
this composite index is associated with firm market value after controlling for several
other variables in a sample representing about 1000 largest R&D doers among European
publicly listed firms.10

Independent variables describing the patent owner
Variables accounting for the characteristics of the patent owner have been used in the
analysis of opposition. The following set of variables has been taken into account.
-

Log stock of EP patents of the patentee (depreciated at 15% annual rate) – a proxy for the
experience of the patentee.

-

Log stock of forward cites per patent of the patentee. This variable is obtained by
dividing EP patent citations received (first three years only, depreciated at 15% annual
rate) by the stock of patents depreciated at same annual rate - a measure of the average
value of the patentee’s inventions.

-

Log stock of XY backward citations by EP patents of the patentee (depreciated at 15%
annual rate) – a proxy for the absence of inventive step in prior inventions, or for
operating in a crowded technological field.

-

For firm size we used three categories defined by the European Network for SME
research (ENSR) of the EC SME observatory (see Table 1).

-

Age of the patentee (dummies for firms that were founded between 1981 and 1995, and
after 1995, with those founded prior to 1981 the left-out category). Preliminary
explorations showed including a more detailed set of dummies lowered precision but did
not change the results.

-

Sector of the patentee (dummies for the 6 leading sectors plus the remainder in the leftout category).

10

The index draws on a methodology first developed by Lanjouw and Schankerman (2004b).

18

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

-

January 2009

Country of the patentee (5 dummies for US, Japan, Germany, France, and the UK, with
the remaining countries as the left-out category).

4. Trends and descriptive statistics
The trends of aggregate and financial methods patenting at the USPTO and EPO are
displayed in Figures 1 and 2 respectively. Figure 1 shows aggregate EPO grants and applications
and USPTO patent grants (all by priority year), while Figure 2 shows the trends in financial
methods patenting at the two agencies.11 Note that prior to about 1991 or 1992 the trends in all
patents and financial patents are very similar. The growth of EP financial patenting follows the
growth of US financial patents closely, although the latter set accelerates more rapidly in 1999
and 2000 and decelerates more quickly after that.
Relative to overall patenting activity, financial patents show a very rapid growth in the
years 1994 and 1995, which are the years of the main software patentability decisions in the
U.S., and also the years during which use of the internet took off in that country. Both in the
EPO and USPTO, by 2006 there were approximately three times as many patents as in 1991
overall, and six times as many financial patents. Even though the EPO subject matter restrictions
in the software and business method area are narrower than in the United States, the growth of
financial patents at the EPO doubtless reflects the impact of the State Street decision in the
United States in 1998 and the changing attitudes toward patenting among business services and
financial firms which that decision engendered.
[Figure 1 about here]
[Figure 2 about here]
Note also that at the end of the period (after about 2001), there is a substantial falling off
in all types of patents, due to the lag between priority year and publication (at the EPO) or grant
(at the USPTO). Nevertheless, there also appears to be real decline in the growth rate of patent

11

The precise definitions of the series shown are the following: All EP patents – patent grants and patent
applications to the EPO; all US patents - patent grants by the USPTO; EP financial patents – the union of sets A, B,
and C; EP business method patents - equivalents of US business method patents; US financial patents - the union of
the sets defined by Hall (2007) and Lerner (2006); US business methods patents – all USPTO patents having at least
one US patent class equal to 705 or 902 but excluding financial patents. All series are shown by priority year or
application year if the priority year is not available.

19

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

applications at both offices which is not accounted for by the grant lag. This trend may be only
partially due to a change in the application strategy after the Business Patent Initiative was
announced by the USPTO in year 2000. Since the aim of this initiative was to raise the
examination standards for patent applications in class 705, applicants may have tried to avoid
filing applications in this class by a careful choice of wording. However, this does not explain
the decline in the growth rate of total patent applications.
To illustrate the characteristics of the patentees who take out financial patents at the EPO,
we focus on the 90 per cent that are taken out by businesses.12 We look at the country of origin,
the business sector, and the size of firm. In our regression analysis we ask how these variables
are related to outcomes at the EPO. To save space, we relegate several tables to Appendix B and
summarize their results here.
Table B.1 shows that a large share of EP financial patents are filed by US applicants
(49% versus 34% for European patentees and 13% for Japanese patentees), with the surge from
the US beginning some 4-5 years earlier than that from the EU. Prior to 2000, applicants from
the US accounted for over half (57 per cent) of the financial patents at the EPO, and after 2000,
only 45 per cent. The overall decline in patenting and the shifting shares probably reflects two
things: the dotcom bust in 2001, which had a bigger impact in the United States, and the
diffusion of patenting activity in this area to European firms.
This distribution however remains clearly more asymmetric in favor of US applicants
than overall patenting activity or even patenting in Information and Communication
Technologies (ICT) at the EPO (see Patent Compendium, OECD 2008). The persistent large
share of US assignees probably reflects the differences in the treatment of financial and business
method patents between the US patent system and other systems. Another plausible explanation
is the high intensity of financial innovations in the US economy vis-à-vis other economies. For
comparison, we also show in Table B.2 the distribution of assignee country for financial patents

12

There are a total of 3,298 patents in our sample. Of these, 169 have more than one applicant (in a few
cases more than two). In the next section we include all the patents, but only once each, so the total number of
observations is 3,298. In this section we focus on those applicants that were in the business sector, excluding
individuals and government applicants, for a total number of observations equal to 2,998, corresponding to 2,934
patent documents, of which 52 have more than one applicant. Note that the 11 observations where the sector of the
applicant could not be identified were also removed from this sample.

20

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

filed at the USPTO, which is even more skewed towards to U.S. It also shows that most of the
patenting at this office is accounted for by applicants in the US, Japan and the EU. The share of
financial patents held by US patentees rose during the 1990s and then fell somewhat after that as
European applicants increased their share. About two-thirds of European-owned financial patents
come from the largest three countries, the UK, Germany, and France.
Table 1 in the text depicts the distribution of financial patents by the main activity of the
patentee. We used different sources to identify the main activity of the applicant, successfully
obtaining this information for almost all (99.7%) of the financial patents owned by businesses.13
There is a very high concentration of patents in a few sectors: in particular, only six sectors
account for about 70% of the financial patents overall and 82% from the business sector, with
four of them being services – computer services including software, financial services,
telecommunications, and other business services – and the remaining computer-related hardware.
This is in line with the concentration of software patents reported by Hall, Thoma and Torrisi
(2007).
The concentration of patents in these six sectors is higher for US applicants than for EU
applicants. Moreover, the two leading sectors in Europe differ significantly from the ones in the
US: in the former case telecommunication firms, computer-related services, and communications
equipment are responsible for 52% of the business sector financial patents, whereas in the US,
firms in the computer hardware, computer services, and financial sectors hold 73% of them. In
Europe, firms in the financial sector account for only 11% of business sector financial patents.
These differences in distribution doubtless reflect the strength of the telecommunications sector
relative to the software and financial sectors in Europe vis-à-vis the US.
[Table 1 about here]
Prior to 1994/1995 there was little patenting in this area. After the U. S. Court of Appeals
of the Federal Circuit (the CAFC) removed the restriction on patentability of software as such in
1995 and then again after the State Street decision in 1998, there were spikes in financial patent
applications, the first due to computer hardware, telecommunications, and other business sectors,

13

In particular, we used Amadeus for European firms, Hoover’s and Who Own Whom for US companies,
Jade for Japanese firms, and the company’s websites for any firms not found on one of these sites.

21

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

and the second mostly from computer hardware and finance and insurance. Between 1993 and
1998 average annual patenting in this technology jumped from 20 patents per year to 100 patents
per year. However, in the period after 2000 the growth appears to have moderated somewhat and
a higher share come from software and finance/insurance firms. The breakdown by sector and
firm age shown in Table B.3 in the appendix demonstrates that the service firms that hold
financial patents tend to be much younger than the manufacturing firms. Thus even in Europe,
there appears to be a shift in attitudes toward patenting among the newer entrants in business
service sectors.
Table B.4 in Appendix B looks at the size of the firms taking out financial patents.14 The
majority of financial patents are obtained by large patentees: however their role decreased
somewhat after 1999 in favor of the small-sized firms. Moreover, the small patentees are
concentrated in a few sectors. Indeed, about 78% of the financial patents held by small sized
firms are held by firms in three service sectors – software, financial and other business services –
whereas these sectors account for less than half (40%) of patents filed by large firms. It is
interesting to note that SMEs account for about 24% of financial patenting at the EPO.
The small patentees operating in the service sectors are also new firms: firms born after
year 1995 account for over 60% of the financial patents by small patentees, whereas their role in
the overall patenting is minimal (Table B.5). In contrast, the great majority of patents held by
large firms are held by firms that were founded prior to 1970, as one might expect. Typically the
emergence of smaller firms active in financial patenting is associated with the advent of the socalled Internet economy. Their business models often rely on licensing transactions and financial
models embodied in a software application that uses non-exclusive technology contracts. This
can be seen in Table B.3, where firms founded after 1990 that take out financial patents are more
likely to be found in the service sector. In contrast, a large share of the communication
equipment and telecommunications firms that have financial patents were born during the 19811990 period with the advent of wireless and cell telephony.

14

For firm size, we used three categories that are compatible with the definition given by the European
Network for SME research (ENSR) of the EC SME observatory: i) small, having 1-49 employees; ii) medium,
having 50-249 employees; iii) large, having more than 249 employees.

22

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

A higher propensity to patent is consistent with the active participation in technology
markets, where IP protection of the goods being traded is important. Ongoing research has not
yet reached a definitive conclusion on the sustainability in the long run of such business strategy.
However, the development of specialized technology providers in the financial area could be
considered a quintessential example of the vertical disintegration that takes place when
ownership of innovation assets becomes available (Arora et al. 2007; Thoma 2008).
Table 2 shows the approximately 50 largest patentees in our sample; almost all of them
are large and old firms. Nevertheless, there are a number of newer entrants among the next 50
such as Bitwallet (electronic money service provider in Japan), Orbis Patents (patent holding
company in Ireland), Trintech (transaction software provider in Ireland) and Contentguard (DRM
technology in the US).
[Table 2 about here]
4.1

Comparing financial patents to other patents
In this section the characteristics of financial patents are compared with all patents at the

EPO, in order to explore potential differences regarding the prior art base and to get some idea of
the economic value or importance of this kind of patenting.
Because most of the variables we consider will vary systematically over time, and
because financial patents are disproportionately represented in the later years, we normalized
each of the variables by its overall year mean before performing tests for differences between the
two samples. Table 3 shows the results of our analysis: it contains some simple statistics on the
unadjusted data for the two sets of patents, and the results of t-tests comparing financial patents
with all other patents. These tests were conducted using the priority year normalized variables.
We used a conventional two-sample t-test for differences in the mean, allowing the two samples
to have different variances.
The upper panel of Table 3 reports some measures of the prior art base for the two sets of
patents. Financial patents cite slightly newer prior art than patents as a whole (average age about
60 months versus 64 months), and the difference is significant. They also have significantly
fewer backward citations (whether XY or otherwise) and citations to the non-patent literature.

23

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

They have the same number of inventors on average, suggesting that the resources invested in
them are roughly comparable with resources invested in other patents.
[Table 3 about here]
The middle panel of Table 3 shows some indicators that are commonly associated with
patent value: the number of claims, the number of technology classes (IPCs) in which the patent
is classified, the number of patents in the rest of the world with the same priority date (the
number of equivalents), whether there are one or more divisionals (continuation) at the EPO
associated with the patent, the number of countries in which coverage was requested at the EPO,
the number of citations received by the patent in the first three years after grant, and the HTT
composite index based on family size, IPC classes, and forward citations.15
On a number of these value measures, financial patents differ substantially from other
patents. Financial patents have similar equivalents (family size), divisionals, and number of
designated states. They have more claims, are more likely to be cited, and are more likely to
reach the EPO via the PCT route. The composite value index of family size, citations, and the
number of IPCs is higher on average than that for other patents, once we adjust for differences
across priority years. Note that the higher rate at which financial patents are cited may indicate
higher social value as well as higher private value, because it implies greater “spillovers” of
knowledge to future inventors than yielded by the typical patent. We should notice that small
population of financial patents at the EPO reduces the likelihood of citations between financial
patents. The high number of citations received then suggests that these patents are mostly cited
by patents from different technological classes. The larger number of citations received by
financial patents is in line with the large number of forward citations of business method patents
reported by Wagner (2008).
Financial patents are classified into significantly fewer IPC classes than all patents, which
is a bit surprising, since business methods and software inventions are excluded from the
patentability ‘as such’ in EPO according to art. 52 of the statute, and hence there is a lack in EPO
of a clear technological classification for this type of patenting; nevertheless, this fact seems to

15

The HTT index relies on the factor analysis for the construction of a synthetic indicator of patent value.
For further information see Hall, Thoma, and Torrisi (2007).

24

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

lead the examiner to place the patent in fewer rather than more classes. The suggestion is that
these patents have less breadth of applicability.
Finally, financial patents have a significantly larger number of claims compared with
other patents, which suggests a greater complexity as compared to other patents.
4.2

Outcomes at the EPO
Most of the analysis in this paper is based on the published patent documents on the EPO

website. These documents are patent applications that may ultimately be rejected, withdrawn, or
granted by the EPO. One indicator of the “quality” or eligibility of these financial inventions for
patenting is their experience in the EPO examining and granting process (Harhoff and Wagner,
2005). In the bottom panel of Table 3, we show some simple statistics on this question for our
two groups of patents. The first question is whether a decision has yet been rendered by the EPO.
For three quarters of all patents, the answer is yes, but for financial patents there are somewhat
fewer decisions, partly because their applications are on average newer. When we adjust for this
fact, these applications are just as likely to have received a decision.
The possible outcomes for an application are that it is granted, that the EPO refuses it, or
that the applicant withdraws it after negotiation with the EPO. The decision to withdraw a patent
application can be considered equivalent to having received a rejection. In this way, the patentee
can preempt a potential rejection decision of the examiner after the dispatch of the results of the
examination process (Lazaridis and van Pottelsberghe, 2007).
Table 3 shows clearly that conditional on a decision having been reached, financial
patents are far less likely to be granted than other patents, indicating that the EPO is finding these
applications unpatentable more often than other patents, which is probably related to the subject
matter restriction of art. 52. Correspondingly, they are more likely to be either refused or
withdrawn. If they are granted, the process takes longer than other patents (as suggested earlier).
Once again, after adjusting for the differences in time profiles, these differences are not
statistically significant. Note that granting rates for business methods patents overall are
significantly larger than for overall patents (Wagner, 2008).
The final step in the EPO process before the patent becomes a set of national patent rights
that can be enforced in national courts is the 9 month post-grant window during which any third

25

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

party may file an opposition against the patent showing that it should not have been granted. The
overall rate at the EPO for opposition during the 1978-2005 period is about 6.5 per cent, but
financial patents have been opposed 9 per cent of the time, which is significantly higher.
The aggregate numbers mask some interesting changes that have occurred over time. In
Figures 3 and 4 we show the evolution of the grant rates and opposition rates for the two groups
of patents at the EPO between 1978 and 2002.16 Three periods can be discerned: In the first,
roughly 1978-1985, financial patents were much less likely to be granted than the other patents,
but also less likely to face opposition, once granted. Between 1986 and 1993, grant rates for all
types of patents were roughly comparable, while financial patents were about 3 times as likely to
be opposed once granted. Then beginning around 1994, the grant rate for financial patents fell
precipitously along with the opposition rates. Financial patents now face the same rate of
opposition as other patents. The conclusion is that greater scrutiny at the EPO has led to an
decrease in the issuance of controversial patents; the question remains whether this has also
eliminated more valuable patents.
[Figures 3 and 4 about here]

5. The determinants of EPO outcomes for financial patents
In order to test hypotheses 1 and 2 and to explore the determinants of a successful
application at the EPO, we estimated a series of probit equations for the probability of a decision
conditional on an application, a grant conditional on a decision, and opposition conditional on a
grant. Controlling for average differences across time, whether a decision has yet been reached
can be an indicator of the quality of the original application and of the speed with which the
patentee pursues the application. Given a decision, whether or not the patent is granted is first
and foremost an indicator of invention quality, and also of whether the invention is viewed as
satisfying the subject matter restrictions. Finally, opposition has been shown repeatedly to be an
indicator of the economic value and importance of the patented invention (Harhoff et al. 2003,
Harhoff and Reitzig 2004).

16

These periods are based on priority years, so there are too few granted patents in 2003-2005 to see much
in the way of opposition. We therefore ended the detailed analysis at 2002.

26

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

The explanatory variables for these equations are a selection from the variables described
previously, plus a dummy for financial patents. That is, in order to test hypotheses 1a, 1b, and 2,
we ask whether financial are more or less likely to receive a decision, be granted, and be opposed
given their prior art and value characteristics and priority year. All variables except the
continuation (divisional) and PCT dummies are in logarithms to facilitate interpretation. We also
included a complete set of priority year dummies in the regressions.
The results are shown in Table 4. As expected, the sample sizes get successively smaller,
from decision conditional on application, grant conditional on decision, and opposition
conditional on grant. In the latter case we removed a few observations for 2004 and 2005, since
there were two few grants corresponding to those priority years for opposition to be observed.
The three groups of variables (priority year dummies, prior art indicators, and value indicators)
were always highly jointly significant using a Wald-type test. In general, the results for these
variables agree with those in prior work: backward references increase the probability of
receiving a timely decision, but not if they are of the XY type, whereas backward references to
patents increase the probability of a grant, with XY type backward citations reducing the
probability substantially and increasing the probability of opposition, once the patent is granted.
Almost all the value indicators reduce the probability of receiving a decision and of
having that decision to grant the patent, while increasing the probability of opposition
significantly, as expected. The one important exception is the size of the patent family: this has
no impact on the speed with which a decision is reached, but a substantial impact on the
probability of a grant (an increase of 0.37 from a doubling of the family size). This may reflect
the fact that the inventions associated with patents that have been applied for in many
jurisdictions are more important (have greater novelty) and are more likely to have satisfied the
subject matter restrictions.17
Financial patents are strikingly different from other patents with the same characteristics,
being less likely to receive a decision, less likely to be granted, and slightly more likely to be
opposed. Thus hypotheses 1a and 1b, which state that financial patents will have longer decision

17

The PCT dummy and family size are correlated because using the PCT route implies a desire to take out
the patent in more than one country. Although the PCT coefficient is significantly negative, which will weaken the
impact of family size, when it is removed, the coefficient falls only slightly (to 0.34).

27

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

lags and are less likely to be granted, fail to be rejected. The evidence in favor of hypothesis 2,
that financial patents are more likely to be opposed, c. p., is somewhat weaker, but that may be
due to the relatively small sample of oppositions (53 for the financial patents).
All of this suggests that these patents are of lower quality technologically than the others
and simultaneously more valuable or at least more controversial, other things equal. Because of
the higher opposition rate faced by financial patents, which concords with the value indicators
shown in Table 3, we can conclude that these patents, once granted, are expected to be of higher
economic value than other patents. As we argued earlier, the outcomes of financial patents
relative to other patents reflect a more stringent scrutiny of this category of patent applications
by the EPO. The longer decision lag, however, may also depend on the complexity and
uncertainty surrounding these patents compared to others. Finally, the lack of documented prior
art may contribute to the difficulty of obtaining a patent grant for financial innovations.
[Table 4 about here]
Hypotheses 3 and 4 concern the variation across financial patents and we test these
hypotheses in Table 5, where we repeat the analysis of Table 4 but restrict it to the 90 per cent of
the financial patents that are held by firms in order to include the influence of firm characteristics
on outcomes at the EPO. The sample consists of 2,998 patent applications corresponding to 1021
patentees that have priority year 2005 or earlier. Almost three quarters of the patentees (998
observations) have applied for only one financial patent at the EPO, while one (IBM) has applied
for more than 100.
There are two sets of explanatory variables included in these equations: the
characteristics of the applicant firm, and the characteristics of the patent application itself. We
also include a reduced set of priority year dummies. Three probit regressions are shown: 1)
predicting the 1,718 decisions for the 2,998 applications that have priority year 2005 and a
decision prior to October 2008; 2) predicting the 618 grants that emerge from those decisions;
and 3) predicting the 53 oppositions filed against the 553 grants that have priority year 2000 or

28

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

earlier.18 All standard errors in Table 5 have been clustered by patent owner, although this makes
relatively little difference to their estimates.19
Turning first to the probability of obtaining a decision on patentability at the EPO,
controlling for patent characteristics and priority year the most important predictor among the
owner characteristics are whether the firm is Japanese, which appears to delay the decision
considerably; this may reflect delays associated with distance and translation. German firms
seem to experience a correspondingly faster decision process. With the exception of mediumsize firms, who receive a somewhat quicker decision, the firm’s size, sector, and past patenting
history do not seem to matter much. The stock of patents and XY backward citations have a quite
limited impact on the likelihood of obtaining a decision. What does matter are the characteristics
of the patent itself: forward and backward cites raise the probability of a decision, while
inventors and the number of designated states lower it.20 This suggests that more valuable
financial patents that have more resources behind them take longer to issue or be rejected, other
things equal. This may reflect the applicant’s willingness to extend the process at the EPO when
more is at stake.
Once a decision has been reached, however, the probability of grant is more affected by
the characteristics of the patent owner. Although size of firm does not matter in the presence of
the size of the firm’s patent portfolio, sector and country do matter. Patenting experience counts
for a great deal: a doubling of the firm’s patent portfolio is associated with a 16 per cent
increment in the probability that a financial patent is granted. Firms in computing hardware or
software experience a higher probability of receiving a financial patent grant than firms in other
business sectors, while firms in finance and insurance have a lower probability. This may reflect
inexperience on the part of these firms, also when compared with software firms, but it is more
likely to be due to the nature of their patent applications, which may fail the subject matter test
more often. Patent application in the hardware sectors are more likely to be for the kinds of
18

There are no oppositions for the grants of financial patents with priority year after 2000, so we excluded
those years from the analysis in the last column (53 observations).
19

However, doing things this way has the advantage of making both our estimates and standard errors
consistent even if there are random firm effects. Given the large number of firms (over 1000) with only a single
patent, using a fixed effect estimator is not very attractive as it would drop too many observations.
20

Since family size and the number of designated countries are correlated, in unreported regressions we
tried with only one of these variables and the results do not change substantially.

29

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

software-hardware combinations that are viewed as patentable subject matter by the EPO.21 US
and Japanese patent owners (who presumably are more likely to have patent applications outside
the art. 52 restrictions but acceptable to the USPTO) are somewhat less likely to receive a grant
of their financial patent application, although the result is not very significant.
Looking at the patent characteristics themselves, our hypothesis 3 stated that financial
patents with few forward citations, many overlapping claims with earlier patents, and a large
number of claims are less likely to be granted. All of this finds confirmation in the regression,
and we fail to reject the hypothesis. In addition, both designating more states at the EPO and
being a member of a large patent family increases the likelihood of a grant once a decision has
been reached, even though both delay the decision. Again, this is consistent with greater effort by
the patentee when more is at stake.
The final column reports on the predictors of opposition conditional on grant.
Unfortunately, the sample size is fairly small and the results therefore somewhat weaker than
some of those in the literature. It is noteworthy that patent owner characteristics do not predict
the probability that a particular patent is opposed, with the exception of very young firms, who
are less likely to be opposed, and German firms, who are more likely to be opposed. The main
predictors of opposition are the number of forward cites received by the patent, and the family
size, both of which are known to be significantly correlated with value, and the number of
backward XY cites, which suggests that the opposition occurs because there is some controversy
over the extent of the inventive step above a competitor’s patent. An additional X or Y cite adds
2 per cent to the probability that a patent will be opposed, which is a large effect given the
average opposition probability of 9 per cent for financial patents.22 The positive sign on claims
adds further evidence in favor of the view that more complex, controversial patents are more
likely to be opposed.

21

In results not shown, when we combine the three ICT hardware sectors, we find that their probability of a
grant is 0.15 higher than all other firms; the services sector probability is no different from that for other
manufacturing firms.
22

In unreported regressions we entered a variable that measure the grant lag (the lag between the time of
application and grant time) in the opposition equation. This variable has a negative and significant impact on the
likelihood of opposition. This effect can be due to the fact that a long lag allows the patent office and the applicant
to negotiate important modifications of the original application that prevent oppositions.

30

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

Hypothesis 4a stated that more valuable patents were more likely to be opposed: these
results provide strong evidence that fails to reject this hypothesis. Hypothesis 4b, that more
controversial patents are more likely to be opposed, is more weakly supported, possibly because
our indicators (claims and XY backward cites) are somewhat weaker proxies for the underlying
concept.
[Table 5 about here]
A better understanding of the relationship between value or importance, complexity or
uncertain enforceability and opposition would require a more qualitative, in-depth analysis which
goes beyond the scope of this paper. A casual inspection of our data, however, provides
interesting insights about the opposition patterns. We found 106 oppositions to 53 financial
patents that had a publication date 2000 or earlier.23 The analysis of opponents and defendants
shows that a large share of oppositions has occurred within the financial and insurance sector.
Financial patents owned by financial firms receive the largest number of oppositions (33),
followed by patents owned by computer hardware and software firms (29). Over half the
oppositions (65) come from German firms, which is similar to what was found by Harhoff and
Hall (2005) for the cosmetics sector.
Most of the opposers come from the same sectors as the active patenters (computing
hardware and software, finance and insurance, and post and telecommunications). By far the
most active opposer is Giesecke & Devrient (G&D), a German supplier of banknote paper,
banknote printing, currency automation systems, as well as smart cards and complex system
solutions in the fields of telecommunications, electronic payment, health care, identification,
transportation and IT security (PKI). This firm alone filed 21 oppositions to financial patents
granted by the EPO, mostly during the first half of the 1990s. Recently, both Swisscom AG and
Siemens have been active opposers. These data suggest that opposition involves mostly firms
that contribute to financial innovation in various ways – from the development of new financial
products and platforms to the creation of the equipment and telecom infrastructure that is needed
to implement financial innovations. It is possible that they feel threatened by patents on
technologies related to standards in this area; more detailed analysis awaits future work.

23

For patents held by business firms, there were 100 oppositions to 53 patents, as in Table 5.

31

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

6. Conclusions
This paper presented a first look at the financial patents in the European Patent Office. It
began by proposing a definition of such patents, drawing on earlier work using USPTO data.
Although in the EPO system software ‘as such’ and business methods are excluded from the
patentable subject matter, we found a substantial number of such patents in the European system.
In principle, in order to be patentable at the EPO, these inventions should yield some technical
effects and some financial inventions like payment technologies indeed have links with
electronic (hardware) devices, such as wireless systems. However, it has often proved to be
difficult to establish a clear border between patentable inventions and “pure” business methods.
Our investigation shows that financial patents are different from other patents in that they
rely less on prior literature (patent or non-patent), and the literature they do rely on is younger,
which is reasonable given their newness in the patent system. They also are slower to receive a
decision at the EPO, which can reflect both the uncertainty surrounding a new and possibly
unpatentable subject matter as well as the applicant behavior – i.e., her willingness to delay the
disclosure of a valuable invention. Once a decision is reached, it is less likely to be a grant, and
more likely to be opposed if it is. All this may reflect greater economic value, and we do find
that financial patents have several indicators of higher value than other patents. The higher
opposition rate may also be due to higher uncertainty surrounding these subject matters,
especially in Europe.
Then we have explored the characteristics of financial patentees. First, firms from a few
sectors (computers, telecommunication equipment, finance and insurance, and software) account
for the bulk of financial patents. Second, large established firms maintain a large, albeit declining
share of these patents while small, young firms have a smaller, but rising share of these patents.
Small firms include some specialized technology firms whose business model is largely based on
technology licensing. Nonetheless, to a great extent these patents are held by the same large
firms (IBM, Siemens, Hitachi, etc) that hold the bulk of software patents at the EPO (Hall,
Thoma, and Torrisi 2007).
Finally, we have analyzed how the main characteristics of the patentee and the invention
impact on the outcome of the examiner’s decision and probability of receiving an opposition.
First we find that the probability of grant for financial patent applications – rather than reject (by
32

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

the EPO) or withdrawal (by the applicant) – is influenced by the owner’s stock of EPO patents,
country of origin, and whether the applicant is in the computing sector (as opposed to the
financial sector). This latter finding could reflect the relative lack of experience with patenting
among financial firms. As expected, financial patent applications with more claims (a measure of
complexity), or more XY-type backward cites (an indicator of limited inventive step) are less
likely to be granted, whereas patent applications with a large number of equivalents in other
jurisdictions (a measure of value) are far more likely to be granted.
The analysis of patent oppositions shows that patent-level characteristics including family
size, forward citations, and XY type backward citations have a significant predictive power, but
that the characteristics of the patent owner hardly matter. Our conclusion was the unsurprising
one that more valuable financial patents were clearly more likely to be opposed. In addition,
there was weaker evidence that more controversial financial patents were more likely to be
opposed. Moreover, oppositions mostly involve, as opponents or as defendants, firms that are
also important contributors to financial innovations and the underlying IT infrastructure. This
result points to an important difference with the US system, where the most active plaintiffs in
patent litigation are patent holder firms specializing in licensing and patent litigation (Lerner,
2006).
Our findings overall offer intellectual property managers and senior managers useful
insights into financial innovations and patenting. Our analysis tells the type of financial patent
applications which are more likely to affect the decision lag and the probability of a rejection at
the EPO. They also point out which financial patents are more likely to be opposed and by
whom. This evidence can help managers in elaborating their patenting strategies, increasing the
probability of granting at the EPO, and economizing on post-grant litigation costs.
In conclusion, the explosion of patents in this field produces contrasting effects on social
welfare. On the one side, the increased number of financial patents has induced more oppositions
(and possibly more litigation costs as in the U.S.) and may to some extent be a byproduct of
strategic patenting by large established computing firms. On the other side, financial patents
open up new windows of opportunities for specialized technology firms. This trend is similar to
what happens in other sectors such as security software and semiconductors (Giarratana, 2008;
Hall and Ziedonis, 2001). In our future research we will explore more thoroughly the differences
33

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

among the financial patents held by different types of firms. Moreover, we will examine the
differences in patent exploitation strategies between specialized technology firms and vertically
integrated firms. Our preliminary analysis shows that specialized technological firms are heavily
involved in licensing out of their financial patents.

34

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

References
Arora A., A. Fosfuri, and A. Gambardella (2001). Markets for Technology: The Economics of Innovation and
Corporate Strategy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Arora A., A. Fosfuri, and A. Gambardella (2007). “Patents and the market for technology.” In Maskus K.
(ed.), Handbook of Intellectual Property Rights and Technical Change.
Bakels R., R. A. Ghosh, S. Torrisi, et al. (2008). Study of the effects of allowing patent claims for computerimplemented inventions. UNU-MERIT, the Netherlands: Final Report to the European Commission.
Barton, J.H. (2000). “Reforming the Patent System.” Science 287: 1933-1934.
Bessen, J. and Meurer, M.J. (2008). Patent Failure: How Judges, Bureaucrats, and Lawyers Put Innovators
at Risk, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bresnahan, T. F., and Trajtenberg, M. (1995). “General purpose technologies: Engines of growth.” Journal of
Econometrics 65: 83-108.
Cohen J. E., Lemley M.A. (2001). Patent Scope and Innovation in the Software Industry,
http://www.georgetown.edu.
Cooter, R.D., and Rubinfeld, D.L. (1989). “Economic analysis of legal disputes and their resolutions.”
Journal of Economic Literature XXVII: 1067-1097.
Dreyfuss, R.C. (2001). “Examining State Street Bank: Developments in Business Method Patenting.”
Computer und Recht International, 2001(1):1-9.
Duffy, J.F. Squires, J.A. (2008). “Disclosure and Financial Patents: Revealing the Invisible Hand.” Paper
presented at the Bank of Finland-CEPR Conference, Helsinki, October 2008.
Gambardella A., D. Harhoff and B. Verspagen (2008). The value of European patents, European
Management Review 5, 69–84
Giarratana M. (2007) Missing the starting gun: de alio entry order in new markets, inertia and real option
capabilities, European Management Review 5: 115–124
Guellec, D. and B. Van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie (2000). “Applications, Grants, and the Value of Patent,”
Economic Letters 69 (1): 109-114.
Jaffe A. B. & J. Lerner (2004). Innovation and Its Discontents: How Our Broken Patent System is
Endangering Innovation and Progress, and What to Do About It. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Janis, M.D. (1997). “Rethinking reexamination: Toward a viable administrative revocation system for U.S.
patent law.” Harvard Journal of Law and Technology 11: 1-122.
Hall, B. H. (2003). “Business method patents, innovation, and policy.” Paper presented at the Financial
Markets Conference of the Atlanta Federal Reserve Bank, Sea Island, Georgia, April 3-5, 2003.
Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper No. W 9717.
Hall, B. H. (2007). “Innovation in non-bank payment systems.” Paper presented at the Kansas City Federal
Reserve Conference, Santa Fe, NM, May 2007.
Hall, B. H., and M. MacGarvie (2006). “The Private Value of Software Patents,” Cambridge, Mass.: NBER
Working Paper 12195 (April).
Hall B. H., A. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg (2005). “Market value and patent citations.” Rand Journal of
Economics 36: 16-38.

35

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

Hall. B. H., Thoma G., and Torrisi S. (2007). “The market value of patents and R&D: Evidence from
European firms.” Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper No. 13426.
Hall, B. H., and R. H. Ziedonis (2001). “The determinants of patenting in the U. S. semiconductor industry,
1980-1994.” Rand Journal of Economics 32: 101-128.
Harhoff, D., and B. H. Hall (2005). “Intellectual property strategy in the global cosmetics industry.” LudwigMaxmilians-Universitaet Muenchen and CEPR; UC Berkeley and NBER: unpublished paper.
Harhoff, D., Narin, F., Scherer, F. M. and Vopel, K. (1999). “Citation frequency and the value of patented
inventions.” Review of Economics and Statistics 81: 511-515.
Harhoff, D., Scherer, F. M. and Vopel, K. (2003). “Citations, family size, opposition, and the value of patent
rights.” Research Policy 32: 1343-1364.
Harhoff, D. and Reitzig, M. (2004). “Determinants of opposition against EPO patent grants - The case of
biotechnology and pharmaceuticals.” International Journal of Industrial Organization 22: 443-480.
Harhoff D. and S. Wagner (2005). Modelling the duration of patent examination at the European Patent
Office, CEPR Working Paper 5283
Heller, M. and R. Eisenberg (1998). “Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anticommons in Biomedical
Research,” Science, 280 May: 698-701.
Hunt, R. (2001). “You can patent that? Are patents on computer programs and business methods good for the
New Economy?” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Business Review, 1 st Quarter: 5-15.
Hunt, R. (2008). “Business method patents and U.S. financial services.”, Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia Working Paper No. 08-10.
Lanjouw, J. O., and M. Schankerman (2001). “Characteristics of patent litigation: A window on
competition.” Rand Journal of Economics 32: 129-151.
Lanjouw, J. O., and M. Schankerman (2004a). “Protecting intellectual property rights: Are small firms
handicapped?” The Journal of Law and Economics 47: 45–74.
Lanjouw, J. O., and M. Schankerman (2004b). “Patent quality and research productivity: Measuring
innovation with multiple indicators.” Economic Journal 114: 441-465.
Lazaridis G. and B. Van Pottelsberghe (2007). “The rigour of EPO's patentability criteria: An insight into the
‘induced withdrawals’.” Brussels: Working Papers CEB 07-007.RS, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Solvay Business School, Centre Emile Bernheim (CEB).
Lemley, M. A. (2007). “Ten things to do about patent holdup of standards (and one not to).” Boston College
Law Review 48: 1-49.
Lerner, J. (1994). “The importance of patent scope: An empirical analysis.” Rand Journal of Economics 25:
319-33.
Lerner, J. (2004). “The new new financial thing: The sources of innovation before and after State Street.”
Journal of Financial Economics 79: 223-255.
Lerner, J. (2006). “Trolls on State Street?: The litigation of financial patents, 1976-2005.” Boston, MA:
Harvard Business School, manuscript.
Levine R. (1997). “Financial development and economic growth.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 35:
688-726.
Lunney, G.S., Jr. (2001). “e-Obviousness.” Michigan Telecommunications Technology Law Review 7: 363422.

36

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

Managing Intellectual Property (2008). “EPO to address software patentability.” Weekly News, October 24.
Managing Intellectual Property (2008). “Federal Circuit clarifies test for business method patents.“ Weekly
news, October 31.
Meyer, M. (1999). “Does science push technology? Patents citing scientific literature.” Research Policy 29:
409– 434.
Putnam, J. (1996). The value of international patent rights. PhD Thesis, Yale University.
Quillen, C. D., O. H. Webster, and R. Eichmann (2002). “Continuing patent applications and performance of
the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office – extended.” The Federal Circuit Bar Journal 12: 35-55
Rosenberg N. and Birdzell L.E. (1986). How The West Grew Rich: The Economic Transformation Of The
Industrial World. New York: Basic Books Inc.
Scotchmer, S. (1996). “Protecting early innovators: Should second generation products be patentable? Rand
Journal of Economics 27: 322-331.
Thoma, G. (2009). “Striving for a large market: evidence from a general purpose technology in action.”
Industrial and Corporate Change doi: 10.1093/icc/dtn050
Torrisi, S. (1989). Industrial Organisation and Innovation. An International Study of the Software

Industry. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Tufano, P. (1989). “Financial innovation and first-mover advantages.” Journal of Financial Economics 25:
213-240.
Tufano, P. (2003). “Financial innovation.” In Costantinides et al (eds), Handbook of the Economics of
Finance. Amsterdam: Elsevier: 307-335.
Von Graevenitz, G., S. Wagner, and D. Harhoff (2008). “Incidence and growth of patent thickets - The
impact of technological opportunities and complexity.” London: CEPR Discussion Paper no. 6900.
Wagner, S. (2008). “Business method patents in Europe and their strategic use - Evidence from franking
device manufacturers.” Economics of Innovation and New Technology 17: 173-94.
Ziedonis, R. H. (2004). “Don’t fence me in: Fragmented markets for technology and the patent acquisition
strategies of firms.” Management Science 50: 804–820.

37

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

Appendix A: Data and Sources
Our analysis is based on multiple sources. The identification of financial patents based on
ECLA codes and keywords has been done using the ESPACE on-line database. Bibliographic
data on EPO patents have been extracted from the EPO-OECD PATSTAT database (October
2007 version), whereas information on oppositions was drawn from EPOLINE files.
For information on the patent owners we used a number of online company directories:
Amadeus for European companies; Compustat for North American firms; Jade for Japanese and
Who Owns Whom for other companies. We complemented these data with information from
companies’ websites.
Selecting financial patents at the EPO
As described in the text, our sample of financial patents is the union of patents selected
using three different algorithms, intersected with patents selected using a set of financial processrelated keywords. Our methodology follows that used by Hall and MacGarvie (2007) to select
software patents at the USPTO. The idea on which it is based is first to identify the universe in
which such patents might lie using the relevant patent classification system and the patenting of
“pure play” firms, and then to select from this universe by means of keywords those patents that
are clearly related to the technology area and sector under consideration.
The first set of financial patents (Set A) relies on Hall (2007) and Lerner (2006), who
defined a financial patent based on the subclasses of the US class 705 and 902. We used a
combination of those definitions obtaining a list of the following US class and subclasses:
705/14; 705/16-18; 705/21; 705/33; 705/35-45; 705/53-56; 705/61; 705/64-79; 902/1-41. For
more details see Appendix 1. Then we retrieved all the documents in the USPTO assigned to at
least one of those class and subclass combinations. We obtained a sample of 9,549 utility patent
documents granted in the USPTO, that correspond to about 1,350 equivalents of patent
applications in EPO.24 A similar approach has been followed by Wagner (2008) to find EPO
patents on business methods. Note that the use of this criterion by itself to identify a financial
patent in EPO has the limitation of excluding EPO applications with no equivalent application

24

For the US patent documents the source is www.uspto.gov, visited August 16 th, 2008; for the EPO
equivalents we used PATSTAT version October 2007. There is a lag of approximately 1.5 years between the release
of PATSTAT and the documents retrieved from the USPTO website.

38

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

filed in the USPTO or with an equivalent US application which has been rejected or not yet
granted.
The second method of defining a financial patent at the EPO relied on other patent
classification systems, the IPC and the ECLA systems (Set B). We started by retrieving all patent
documents classified in the full digit IPCs corresponding to the above US classes and subclasses
according to the USPC-to-IPC Concordance Table provided by the USPTO.25 The validity of this
task is hampered by the fact there is a many-to-many correspondence across the IPC and USPC.
Hence, in order to check that these IPCs are appropriate for identifying financial patents, we
consider how many other subclasses not identified by 705/902 end up in the same full digit IPCs.
We found that no full digit IPC is related one-for-one to the US classes and subclasses of
financial patents defined by Hall (2007) and Lerner (2006). The IPCs either include subclasses
different from the US 705 subclasses considered by Hall and Lerner (e.g., IPC class G06F/11/34
corresponds to USPC class 705/11 which is about “job performance analysis”) or they are linked
to other U.S. classes such as 235, 186, 178, 380, which are not related with financial inventions.
Hence, the use of the IPC classes only for defining a financial patent could generate some false
positives.
Therefore we employed an extension of the IPC – the ECLA classification - which is
administrated by the EPO and is about twice as detailed as the IPC.26 On the one hand, we used
the Concordance Table provided by the USPTO (see previous paragraph) to choose the ECLA
codes related to the IPCs corresponding the USPC classes of Hall (2007) and Lerner (2006). On
the other hand we identified those ECLA codes in which the EPO equivalents of the US financial
patents were classified. In particular we considered the top ten groups of ECLA codes which
contain about 78 per cent of the EPO equivalents of the US financial patents. This yielded the
following ECLA codes for identifying financial system-related patents at the EPO (for the
description see Table A.5): G06Q20/00; G06F21/00N9A2P; G07F7/02; G07F7/08; G07F7/10D;
G07F7/10E; and H04L9/32. This subset of patents consists of circa 2,803 patent documents
which are referred to as SET B in Table 1.

25

See http://www.uspto.gov/go/classification/international/ipc/ipc8/ipc_concordance/ipcsel.htm

26

For more information on the ECLA classification see:

http://ep.espacenet.com/help?topic=classesqh&locale=en_EP&method=handleHelpTopic

39

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

The third criterion used to define a financial patent was based on an analysis of the
patenting activity of ‘pure play’ firms, that is, firms that specialize in financial services or
software. To identify pure play firms we started with a list provided by Hall (2007) for the US
patentees, and for the largest European patentees we considered those classified in investment
banking and securities dealing (NAICS activity 523110).27 We then retrieved all patent
applications filed by these firms in the EPO. We found about 452 patents that could potentially
be related to financial innovations, because they were filed by firms specializing in financial
services. To these we added all patents having the same class/subclass areas where the chosen set
of “pure play” firms patent, as was done by Graham and Mowery (2004). This group consisted of
85,542 EPO patents labeled as SET C in Table 1.
Table A.1: Number of patents in each set and their intersection sets
SET A

SET B

SET C

SET A

1350

217

927

SET B

217

2803

1425

SET C

927

1425

85,994

Source: Our elaborations using USPTO and EPO datasets
The results of this complex search procedure are illustrated in Table A.1. The union of
the three search criteria yields 87,719 patent applications at the EPO, whereas the intersection
yields only 141 patents. The largest similarity across methods is obtained when SET A and SET
B are taken together, yielding an intersection of about 217 patents, accounting for 16.1% of
patents in SET A and 7.7% in SET B. Moreover, there is a very small intersection between SET
C and the other two sets. This evidence points to the fact that the three search methods may
include patents unrelated to financial innovations, and also that most of these patents are not held
by pure play firms.
Hence, to minimize the number of false positives (Type I error) at this preliminary stage
of the analysis, we analyzed the text of the titles and abstracts of the selected patents and

27

For European firms we considered only NAICS 523110 because the other NAICS related to market of
financial services are characterized by the presence of many holding companies of large industrial groups.

40

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

restricted our sample only to patent documents having as words or sub-words (e.g., wallet in
electronic-wallet) at least one these keywords: transaction, financial, credit, payment, money,
debit card, portfolio, and wallet.
After this further refining of financial patent definition, our sample was reduced to about
3,446 patent applications at the EPO (see Table A.2). This constitutes the final set of financial
patents. Note that the table shows a greater similarity across the results obtained with the three
different definitions.
Table A.2: Including financial keywords in the title and abstract
SET A

SET B

SET C

SET A

362

119

274

SET B

119

944

591

SET C

274

591

3,039

Source: Our elaborations using USPTO and EPO datasets
The sample actually used in estimation was slightly reduced to 3,298 patents by
restricting the priority year to be prior to 2006, and removing a few patents for whom we did not
know the applicant name or type (Table A.3).
Table A.3: Selecting the sample

Total number of financial patents on the
Oct 2007 PATSTAT
Less loss due to slight change in Set B
(no bibliometric information)

3,446

-17

Less patents with priority year>2005

-40

Missing applicant code

-97

Other

-4

Sample of financial patents

41

3,298

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

Finally, in order to fully access the different kind of patents identified by the above
searching strategy we read the titles, abstracts and the description of the patent documents. In
particular we classified them using a similar taxonomy to that suggested by Duffy and Squires
(2008) consisting of the following categories:
1) ATM (Automatic Teller Machine), mechanical or electronic technologies that have
some connection to the financial industry
2) Trading technologies including anti-fraud techniques, mechanisms for
implementing trades, and trading structures and market microstructure. This also
includes web transaction methods.
3) Valuation techniques or other financial strategies
4) Financial products, broadly construed to include sophisticated products such as a
new credit default swap or a more consumer oriented product.
We selected for reading the patent documents in SET A that had received a final decision,
that is a Grant, Withdrawal or Rejection. The goal of this choice was two-fold: On the one hand,
the patents of SET A have by definition an equivalent in USPTO, which ensures potential
comparability with current and future studies on the US patents. On the other hand, considering
only those that have received a final decision allows us to document which technologies are
considered patentable by the EPO.
As we can see from Table A.4, a large share of the patents analyzed are in category (2),
which relates to the methods and technologies for implementing transactions and payments
systems. In one sense, Table A.4 helps to validate the keywords search algorithm proposed
above, as we found almost no patents in SET A that were unrelated to finance and payments
methods. In the same vein, there is little evidence of the presence of advanced financial
engineering methods in the SET A patents. Thus we conclude that the methodology proposed
provides a fairly robust definition for selecting patents related to technologies for trading and
payment systems at the EPO.

42

Hall, Thoma, Torrisi

January 2009

Table A.4 Financial patents by type of the technologies involved

Granted
Category

Rejected

Withdrawn

Number

Share

Number

Share

Number

Share

(1) ATM, etc.

14

14.7%

3

12.0%

13

10.2%

(2) Trading

72

75.8%

12

48.0%

94

74.0%

(3) Valuation

9

9.5%

6

24.0%

20

15.7%

(4) Fin prods

0

0.0%

4

16.0%

0

0.0%

Overall

95

100.0%

25

100.0%

127

100.0%

Sources: The taxonomy is based on Duffy and Squires (2008)
Notes: (1) ATM's or mechanical or electronic technologies that have some connection to the financial industry;(2)
Trading technologies including anti-fraud techniques, mechanisms for implementing trades, and trading structures
and market microstructure. This includes also the web transactions; (3) Valuation technique or other financial
strategy; (4) Financial products, broadly construed to include sophisticated products such as a new credit default
swap or a more consumer oriented product.

43

N
12
13

14
15
16
17

18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
61

142
154

159
160
161
162

Table A.5: List of ECLA classes with financial patents
ECLA subclass
Description
G06Q20/00
Payment schemes, architectures or protocols(apparatus for performing or
posting payment transactions
G06Q20/00K
further characterised by the type of neutral party arbitrating, type of payment
circuit used, architecture used, payment model or scheme applied, or details of
specific step in the protocol
G06Q20/00K1
involving a neutral party, e.g. certification authority, notary or trusted third
party (TTP)
G06Q20/00K2
characterised by the type of payment circuit
G06Q20/00K2B
in a public payment circuit, e.g. standard banking accounts
G06Q20/00K2C
in a private payment circuit, e.g. electronic cash used only among participants
of a common payment scheme or inside a defined community, money
generated by private organizations
G06Q20/00K3
characterised by the architecture used
G06Q20/00K3A
Electronic funds transfer (EFT) systems; Home banking systems
G06Q20/00K3B
Electronic shopping systems
G06Q20/00K3C
Billing systems
G06Q20/00K3D
Payments settled via telephone service provider
G06Q20/00K3E
Payments for services accessed through systems involving a self- service
terminal (SST), a vending machine or a multimedia terminal
G06Q20/00K3F
point-of-sale (POS) network systems (POS per se G07F or G07G)
G06Q20/00K4
characterised by the payment model or scheme
G06Q20/00K4C
Credit card scheme, e.g. pay after
G06Q20/00K4D
Debit scheme, e.g. pay now
G06Q20/00K4P
Pre-payment scheme, e.g. pay before
G06Q20/00K5
characterised by the use of a wireless device
G06Q20/00K6
characterised by details of the protocol
G06Q20/00K6A
Authorisation
G06Q20/00K6C
Confirmation
G06F21/00
Security arrangements for protecting computers or computer systems against
unauthorised activity(multiprogrammingG06F9/46; protection against
unauthorised use of memoryG06F12/14; dispensing apparatus actuated by
coded identity card or credit cardG07F7/08;
G06F21/00N9A2P ... protecting personal data, e.g. for financial or medical purposes
G07F7/00
Mechanisms actuated by objects other than coins to free or to actuate vending,
hiring, coin or paper currency dispensing or refunding apparatus (handling
coins or paper currencies apart from coin-freed or like apparatus G07D;
complete banking systems G07F
G07F7/02
by keys or other credit registering devices (for producing a coded signal for
use together with coded identity cards G07F7/10)
G07F7/02B
... by active credit-registering devices, e.g. counters, memories
G07F7/02C
... by means, e.g. cards, comprising cases representing monetary value (for
cancelling tickets, see G07B11/11)
G07F7/02D
... by cards with numerical value (G07F7/08 takes precedence)

163 G07F7/02E

170 G07F7/08
171 G07F7/08B

172 G07F7/08C
173 G07F7/08C2
174 G07F7/08C2B
175 G07F7/08C2C
176 G07F7/08C4
177 G07F7/08C6
178 G07F7/08C8
179 G07F7/08D
180 G07F7/08E
181 G07F7/08E2
182 G07F7/08E4
183 G07F7/08F
184 G07F7/08F2
185 G07F7/08F4
192 G07F7/10D
193
194
195
196

G07F7/10D2
G07F7/10D2K
G07F7/10D2M
G07F7/10D2P

197 G07F7/10D4
198 G07F7/10D4E
199 G07F7/10D4E2
200 G07F7/10D4T
201 G07F7/10D6
202 G07F7/10D6F

... by means, e.g. cards, providing billing information at the time of purchase,
e.g. identification of seller or purchaser, quantity of goods delivered or to be
delivered]
by coded identity card or credit card ... or other personal identification
means(without personal verification meansG07F7/02)
... by passive credit-cards adapted therefore : constructive particularities to
avoid counterfeiting, e.g. by inclusion of a physical or chemical security-layer
(for security documents see G07D7/00; for the reading of record-carriers in
general see G06K7/
... by active credit-cards adapted therefor (G07F7/10D takes precedence)
... Electronic wallets suitable to be connected to similar devices for mutual
funds transfer, either with or without a terminal
... with central accounting to keep track of the electronic money in circulation
... the wallets having several accounts
... the value being automatically decremented in function of a variable, e.g.
time, distance
... Systems wherein such cards are used for payment
... Separate devices accepting such cards for payment
... Details or accessories, e.g. reading, decoding, printing of data from the
cards (G06K takes precedence)
... Verification of the card, i.e. checking validity to avoid misuse, e.g. checking
expiry date
... by comparing with other document or pass, e.g. with a bank-cheque
... by mutual comparing codes on the card
... Account status verification, e.g. checking solvency of the holder (computers
adapted for financial accounting G06Q40/00A)
... Local credit-checking, e.g. with black-list on tape
... Central credit-checking via terminal (G07F7/10 takes precedence)
... Active credit-cards provided with means to personalise their use, e.g. with
PIN-introduction/comparison system
... Personalisation or initialisation of card
... with securisation during issuing/transport phase
... for several users, e.g. hierarchical
... by application program downloading (G07F7/10D10M2 takes precedence)
... Mutual authentication of card and transaction partner, e.g. terminal, host,
other card
... the card having encyphering/decyphering capabilities
... used for an authentication protocol (means for verifying the identity or
authority of the user of a communication system per se H04L9/32)
... with transaction monitoring means, e.g. deriving transaction authentication
number; with registration of transaction
... Identification of card user
... with means to protect against fraudulent identification attempts, e.g. counter
for erroneous PIN-attempts

203 G07F7/10D6K
204 G07F7/10D6P
205 G07F7/10D8
206 G07F7/10D8C
207 G07F7/10D8P
208 G07F7/10D10
209 G07F7/10D10M

210 G07F7/10D10M2
211 G07F7/10D12
212 G07F7/10D14
213 G07F7/10D16

214 G07F7/10E
225 H04L9/00
260 H04L9/32

261
262
263
264
265
266
267
268
269
270
271
272
273
274
275

H04L9/32A
H04L9/32B
H04L9/32C
H04L9/32H
H04L9/32M
H04L9/32P
H04L9/32R
H04L9/32R2
H04L9/32R4
H04L9/32S
H04L9/32S1
H04L9/32S3
H04L9/32S5
H04L9/32S5P
H04L9/32T

... by comparing other identifying data with reference data stored in the card
chip (G07C9/00B6 takes precedence)
... by PIN check
... Independent cards, capable to authorise a transaction without the
intervention of a terminal, e.g. by self-checking of user identity or solvency
... Cards only used as intermediate carriers for identification data of user and
for transaction data
... Cards combined with portable reader/writer to constitute an independent
assembly
... Multiple service cards, e.g. for several accounts, applications of the same
person, the card to be processed by different terminals/issuers
... with protecting memory zones, assigned to one service, against access
(read/write/delete) by terminals of other services (protection against
unauthorised access of computer memory areas in general G06F12/14; circuits
for protecting data, e.g. PIN, in
... Zone-allocation and setting access conditions of zones
... Means to guarantee integrity of card data, not provided for in G07F7/10D2
to G07F7/10D10, e.g. digital signatures, check numbers
... Details or accessories concerning data transfer and storing, e.g. error
detection, self diagnosis (G06K19/07 takes precedence)
... Multiple-card systems, the cards having either different or identical
functions
...
Devices and methods for securing the PIN and other transaction-data, e.g.
by encryption (arrangements for secret communication, see H04L9/00)
Arrangements for secret or secure communication
including means for verifying the identity or authority of a user of the system
(computer systems G06F; coin-freed or like apparatus with coded identity card
or credit card G07F7/08)
involving a third party or a trusted authority
using a non-public key algorithm
using a zero-knowledge proof
using hash functions
for message authentication (H04L9/32S takes precedence)
involving the concurrent use of a plurality of channels of different nature
using challenge-response
for mutual authentication
involving splitting up or repeating the challenge and/or response
using electronic signatures
using blind signatures
involving a plurality or a group of signers
with message recovery
with partial message recovery
using time stamps or public key certificates

Appendix B: Additional Figures and Tables

Table B.1: Time evolution of EPO financial patents by region of the patentee
3,127 EPO patent documents*
Country

before 1990

US
Germany
France
UK
Other EU countries
EU27 total
Japan
Rest of world
Overall
Country
US
Germany
France
UK
Other EU countries
EU27 total
Japan
Rest of world

Number with priority year equal to
1990-1994
1995-99 2000-2005

Total

85
17
23
17
18
75
24
8

109
14
23
3
18
58
25
4

594
68
60
30
120
278
129
28

771
202
100
86
260
648
219
72

1559
301
206
136
416
1059
397
112

192

196

1029

1710

3127

Shares with priority year equal to
1990-1994
1995-99 2000-2005

Total

before 1990
44.3%
8.9%
12.0%
8.9%
9.4%
39.1%
12.5%
4.2%

55.6%
7.1%
11.7%
1.5%
9.2%
29.6%
12.8%
2.0%

57.7%
6.6%
5.8%
2.9%
11.7%
27.0%
12.5%
2.7%

45.1%
11.8%
5.8%
5.0%
15.2%
37.9%
12.8%
4.2%

*245 documents have more than one applicant but in all cases the applicants are from the same country.
Source: our computations, see text for details.

49.9%
9.6%
6.6%
4.3%
13.3%
33.9%
12.7%
3.6%

Table B.2: Time evolution of US financial patents by region of the patentee
Financial Patents based on Hall (2007) and Lerner (2006) classes plus financial keywords
4,460 US utility patent documents*
Country

Number with priority year equal to
before 1990 1990-1994
1995-99 after 2000

Total*

US
Germany
France
UK
Other EU countries
EU27 total
JP
Rest of world

392
15
19
21
11
66
179
23

1829
16
27
26
52
121
144
90

283
6
12
12
8
38
51
16

1040
6
6
12
42
66
75
73

3544
43
64
71
113
291
449
202

Overall*

660

2184

388

1254

4486

Shares with priority year equal to
before 1990 1990-1994
1995-99 after 2000

Total

Country
US
Germany
France
UK
Other EU countries
EU27 total
JP
Rest of world

59.4%
2.3%
2.9%
3.2%
1.7%
10.0%
27.1%
3.5%

83.7%
0.7%
1.2%
1.2%
2.4%
5.5%
6.6%
4.1%

72.9%
1.5%
3.1%
3.1%
2.1%
9.8%
13.1%
4.1%

82.9%
0.5%
0.5%
1.0%
3.3%
5.3%
6.0%
5.8%

79.0%
1.0%
1.4%
1.6%
2.5%
6.5%
10.0%
4.5%

*292 documents have more than one applicant but in almost all cases the applicants are from the same country.
Source: PATSTAT October 2007

Table B.3: EPO financial patents by the sector and age of the patentee
2,945 EPO patent documents*
Stan
Code Sector Description

pre-1970

19711980

Founding year of firm
1981199119961990
1995
2000

20012005

Unknown

17
19

Office, accounting, computing machinery
Radio, television & comm. equipment
Equipment

492
173
665

44
5
49

67
30
97

5
6
11

4
8
12

8
4
12

4
0
4

38
41
37
43

Finance & insurance
Software & computer related activities
Post & telecommunications
Other business services
Services

325
40
125
38
528

6
57
0
1
64

25
130
91
53
299

60
72
23
16
171

61
134
39
42
276

40
135
12
75
262

15
2
0
2
19

Other business sectors
Sector unknown

377
0

12
0

43
0

29
1

36
1

25
0

7
9

Total

1570

125

439

212

325

299

39

-

Within-sector shares of financial-patenting firms founded in each period
17
19

Office, accounting, computing machinery 78.8%
Radio, television & comm. equipment
76.5%
Equipment 78.2%

7.1%
2.2%
5.8%

10.7%
13.3%
11.4%

0.8%
2.7%
1.3%

0.6%
3.5%
1.4%

1.3%
1.8%
1.4%

0.6%
0.0%
0.5%

38
41
37
43

Finance & insurance
Software & computer related activities
Post & telecommunications
Other business services
Services

61.1%
7.0%
43.1%
16.7%
32.6%

1.1%
10.0%
0.0%
0.4%
4.0%

4.7%
22.8%
31.4%
23.3%
18.5%

11.3%
12.6%
7.9%
7.0%
10.6%

11.5%
23.5%
13.4%
18.5%
17.0%

7.5%
23.7%
4.1%
33.0%
16.2%

2.8%
0.4%
0.0%
0.9%
1.2%

Other business sectors
Sector unknown

71.3%
0.0%

2.3%
0.0%

8.1%
0.0%

5.5%
9.1%

6.8%
9.1%

4.7%
0.0%

1.3%
81.8%

-

*The sample includes double counting in case of copatenting and excludes patents held by individuals and governments. There are 52 patents with more
than one applicant.

Table B.4: Time evolution of financial patents by size of the patentee
2,945 EPO patent documents*
With priority year equal to
Size of firm

before 1990 1990-1994

1995-99 2000-2005

Overall

Number of patents
Large (>249 employees)
Medium (50-249 employees)
Small (<50 employees)
Size class not available

130
13
33
0

151
16
25
1

800
63
138
1

1,191
114
329
4

2272
206
525
6

Total

176

193

1002

1638

3009

Share of patents by size of firm
Large (>249 employees)
Medium (50-249 employees)
Small (<50 employees)
Size class not available

73.9%
7.4%
18.8%
0.0%

78.2%
8.3%
13.0%
0.5%

79.8%
6.3%
13.8%
0.1%

72.7%
7.0%
20.1%
0.2%

75.5%
6.8%
17.4%
0.2%

*The sample includes double counting in case of copatenting and excludes patents held by individuals and
governments. There are 52 patents with more than one applicant.

Table B.5: EPO financial patents by the size and age of the patenting firm
2,945 EPO patent documents*
Size of firm
Size
Founding Year
Large
Medium
Small
unknown
Total
Number of patents
pre-1970
1971-1980
1981-1990
1991-1995
1996-2000
2001-2005
Not known

1559
115
370
127
78
15
8

5
7
25
38
99
25
7

6
3
44
47
148
259
18

0
0
0
0
0
0
6

1570
125
439
212
325
299
39

Total

2272

206

525

6

3009

Shares by size in each founding period
pre-1970
1971-1980
1981-1990
1991-1995
1996-2000
2001-2005
Not known

99.3%
92.0%
84.3%
59.9%
24.0%
5.0%
20.5%

0.3%
5.6%
5.7%
17.9%
30.5%
8.4%
17.9%

0.4%
2.4%
10.0%
22.2%
45.5%
86.6%
46.2%

0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
15.4%

*The sample includes double counting in case of copatenting and excludes patents held by individuals
and governments. There are 52 patents with more than one applicant.

1

Table 1: Patents by the country and sector of the patentee
Overall
N Share*

Code+ Sector Description
17
41
38
37
43
19
18
20
31
16
9
7
46
21
8
35
25
23
47
4
33
42
11
30
26
36
39
10
15
2
3
13
14
32

EU 27
N Share*

US
N Share*

Office, accounting & computing machinery
Computer services & related activities
Finance & insurance
Post & telecommunications
Other business services
Radio, television & communication equip.
Electrical machinery & apparatus, nec
Medical, precision & optical instruments
Wholesale & retail trade repairs
Machinery & equipment, nec
Chemicals excluding pharmaceuticals
Pulp, paper products, printing and publishing
Health & social work
Motor vehicles, trailers & semi-trailers
Coke, petroleum products & nuclear fuel
Air transport
Manufacturing nec recycling (in. Furniture)
Aircraft & spacecraft
Other community, social & personal services
Food products, beverages and tobacco
Land transport transport via pipelines
Research & development
Rubber & plastics products
Construction
Production and distribution of electricity
Supporting and auxiliary transport activities
Real estate activities
Pharmaceuticals
Fabricated metal products (no machinery)
Mining and quarrying (energy)
Mining and quarrying (non-energy)
Iron & steel
Non-ferrous metals
Hotels & restaurants

624
570
532
290
227
226
162
91
65
60
24
21
11
10
9
9
8
7
7
6
6
6
5
4
3
3
3
2
2
1
1
1
1
1

20.8%
19.0%
17.7%
9.7%
7.6%
7.5%
5.4%
3.0%
2.2%
2.0%
0.8%
0.7%
0.4%
0.3%
0.3%
0.3%
0.3%
0.2%
0.2%
0.2%
0.2%
0.2%
0.2%
0.1%
0.1%
0.1%
0.1%
0.1%
0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

45
212
106
182
69
123
108
44
33
23
1
18
0
3
0
2
1
1
4
1
1
3
1
2
2
1
3
1
2
0
1
0
0
0

4.5%
21.3%
10.7%
18.3%
6.9%
12.4%
10.9%
4.4%
3.3%
2.3%
0.1%
1.8%
0.0%
0.3%
0.0%
0.2%
0.1%
0.1%
0.4%
0.1%
0.1%
0.3%
0.1%
0.2%
0.2%
0.1%
0.3%
0.1%
0.2%
0.0%
0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

378
323
388
67
132
47
6
23
23
28
22
1
10
2
6
6
5
6
2
5
3
1
4
1
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

25.3%
21.6%
26.0%
4.5%
8.8%
3.1%
0.4%
1.5%
1.5%
1.9%
1.5%
0.1%
0.7%
0.1%
0.4%
0.4%
0.3%
0.4%
0.1%
0.3%
0.2%
0.1%
0.3%
0.1%
0.1%
0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.1%

Top 6 business sectors

2469 82.4%

737

74.2% 1335 89.4%

Total for all business sectors
2998 85.2% 993 80.3% 1493 88.4%
Individuals & non-business organizations
511 14.5% 240 19.4% 191 11.3%
Patents held by non-classified business firms 11
0.3%
4
0.3%
5
0.3%
Total, including double counting for co3520
1237
1689
patenting
*The share of business sector financial patents is shown in these columns, with the exception of the last 3 rows, where the
share of all financial patents is shown. + The sector code is from the OECD-STAN database.

36

Table 2: Top financial patentees and their patent portfolio composition
Rank Company

Country Industry

1
IBM
US
Comp serv
2
CITICORP
US
Fin & ins
3
NCR
US
Machinery
4
FUJITSU
JP
Comp serv
5
SIEMENS
DE
Elec. Eq.
6
HITACHI
JP
Comp mach
7
SONY
JP
Comm. Eq.
8
HEWLETT PACKARD
US
Comp mach
9
SAP
DE
Comp serv
10 SUN MICROSYSTEM
US
Comp mach
11 ATT
US
Post & tele
12 FRANCE TELECOM
FR
Post & tele
13 MICROSOFT
US
Comp mach
14 PITNEY BOWES
US
Comp mach
15 ALCATEL
FR
Comp mach
16 NOKIA
FI
Comm. Eq.
17 FIRST DATA
US
Fin & ins
18 DEUTSCHE POST TELEKOM
DE
Post & tele
19 VISA
US
Fin & ins
20 MASTERCARD INTERNAT.
US
Oth bus
21 LM ERICSSON
SE
Comm. Eq.
22 ACCENTURE
US
Comp serv
23 LUCENT TECHNOLOGY
US
Comp serv
24 KONINKLIJKE PTT NEDERLAND
NL
Post & tele
25 DIEBOLD
US
Comp mach
26 MATSUSHITA ELEC INDUSTRIAL
JP
Elec. Eq.
27 NTT
JP
Post & tele
28 SWISSCOM
CH
Post & tele
29 TOSHIBA
JP
Comp mach
30 AMERICAN EXPRESS
US
Fin & ins
31 PHILIPS
NL
Elec. Eq.
32 SAGEM
DE
Instruments
33 NEC
JP
Comp mach
34 WESTERN UNION
US
Fin & ins
35 KODAK
US
Instruments
36 GOLDMAN SACHS
US
Fin & ins
37 US BANCORP
US
Fin & ins
38 OMRON
JP
Instruments
39 GEMPLUS
FR
Comm. Eq.
40 GIESECKE DEVRIENT
DE
Printing
41 AXALTO
FR
Comm. Eq.
42 NOKIA SIEMENS NETWORKS
FI
Comm. Eq.
43 BRITISH TELECOM
UK
Post & tele
44 SCHLUMBERGER
FR
Instruments
45 MOTOROLA
US
Comm. Eq.
46 LA POSTE
FR
Post & tele
47 SUMITOMO MITSUI BANKING
JP
Fin & ins
48 METAVANTE
US
Comp serv
49 OKI
JP
Elec. Eq.
50 EBAY
US
Comp serv
51 GE CAPITAL
US
Fin & ins
52 ELECTRONIC DATA SYSTEM
US
Comp serv
* High:>50%; Medium:10-50%; Low: 3-10%; Very low: 0-3%

Entry
pre-1970
pre-1970
pre-1970
pre-1970
pre-1970
pre-1970
pre-1970
1981-1990
1971-1980
1971-1980
pre-1970
1981-1990
1981-1990
pre-1970
pre-1970
pre-1970
1991-1995
pre-1970
pre-1970
pre-1970
pre-1970
1981-1990
1985-1990
1981-1990
pre-1970
pre-1970
pre-1970
1996-2000
pre-1970
pre-1970
pre-1970
pre-1970
pre-1970
pre-1970
pre-1970
pre-1970
pre-1970
pre-1970
1981-1990
pre-1970
pre-1970
pre-1970
1981-1990
pre-1970
pre-1970
1981-1990
pre-1970
pre-1970
pre-1970
1991-1995
pre-1970
pre-1970

Fin All
Pats Pats
111
96
86
85
76
69
47
47
47
40
40
39
38
34
34
33
33
33
32
30
29
27
26
25
25
22
22
21
18
18
17
17
16
16
15
14
14
13
12
12
11
11
11
11
11
10
10
10
10
10
10
10

14950
101
1588
8707
28497
8733
14246
7312
1011
1415
5053
1915
2847
789
3847
6587
69
746
65
47
6502
333
3812
569
83
16921
1390
266
10047
47
4382
281
8272
20
11187
44
16
1197
478
665
261
1318
1908
1049
5300
60
32
14
1026
39
27
148

Fin
pat
share*
very low
high
low
very low
very low
very low
very low
very low
low
very low
very low
very low
very low
low
very low
very low
high
low
high
high
very low
low
very low
low
medium
very low
very low
low
very low
medium
very low
low
very low
high
very low
medium
high
very low
very low
very low
low
very low
very low
very low
very low
medium
medium
high
very low
medium
medium
low

Table 3: Comparing financial to all other patents
T-test†
All patents
18,523 observations## fin pat vs
mean
sd median all other
Inventors
Non-patent literature references
Backward citations to patents
Backward citations per inventor
XY Type backward citations
XY Type backward citations per inventor
Citation Lag in Months @
Number of claims
Technological classes
Patent family size (worldwide equivalents)
Continuations rate
Designated countries
Application via PCT route (dummy)
Forward citations after 3 years
HTT Composite Index
Value from Patval survey (1000s euros) #

2.44
0.49
3.75
2.28
0.88
0.51
63.6

1.79
1.4
2.98
2.32
1.6
1.06
42.7

Financial patents
3,298 observations
mean
sd
median

Indicators of Prior Art Base
2.0
2.53
0.0
-0.46
3.0
--3.34
1.7
2.05
0.0
--0.87
0.0
0.53
52.5
--59.5

2.08
1.13
3.27
2.45
1.44
1.03
37.0

2.0
0.0
3.0
1.3
0.0
0.0
50.0

Indicators of Patent Value
14.89 12.77
11
++
21.78 17.78
7.16
6.96
6.0
--5.77
4.61
11.03 74.05
6.0
11.40 30.54
0.05
0.21
0.0
0.05
0.21
11.95 9.10
9.0
14.50 9.88
0.40
0.49
0.0
+++
0.44
0.50
0.41
0.97
0.0
+++
0.67
1.81
0.00
0.54
-0.1
+++
0.12
0.65
11,083 65,580 650
--1,523 2,791

17
4.0
6.0
0.0
18.0
0.0
0.0
-0.1
200

Status
Decision reached
Granted, conditional on decision
Refused,conditional on decision
Withdrawn, conditional on decision
Grant lag in years‡
Opposition if granted‡

0.760
0.640
0.033
0.327
3.91
0.065

1.78

3.59

++

0.580
0.341
0.071
0.588
5.10
0.090

2.23

4.77

Notes:
† T-test for the hypothesis that the mean for financial patents differs from that for all patents. Significant at 1% (+++), 5% (++),
or 10% (+) level if the mean is larger; similarly for smaller but with a minus (-). Before testing, all variables have bee
@ Computed for nonzero lags only. Numbers of observations are 1077 and 833.
# Computed for patents that were covered by the PATVAL survey only. Numbers of observations are 5 and 8,281.
‡ Computed for granted patents only. Numbers of observations are 9003 and 736; for grant prior to 2001, they are 8883 and
642.
## This is a 1% sample of all patents.

Table 4: Probability of decision, grant, and opposition conditional on grant 1978-2005

Dependent variable

Financial patents vs. a one per cent sample of other patents
Grant conditional on
Decision
decision
Marginal
Marginal
effect
effect
s.e.
s.e.

Opposition conditional
on grant by 2003
Marginal
effect
s.e.

D (financial patent)

-0.054

0.008 ***

-0.240

0.014 ***

0.018

0.011

Inventors (log)
Non-patent literature references (log)
Backward citations to patents (log)
XY Type backward citations (log)

-0.050
0.013
0.064
-0.015

0.006 ***
0.006 **
0.005 ***
0.005 ***

0.017
-0.042
0.077
-0.104

0.011 *
0.009 ***
0.009 ***
0.008 ***

0.001
-0.016
0.005
0.016

0.006
0.006 ***
0.005
0.005 ***

Claims (log)
Technological classes (log)
Family size (log)
D (continuation)
Designated countries (log)
D (PCT route)
Forward citations after 3 years (log)

-0.055
-0.010
0.006
-0.181
-0.033
-0.086
-0.014

0.005
0.005
0.005
0.020
0.003
0.006
0.007

-0.091
-0.083
0.369
-0.085
-0.017
-0.143
0.051

0.007
0.008
0.016
0.026
0.006
0.011
0.009

0.007
-0.010
0.020
0.021
0.026
-0.018
0.026

0.004
0.004
0.005
0.012
0.005
0.006
0.005

Number of observations (number=1)
Pseudo R-squared

23,011 (16,689)
0.454

***
**
***
***
***
**

***
***
***
***
***
***
***

16,689 (10,034)
0.173

Marginal effects and their robust standard errors are shown. Significance at 1% *** 5% ** 10% *.

9779 (705)
0.051

*

**
***
**
***
***
***

Table 5: Probability of decision, grant, and opposition conditional on grant 1978-2005
Financial patents only
2998 observations for 1021 patentees (1718 decisions, 618 grants, 53 oppositions out of 553 pre-2001 grants)
Opposition
Grant conditional on
Dependent variable
conditional on grant
Decision
decision
Marginal s.e.
Marginal s.e.
Marginal s.e.
Owner characteristics
Log (stock of EP patents) +
-0.079 0.045 *
0.157 0.059 *** -0.036 0.032
Log (stock of XY backward cites) +
0.059 0.031 * -0.051 0.034
-0.001 0.014
0.108 0.077
-0.029 0.038
Log (stock of forward cites per patent)+ -0.030 0.046
D (small firm)
0.047 0.045
-0.048 0.064
0.040 0.055
D (medium firm)
0.108 0.042 ** 0.003 0.073
0.072 0.071
Founded 1981-1995
0.039 0.039
-0.031 0.054
-0.022 0.020
Founded after 1995
0.014 0.049
0.042 0.074
-0.051 0.017 **
Software sector
-0.053 0.044
0.095 0.058 * -0.012 0.026
Other business services
-0.009 0.051
0.026 0.072
-0.032 0.020
Post & telecommunications
-0.002 0.056
0.086 0.076
0.011 0.027
Finance & insurance
0.070 0.049
-0.119 0.060 *
0.016 0.041
Computing equipment
-0.034 0.067
0.254 0.064 *** 0.029 0.036
Communication equipment
-0.075 0.075
0.093 0.066
0.032 0.050
US owner
-0.040 0.037
-0.130 0.066 ** -0.022 0.027
Japanese owner
-0.161 0.060 *** -0.128 0.066 * -0.008 0.031
German owner
0.105 0.049 *
0.076 0.084
0.110 0.074 **
French owner
0.085 0.053
0.081 0.094
0.041 0.048
UK owner
-0.005 0.061
0.027 0.097
0.014 0.052
Chi-squared (2) size
Chi-squared (2) founding year
Chi-squared (6) sector dummies
Chi-squared (5) region
Chi-squared (18) firm characteristics

5.5
0.065 *
0.9
1.1
0.593
1.1
8.5
0.209
25.1
21.0
0.001 *** 18.2
49.9
0.000 *** 123.3
Patent characteristics
Log (inventors)
-0.053 0.017 *** 0.015
Log (total backward cites)
0.093 0.018 *** 0.120
Log (XY backward cites)
-0.025 0.021
-0.089
Log (claims)
-0.041 0.017 ** -0.095
Log (family size)
-0.041 0.026
0.239
Log (N of designated states at EPO)
-0.093 0.015 *** 0.027
D (PCT route)
-0.114 0.033 *** -0.069
Log (forward pat cites received in 3 yrs) 0.042 0.019 ** 0.046
Priority year 1986-1990
0.103
combined with pre-1986
Priority year 1991-1995
-0.857 0.013 *** 0.011
Priority year 1996-2000
-0.995 0.002 *** -0.213
Priority year post-2000
-0.999 0.000 *** -0.231
Pseudo R-squared

0.302

0.637
0.567
0.000 ***
0.003 ***
0.000 ***
0.024
0.023
0.025
0.024
0.031
0.021
0.038
0.021
0.103
0.079
0.078
0.061
0.307

***
***
***
***
*
**

***
***

1.9
5.2
3.1
9.2
31.0
0.005
0.005
0.021
0.021
0.045
-0.009
-0.044
0.041
0.034
-0.044
-0.056

0.389
0.076
0.800
0.103
0.029

*

**

0.015
0.020
0.016 **
0.013 *
0.014 ***
0.018
0.016 **
0.012 ***
0.049
0.028
0.037

no oppositions

0.243

The left out category is a patent owned by a large firm in the rest of the world that was founded before 1981, and that operates in
one of the remaining business sectors, with priority year prior to 1986 (prior to 1991 in the first set of columns).
Marginal effects and their standard errors clustered on patentee are shown. Significance at 1% *** 5% ** 10% *.
+ These variables are stocks for all the firm's patents as of the priority year of the current patent, constructed using a 15% depreciation rate.
# All patent characteristics excluding the priority year dummies, which control for selection over time.

Figure 1: Aggregate patenting trends by priority year at the
EPO and USPTO
250,000
All US patents
granted

Number of patents

200,000
150,000

All EP patents
granted

100,000

All EP patent
applications

50,000
0
1978 1981 1984 1987 1990 1993 1996 1999 2002 2005
Priority Year

Figure 2: EP and US financial methods patenting
1200
1000

US financial
patents
(granted)

Number of patents

800

EP financial
patents
(granted)

600
400

EP financial
patents (apps)

200
0
1978 1981 1984 1987 1990 1993 1996 1999 2002 2005
Priority Year

Figure 3: Grant rate at the EPO, conditional on a decision
(5 year moving average)
80%
70%
60%

All patents

50%
40%
30%

Financial
patents

20%
10%
0%
1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Priority year

Figure 4: Opposition rates at the EPO, conditional on grant
(5 year moving average)
0.3
0.25

All patents

0.2
0.15
Financial
patents

0.1
0.05
0
1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Priority year

