                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WORK ENVIRONMENT AND “OPT-OUT" RATES AT MOTHERHOOD ACROSS
                   HIGH-EDUCATION CAREER PATHS

                                          Jane Leber Herr
                                         Catherine Wolfram

                                        Working Paper 14717
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14717


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2009




We would like to thank Marianne Bertrand, Dan Black, David Card, Constança Esteves-Sorenson,
Claudia Goldin, Jason Grissom, Robert LaLonde, Ioana Marinescu, Annalisa Mastri, Emily Oster,
Rebecca Ryan, Lucie Schmidt, Jesse Shapiro, and seminar participants at the University of Chicago,
U.C. Berkeley, the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and the University of Michigan for
their comments and suggestions. We would also like to thank Joshua Langenthal, Marci Glazer, Charles
Jones, and Zachary Leber for the use of their Harvard anniversary reports, Jessica Chen, Margaret
Gough, Cathy Hwang, Omar Jabri, Tatyana Shmygol and Jenny Zhuo for providing excellent research
assistance, and Peter Jacobs for providing our estimated salaries. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Jane Leber Herr and Catherine Wolfram. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Work Environment and “Opt-Out" Rates at Motherhood Across High-Education Career Paths
Jane Leber Herr and Catherine Wolfram
NBER Working Paper No. 14717
February 2009
JEL No. J01,J13

                                               ABSTRACT

Using data from the 2003 National Survey of College Graduates and a sample of Harvard alumnae,
we study the relationship between work environment and the labor force participation of mothers.
We first document a large variation in labor force participation rates across high-education fields. Mindful
of the possibility of systematic patterns in the types of women who complete different graduate degrees,
we use the rich information available in each dataset, and the longitudinal nature of the Harvard data,
to assess the extent to which these labor supply patterns may reflect variation in the difficulty of combining
work with family. While it is difficult to entirely rule out systematic sorting, our evidence suggests
that non-family-friendly work environments “push” women out of the labor force at motherhood.


Jane Leber Herr
Harris School of Public Policy Studies
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
jlherr@uchicago.edu

Catherine Wolfram
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
wolfram@haas.berkeley.edu
1    Introduction

One of the most profound social changes of the 20th century has been the dramatic increase

in the number of women in the labor force. Recent statistics, however, suggest that the
increase in female labor force participation began to level oﬀ in the late 1990s and early
2000s (Mosisa and Hippie, 2006). This has led to speculation about whether the “natural”

rate of female labor force participation has been achieved (Goldin, 2006), whether this is
instead a temporary slow-down driven by economic conditions (Boushey, 2005; Joint Eco-
nomic Committee, 2008), or whether there are remaining policy, cultural, or social changes
that would accommodate more women in the workforce (Drago and Hyatt, 2003).


     Within the broader trends, much of the media discussion has focused on highly educated
women leaving the labor force at motherhood. Most visibly this includes two cover articles,

the “Opt-Out Revolution” in the New York Times magazine (Belkin, 2003) and “The Case

for Staying Home” in Time Magazine (Wallis, 2004). In this paper we begin by documenting,

however, that labor force participation rates of highly educated mothers vary markedly across

professions. For example, among women with young children, the 2003 National Survey of
College Graduates (NSCG) shows that 94 percent of MDs work, compared to only 75 percent

of MBAs. Likewise, among Harvard graduates of the same cohort, 94 percent of MD mothers

work, compared to only 72 percent of MBAs.


     We next ask whether these patterns suggest that there are elements of the work envi-
ronment – perhaps mutable with diﬀerent policies or social norms – that drive mothers out
of the labor force. If so, does variation in “family friendliness” across high-education profes-
sions help explain the large diﬀerences in labor force participation among mothers? Our aim
is to assess whether work environment inﬂuences women’s work decisions after motherhood,
while mindful of the inherent diﬀerences in the set of women who pursue a given career path.


     There is a vast literature on the factors that inﬂuence married women’s labor supply (for
recent examples see Goldin, 2006, and Blau and Kahn, 2007). Similar to this study, a subset


                                               1
of this literature has begun to focus on variables that elaborate on the traditional economic

model by analyzing such factors as gender role attitudes (Fortin, 2005), social learning (Fogli
and Veldkamp, 2008), and inter-generational preference transmission (Fernandez and Fogli,
2009). Our description of the potential inﬂuence of work environment, which assumes a
minimum hours requirement that may vary across ﬁelds, lies outside the traditional model
by placing this constraint on the labor supply decision.


       One beneﬁt of considering this question among highly educated women is that graduate
degree is observable, and provides a clear delineation across which we expect systematic
variation in work environment. Furthermore, highly educated women may be more sensitive
to a given level of family friendliness. Although work environment may aﬀect all women’s
utility, because these women are more likely to be married to high-earning men, they may

have a greater capacity to respond by exiting the labor force.1 By using this set of women,

we are therefore focusing on the “canaries in the coal mine”, and can thus detect the eﬀects

of work environment when using a relatively blunt measure such as labor force participation.


       At the same time, we might expect educated women to work in positions with greater

beneﬁts and professional standing, suggesting that they should have a greater capacity to
adjust their work environment in response to motherhood (Tomlinson, 2004). If we then

ﬁnd evidence that work environment is correlated with labor force participation among
these women, this may reﬂect an underestimate of the eﬀect felt by women in lower ranks
of the professional hierarchy.


       We begin our analysis by discussing the elements likely to factor into a woman’s labor
supply decision at motherhood, focusing on two key components of taste: taste for time at
home with one’s children, and the identity value provided through one’s career. In this section
we provide a careful discussion of how the unobservable elements of taste will also aﬀect
sorting across graduate degrees, and across jobs within a ﬁeld (as well as into motherhood
   1
    Conversely, because these women are more likely to be the primary earner in their household, they may
have greater parity with their spouse in home production, and may therefore be less likely to quit.



                                                   2
itself). This insight helps guide our subsequent analysis. After introducing the data, we then
discuss our identiﬁcation strategy to address these two sources of bias in trying to tease out
treatment from selection.


      Among both the NSCG and Harvard graduate mothers, we focus our analysis on women
with small children, to consider the eﬀect of parenthood at the stage when demands at home

are most intense. Given the long-run eﬀects of labor supply gaps on women’s career outcomes
(Mincer and Ofek, 1982; Wood, Corcoran, and Courant, 1993; Bertrand, Goldin, and Katz,
2010), focusing on families with children not yet in the school system captures this key period
in mothers’ career and family life cycles.2


      Our two data sources provide complementary beneﬁts. The NSCG provides a more

representative sample of highly educated mothers, but the information on spouses is limited

and we observe only a cross-section. The Harvard sample is less representative but also more

homogeneous, and the data include much richer information about spouses and marriages.
Furthermore, in the Harvard data we can observe a subset of women both before and after

their ﬁrst birth. In both datasets, however, we have very rich information on education

and careers. Furthermore, we ﬁnd that the labor force participation rates across graduate

degrees are almost identical in each.


      As a ﬁrst step, we capitalize on our rich data to assess whether the labor supply diﬀer-

ences across career paths can be explained by systematic variation in women’s characteristics,
many of which will in part capture unobservable tastes for work or time at home. Even con-
trolling for these rich sets of variables, in both the NSCG and Harvard data we ﬁnd that the
disparities in labor force participation by advanced degree remain remarkably unchanged.


      This persistent diﬀerence in the propensity to remain working across women who com-
plete diﬀerent graduate degrees may therefore speak to systematic diﬀerences in the charac-
teristics, or “family friendliness,” of the jobs to which these degrees lead. Ideally, we would
  2
    Because we focus on women with small children, we are not addressing “opt-in” patterns, or re-entry
into the labor force.

                                                  3
like to capture several dimensions of women’s jobs, including both variation in “work-family”

policies and in the culture of the workplace.3 Elements of the former will include the gen-
erosity of available maternity leave, formal part- or ﬂex-time policies, or telecommuting. The
latter will include de facto norms on the implications of using such policies, as well as the
importance of factors such as “face time.” Systematic variation in either of these character-
istics may aﬀect the family friendliness of jobs, that is, the relative utility they provide to
women who must balance work and family commitments.


      Because we cannot directly observe these characteristics, our measure of family friend-

liness is primarily built on the simplest dimension of workplace ﬂexibility, the capacity to cut
one’s hours. As a ﬁrst, coarse measure, we deﬁne as non-family friendly those settings where
fewer than 20 percent of working mothers work part-time. For the Harvard sample, however,

because we can observe employer, we can build a more reﬁned measure that incorporates

information from listings of family-friendly ﬁrms, such as that published by Working Mother

magazine. For large for-proﬁt ﬁrms, this will capture the richer dimensions that generate
a family-friendly work environment, which are used to develop these rankings. By either

measure and within both datasets, MBAs are most likely to work in a non-family-friendly

environment before having children.


      For the set of Harvard mothers who we can observe both before and after ﬁrst birth, we
then consider how pre-birth work environment aﬀects post-birth labor supply. We ﬁnd that

work environment is a strong predictor of subsequent labor supply, but this may reﬂect the
taste of women who choose family-friendly jobs before having children. We then use a control-
function approach to predict sorting across pre-birth jobs based on the rich information
observed at college. We ﬁnd not only that these variables can predict whether a woman works
in a family-friendly job, but also that factors observed after college but before children have
little additional power in predicting this sorting. When we use this control function to assess
the inﬂuence of pre-birth work environment, the results are unchanged. By these estimates,
   3
     One might also consider the production function of a job as a central factor of its family friendliness,
such as ﬂexibility in the work itself or in who completes it. Evidence suggests, however, that the production
function need not be a ﬁxed characteristic of a given job (Claudia Goldin, as cited in Leonhardt, 2009).

                                                     4
women working in family-friendly environments before their ﬁrst birth are approximately 6

to 7 percentage points more likely to remain working after motherhood.


     Lastly, we return to focus on the pattern in labor force participation by graduate degree,

given the variation observed among women who by our deﬁnition are classiﬁed as working in
non-family-friendly jobs before motherhood. Using data from both samples, as well as the
ﬁndings of previous research, we ﬁnd evidence suggesting that the non-family-friendly jobs
held by MBAs are especially “unfriendly” for working mothers, in terms of both access to
part-time positions, and the negative consequences of using available work-family policies.


     Several caveats are in order in interpreting our results. First, because the second
half of our analysis relies exclusively on the Harvard sample, it reﬂects the labor supply

patterns of a particular set of mothers. As we document in the ﬁrst half of the analysis,
however, the labor supply patterns by degree are strikingly consistent across datasets. Thus,

at least on this dimension, the Harvard women look surprisingly similar to this otherwise

more representative sample of highly educated women.


     More importantly, it is extremely diﬃcult to rule out explanations based on selection.

Nonetheless, considering both our inability to explain the observed diﬀerences in labor supply

across advanced degrees, and our results on the importance of the family friendliness of a
woman’s job in explaining work propensity after motherhood, we ﬁnd this evidence suggestive

that a mother’s work environment inﬂuences her decision about whether to remain in the
labor force. Our results thus suggest that improved work-family policies or changes to social
norms could drive labor force participation of women closer to parity with men.


     This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 begins with a discussion of the existing
research on the inﬂuence of work environment. In Section 3 we introduce our framework for
assessing a mother’s labor force participation decision, and the related selection decisions
across career paths and job types. Section 4 describes our two datasets, and how we deﬁne
our measure of family friendliness. Given the underlying selection issues and the data at


                                              5
our disposal, Section 5 then lays out our empirical strategy, and Section 6 follows with our

results. In Section 7 we discuss some possible interpretations of our ﬁndings, and in Section 8
we conclude.


2       Existing Research on “Family Friendliness”

As yet there has been relatively little economic research speciﬁcally on the eﬀect of work

environment, although some work focuses on its relationship with wages. For instance John-
son and Provan (1995) assess whether wage diﬀerences between those with and without
work-family policies reﬂect a compensating diﬀerential or productivity gains, and Drago et
al. (2001) study the willingness to pay for these policies among teachers. Nielsen, Simon-

sen, and Verner (2004) consider whether worker selection across ﬁrms with varying levels
of such policies can help explain the “motherhood wage gap,” and Anderson, Binder, and

Krause (2003) oﬀer variation in work ﬂexibility as a potential explanation for diﬀerences in

the motherhood wage gap by education. To our knowledge, no paper before this one has

studied the eﬀect of work environment on women’s labor supply.


        By comparison, within the sociology literature there is a signiﬁcant body of research

on the eﬀect of work-family policies on the conﬂict between family and work commitments.4
This literature began with The Time Bind, the seminal work by Arlie Hochschild. Most

comparable to our setting, Swiss and Walker (1993) look at this question among alumnae
from Harvard’s business, medical, and law schools.


        Much of this literature focuses on job characteristics central to “family friendliness.”
This research considers not only variation in formal work-family policies, such as the avail-
ability of ﬂex- and part-time schedules, but also the ways in which work environment and
norms interact with these policies.
    4
    Another strain of literature in the area of organizational behavior and human resource management
focuses on the “business case” for these policies, such as their eﬀect on labor turnover (Batt and Valcour,
2003), proﬁts (Arthur and Cook, 2003), productivity (Clifton and Shepard, 2004), and shareholder value
(Arthur and Cook, 2004).



                                                    6
      For instance, a number of studies discuss the relationship between the use of non-

standard schedules and the nature of the work itself (Berg, Kalleberg and Appelbaum, 2003).
Swiss and Walker (1993) and Blair-Loy and Wharton (2004) focus on its predictability, and
Boulis (2004) focuses on a woman’s control over her own schedule. These papers discuss
women selecting specialties to attain a controllable work schedule, such as primary care
among doctors and avoiding litigation-heavy ﬁelds among lawyers.


      Much of this research also focuses on variation in perceived barriers to using work-
family policies because of negative long-term career consequences (e.g., Eaton, 2003; Blair-
Loy and Wharton, 2002). For instance, in high-education careers where productivity is hard
to measure, long hours can become its signal (Landers, Rebitzer, and Taylor, 1996). In
jobs with such work-hour norms, the use of part-time schedules can be especially harmful to

career advancement (Wax, 2004).


      In the theoretical framework that follows, we abstract away from the detail of workplace

policies and norms, and consider only the simplest metric, hours worked. In Section 7,

however, we will return to this discussion to provide insight for interpreting our results.


3     Framework for Assessing Women’s Career and Work Choices

In this section we lay out a framework for assessing the inﬂuence of work environment on the
labor force participation decision of highly educated mothers. Given that we focus on vari-
ation in work levels across women with diﬀerent graduate degrees, we face the complication
created by two selection processes:

    1. the sorting of women across ﬁelds (as deﬁned by graduate degree), and
    2. within ﬁeld, the sorting between family-friendly and non-family-friendly jobs.


This section describes how women make these decisions based on individual tastes, and
the implications of this sorting. In the ﬁrst half of the section we make the simplifying
assumption that all jobs within a profession are homogeneous, leaving only the selection

                                              7
process across graduate degrees. We will then consider the implications of women sorting

across job types within ﬁelds.


       As a starting point, however, there is a third potential selection issue if work environ-

ment inﬂuences the initial decision to have children. If some women in non-family-friendly
jobs respond by foregoing parenthood, the average taste for children among those who choose
to have kids will be higher among mothers from a non-family-friendly environment. If this
taste is positively correlated with taste for time at home, labor force participation rates
among these women will be driven down accordingly. As we show in Appendix Section C,

we ﬁnd no evidence of variation in the propensity to have children among women from
diﬀerent work environments, so for the sake of simplicity, we ignore this issue here.5


       Given this choice into parenthood, suppose a given mother i decides whether to work
in year t based on the relative value of her marginal hour at work (wit ) and at home (wit∗ )

(Heckman, 1974):

                      ∑
         wit = b0 +         b1j Sij + b2 Eit + b3 Zit + νit ,                                             (1)
                        j



         wit∗ = β0 + β1 hit + β2 Kit + β3 Yit + β4 Ait + εit .                                            (2)

In Equation (1), Sij is a vector of dummy variables indicating whether woman i has a
graduate degree of type j (e.g., MBA or MD), Eit is her work experience at time t, and Zit
are other factors that inﬂuence her oﬀered wage. The elements of Equation (2) include hours

worked (hit ), total children (Kit ), her husband’s salary (Yit ), and non-earned income (Ait ).
   5
     This lack of variation in the propensity to have children may indicate that women have diﬃculty assessing
the impact of their work environment before they become mothers. In Appendix Section C we also test for
selection into parenthood on ability. In both the NSCG sample and the Harvard longitudinal sample (but
not the full Harvard sample), we ﬁnd mild evidence of positive selection. By comparison, Bertrand et al.,
2010 ﬁnd no evidence of ability-based selection into parenthood among their MBA sample, but they do not
address the possibility that mothers may select into diﬀerent job types.




                                                       8
       The general practice is to assume that a woman works, hit > 0, if the hourly wage is

greater than her reservation wage assessed at h = 0, wit > wit∗ (0).6 Such a woman will then
choose her optimal labor supply, h∗it , where the two equations are equal. Yet this assumes
that women have perfect control over their work hours.


       Suppose, instead, that there exists a minimum hours requirement for a given career
path, hmin
       j   , that varies across ﬁelds j (but not across jobs within ﬁeld j). Under this as-
sumption, the relevant comparison is the oﬀered wage versus the reservation wage at hmin
                                                                                     j   :7


          wit∗ (hmin
                 j   ) = β0 + β1 hmin
                                  j   + β2 Kit + β3 Yit + β4 Ait + β5 (wit hmin
                                                                            j   ) + εit .                   (3)


Thus at a given point in time, a woman i in ﬁeld j will work only if:

                                  (                         )
           P (hit > 0|Sij ) = P wit (Sij ) ≥    wit∗ (hmin
                                                       j   )
                              (
                          = P b0 + b1j Sij + b2 Eit + b3 Zit + νit ≥                                        (4)
                                                                                                    )
                                 β0 + β1 hmin
                                          j   + β2 Kit + β3 Yit + β4 Ait + β5 (wit hmin
                                                                                    j   ) + εit .



       Now consider the observation that among mothers, MDs are much more likely to work

than MBAs: P (hi > 0|SM D ) > P (hi > 0|SM BA ). If b1M D = b1M BA , and all of the variables

in Equation (4) are equally distributed, this would imply that hmin    min
                                                                M D < hM BA – that being a

doctor is more easily combined with family than working in the business world.


       Yet the elements of Equation (4) are unlikely to be equal among women in diﬀerent
ﬁelds. For instance, since many meet their spouse in graduate school, we would expect
systematic variation in their husbands’ salaries. We might also expect the number of children
to vary if women time births around schooling of diﬀerent lengths.
   6
     This assumes that women make their current-period decision without factoring in future consequences.
A more complete speciﬁcation would consider the path of period-speciﬁc labor supply in a life-cycle setting.
Current choices may aﬀect future wage oﬀers not only through experience, Eit , but also if there exist penalties
for labor supply gaps, which may vary across ﬁelds j (Bertrand et al., 2010).
   7
     The minimum hours requirement creates a new corner solution, where the choice at the margin is the
decision to work hmin
                  j    hours and earn wit hmin
                                           j   , explaining the additional term in Equation (3).



                                                       9
       More importantly, we know that women are not randomly assigned across ﬁelds. Each

woman i will choose the graduate degree Sj that maximizes her expected lifetime utility,
where E[Uij ] reﬂects the diﬀerence between her expected beneﬁts and costs of career path j:


         E[Costij |Sij ] = E[tuitionj |Sij ] + E[(years in school)j |Sij ] ∗ (forgone wages/year)i ,

                            (                         )
         E[Beneﬁtij |Sij ] = E[∆earningsi |Sij ] + ψij ∗ E[(years working)i |Sij ].

The costs include the tuition and years of schooling, while the beneﬁts include the expected
change in earnings, plus a factor ψij that reﬂects the value of a woman’s professional identity

from working in ﬁeld j, each multiplied by the expected number of years worked.8


      Notice two things. First, hmin
                                 j   will enter into the expected beneﬁts of a given career
                                                                         [∑                   ]
                                                                                  ∗
path through its inﬂuence on years worked: E[(years working)i |Sij ] = E    t P (hit ≥ hmin
                                                                                        j   )  .9

Second, we can decompose the error term in the reservation wage into three elements, εit =

ζit − ψij + ωit , where ζit reﬂects her taste for time at home with her children, and ωit captures

all other factors.10 Since ψij can only be enjoyed if working, it enters negatively into εit .


       Given Equation (4), we can see that ζ will likewise enter into the expected beneﬁts of

a given career path, again through an inﬂuence on the number of years a woman expects
to work. Thus unobserved elements of taste, θ = (ζ, ψ), as well as hmin
                                                                    j   , will inﬂuence not

only a woman’s labor supply decision at a speciﬁc point in time, but also the initial selection

process across ﬁelds.


       Now consider the implications of relaxing the assumption that all jobs within each
career path are homogeneous. In truth the types of jobs within any ﬁeld will vary in their
work environment, and women may include this information on the mix of family friendliness
   8
     Much of the popular press and sociology literature discuss the personal identity issues associated with
leaving one’s job (Wallis, 2004; Swiss and Walker, 1993; Stone and Lovejoy, 2004).
   9
     This equation is a slight over-simpliﬁcation. For the years in which h∗ < hmin , the threshold of whether
a women works reﬂects the diﬀerence in utility of working 0 versus hmin hours.
  10
     This formulation assumes all women anticipate having children. As written, ζit may vary over time, for
instance with the age of a woman’s children.


                                                     10
in their initial schooling decision. Likewise, after completing their education, we should also

expect women to sort across these job environments based on taste (Polachek, 1977).


Challenge #1: Eﬀect of Variation in ψ

Given the large variation in cost across graduate degrees, all else equal, the mean value of
ψ must be higher for women who choose a high-cost ﬁeld over a low-cost ﬁeld (e.g., an MD
instead of an MBA). This systematic diﬀerence will be necessary to increase their expected
number of years worked – thus oﬀsetting the higher cost – and will in turn increase their
labor force participation at any point in time.11 Thus when considering whether variation in

labor supply across ﬁelds speaks to variation in work environment, if we cannot fully control
for this element of taste, any remaining diﬀerences between high- and low-cost ﬁelds may
speak only to variation in ψ.12


Challenge #2: Eﬀect of Variation in ζ

Consider the distribution of ζ among the whole population of women. There exists some

threshold, ζ H , above which all women will leave the labor force at motherhood – regardless

of their work environment – because their h∗ will fall below the minimum hours requirement

in all ﬁelds. Among these women the family friendliness of their pre-birth job is irrelevant,
and they will choose non-family-friendly options if they oﬀer systematically higher wages.


       Exclusive of these women, among the remainder of the population we should expect

those in the upper part of the ζ distribution to choose family-friendly ﬁelds, or family-friendly

jobs within a given ﬁeld. Thus if non-family-friendly jobs pay more, the sorting across job
types will switch directions at two points in the ζ distribution: women with both low and
very high levels of ζ may systematically choose to work in non-family-friendly environments
before they have children.
  11
     By this same argument, if the distribution of ψ is instead equal across ﬁelds, women in high-cost ﬁelds
must heave systematically lower ζ.
  12
     Likewise, if for some reason those women who select family-friendly jobs have systematically higher ψ,
any greater labor force participation among these mothers could arise through this variation in taste rather
than through a treatment eﬀect of work environment.




                                                    11
       The implication of this sorting depends on which part of the ζ distribution is captured

in our population of highly educated women. If our samples primarily exclude women in
the right-hand tail of the ζ distribution – such that we only capture the lower switching
point – the mean value of ζ among women who choose family friendly jobs before children
will be higher than the mean among women working in non-family-friendly jobs: E[ζ|F F ] >
E[ζ|nF F ]. If instead our samples include women with ζ ≥ ζ H , the opposite may hold.13


       We suspect that the former is more likely. Why would women with very high ζ invest
in a graduate degree?14 Given this likely direction of sorting, because the mean value of ζ
will be higher among women who choose family-friendly jobs, their post-children distribution
of h∗ will lie to the left of the distribution among women we observe in non-family-friendly
environments. Thus for a given value of hmin , all else equal, women who choose family-

friendly jobs should be more likely to leave the labor force at motherhood.


       Consider this in terms of measuring the causal eﬀect of work environment on labor

force participation. If a family-friendly environment has a positive eﬀect on mothers’ work

levels, unless we can fully absorb variation in ζ, our measure will understate the true causal

eﬀect. If, however, sorting on ζ occurs in the opposite direction, the reverse will hold and
our coeﬃcient will be too large.


       Throughout this section, however, we are likely overstating the level of bias created by

variation in taste by assuming complete information. In truth, women make choices under

great uncertainty. It is diﬃcult to gauge the family friendliness of any job before the fact,
and appreciably harder to determine the overall level of an entire ﬁeld, especially since it
  13
     If, however, the same ﬁelds that have low hmin likewise have lower penalties for time oﬀ, those high-ζ
women who anticipate a return to work may instead choose a family-friendly ﬁeld j before having children.
  14
     An intriguing possibility is that high-ζ women use graduate school as a marriage market for high-earning
spouses. Considering the three high-salary professions – doctors, lawyers, and businessmen – the least costly
choice would be to enroll in business school. (Men with MBAs might likewise have a greater taste for high-ζ
wives.) Using the Harvard data, comparing the labor force participation rates of women who are paired
before graduate school versus those who marry a classmate, a comparison across degrees ﬁnds no evidence
suggesting this phenomenon.




                                                     12
will change over time, and at potentially varying rates across the set of alternatives j.15


       Furthermore, women may not be fully cognizant of their value of ζ before they have
their ﬁrst child, which for most occurs after they have started their ﬁrst post-graduate job.
In the Harvard sample, for example, the average age at ﬁrst birth is 32, on average 7 to 9
years after applying to graduate school. Thus at each stage, the eﬀects of selection are likely

to be dampened by this lack of complete information.


4      Data and Descriptive Statistics

In this section we begin by introducing the NSCG and Harvard data (see the data appendix
for greater detail), and compare the educational and family formation patterns of these two

populations of women. We then introduce our measures of family friendliness.


4.1     NSCG Data

The 2003 wave of the National Survey of College Graduates captures a sample of US residents

who hold at least a bachelors degree (completed by April 1st, 2000), and who lived in the

US in both 2000 and 2003. For each respondent we observe highest degree attained, grouped

by PhD, MA, or a professional degree. We distinguish MBAs from MAs based on graduate
ﬁeld of study (business); among those with professional degrees, we distinguish JDs, MDs,
and those with specialized MAs, based on ﬁeld of study and occupation.


       The NSCG captures enormously rich information on education and employment (e.g.,
occupation, sector, salary, and hours worked). Unfortunately the survey provides more lim-
ited demographic information, especially with respect to each woman’s spouse. In particular,
we do not observe spouse’s earnings.


       We focus our analysis on women who have children under the age of 6, and, for the
sake of homogeneity, we include only those who have completed a graduate degree.16 We
  15
     When choosing across graduate programs women will also have, at best, a rough estimate of their
spouse’s future earnings, especially since most are not yet married.
  16
     For the same reason, we also exclude women who completed their BA outside the US or after they turned
                                                   13
also limit our sample to married women, who will have another potential source of income

beyond their own earnings. This provides a sample of 1,404 women, with a mean age of 36.2.


4.2     Harvard Graduate Data

We collect data from the 10th and 15th anniversary reports for the graduating classes of 1988
through 1991, focusing on women observed 15 years after earning their BA (in 2003 to 2006),
when they are approximately 37.17 Among these classes, 55 percent of women responded to

the 15th-year survey; see Appendix B.1 for a discussion of the response patterns.


      The anniversary reports provide rich professional and demographic information. The
professional data include detailed information on post-graduate education (including the
program attended, institution, and year of graduation), and current occupation and ﬁrm.

The personal information include spouse’s detailed education and occupation, and children’s

year of birth.


      We supplement this with data collected from the yearbook, including college activities

(major and varsity sports participation), family background (region of origin, private school

attendance, and race/ethnicity), and dormitory. Students chose dorms at the end of their
ﬁrst year, and many were known to have a certain identity (e.g., “artsy”, “jocks”, “legacy”,

or “pre-med”). As discussed below, we ﬁnd that this information predicts much about these
women’s subsequent career decisions.


      In the anniversary reports many graduates also write a narrative describing their life
and achievements over the previous ﬁve years. Among those respondents moving into parent-
hood, this often focuses on a description of life after children, including a discussion of their
work choices. From these comments, as well as those reporting their occupation as “mom”
25, and those who attended community college.
   17
      Goldin and Katz (2008) report preliminary results from a large data collection eﬀort on several cohorts
of Harvard and Radcliﬀe graduates (the “Harvard and Beyond” study sample). Their study depicts broad
trends in various schooling, family, and work choices made by men and women graduating around 1970,
1980, and 1990. In recent work Goldin and Katz use this data to explore the question of variation in labor
force participation rates among highly educated women (John R. Commons Award Lecture, ASSA, January,
3, 2010). Our analysis relies on a diﬀerent data source, although our sample overlaps with their 1990 cohort.
See Section 4 and Appendix B for a more detailed discussion of our data.
                                                     14
or its equivalent, we can measure the current employment status of Harvard mothers.18


       One limitation of the Harvard data is that we lack information on earnings. We there-
fore hired a career consultant to impute salaries for both the graduates and their spouses.
We provided him our rich information on an individual’s education, location, occupation,
and ﬁrm. Because he did not observe gender or parental status, these estimates reﬂect

gender-neutral salary levels associated with a given career. We estimate “gendered” wages
from these salary values using detailed sector/industry/occupation average hours and gender
wage gaps, as described in detail in Appendix B.2.19


       As with the NSCG, we limit ourselves to women who are married, but include women

with children of all ages and those with no graduate degree.20 This gives us a sample of
934 women. We also focus on the subset of Harvard mothers who we observe both before

and after ﬁrst birth, the “longitudinal” sample. This includes the 286 women observed both

10 and 15 years after graduation, who had their ﬁrst child within this period, who provide
suﬃcient work information at both points, and who do not hold either an MD or PhD.21


4.3     Comparing NSCG and Harvard Mothers

Table 1 compares education and family formation patterns for all female college graduates
in their late 30s in the NSCG and Harvard datasets. The ﬁrst lines show that Harvard

graduates attain much more education than the more representative sample of US college
  18
     Using data from married Harvard couples, we test for two potential sources of bias: that stay-at-home
mothers under-respond to the survey or fail to report their at-home status, or that at-home mothers are
over-represented. We ﬁnd no evidence that at-home mothers are under-represented, and weak evidence that
they may be slightly over-represented.
  19
     Appendix B.2 also discusses whether our initial salary estimates are systematically understated. We
conclude that spouse’s, but not own, earnings may be too low. Because this pattern may vary by spouse’s
graduate degree, we include this additional factor directly in our analysis.
  20
     Nine percent of the Harvard mothers have a youngest child age 6 or older (of which half are exactly 6).
We do not exclude women without graduate degrees because this sample is much more homogenous.
  21
     As discussed in Section 5, we exclude the MDs and PhDs because these reﬂect much higher-cost graduate
degrees, and are therefore likely to introduce the strongest selection on taste. On a more practical matter,
we also exclude them because too many are still in training 10 years after graduation, thus we lack suﬃcient
information on their pre-birth (post-training) work environment to assess its inﬂuence on their subsequent
work patterns. For instance, 43 percent of women who hold a PhD by 15 years after graduation are still
in graduate school or are completing post-doctoral fellowships 5 years earlier, and 58 percent of MDs are
completing their residency or fellowships, or are still in medical school.


                                                    15
        Table 1: Comparison of Education and Family Formation                             Patterns
                            All         MD PhD           JD    MBA                        MA     None
 Distribution of Highest Graduate Degrees (%):
    NSCG                      -         1.6∗∗   1.6∗∗   2.7∗∗   4.2∗∗                     22.1∗∗     67.8∗∗
                                            ∗∗      ∗∗      ∗∗
    Harvard                   -       14.7     14.4    20.4    13.8∗∗                     18.7∗∗     18.0∗∗
 Married (%):
    NSCG                    76.1        77.5    70.9   65.8∗    75.3                       74.1       78.0
    Harvard                 77.1        81.2    73.5   76.5∗    77.6                       75.8       78.1
 If Married, Children (%):
    NSCG                    80.7        78.5    74.9    81.3    80.8                       78.3       82.3∗
    Harvard                 79.6        85.1    72.7    82.4    84.7                       76.9       76.2∗
 If Married & Children, Total Kids (#):
    NSCG                   2.18∗∗     2.21∗∗ 1.90       2.08   2.10∗                      2.09∗∗     2.24∗∗
                           (0.97)     (0.95) (0.86) (0.79) (0.88)                         (0.92)     (1.00)
    Harvard                1.88∗∗     1.84∗∗ 1.74       1.94   1.88∗                      1.86∗∗     1.97∗∗
                           (0.79)     (0.67) (0.78) (0.74) (0.85)                         (0.88)     (0.79)
 If Married & Children, Kids Under Age 6 (%):
    NSCG                   73.4∗∗     83.3∗∗ 83.9       89.7   86.9+                      74.6∗∗     69.9∗∗
    Harvard                90.8∗∗     96.1∗∗ 89.7       92.9   92.8+                      92.8∗∗     80.4∗∗
 NOTES:
 Values reﬂect means (and for total children, standard deviations). The NSCG sample includes women
 ages 35 to 40 who completed their BA in the US by the year they turned 25 and never attended community
 college (N = 5237). The Harvard sample includes all women in the classes of 1988 to 1991 observed 15
 years after college graduation (N = 1522). Given the NSCG’s focus on science and technology, we apply
 survey weights to calculate the education proportions. Signiﬁcance levels reﬂect the ability to reject the
 null of equality of each proportion within the Harvard and NSCG samples (+ signiﬁcant at 10%, ∗ at 5%,
 and ∗∗ at 1%). See Appendix Section C for a discussion of whether the proportion who have children
 varies across degrees within samples.



graduates. Despite these large diﬀerences, we see that the proportion who are married,
and among those, the proportion who have children, is surprisingly similar across these two

samples, both overall and by graduate degree. Given that Harvard women have fewer and
younger children, however, it is clear that Harvard graduates delay parenthood for longer.22


       Table 2 next compares the employment rates of our two samples of mothers to those
for women and men who have not yet had children.23 (See Appendix Tables A-1 and A-
  22
     As shown in Appendix Tables A-1 and A-3, however, given our restriction of the NSCG to women with
graduate degrees and children under age 6, the number of kids is very similar in the two samples used.
  23
     See the notes to Table 2 for detail on the sample criteria for the population without children. Our goal is
to measure employment rates among women who currently do not have children, but who may do so in the
future, since the behavior of women who choose to stay childless may not reﬂect the pre-birth work patterns
of women who later become mothers.


                                                      16
                     Table 2: Employment Rates by Parental Status
                                All    MD PhD JD MBA MA                                     None
                                    NSCG Sample
 No Children:
  Women (%)                          93.8     97.3  92.8          92.2    97.1      93.3       -
                                    [915]      [73]  [69]         [90]     [70]    [613]       -
       Men (%)                       93.3     98.6  95.6          87.3    89.1      93.6       -
                                    [824]      [70] [113]         [63]     [92]    [486]       -
 Mothers (%)                         77.7     94.3  84.1          78.1    75.2      74.6       -
                                   [1404]     [106] [189]        [114]    [141]    [854]       -
                                         Harvard Sample
 No Children:
  Women (%)                          98.2      100.0    99.1      98.0     96.6     97.4     98.5
                                   [1063]      [162]    [112]    [253]    [146]    [193]     [197]
       Men (%)                       97.8      100.0    98.5      98.1     95.9     97.7     97.7
                                   [1348]      [167]    [136]    [315]    [246]    [131]     [353]
 Mothers (%)                         78.1       94.2     85.5     77.6    71.7     72.9       68.7
                                    [934]      [154]    [117]    [196]    [138]    [166]     [163]
 NOTES:
 Data reﬂect the mean employment rates, with sample sizes listed in brackets. In the NSCG, the “no
 children” sample include all respondents who meet the sample criteria listed Section 4.1, but who
 are childless and are between the ages of 26 and 33. In the Harvard sample the “no children” sample
 are those observed in the 10th-year reunion who have no children, and who have already completed
 their schooling. The data for the NSCG and Harvard mothers reﬂect the analysis samples discussed
 in Sections 4.1 and 4.2, respectively.



3 for more summary statistics for the NSCG and Harvard samples, respectively.) Notice

that employment rates among women without children are very high, and vary little across

graduate degrees. For instance, in both the NSCG and Harvard samples, 97 percent of the
childless female MBAs are working (signiﬁcantly more than MBA men in the NSCG).


        Among mothers, however, the proportion working varies strongly by ﬁeld. In the
NSCG 94 percent of MDs work, compared to only 75 percent of MBAs and MAs. Among
the Harvard sample, an equal 94 percent of MDs work, compared to 72 to 73 percent of
MBAs and MAs, and 69 percent of women with no graduate degree.24 The similarity of
these labor force participation rates are striking, especially given that the Harvard sample
are a much more select group of women.25 Furthermore, these rates are high compared to
  24
     Women in the Harvard longitudinal sample have higher labor force participation: 84 percent for the
JDs, 74 percent for the MBAs, and 81 percent for both the MAs and those with no additional degree.
  25
     Likewise, among their sample of Harvard business, law, and medical school alumnae who graduated 15
                                                   17
those for women with only a BA, calling into question the media focus on the “excessive”

opt-out rates among highly educated mothers.26


4.4     Deﬁning Family Friendliness

As the ﬁrst step in deﬁning family friendliness, we use the distribution of hours worked among
mothers in diﬀerent types of jobs as an indication of the ﬂexibility of the environment. The
NSCG provides detailed data on hours worked, employer sector (e.g., for-proﬁt, non-proﬁt,
government), employer size, and occupation. We use these data – by graduate degree – to
distinguish across types of work environments, for instance large versus small ﬁrms, or in
education, working as a teacher versus in another capacity.


      We use the hours distribution of working mothers to deﬁne our family-friendliness

measure because we think it will reﬂect the existence of a minimum hours requirement. In

ﬁelds with no such threshold, we expect observed hours to approximate h∗ , women’s ideal

work hours after children. In ﬁelds with a minimum requirement, however, we expect hours

to be truncated, with women with low values of h∗ forced to leave the labor force.


      Within each work environment, we deﬁne as non-family friendly those settings in which
the 25th percentile of the hours distribution for working mothers is full-time, or fewer than

20 percent work part-time. As the top panel of Table 3 shows, these two criteria capture
exactly the same ﬁelds: big ﬁrms, the government, and teaching.27 Even though we consider
this separately by graduate degree, the patterns are the same across each.


      A comparison of the hours distribution among women with and without children sug-
gests that our criteria capture those ﬁelds in which work hours are more constrained. Com-
to 25 years before our samples, Swiss and Walker (1993) ﬁnd similar results. By their 30s and 40s, only 75
percent of MBA mothers are working, compared to 89 percent of JDs and 96 percent of MDs.
  26
     By comparison, among the NSCG married mothers of small children who hold only a BA (but who
otherwise meet the criteria listed in Section 4.1), only 66.4 percent are working.
  27
     Some may ﬁnd this designation for teaching surprising. Because our measure may be slightly misspeciﬁed
for these women (since it is based on weekly hours and ignores that they get the summers oﬀ), we distinguish
teachers from those in other non-family-friendly environments in our speciﬁcations reported in Table 7.
Another reason for this is that we suspect that women who select teaching – working with other people’s
children – may have a systematically higher desire to stay home with their own.


                                                    18
       Table 3: Labor Supply Patterns of NSCG Mothers and Non-Mothers
                        Big Small Non- School Educ- Govern-           Self-
                       Firm Firm proﬁt Teacher ation        ment   Employed
                                 Women With Children:
 MA
   % < 35 hrs/wk             17.5      46.0      42.2        12.1        36.1        18.5            56.4
   25th p-tile (hrs/wk)       40        21        24          40          21          38              15
   Sample size               514       150       204         603         590         227             275
 JD
   % < 35 hrs/wk             19.1      43.8      29.6          -           -         10.5            46.2
   25th p-tile (hrs/wk)       38        20        30           -           -          37              15
   Sample size                47        32        27           -           -          38              65
 MBA
   % < 35 hrs/wk             14.6      40.7      31.1      -               -         15.4            51.1
   25th p-tile (hrs/wk)       40        21        32       -               -          40              17
   Sample size               192        27        61       -               -          26              45
                                       Women     Without Children:
 MA
   % < 35 hrs/wk              4.5      16.9       8.9        2.6         28.4        3.2             15.6
   25th p-tile (hrs/wk)       40        37        40         40           30         40               36
   Sample size                399      118        203        312         507         219             147
 JD
   % < 35 hrs/wk             1.7        0.0      19.0          -           -         1.8             17.5
   25th p-tile (hrs/wk)      46.5       40        38           -           -         40               40
   Sample size                60        21        21           -           -         55               40
 MBA
   % < 35 hrs/wk              0.6       0.0      11.3          -           -         0.0             13.0
   25th p-tile (hrs/wk)       40        45        40           -           -         40               35
   Sample size                158       21        53           -           -         25               23
 NOTES:
 Environments deﬁned as non-family-friendly are distinguished in bold. (As discussed in footnote 21, we do not
 include MDs and PhDs.) Relative to other degrees, a much higher proportion of MAs work in education, so we
 distinguish education from other non-proﬁts, and within education, distinguish primary-and secondary-school
 teachers from those working in other capacities. To increase the sample sizes, we use NSCG mothers of children
 under age 12, and for the set of non-mothers we include women ages 25 to 40. We also do not exclude those
 who attended a community college or university outside of the US, or who completed their BA after age 25,
 although among the mothers we still include only those who are married. In both instances, the patterns are
 the same if we instead use these exclusion restrictions.


paring the top and bottom panels of Table 3, whereas non-mothers in “family-friendly”
ﬁelds are generally working full-time, mothers are working 10 to 25 fewer hours per week.
By comparison, in the “non-family-friendly” ﬁelds, the 25th percentile among mothers is,
with one exception, at most 3 hours per week lower than among non-mothers. We take this
as evidence of a limit on women’s capacity to cut their work hours in these environments.

                                                   19
       Lastly, because we observe ﬁrm names in our Harvard data, for the longitudinal sample

we build a richer measure of work environment by using ﬁrm-speciﬁc family friendliness
rankings. In particular, we reclassify as family friendly those large ﬁrms that are included
in the list of “Top Ten Family-Friendly Firms” as compiled by the Yale Law Women, or
the list of “Best Places” for working mothers by Working Mother magazine.28 Using this
data, 20 percent of the Harvard women in large ﬁrms are re-categorized as working in a
family-friendly environment, including 25 percent of MBAs and JDs.


       One concern in using these deﬁnitions is that our initial measure of “family friendliness”

is endogenous to sorting across work environments. As discussed in Section 3, women with
high taste for time at home with their children, ζ, may select more family-friendly ﬁelds.
Among these women we would therefore expect h∗ to shift down by more at motherhood.

Thus our observation that mothers in certain ﬁelds are more likely to be working part-time

may reﬂect a higher proportion wanting to work part-time, not a higher proportion being

allowed to work part-time.


       A second concern is tautological. If the hours distribution in “non-family friendly” ﬁelds

arises because women with low h∗ quit, we are eﬀectively using a measure of the proportion
of women who quit to predict the proportion of women who quit, albeit in another dataset.


       An alternative approach would be to rely on the labor supply patterns of women

without children to gauge access to part-time schedules. Looking at the bottom panel of
Table 3, we see roughly two norms – those environments in which fewer than 5 percent work
part-time, and those where 10 to 20 percent do so.


       If we instead used this data to build our deﬁnition of work environment, setting the
threshold at 5 percent, the set of jobs classiﬁed as non-family friendly would be almost
identical.29 Furthermore, because much of our analysis focuses on the application of this
  28
    See Appendix Table A-4 for a listing of the ﬁrms included in each of these sources.
  29
    The two exceptions are JDs and MBAs working for small ﬁrms. We rely on our original criteria rather
than this deﬁnition because of this discrepancy. If the data for non-mothers suggest JDs and MBAs in small
ﬁrms cannot work part-time, how can it be that 40 percent of mothers do so? As a check, however, see

                                                   20
deﬁnition to the Harvard sample, this part of the classiﬁcation will not be endogenous to

the labor supply choices of the Harvard women themselves. In addition, the main parts of
our analysis use the more reﬁned measure of work environment, which incorporates direct
information about the family friendliness of large ﬁrms.

             Table 4: Distribution of Family Friendliness Before Children
                                                     All     JD MBA MA                                    None
 NSCG:
  Non-family-friendly (%)                                          50.6       57.4      61.4     48.4        -
    Big ﬁrm                                                        22.9       29.7      53.4     18.4        -
    Government                                                     13.5       27.7       8.0     12.2        -
    School teacher                                                 14.3        -          -      17.8        -
    Small ﬁrm                                                       7.3       10.9       8.0      6.8        -
    Non-proﬁt                                                      11.0       11.9      21.6     11.7        -
    Other education                                                22.9        -          -      26.8        -
    Self-employed                                                   8.1       19.8       9.1      6.4        -
   Sample Size:                                                    943        101        88      754         -

 Harvard Longitudinal Sample:
  Non-family-friendly (NSCG-compatible, %)                         57.0       62.0      71.2     36.0      60.4
  Non-family-friendly (ﬁrm-speciﬁc, %)                             47.9       51.1      53.0     36.0      52.8
     Big non-FF-ﬁrm                                                35.0       32.6      51.5     16.0      45.3
     Government                                                    9.4        18.5       1.5     9.3        3.8
     School teacher                                                3.5          -         -      10.7      3.8
     Big FF-ﬁrm                                                     9.1       10.9      18.2      0.0       7.5
     Small ﬁrm                                                     18.9       23.9      18.2     20.0       9.4
     Non-proﬁt                                                     12.9       10.9       4.5     25.3       9.4
     Other education                                                4.9         -         -      14.7       5.7
     Self-employed                                                  6.3        3.3       6.1      4.0      15.1
   Sample Size:                                                    286         92        66       75        53

 NOTES:
 The NSCG sample reﬂects all women who ﬁt the criteria listed in Section 4.1, but who are childless and within
 the ages of 26 to 36. (The median age is 31, and the 25th and 75th percentiles are 28 and 33. By comparison, in
 the NSCG mothers sample, among women with only children under age 2, the median age is 33, and the 25th
 and 75th percentiles are 30 and 35.) For each sample, the ﬁrst line(s) reﬂects the total percentage working in
 non-family-friendly environments, as deﬁned in the text. The lines that follow reﬂect the percentage working
 in each type of work environment, with those classiﬁed as non-family-friendly highlighted in bold.



      Using these deﬁnitions, Table 4 shows the proportion of women working in non-family-
friendly jobs before kids, both overall and by graduate degree. The top panel shows this for
footnote 40 for results when we use this alternate deﬁnition. Overall, we ﬁnd reassuring the general similarity
of these two potential deﬁnitions.


                                                      21
a sample of NSCG women who are comparable to our population of mothers, but who are

as-yet childless. The bottom panel shows this data for the Harvard longitudinal sample.


     Using only the coarser measure of family friendliness, we see that 51 percent of the

NSCG women and 57 percent of the Harvard longitudinal sample work in a non-family-
friendly environment. By the more detailed measure, a smaller 48 percent of our Harvard
sample work in such an environment before motherhood.


     In both datasets and by both measures, we see that family-friendly jobs are least
common among MBAs, driven by the high percentage of MBAs who work for (non-family-
friendly) large ﬁrms. Thus if work environment has a causal eﬀect on women’s labor supply

decisions after motherhood, the results in Table 4 provide a potential explanation for the

relatively low participation levels among MBAs.


     Using the more reﬁned measure for the Harvard sample, however, MBAs are only

slightly more likely to be in non-family-friendly jobs than JDs, primarily because of the
large number of lawyers who work for the government. Given insight from other sources on

the constraints in law, if we were to designate only litigation-heavy government positions as

non-family friendly (Swiss and Walker, 1993), and distinguish jobs as legal counsels for big

ﬁrms as family friendly (Mason and Eckman, 2007), a much lower 36 percent of the Harvard
JDs would be categorized as working in an “unfriendly” environment. We do not incorporate

this information into our primary measure of family friendliness because we have no similar

means to reﬁne our deﬁnition for women with other degrees, who tend to work in much less
homogenous settings.


5    Empirical Strategy

The following section outlines how we will attempt to identify the treatment eﬀect of work
environment, given the sources of potential bias discussed in Section 3.




                                             22
5.1     Controlling for Diﬀerences in Characteristics

Exploiting the richness of our two data sources, we begin with the simple approach of as-
sessing whether the observed labor supply diﬀerences across women with diﬀerent graduate
degrees can be explained by their characteristics. Rewriting Equation (4),

                      (    ∑                       )
         p(hi > 0) = F α +   βj Sij + γ1 Xi + γ2 θi ,                                                   (5)
                                   j



where X are the factors from the wage and reservation wage equations, and θ = (ζ, ψ) are
unobserved taste, we ﬁrst run this speciﬁcation with no controls, then add X, followed by
proxies for θ. Our focus is on the degree coeﬃcients, βj , which reﬂect the level diﬀerence in
labor supply between each degree j and MBAs, the excluded category.


       The variables X include many common to a married woman’s labor supply model,

such as her potential wage, number of children, and proxies for spouse’s income.30 We
also include proxies for assets (in the Harvard sample, private school attendance, and in

the NSCG, private university attendance and parents’ education), and controls to capture

variation in childcare costs (census region, and whether a woman lives in the same region

in which she was raised, suggesting potential proximity to family). As with many of the
other components of X, current region may also capture an element of taste, if there exists

geographic variation in the social norms on the acceptability of being a working mother
(Fogli and Veldkamp, 2008).


       The one element of X for which we have very diﬀerent information in these two datasets
is spouse’s earnings. In the NSCG we can only observe his labor force status and whether
his job requires a BA. In the Harvard data, we instead have estimates of his salary itself,
  30
    See Appendices A.1 and B.2 for greater detail on how we build estimated wages in the NSCG and
Harvard samples, respectively. Following Blau & Kahn (2007) and Juhn and Murphy (1997), we instrument
for wages using predicted wage distribution dummies to address measurement error. For the Harvard data,
because we rely on salary estimates as our building block for wages, to absorb any residual eﬀect that may
not be captured in our career consultant’s estimates, we also control for whether each woman attended a
top-10 graduate program and whether she holds more than one graduate degree. In both datasets we also
include year-of-graduation (from graduate school) ﬁxed eﬀects, to allow for long-term eﬀects of the economic
environment at the time of graduation (Oyer, 2008).


                                                    23
based on his education, occupation, location, and in some instances, ﬁrm.31


       In the Harvard data we also supplement this with detailed information on husbands’
education type and quality, including his graduate degree. Along with its inﬂuence on his
earnings, the latter may also speak to diﬀerent time constraints that translate into variation
in the value of a woman’s time at home (Stone and Lovely, 2004). For instance, husbands who

are MDs may be on call many nights, and husbands who are MBAs may travel frequently,
making each less available for household responsibilities.


       We next include controls that may reﬂect the underlying elements of taste, θ. For
instance, we expect educational choices such as undergraduate major, and in the NSCG,
type of institution (e.g., liberal arts versus research university), to reﬂect much about tastes,

especially ψ. In the Harvard data we can also control for whether a woman had her ﬁrst

child before she started graduate school; choosing a career path after motherhood may signal

a strong value associated with the identity of working in that ﬁeld.


       Our detailed information on marriages and spouses in the Harvard data also provide
an especially rich set of proxies for ζ. This includes whether a woman changed her name

at marriage, and her age diﬀerence with her spouse.32 Both may speak to diﬀerences in the

strength of gender norms within the household.


       We also include a rich set of controls that are likely to pick up both elements of taste.
These include family background, such as race and ethnicity, place of origin, and in the
NSCG, citizenship and reason for coming to the US. In the Harvard data we can also control
for the dorm in which each woman lived, and whether she played sports. The latter may
reﬂect women whose self-identity is tied more strongly to their athleticism than to their
careers, speaking especially to variation in ψ.
  31
     Because we are measuring spouse’s earnings after the ﬁrst child is born, this may reﬂect career adjust-
ments, especially among men married to women with a high taste for time at home, ζ. We may therefore
be “over-controlling” for its eﬀect on women’s labor supply, but in turn may be absorbing some of the eﬀect
of ζ on her participation decision.
  32
     Goldin and Shim (2004) use the anniversary reports to assess women’s surname choices at marriage.


                                                    24
        Given our focus on βj , our hope is that these elements of X and proxies for θ absorb

much of the variation in taste that leads to sorting across graduate degrees. As a check, we
can test this directly for the subset of controls observed by the time of college graduation. As
Appendix Tables A-5 and A-6 show, undergraduate major is strongly related to a woman’s
subsequent graduate degree. Many of the other factors are likewise important in predicting
this sorting, such as a woman’s race, where she grew up, whether she played sports, or the
type of institution she attended. In the Harvard data we also ﬁnd that her dorm is a strong
predictor, supporting the interpretation of her choice of dorm as a reﬂection of taste.


5.2       Controlling for Pre-Birth Work Environment

After controlling for X and θ in Equation (5), if there remain large diﬀerences in labor force

participation across ﬁelds – βj remain signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero – one might interpret

this as evidence of systematic variation in other factors, such as work environment. For the
Harvard longitudinal sample, we can test for this directly by assessing whether working in a

non-family-friendly environment before having children, nF Fi10 , predicts subsequent labor

supply:

                        (    ∑                                  )
           p(hi > 0) = F α +   βj Sij + δnF Fi10 + γ1 Xi + γ2 θi .                          (6)
                                   j


        As discussed in Section 3, however, if we cannot fully control for taste, we must be
especially wary of any conclusion based on the comparison of women who choose high- and
low-cost ﬁelds, such as MDs versus MBAs. For that reason, when we run Equation (6) we
exclude the two high-cost ﬁelds, MDs and PhDs, where we expect the strongest selection on
unobserved taste.33 Among the remaining women, we also focus our attention on the com-
parison of JDs and MBAs, where the costs and beneﬁts of each degree are much more similar,
both in terms of the length of training, and with respect to the structure of subsequent jobs
and their wage trajectories.


        Another factor discussed in Section 3 is that because women can sort across jobs, we
 33
      As noted in footnote 21, we also exclude MDs and PhDs for data reasons.

                                                    25
cannot necessarily interpret δ, the coeﬃcient on pre-birth work environment, nF Fi10 , as a

measure of the causal eﬀect. If women sort across jobs such that those observed in family-
friendly environments before children have systematically higher ζ and thus lower h∗ , if we
cannot fully control for taste, δ will be attenuated towards zero. (Any measurement error
in nF Fi10 will likewise attenuate δ towards zero.) If the opposite sorting predominates, the
reverse will hold.


        Given how we deﬁne family friendliness, women may also sort across jobs based on ψ.
For instance, non-proﬁt jobs – which may attract high-ψ women – are classiﬁed as family
friendly. Teaching and government, however, are classiﬁed as non-family friendly, and may
attract similar women.


        To address the bias introduced by this possible sorting, we adopt a control-function
strategy. Using the rich data from when our sample were college-age, Ci , we begin by

predicting a woman’s choice of pre-birth (post-graduate school) work environment:


           nFˆ F i10 = P (nF Fi10 = 1|Ci , Sij ).                                                      (7)


We then calculate the residual element of work environment, nF˜ F i10 = nF Fi10 − nFˆ F i10 . To

the extent that Ci absorb the factors that drive selection across job types, we can interpret
nF˜ F i10 as the random element of a woman’s pre-birth work environment.


        Table 5 reports the coeﬃcients on C in Equation (7) using our Harvard longitudinal
sample. To allow for sorting on ψ, we include as necessary interactions between individual
elements of C and graduate degree Sj , because the eﬀect of a given control may have varying
implications for women in diﬀerent ﬁelds. For instance, majoring in economics could inﬂuence
MAs in one way and JDs in another. By comparison, if women choose jobs based on their
family friendliness alone, and thus sort only on ζ, we would expect the coeﬃcient on a given
control to have the same sign for all degrees.34
 34
      This assumes we are capturing women from the same part of the ζ distribution among all degree groups.


                                                     26
           Table 5: Predicting Non-Family-Friendly Work Environment
                                          All      JD    MBA      MA                                None
                                                       +
Graduate degree                                 -0.354      -    -0.099                             0.079
  (excluded = MBA)                              (0.182)     -   (0.192)                            (0.202)
Undergraduate Major: (excluded = liberal arts)
  Economics                                      -0.303   0.188  0.491                              0.346
                                                (0.197) (0.165) (0.300)                            (0.312)
  Psychology                                    -0.517* -0.182 -0.200                               0.239
                                                (0.218) (0.305) (0.247)                            (0.270)
  Other social sciences                          -0.022   0.240 -0.324*                             0.270
                                                (0.131) (0.177) (0.151)                            (0.179)
  Science                                        0.664*   0.029  -0.112                                -
                                                (0.300) (0.358) (0.245)                                -
Played sports in college                        0.353** -0.109   0.171                              -0.243
                                                (0.128) (0.131) (0.136)                            (0.199)
Race: (excluded = Caucasian)
  Asian                                         0.585** 0.079     0.074                             -0.072
                                                (0.169) (0.192) (0.248)                            (0.409)
  Other minority                         0.200
                                        (0.157)
Private high school                               0.093  -0.188 -0.188                             -0.334+
                                                (0.118) (0.141) (0.135)                            (0.173)
Region in High School: (excluded = D.C. area)
  Northeast                              -0.071
                                        (0.128)
  Mid-Atlantic                          -0.226+
                                        (0.133)
  Midwest                                       -0.439* -0.418    0.200                             -0.169
                                                (0.196) (0.271) (0.285)                            (0.242)
  West (excluding CA)                            -0.366  -0.344  0.625                             0.966*
                                                (0.310) (0.398) (0.403)                            (0.399)
  California                                     0.429+ -0.156 -0.242                               0.163
                                                (0.231) (0.230) (0.234)                            (0.266)
  Big city                               0.077
                                        (0.088)
  Low-density state                              0.311+   0.057  -0.105                             -0.413
                                                (0.177) (0.273) (0.291)                            (0.293)
NOTES:
Results reﬂect coeﬃcients from a single OLS regression predicting the probability of working in a non-family
friendly environment 10 years after college, given one’s graduate education and factors observed at college
graduation. (Also included, but not shown here, include undergraduate dorm and growing up in the south or
outside of the US.) The ﬁrst column reports the marginal eﬀect for factors that are not interacted by degree;
the following four columns report the coeﬃcient on the interaction term between the given control and
each graduate degree, included only in those instances in which at least one interaction term is individually
signiﬁcant (or close at standard levels), and signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from another interaction term. The sample
included are the 286 women in the Harvard longitudinal sample. The R2 and adjusted R2 are 0.38 and 0.17,
respectively. Statistical signiﬁcance is indicated by + at 10%, * at 5%, and ** at 1%.

                                                   27
     Table 5 shows that the factors observable at college graduation are strongly related to

the types of jobs women hold 10 years later. For instance, undergraduate major has a strong
relationship with whether a woman subsequently works in a family-friendly job, although
the direction of sorting varies across degrees. Race, place of origin, and sports participation
are also closely related, again with varying eﬀects across groups. By comparison, the eﬀect
of undergraduate dorms is surprisingly consistent across degrees, and is a good predictor of
the family-friendliness of women’s pre-birth jobs.


     One might worry, however, that these college-level variables are more likely to pick up

variation in ψ than in ζ. Do 19- or 22-year old women really know if they will want to take
time oﬀ when they have children? Our results suggest that they do. If we regress the residual
element of work environment, nF˜ F i10 , on factors that occur after graduation but before the

10th-year job, these controls provide little additional explanatory power, even though many

are strongly related to subsequent labor supply after motherhood.


     Furthermore, we ﬁnd that C can predict who will take her husband’s name at marriage,

which we consider a proxy for ζ. In particular, it is the information on undergraduate dorm

that provides this power. Combining this with our ﬁnding that the eﬀect of dorm choice on
nF Fi10 is almost identical across degrees, this suggests that the element of taste that drives

a woman’s choice of dorm at the age of 19 is strongly correlated with ζ.


     Given this decomposition of observed pre-birth work environment, we then rerun Equa-
tion (6), replacing nF Fi10 with the predicted value and the residual, nFˆ F i10 and nF˜ F i10 .
In this control-function regression, to the extent that the college-level factors Ci absorb se-
lection across job types, the coeﬃcient on nF˜ F i10 should give us the causal eﬀect of work
environment, and the diﬀerence between the coeﬃcient on nF˜ F i10 and nFˆ F i10 will give
us the direction of the bias created by this selection. Furthermore, any attenuation in the
graduate degree coeﬃcients after controlling for this admittedly blunt measure of work envi-
ronment, will suggest that variation in family friendliness across ﬁelds helps drive the overall
variation in labor supply.

                                              28
6      Results

Table 6 reports the marginal eﬀects associated with the degree coeﬃcients, βj , when we
run Equation (5) on the NSCG and Harvard samples (top and bottom panels, respectively).
In each panel, Line (1) reports the results before including controls, Line (2) the results
after including only X, and Line (3) the fully-controlled speciﬁcation. The columns be-

tween the marginals report whether the diﬀerences between adjacent graduate programs are
statistically signiﬁcant. Appendix Table A-7 reports the marginals for the controls.

         Table 6: Diﬀerences in Probability Working by                     Graduate Degree
                         MD         PhD          JD                         MA      None                  R2
                                     NSCG Sample
                               ∗∗
 (1)   Uncontrolled    0.184**     0.085*       0.027                        -0.005           -          0.02
                       (0.028)     (0.038)     (0.048)                      (0.036)
 (2)   + Xs            0.172** ∗ 0.104**        0.051                        -0.003           -          0.10
                       (0.025)     (0.035)     (0.044)                      (0.038)
 (3)   + Proxies for θ 0.152**    0.104**       0.047                        -0.007           -          0.14
                       (0.032)     (0.037)     (0.047)                      (0.041)
                                    Harvard Sample
 (1)   Uncontrolled    0.205** ∗ 0.114** + 0.049                             0.011         -0.025        0.05
                       (0.027)     (0.036)     (0.039)                      (0.043)       (0.045)
                               +
 (2)   + Xs            0.172**     0.090*      0.069+                        0.044          0.007        0.21
                       (0.026)     (0.042)     (0.038)                      (0.047)       (0.073)
                                ∗
 (3)   + Proxies for θ 0.158**      0.066       0.046                        0.016         -0.029        0.28
                       (0.025)     (0.045)     (0.040)                      (0.052)       (0.081)
 NOTES:
 Each line reﬂects the results from a diﬀerent probit regression of labor force participation after motherhood,
 including an increasing number of controls, with the excluded category MBAs. The values listed are the
 marginal eﬀects associated with the given degree coeﬃcient, βj , from Equation (5). The ﬁrst line reports
 results when we control only for graduate degree. The second and third lines reﬂect the results when we
 control for the observable elements of the wage equation (X) and proxies for the unobservable elements (θ).
 (Lines (2) and (3) are estimated via instrumental variables; see footnote 30 for more detail.) See Appendix
 Table A-7 for a full listing of the controls included in the regressions reported in Lines (2) and (3), as well
 as the marginal coeﬃcients for a subset of these controls. The columns between the coeﬃcients in this table
 report whether the diﬀerences between adjacent graduate programs are statistically signiﬁcant. The last
 column reports the pseudo-R2 when we run the probit without instrumenting for own wage. Signiﬁcance
 levels marked as + (signiﬁcant at 10%), * (at 5%), and ** (at 1%).



       As with the raw data, the results in Lines (1) are very similar in the two samples.35 In
each we see, for instance, that MDs work appreciably more than PhDs, and both MDs and
  35
   Whereas the labor force participation rates for MDs, PhDs, and JDs are almost identical in these two
samples, in the Harvard sample MBAs are slightly less likely to work than MBAs in the NSCG, creating a
small level diﬀerence in the degree marginals reported here.
                                                     29
PhDs work more than MBAs. But we cannot reject that MBAs are as likely to work as JDs,

MAs, and in the Harvard sample, those with no graduate degree.


       As the results in Lines (2) and Appendix Table A-7 demonstrate, the elements of X

are highly correlated with labor supply in the predicted way, and the R2 s rise appreciably
with their addition.36 Yet including these controls does little to narrow the diﬀerence in
labor supply across graduate degrees. In both samples the coeﬃcient on JDs in fact rise – in
part because they have more children than MBAs – thus augmenting the diﬀerence between
these two ﬁelds.


       When we include the proxies for taste, we ﬁnd that many are strongly related to labor
force participation. For instance, in the Harvard data, women who begin graduate school

after having children – a proxy for ψ – are 10 percentage points more likely to remain working.
We also see that those who change their last name at marriage are instead 11 percentage

points more likely to quit. Because MBAs are by far the most likely to do so, this in part

helps explain their lower participation.


       Despite the power of these controls in predicting work patterns, and the resulting

attenuation of most of the degree coeﬃcients towards zero, the changes are fairly small.

In combination, a comparison of Lines (1) and (3) in both panels show that persistent
diﬀerences in labor supply remain, even after controlling for these rich sets of individual-

speciﬁc factors.37


       Table 7 reports the results of Equation (6), where we rerun the fully-controlled spec-
iﬁcation on the Harvard longitudinal sample, now controlling directly for pre-birth work
environment. Column (1) lists the degree-speciﬁc coeﬃcients, βj , for this subset of women
before including work environment, Column (2) reports the results when we control for the
  36
     The R2 is higher in the Harvard results, in part because of the richer data on spouse’s earnings, but also
because of the greater sample homogeneity. Even in speciﬁcations in which we include only those controls
that are observed in both datasets, the R2 s are consistently higher in the Harvard regressions.
  37
     The results for PhDs vary in the two datasets primarily because of the large proportion of science-related
PhDs among women in the NSCG.


                                                      30
                      Table 7: Eﬀect of Pre-Birth Work Environment

                                                                                 (1)         (2)          (3)
 Graduate Degree Controls: (Excluded = MBA)
   JD                                                                           0.043        0.039        0.040
                                                                               (0.030)     (0.025)      (0.025)
   MA                                                                           -0.022      -0.004       -0.006
                                                                               (0.066)     (0.041)      (0.042)
   None                                                                         0.045        0.033        0.033
                                                                               (0.037)     (0.026)      (0.026)
 Pre-Birth Work Environment:
   Non-family friendly (nF Fi10 )                                                         -0.073**
                                                                                           (0.035)
   Residual Non-family friendly (nF˜ F i10 )                                                           -0.060**
                                                                                                        (0.031)
   Predicted non-family friendly (nFˆ F i10 )                                                            -0.054
                                                                                                        (0.039)
   School teacher                                                                           0.001        0.002
                                                                                           (0.039)      (0.038)
 Sample Size                                                                    286          286          286
 Pseudo R2                                                                      0.45        0.48          0.48
 NOTES:
 Each column reﬂects a diﬀerent speciﬁcation predicting labor force participation after children (15 years after
 college graduation), reporting results before and after controlling for pre-birth work environment. Reported
 values reﬂect the marginal eﬀect calculated from a probit regression; we do not use the IV speciﬁcation
 described in the notes to Table 6 because doing so has no eﬀect on the results. See footnote 27 for why we
 separately distinguish teachers from those in other non-family-friendly environments. Because wages may be
 systematically lower in family-friendly jobs, we also run regressions which control for wages in a more ﬂexible
 way; this has no eﬀect on the results reported here. Standard errors reported in parentheses; signiﬁcance
 levels marked as + signiﬁcant at 10%; * at 5%; ** at 1%.



observed value, nF Fi10 , and Column (3) reports the control-function results.


      As the results in Columns (2) and (3) show, working in a non-family-friendly envi-
ronment before having children is signiﬁcantly associated with a woman’s labor supply ﬁve
years later. The small and insigniﬁcant diﬀerence between the coeﬃcients on nFˆ F i10 and
nF˜ F i10 in Column (3), combined with the evidence in Section 5 that nF˜ F i10 is largely or-
thogonal to taste, suggest that sorting across work environments creates little to no bias in
the estimated eﬀect of work environment. And the coeﬃcients on nF Fi10 in Column (2)
and on nF˜ F i10 in Column (3) are accordingly very similar: women who work in a non-
family friendly environment are 6 to 7 percentage points less likely to continue working after
                                                     31
motherhood.38


7      Interpreting Our Results

Although the results in Table 7 make it clear that working in a non-family-friendly envi-
ronment inﬂuences labor supply after motherhood, it is less clear that it can explain work

patterns observed by graduate degree. As discussed in Section 5, if variation in work envi-
ronment is a driving factor, controlling for it directly should attenuate the degree coeﬃcients
towards zero.39 As shown in Table 7, we do ﬁnd that the coeﬃcients for JDs and women
with no graduate degree are somewhat attenuated.40 But notice that although the alterna-

tive deﬁnition discussed at the end of Section 4.4 suggests that fewer Harvard JDs are in

non-family-friendly jobs, by our main deﬁnition used in Table 7, JDs are almost as likely to

work in such environments as MBAs.


       Since we observe that JDs are less likely to quit, is this because their “non-family-

friendly” jobs are less unfriendly than the jobs held by MBAs? For instance, among the
Harvard women who initially worked in non-family-friendly jobs, we see in the top panel of

Table 8 that JDs and MAs are much more likely to remain in such an environment than

either MBAs or women with no degree.
  38
      One might ask whether these results reﬂect variation in the production functions of jobs across industries.
Are certain jobs by their nature easier for women to pair with motherhood? We do not include industry ﬁxed
eﬀects for two reasons: (1) controlling for industry may also capture systematic variation in work norms
and mores (e.g., variation in the strength of the “old boys” network), which may encompass part of a job’s
family friendliness, and (2) we do not believe that production functions are a ﬁxed characteristic. (Consider
the shift in the structure of many medical specialties over the last 30 years, and its inﬂuence on the capacity
for MDs to work part-time.) If, however, one splits the sample of women who worked in large for-proﬁt ﬁrms
into 7 broad industry groups, within each, the proportion who remain working is higher among those who
worked for family-friendly ﬁrms. For instance, in banking, 88 percent of those who worked in family-friendly
ﬁrms remain working, compared to only 67 percent of those previously in non-family-friendly ﬁrms.
   39
      In comparison to the coeﬃcient in Table 6, the initial coeﬃcient for MAs in Table 7 is negative. (This
may reﬂect the strong positive selection into the longitudinal sample evident for MBAs – see Appendix
Section C.) Since, by our deﬁnition, these MAs are less likely than MBAs to work in non-family-friendly
jobs, we should instead expect their coeﬃcient to become more negative. Although Table 7 instead shows
that the coeﬃcient moves towards zero, the standard errors are large in comparison to the point estimates.
   40
      Using the alternate deﬁnition of family friendliness discussed at the end of Section 4.4, the coeﬃcients
for JDs and MAs are instead 0.030 (s.e. 0.023) and -0.013 (s.e. 0.045), and the eﬀect of work environment
is 6 to 9 percentage points. Likewise, following the alternate deﬁnition from footnote 29, the coeﬃcients
for JDs and women with no graduate degree are attenuated to 0.034 (s.e. 0.024) and 0.026 (s.e. 0.024).
Lastly, if we use the coarser measure that excludes ﬁrm-speciﬁc information, the estimated eﬀect of work
environment is 3 to 4 percentage points.

                                                       32
              Table 8: Work Environment Before and After Children
                                              All      JD MBA MA None
      Post-Children Work Environment:
        Working in a non-family-friendly position at 10th:
           % Non-family friendly              45.6     55.3 35.3 33.3 53.6
           % Family friendly                  28.7     27.7 29.4 40.7 17.9
           % At home                          25.7     17.0 35.3 25.9 28.6
        Working in a family-friendly position at 10th:
           % Non-family friendly              17.2     15.9 23.3 19.1  8.3
           % Family friendly                  68.3     68.2 60.0 66.0 83.3
           % At home                          14.5     15.9 16.7 14.9  8.3
      Work Setting: (All women who remain working)
      10th Year:
          Big non-FF ﬁrm                     32.4      32.9 44.7 18.3 38.1
          Government                          9.8      18.4  2.1 8.3   9.8
          School teacher                      2.7        -    -   6.7  4.8
          Big FF ﬁrm                          10.7     11.8 23.4  0.0  9.5
          Small ﬁrm                           18.7     21.1 19.1 21.7  9.5
          Non-proﬁt                           14.7     11.8  6.4 26.7 11.9
          Other education                      4.9       -    -  13.3  7.1
          Self-employed                        6.2      3.9  4.3  5.0 14.3
      15th Year:
          Big non-FF ﬁrm                     28.9      30.3 38.3 16.7 33.3
          Government                          7.1      13.2  2.1 6.7   2.4
          School teacher                      2.7        -    -   6.7  4.8
          Big FF ﬁrm                           6.2      7.9 10.6  1.7  4.8
          Small ﬁrm                           12.4     11.8 21.3  6.7 11.9
          Non-proﬁt                           21.8     26.3 14.9 25.0 16.7
          Other education                      5.8       -    -  16.7  7.1
          Self-employed                       15.1     10.5 12.8 20.0 19.0
      NOTES:
      Data for the Harvard longitudinal sample, using the more detailed measure of family friend-
      liness. In the listing of detailed work environments, those classiﬁed as non-family-friendly
      are highlighted in bold.



     If we return to the labor supply data for NSCG mothers used in Table 3, we do see
evidence that non-family-friendly environments are especially “unfriendly” for MBAs. For
instance, looking further down in the hours distribution, we see that the MBAs in big ﬁrms –
their most common work setting – are the only group who remain working 40 hours per week
at the 20th percentile, and full-time at the 15th. Overall we see a much smaller proportion
of MBAs working part-time: only 23 percent, compared to 32 percent of MAs and JDs.


                                                   33
       This raises the question: Do we observe fewer MBA mothers working part-time because

fewer part-time options exist, or because the career consequences of going part-time are
especially high? Some evidence from the NSCG suggests the former. We see that 14 percent
of MBA mothers are working in jobs unrelated to their education, compared to at most 5
percent in all other degrees.41 Among these MBAs, 53 percent work part-time, compared
to 17 percent among the remainder, suggesting the necessity to leave “MBA-type” jobs in
order to be able to work part-time. In their study of graduates from Harvard’s medical, law,
and business schools, Swiss and Walker (1993) likewise report that many women who left
the labor force – especially MBAs – would have preferred to work part-time, but were not

oﬀered the option by their pre-birth employer.


       Evidence for the Harvard longitudinal sample likewise suggests that JDs face relatively

more family-friendly options than MBAs. Returning to the top panel of Table 8, among

women who were working in non-family-friendly environments before kids, we see that MBAs

and women with no graduate degree are more likely to quit than to switch to a family-friendly
job, whereas the reverse holds for JDs and MAs.42 (By comparison, among those who were

working in family-friendly jobs before motherhood, MBAs are no more likely to quit.) Among

those who remain working, the bottom panel of Table 8 shows a large shift towards non-proﬁt

jobs and self-employment.43,44


       Other sources also suggest that among women working in jobs with formal “work-
family” policies, MBAs face the highest career repercussions for using these policies. For
instance, among workers in a ﬁnancial services ﬁrm, Blair-Loy and Wharton (2002) report
high levels of concern over the harmful career eﬀects of using available work-family policies.
  41
      This diﬀerence is signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level. This same pattern does not hold among women who
have not yet had children.
   42
      This diﬀerence between the JDs and MBAs is signiﬁcant at the 10 percent level.
   43
      This shift towards self-employment supports past research suggesting that women enter self-employment
as a means to balance household responsibilities with a maintained labor force presence (Connolly, 1992;
Hundley, 2000).
   44
      Although these results show only a small decrease in the proportion of JDs working at large non-family-
friendly ﬁrms, much of this is driven by women working as special counsels. If we were to categorize these as
family-friendly jobs per Mason and Eckman (2007), the proportion of JDs working in a non-family-friendly
ﬁrm would shift from 30 percent before motherhood to 24 percent afterwards, and the proportion working in
family-friendly positions would stay even at 14 percent. This suggests that Mason and Eckman are correct.

                                                     34
By comparison, Wood et al. (1993) ﬁnd that the use of such policies among law school
graduates bore no relationship with future promotions.


      In a survey of highly educated women, Hewlett et al. (2005) likewise ﬁnd evidence
that MBAs fear greater career penalties for using these policies than women in other ﬁelds.
Table 9, which shows a subset of their results, reports that women in business, and especially

those in ﬁnance, perceive greater barriers to using available work-family policies, and take-
up rates are correspondingly lower. These results are especially telling for our sample of
Harvard women, since 26 percent of the MBAs in the longitudinal sample work in ﬁnance
or banking before they have children.

                 Table 9: Evidence on Variation in Work Environment
                                    Medicine Academia Law Business                            Finance &
                                                                                               Banking
 Variation in Family-Friendly Environment:
 Perceived Barriers to Using Available Work Balance Options:             (%)
   Reduced Hours                        30         36                    25         42             56
   Flexible Hours                       29         23                    22         33             45
   Part-time senior positions           35         32                    46         36             75
   Unspoken rule that those who         24         20                    24         32             41
     used available options would not be promoted
 Labor Supply Choices to Accommodate Work Balance: (%)
   Worked part-time                     37         32                    30         26             12
   Worked reduced hours (> PT)          38         25                    27         26             30
 NOTES:
 Data from Hewlett, Luce, Shiller, and Southwell (2005), from a survey of 2,500 “highly qualiﬁed” US women
 – those with a graduate degree or a college degree with honors. The categories by which they group women
 reﬂects the makeup of the committee sponsoring the survey, including representatives from Goldman Sachs,
 Lehman Brothers, and Ernst & Young. From the data reported we cannot determine if diﬀerences across
 columns are statistically signiﬁcant.



      All told, this evidence suggests that MBAs work in systematically less family-friendly
environments, which may help explain their lower labor force participation after motherhood.
Yet this begs a ﬁnal question: for those MBAs who ultimately quit, why did they complete
an MBA in the ﬁrst place?45
  45
     Note that these women may not leave the labor force for long. Goldin and Katz (2008) report that the
mean length of time oﬀ for mothers in their 1990 cohort was only 19 months, although longer among MBAs
than among other women. Yet Bertrand et al. (2010) ﬁnd enormous ﬁnancial penalties for any gaps for
MBAs, much larger than the corresponding penalties for JDs. Thus this only increases the puzzle of why

                                                   35
      One possible explanation is that these women had the least information about the

family friendliness of their intended ﬁeld at the time they applied to graduate school. By our
estimate, however, MBAs took the most time oﬀ before returning to school – approximately
4 years in comparison to 2 for JDs. This greater level of work experience suggests that MBAs
should instead have had better information on the family-friendliness of their intended ﬁeld.46


      An alternative possibility is that women who chose an MBA were systematically too
optimistic about how quickly the ﬁeld would change between the time when they chose
their graduate program, and the time when they had their ﬁrst child, on average 7 years

later. Even if these women understood the current level of family friendliness within the
business world, they may have expected it to get better over the following years.47 This
far in advance, it is also possible that many were not thinking about this at all. Thus the

investment decisions that look questionable ex post may have been rational ex ante.


8     Conclusion

Our results provide insight into the labor supply decisions of highly educated women, many of

whom delayed fertility as they completed additional schooling and established their careers.

Yet despite the large opportunity cost of doing so, we see that a substantial proportion leave
the labor force, at least temporarily, at the transition into motherhood.


      More strikingly, we ﬁnd that this propensity varies dramatically across career paths,
and is remarkably consistent across two diﬀerent populations of women. Furthermore, this
diﬀerence remains, even when we take into consideration variation in very rich sets of observ-
able characteristics, many of which we expect to be correlated with unobservable elements
of taste important in both the labor supply decision and selection across careers. Lastly, we
MBAs are more likely to quit.
  46
     Another possibility is that MBAs were especially likely to underestimate their taste for time at home
once they had children. If women learn about their value of ζ as they age, however, MBAs should instead
have had the most accurate information about their taste when they made their choice across ﬁelds.
  47
     MBAs need not have been more optimistic than women choosing other ﬁelds. If the family friendliness
of the business world progressed more slowly over this period than in other ﬁelds, they may simply have
been more incorrect in their expectations.


                                                   36
ﬁnd that women who worked in non-family-friendly jobs before they had children are 6 to 7

percentage points less likely to remain working after motherhood.


     We ﬁnd these results suggestive that a woman’s work environment plays a causal role in

“pushing” her out of the labor force at motherhood. Our results also suggest that variation
in family friendliness across high-education careers helps explain variation in female labor
force participation – that the raw diﬀerences in the proportion of mothers who work in these
high-powered professions speaks at least in part to treatment, and not solely to selection.


     Comparing the outcomes for JDs and MBAs, evidence suggests that women in law
face a larger set of family-friendly job alternatives, and that the career consequences of using

available family-friendly options are most costly in the business world. This is clearly an

area where more research needs to be done to address the inﬂuence of work environment on
mother’s labor supply decisions. Our results suggest, however, that with improved work-

family policies and changes in social norms, a smaller proportion of women would exit, or

“opt out” of, the labor force at motherhood.




                                               37
References

 [1] American Medical Association, Center for Health Policy Research. 2002. Physician So-
     cioeconomic Statistics, 2000-2002.

 [2] Anderson, Deborah J., Melissa Binder, and Kate Krause. 2003. The Motherhood Wage
     Penalty Revisited: Experience, Heterogeneity, Work Eﬀort, and Work-Schedule Flexi-
     bility. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 56(2): 273-294.

 [3] Arthur, Michelle M. and Alison Cook. 2003. The Relationship Between Work-Family
     Human Resource Practices and Firm Proﬁtability: A Multi-theoretic Perspective. Re-
     search in personnel and human resource management, Vol. 22: 219-252.

 [4] Arthur, Michelle M. and Alison Cook. 2004. Taking Stock of Work-Family Initiatives:
     How Announcements of “Family-Friendly” Human Resource Decisions Aﬀect Share-
     holder Value. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 57(4): 599-613.

 [5] Baker, Joe G. 2002. The Inﬂux of Women into Legal Professions: An Economic Analysis.
     Monthly Labor Review, August 2002: 14-24.

 [6] Batt, Rosemary and P. Monique Valcour. 2003. Human Resources Practices as Pre-
     dictors of Work-Family Outcomes and Employee Turnover. Industrial Relations, 42(2):
     189-220.

 [7] Belkin, Lisa. 2003. The Opt-Out Revolution. New York Times, October 26, 2003.

 [8] Berg, Peter, Arne L. Kalleberg, and Eileen Appelbaum. 2003. Balancing Work and
     Family: The Role of High-Commitment Environments. Industrial Relations, 42(2): 168-
     88.

 [9] Berger, Joseph. 2007. Exploring Ways to Shorten the Ascent to a PhD. New York Times,
     October 3, 2007.

[10] Bertrand, Marianne, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2010. Dynamics of the
     Gender Gap for Young Professionals in the Financial and Corporate Sectors, American
     Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(3): 228-255.

[11] Blair-Loy, Mary and Amy S. Wharton. 2002. Employee’s Use of Work-Family Policies
     and the Workplace Social Context. Social Forces, 80(3): 813-845.

[12] Blair-Loy, Mary and Amy S. Wharton. 2004. Organizational Committment and Con-
     straints on Work-Family Policy Use: Corporate Flexibility Policies in a Global Firm.
     Sociological Perspectives, 47(3): 243-267.

[13] Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2007. Changes in the Labor Supply Behavior
     of Married Women: 1980-2000. Journal of Labor Economics, 25(3): 393-438.

[14] Boulis, Ann. 2004. The Evolution of Gender and Motherhood in Contemporary
     Medicine. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 596: 172-
     206.
                                           38
[15] Boushey, Heather. 2005. Are Women Opting Out? Debunking the Myth. Center for
     Economic and Policy Research Brieﬁng Paper.

[16] Clifton, Thomas J. and Edward Shepart. 2004. Work and Family Programs and Pro-
     ductivity: Estimates Applying a Production Function Model. International Journal of
     Manpower, 25(7-8): 714-728.

[17] Connelly, Rachel. 1992. Self-Employment and Providing Child Care. Demography, Vol.
     29(1): 17-29.

[18] Drago, Robert and Douglas Hyatt. 2003. Symposium: The Eﬀect of Work-Family Poli-
     cies on Employees and Employers. Industrial Relations, 42(2): 139-144.

[19] Drago, Robert, David Costanza, Robert Caplan, Tanya Brubaker, Darnell Cloud,
     Naomi Harris, Russell Kashian, and T. Lynn Riggs. 2001. The Willingness-to-Pay for
     Work/Family Policies: A Study of Teachers. Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
     Vol. 55(1): 22-41.

[20] Eaton, Susan C. 2003. If You Can Use Them: Flexibility Policies, Organziational Com-
     mitment, and Perceived Performance. Industrial Relations, 42(2): 145-167.

[21] Fernandez, Raquel and Alessandra Fogli. 2009. Culture: An Empirical Investigation of
     Beliefs, Work and Fertility. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1): 146-
     177.

[22] Fogli, Alessandra and Laura Veldkamp. 2008. Nature or Nurture? Learning and the
     Geography of Female Labor Force Participation. NBER Working Paper #14097.

[23] Fortin, Nicole M. 2005. Gender Role Attitudes and Women’s Labour Market Outcomes
     Across OECD countries. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 21: 416-438.

[24] Goldin, Claudia. 2006. The Quiet Revolution that Transformed Women’s Employment,
     Education and Family. American Economic Review, 96(2): 1-21.

[25] Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. Transitions: Career and Family Life Cycles
     of the Educational Elite. American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings,98(2): 363-
     369.

[26] Goldin, Claudia and Maria Shim. 2004. Making a Name: Women’s Surnames at Mar-
     riage and Beyond. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18 (Spring): 143-60.

[27] Heckman, James. 1974. Shadow Prices, Market Wages, and Labor Supply. Economet-
     rica, 42(4): 679-694.

[28] Hewlett, Sylvia Ann, Carolyn Buck Luce, Peggy Shiller, and Sandra Southwell. 2005.
     The Hidden Brain Drain: Oﬀ-Ramps and On-Ramps in Womens Careers. Harvard
     Business Review Research Report, March 2005.

[29] Hochschild, Arlie. 1997. The Time Bind: When Work Becomes Home and Home Be-
     comes Work. New York: Metropolitan Books.


                                            39
[30] Hundley, Greg. 2000. Male/Female Earnings Diﬀerences in Self-Employment: The Ef-
     fects of Marriage, Children, and the Household Division of Labor. Industrial and Labor
     Relations Review, Vol. 54(1): 95-114.
[31] Johnson, Nancy Brown and Keith G. Provan. 1995. The Relationship Between
     Work/Family Beneﬁts and Earnings: A Test of Competing Predictions. Journal of
     Socio-Economics, 24(4): 571-584.
[32] Joint Economic Committee (Majority Staﬀ). 2008. Equality in Job Loss: Women are
     Increasingly Vulnerable to Layoﬀs During Recessions. July 22, 2008.
[33] Juhn, Chinhui and Kevin M. Murphy. 1997. Wage Inequality and Family Labor Supply.
     Journal of Labor Economics, 55(1, part 1): 72-97.
[34] Landers, Renee M., James B. Rebitzer, and Lowell J. Taylor, 1996. Rat Race Redux:
     Adverse Selection in the Determination of Work Hours in Law Firms, American Eco-
     nomic Review, 86(3): 329-348.
[35] Leonhardt, David. 2009. Economic Scene: Financial Careers Come at a Cost to Families.
     New York Times, May 27, 2009.
[36] Mason, Mary Ann and Eve Mason Eckman. 2007. Interrupted Work Careers: Depre-
     ciation and Restoration of Human Capital. Mothers on the Fast Track: How a New
     Generation Can Balance Family and Careers. Oxford University Press.
[37] Mincer, Jacob and Haim Ofek. 1982. Interrupted Work Careers: Depreciation and
     Restoration of Human Capital. The Journal of Human Resources, 17(1): 3-24.
[38] Mosisa, Abraham and Steve Hippie. 2006. Trends in Labor Force Participation in the
     United States. Monthly Labor Review, October: 35-57.
[39] Nielsen, Helena S., Marianne Simonsen, and Mette Verner. 2004. Does the Gap in
     Family-friendly Policies Drive the Family Gap? Scandinavian Journal of Economics,
     106(4): 721-744.
[40] Oyer, Paul. 2008. The Making of an Investment Banker: Macroeconomic Shocks, Career
     Choice, and Lifetime Income. Journal of Finance, 63(6): 2601-2628.
[41] Russo, Eugene. 2004. Fast Track: PhDs. Nature, Vol 431, Sept. 16th, 2004.
[42] Polachek, Solomon William. 1977. “Occupational Segregation Among Women: Theory,
     Evidence, and A Prognosis”, in Women in the Labor Market, Cynthia B. Lloyd, Emily
     S. Andrews, and Curtis L. Gilroy, Eds. Columnia University Press.
[43] Stone, Pamela and Meg Lovejoy. 2004. Fast-Track Women and the “Choice” to Stay
     Home. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 596: 62-83.
[44] Swiss, Deborah J., and Judith P. Walker. 1993. Women and the work/family dilemma:
     how today’s professional women are finding solutions. New York: J. Wiley.
[45] Tomlinson, Jennifer. 2004. Perceptions and Negotiations of the “Business Case” for
     Flexible Careers and the Integration of Part-Time Work. Women in Management Re-
     view, 19(8): 413-420.
                                            40
[46] Wallis, Claudia. 2004. The Case for Staying Home. Time Magazine, March 22, 2004.

[47] Wax, Amy L. 2004. Family-Friendly Workplace Reform: Prospects for Change. Annals
     of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 596: 36-61.

[48] Wood, Robert G., Mary E. Corcoran, and Paul N. Courant. 1993. Pay Diﬀerences
     Among the Highly Paid: The Male-Female Earnings Gap in Lawyers’ Salaries. Journal
     of Labor Economics, 11(3): 417-441.




                                          41
Data Appendix

A      NSCG Data

The 2003 wave of the National Survey of College Graduates captures a sample of 100,402
US residents who held at least a bachelors degree as of April 1st, 2000, who lived in the
US or its territories at both that time and on October 1st, 2003, and who were age 76 and
under as of the latter point. Of these, 43,185, or 49.4 percent (weighted), are women. Given
our focus on the highly educated, we limit this sample to those who have at least a masters
degree (35 percent).

       To provide a more homogeneous sample, we also limit ourselves to those who never
attended a community college, who received their undergraduate degree from a U.S. univer-
sity, and who completed their BA by the year they turned 25 (8,270 women). Because these
criteria provide a select subsample, we do not use survey weights in our analysis. Given
the oversample of respondents in the sciences and engineering, our sample therefore includes
relatively more PhDs and those born outside the U.S. Among these 8,270 women, we focus
on the population of married mothers of children under age 6, giving us a sample of 1,404
women.48

      The NSCG captures very rich data on each individual’s occupation, work environment,
and education, including detailed ﬁeld of study. By comparison, the NSCG captures more
limited demographics. Most importantly, the survey captures very little information on
spouses. We observe only whether the spouse works full-time, part-time, or is out of the
labor force, and whether his job requires a BA.

      Unfortunately the NSCG does not provide suﬃcient information to do an analysis of
the eﬀect of pre-birth work environment on post-birth labor supply. Because of its design,
the NSCG captures some work information for 2000 as well as 2003. For instance, for those
working in both periods, the survey captures information on the 2000 work environment by
asking whether a given person has changed employers and/or jobs. For those not working,
the survey provides most recent occupation and year of employment.

      But this information is insuﬃcient to capture 2000 work environment for the full popu-
lation of women with ﬁrst births between 2000 and 2003. For those in the labor force at both
times, we observe pre-birth work environment for those who did not change jobs, but can
  48
    Because the NSCG reports all children in the household, our sample also excludes women who report
both children under age 6 and over age 18 (suggesting that one set may be step-children), and likewise
exclude those women who are over age 50, for whom any children under age 6 are likely not their own.
Among the remaining women with children under age 6, 94 percent are married.

                                                 42
only approximate this for those who did. And for those out of the labor force, although we
can distinguish occupation, this is insuﬃcient for deﬁning work environment. For instance,
we can tell that a woman was a lawyer, but not if she worked for a large for-proﬁt ﬁrm or
for the government.

A.1      Estimating Wages for Non-Working Mothers

To calculate hourly wages for the working mothers, we use reported 2003 annualized salary
and average hours worked per week, assuming 50 weeks worked per year (see the ﬁrst panel
of Table A-1). We translate these into year 2000 dollars using the Consumer Price Index
for all urban consumers (US city averages for all items). We set as missing values wages for
women who worked 10 or fewer hours per week, and hourly wages less than $6 and greater
than $300. (These values are higher than the standard cutoﬀs in the literature, but reﬂect
the education level of our population).

      We use these values to estimate hourly wages for those who are not working (or for
missing values). In particular, we begin by estimating a woman’s predicted probability
of working, p̂, built from a speciﬁcation that excludes wages. To allow for selection out
of the labor force, we split the sample by the degree-speciﬁc medians of p̂, and estimate
wages separately within each half of the distribution.49 The controls in the wage equation
include graduate degree, years’ experience since degree completion, occupation, graduate
and undergraduate institution type, undergraduate major, and region of residence.

      The top panel of Table A-1 reports these predicted (log) wage values, both for the
sample overall and separately for working mothers and those at home. Notice that for
all but MDs, the mean estimated wages are higher for women out of the labor force. In
some instances this speaks to composition. For instance, among PhDs this reﬂects an over-
representation of professors among those working, and a corresponding over-representation
of formerly biotech- and high-tech workers among those at home.

      More broadly, however, among the working women we often ﬁnd that the calculated
hourly wage is higher among women who work shorter hours, in large part because it appears
that salaries do not scale down as much as hours. Because these women tend to fall in the
bottom half of the p̂ distribution (as we would expect), their wages are especially important
in predicting wages for the non-working women.

       Table A-1 also shows that the fathers of MBAs have the least education; the fathers of
  49
    This amounts to assuming selection on observables. As an alternative approach we estimate wages
including the whole sample, thus assuming no selection. The results are qualitatively similar throughout the
analysis.

                                                    43
JDs have the most. This suggests that MBAs in the NSCG are a relatively less select group
of women than those who select into other ﬁelds, especially law. Some of this diﬀerence may
arise from our imprecise deﬁnition of graduate degree; it is easier to distinguish JDs and
MDs based on their ﬁeld of study and occupation, than it is to distinguish MBAs.

                            Table A-1: NSCG Summary Statistics

                                          All        MD       PhD        JD       MBA        MA
 Salary and Wages (2000$):
   If working:
      Annualized salary (’000s)           55.7        96.2      55.8      74.3      67.1      44.9
                                         (41.5)      (55.4)    (36.0)    (41.5)    (41.3)    (34.4)
     Weekly hours                         37.1        43.6      38.5      37.4      38.3      35.5
                                         (14.8)      (18.6)    (16.5)    (13.7)    (11.9)    (14.0)
     Hourly wage                         30.85       51.68     30.13     38.46     35.45     25.95
                                        (21.25)     (34.58)   (16.87)   (17.26)   (19.30)   (17.60)
   Predicted log hourly wage:             3.30        3.70      3.37      3.66      3.48      3.16
                                         (0.38)      (0.40)    (0.45)    (0.17)    (0.38)    (0.29)
     If working                           3.30        3.71      3.34      3.63      3.44      3.15
                                         (0.37)      (0.39)    (0.43)    (0.17)    (0.31)    (0.29)
     If at home                           3.30        3.64      3.49      3.75      3.58      3.17
                                         (0.41)      (0.58)    (0.53)    (0.14)    (0.54)    (0.28)
 Conventional Elements of the Labor Supply Decision (X):
   Total children                         1.90        1.99     1.85      1.94      1.90      1.89
                                         (0.86)      (0.94)   (0.79)    (0.89)    (0.83)    (0.86)
   Proxies for spouse’s earnings:
     Works less than full-time (%)        10.3        21.7     12.7      7.9       9.9       8.7
                                         (30.3)      (41.4)   (33.4)    (27.1)    (30.0)    (28.1)
     Spouse job requires BA in: (excluded = ‘other’, %):
        Science                           33.3        22.6     51.3      20.2      34.0      32.2
                                         (47.1)      (42.0)   (50.1)    (40.3)    (47.6)    (46.8)
        Social science                     8.8         6.6     12.2      14.0       5.7      8.1
                                         (28.3)      (25.0)   (32.8)    (34.9)    (23.2)    (27.3)
        Not required                      25.2        31.1     14.8      18.4      29.8      26.9
                                         (43.4)      (46.5)   (35.6)    (38.9)    (45.9)    (44.4)
   Proxies for household assets: (%)
     Private undergraduate                43.3        49.5     50.5      51.8      40.4      40.2
        institution                      (49.6)      (50.2)   (50.1)    (50.2)    (49.2)    (49.1)
     Father ≤ high school                 24.9        23.6     18.5      14.9      31.2      26.8
                                         (43.3)      (42.7)   (38.9)    (35.8)    (46.5)    (44.3)
   Live in same region as grew up (%)     48.6        50.9     31.7      45.6      46.8      52.8
                                         (50.0)      (50.2)   (46.7)    (50.0)    (50.1)    (50.0)
 Proxies for Taste-Based Elements, θ = (ζ, ψ):
   Age                                    36.2        36.5     37.7      37.0     36.6     35.7
                                          (4.5)       (4.6)    (4.1)     (4.3)    (4.5)    (4.5)
   Minority (%)                           23.3        34.9     28.6      26.3     24.8     20.0
                                         (42.3)      (47.9)   (45.3)    (44.2)   (43.4)   (40.0)
                                                                           Continued on next page


                                                44
                          Table A-1 – continued from previous page
                                         All       MD    PhD       JD                      MBA         MA
   Undergraduate Major: (%)
     Biology                            20.1       74.3   25.9     0.9                      4.3       17.2
                                       (40.1)     (43.9) (43.9)   (9.5)                   (20.4)     (37.7)
     Other sciences & engineering       16.8        7.6   22.8     6.3                     23.0       17.0
                                       (37.4)     (26.7) (42.0)  (24.4)                   (42.2)     (37.6)
     Psychology                         12.7        9.5   20.6     8.1                      4.3       13.3
                                       (33.3)     (29.5) (40.6)  (27.4)                   (20.4)     (33.9)
     Economics & business               11.3        0.0    3.7    14.4                     47.5        8.0
                                       (31.7)      (0.0) (18.9)  (35.3)                   (50.1)     (27.2)
     Political science                   5.3        0.0    3.2    25.2                      2.9        4.3
                                       (22.5)      (0.0) (17.6)  (43.6)                   (16.8)     (20.2)
     Other social studies               22.5        4.8   13.2    15.3                      9.4       29.9
                                       (41.8)     (21.4) (34.0)  (36.2)                   (29.2)     (45.8)
     English                             5.9        1.9    4.8    18.0                      5.0        5.2
                                       (23.6)     (13.7) (21.4)  (38.6)                   (21.9)     (22.2)
     History                             2.3        1.0    3.2    10.8                      1.4        1.3
                                       (15.0)      (9.8) (17.6)  (31.2)                   (12.0)     (11.3)
 Sample Size:                           1404       106    189     114                      141        854
  (% of total):                                   (7.6) (13.5) (8.1)                      (10.0)     (60.8)
 NOTES:
 Reported mean (and standard deviations) of a subset of the controls included in the speciﬁcations in Table 6.
 (See the notes to Table A-7 for the full set of controls.)



A.2      Other Variable Deﬁnitions

Lastly, for other variable deﬁnitions:

   • For each respondent we observe highest degree attained, grouped by PhD, MA, or
     professional degree. We distinguish MBAs from MAs based on graduate ﬁeld of study
     (business). Among those with professional degrees, we distinguish JDs, MDs, and
     those with specialized MAs, based on ﬁeld of study and occupation. We group dentist,
     veterinarians, optometrists, and pharmacists with MDs.

   • We deﬁne an undergraduate major as small if less than 1 percent of the (weighted)
     sample of NSCG respondents graduated in that major, using all respondents ages 34
     to 40.

   • For MDs, JDs, and MBAs, we deﬁne a “matching” undergraduate major as biology,
     political science, and economics or business, respectively. For MAs and PhDs, we
     deﬁne the match based on reported ﬁeld of major.

   • We deﬁne respondents’ as minority if they list themselves as at least partly minority.



                                                    45
B      Harvard Graduates Data

The Harvard college graduating classes of 1988 through 1991 included 6,764 students, of
which 41 percent were female. This sample reﬂects those individuals listed in either their
10th or 15th anniversary reports, which includes anyone for whom the alumni association
had a current or previous address. (For those who do not respond to the survey, the report
lists only the name and address.) We focus on the 3,456 who responded to the 15th-year
survey (51 percent of the sample overall, with a larger 55 percent of women).50 Appendix
Section B.1 discusses the representativeness of the population who respond to the survey.
Of these 3,456 graduates, 1,522 (44 percent) are women.

      Our main sample is the 934 women who are married and have had their ﬁrst child
at the time of the 15th anniversary survey.51 For 743 of these women (80 percent), we can
supplement these data with additional information from their 10th anniversary survey. From
these, we separately focus on the 286 women that we observe both 10 and 15 years after
college, who had their ﬁrst child between these two points, who provide labor force and
occupation data at each, and who do not hold a PhD or MD.

      For the purpose of our analysis, we deﬁne a woman’s labor supply based on her self-
reported current occupation, supplemented by information provided in her narrative.52 For a
small number of women, we infer that they are at home if they provide detailed information
for their spouses’ occupation, but none for their own. Or, if they listed two occupations,
such as “Attorney, Mom”, we assumed the second reﬂected her current situation and the
ﬁrst her occupation before leaving the labor force.

B.1      Sample Selection into the 15th-Year Anniversary Report

We next consider the representativeness, among female Harvard graduates, of the population
who respond to the 15th-year anniversary survey.53 Table A-2 reports mean background
   50
      This number includes 84 individuals captured because their spouse – a Harvard graduate in one of the
four years covered – provided information for both. (We also use spouse data to supplement details missing
from the self-reported information.) For those married to members of a diﬀerent class, this means that the
information reﬂects a period shortly before or after the 15th year.
   51
      This excludes 27 mothers who are unmarried at the time of the 15th.
   52
      Because we deﬁne ‘at home’ status based on current employment, women who report that they recently
went back to work or that they anticipate leaving soon, are deﬁned as ‘at work’. Maternity leaves are coded
as ‘at work’, but women who report that they are ‘on leave’ from their past position are coded as ‘at home’.
   53
      There is evidence that graduates who are married and/or have children are generally more likely to
respond. For instance, taking the sample who report the year of their ﬁrst birth in their 15th-year response,
we can compare the 10th-year response rates of those who had their ﬁrst birth in the 2 years prior to the 10th-
year reunion, to those who have their ﬁrst birth afterwards. In both genders we ﬁnd higher response rates
among the already-parents, although the diﬀerence is only statistically signiﬁcant among men. Likewise,
we see that among women (but not men), those who married recently before the 10th-year reunion are
signiﬁcantly more likely to respond, and among men (but not women), those who recently ﬁnished their

                                                      46
characteristics available from the graduation yearbooks, comparing those women who are
and are not observed in the 15th-year survey. Looking at the ﬁrst set of columns, there
is clear evidence that the women observed at the 15th year are a non-random sample of
all Harvard graduates. In particular, if we use these background characteristics to predict
who will respond to the survey, a χ2 test of their predictive power is highly statistically
signiﬁcant. Comparing across background characteristics, the most striking diﬀerence is by
race: whites are more likely to respond.

      Because our analysis focuses on the comparison of women who choose diﬀerent graduate
programs, an important question is whether selection into the sample varies systematically
among women of diﬀerent education types. Unfortunately a direct comparison is infeasible
because we cannot observe the graduate education of those women who do not respond.
However as an indirect test, we can compare the response rates among Harvard graduates
in the undergraduate majors that are the primary feeders for three of the graduate degrees
considered: biology (MDs), political science (JDs), and economics (MBAs).54 Because mas-
ters and doctoral degrees are granted across all ﬁelds, we have no similar means to compare
reporting propensities for MAs and PhDs, or for those who get no additional schooling.


      The foot of Table A-2 compares the 15th-year response rates for all female graduates to
the response rates for women in these three majors. As we see, potential MBAs are the most
likely to respond. Their response rate is signiﬁcantly higher than all other majors combined,
and than either potential MDs or JDs. (This might reﬂect the nature of the business world
relative to other career paths, if MBAs are more likely to view the anniversary surveys as a
networking mechanism.) This higher response rate, however, does not translate into a more
representative sample. We instead ﬁnd that as with potential JDs, among potential MBAs,
background characteristics can predict who will respond (signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level),
whereas among potential MDs the response rate appears more random.

      In combination, these results show two things. First it is clear that our responding
sample is not randomly drawn from the full pool of Harvard graduates. In particular,
in direct contrast to the NSCG sample, our Harvard sample under-represents minorities.
Furthermore, because our results suggest that minority women tend to work at higher rates,
primary degree are more likely to respond.
  54
     Among all respondents to the 15th year survey who have an MD, 38 percent hold a BA in biology.
Similarly, among observed biology majors, 66 percent go on to get an MD. Among observed MBAs, 23
percent studied economics, and 44 percent of observed economics majors get an MBA; among JDs, 15
percent studied political science, and 44 percent of political science majors complete a JD. (Among all
observed JDs, a larger 23 percent studied English. Among observed English majors, however, although 24
percent complete a JD, this is followed closely by 23 percent who get an MA, and 23 percent who complete
no graduate degree. For that reason we do not treat an English undergraduate degree as a feeder for a law
degree.)

                                                   47
                        Table A-2: Characteristics of Responders vs. Non-Responders to 15th-Year Survey
                                        All Women          Biology Majors     Economics Majors       Political Science Majors
                                                          (potential MDs)     (potential MBAs)            (potential JDs)
     Characteristic:               Respond        Do Not Respond      Do Not Respond       Do Not Respond             Do Not
     Race: (%)
                                                                                        +
       White                         0.80     **   0.69    0.66    *   0.52    0.76         0.62    0.86    **         0.58
                                                                   +                                         +
       Asian                         0.12     **   0.17    0.23        0.35    0.15         0.22    0.06               0.14
       Other                         0.08     **   0.14    0.10        0.13    0.08         0.16    0.07    **         0.26
     Region in High School: (%)
       New England                   0.24          0.25    0.20        0.22    0.33         0.25    0.31     *         0.17
       Middle Atlantic               0.27          0.25    0.26        0.25    0.26         0.20    0.22               0.27
       DC Region                     0.06          0.06    0.06        0.03    0.04         0.02    0.04               0.06
       South                         0.10          0.09    0.09        0.11    0.08         0.07    0.10               0.08
       Midwest                       0.13          0.12    0.14        0.11    0.14         0.22    0.14               0.09
       West (excluding CA)           0.04          0.04    0.08        0.07    0.04         0.00    0.06               0.05
       California                    0.12          0.12    0.13        0.15    0.09         0.04    0.11               0.17
       Outside of US                 0.04     **   0.07    0.05        0.05    0.03     **  0.20    0.02     *         0.10
                                              +
     Private High School (%)         0.33          0.37    0.23        0.32    0.28         0.27    0.27               0.31




48
     Undergraduate Major: (%)
                                              +
       Arts                          0.04          0.06      -           -       -            -       -                  -
       English                       0.22          0.20      -           -       -            -       -                  -
       Cultural Studies              0.09     *    0.12      -           -       -            -       -                  -
       Anthropology                  0.07     **   0.04      -           -       -            -       -                  -
       History                       0.11          0.10      -           -       -            -       -                  -
       Political Science             0.07          0.08      -           -       -            -       -                  -
       Social Studies                0.07          0.07      -           -       -            -       -                  -
       Economics                     0.08     *    0.06      -           -       -            -       -                  -
       Psychology                    0.09          0.09      -           -       -            -       -                  -
       Biology                       0.10          0.10      -           -       -            -       -                  -
     Sample size:                   1,337          932     128          95     109           55      94                 77
     Proportion observed:                   0.59                 0.57                 0.66                       0.55
     χ2 test of joint sig:                 0.00**                0.32                0.05+                      0.03*
     NOTES:
     These data exclude the 18 percent of women who we can not match between the anniversary surveys and yearbooks. Although not listed, we also include graduation
     class in the χ2 calculations, but their inclusion has relatively little eﬀect on the results. MBA response rates are signiﬁcantly higher than all other majors combined
     (at the 5%level), and than either potential MDs or JDs (at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively). Signiﬁcance levels are distinguished by + (signiﬁcant at 10%), *
     (at 5%), and ** (at 1%).
all else equal, our sample may therefore include a higher proportion of at-home mothers than
among the full population of female Harvard graduates. (This may be tempered somewhat
by the lower response rates among those who attended a private school, a characteristic that
is instead associated with lower labor force participation among the observed sample.)

      Our second result is that the level of selection likely varies across women who choose
diﬀerent career paths. For instance, based on the three degrees that we can match to
speciﬁc undergraduate majors, we see that the observed sample of potential MDs is less
strongly selected than the sample of either potential MBAs or potential JDs. Beyond the
diﬀerence in reporting rates by race that is evident across all women, it is not obvious how
these selection patterns will aﬀect our overall results.

      As a check, we therefore build a predicted probability of being included in our ﬁnal
sample – those women who respond to the 15th year anniversary survey and are married and
have had a child by that point – based on characteristics observable at the time of graduation
from college. We ﬁnd that women included in our sample have a mean predicted probability
of 0.40 of meeting these criteria, which is completely invariable across degrees (from 0.39
to 0.40). Furthermore, if we include this predicted probability as a control in the Harvard
labor supply probits in Table 6, it has no eﬀect on the variation across degrees, and is itself
completely uncorrelated with labor force status.

B.2     Estimating Wages and Spouse’s Salary

Despite this rich professional data, we lack information on salaries and wages. We therefore
had a career consultant build imputed salaries, for both mothers and their spouses, based on
self-reported education, location, occupation, and ﬁrm. He used sources such as the Bureau
of Labor Statistics’ Occupational Employment Statistics, information from the Chronicle of
Higher Education, and online sources such as CareerJournal.com, PayScale.com, Vault.com,
and Indeed.com. For example, to determine the salary of an assistant US attorney, he
used salaries reported on a Justice Department website for attorneys with similar years of
experience. All salaries are updated to year 2000 dollars using the Consumer Price Index
for all urban consumers (US city averages for all items).

       Because these salary estimates are based on occupation-speciﬁc averages, one worry is
that they will systematically understate the salaries received by this population of Harvard
graduates. As a rough comparison, we can compare our values to those reported for women
in the Harvard & Beyond sample (Goldin and Katz, 2008). They report a mean 2005
full-time/full-year salary of $99,500 (in year 2000 dollars), although because this reﬂects a
combined value for cohorts graduating in approximately 1970, 1980, and 1990, it may be

                                              49
a poor estimate of the salaries received by the youngest cohort.55 By comparison, doing a
back-of-the-envelope calculation, we estimate average annual salaries of $106,000.56 Thus
from this (admittedly poor) comparison we see no evidence that our starting salaries are
systematically too low for the female Harvard graduates.

      Likewise, comparing our wage estimates for the working population of Harvard and
NSCG mothers (see Tables A-1 and A-3, with Harvard wages calculated via the method
described below), the Harvard wages are systematically higher. Thus although the building
blocks for our salary estimates are based on occupation-speciﬁc averages, Harvard women
are clearly distributed across a diﬀerent, higher paid, set of jobs.

      Even if our initial salary estimates are too low for this population of women, this is only
problematic if the relative understatement varies across graduate degrees. Unfortunately
Goldin & Katz (2008) does not provide average salaries by degree. The only data available for
a relevant comparison group (in terms of age, cohort, and education quality), that provides
information by speciﬁc degree, is data for a recent cohort of graduates from the Booth School
of Business at the University of Chicago (Bertrand et al., 2010).

      Bertrand et al. report signiﬁcantly higher earnings for MBA mothers than our estimates
for these Harvard graduates. Measured 8 years post-MBA (approximately 15 years after
college, given their average age at entry), they ﬁnd mean and median annual salaries of
$192,000 and $138,000, respectively (in year 2000 dollars). Given reported labor supply
levels, these translate roughly into mean and median hourly wages of $79 and $61, both of
which are higher than our estimated hourly wage of $50. Yet if our wage values for these
MBA women are especially understated compared to our estimated wages for the other
degree groups, this will only dampen our result that MBA women are less likely to work.

      This potential understatement of earnings may be more problematic in terms of spouse’s
salaries. Goldin & Katz (2008) report average annual salaries of $165,300 for men in the
Harvard & Beyond sample. (Again, because this value reﬂects data for all three cohorts,
in this case this likely overstates the earnings of the youngest generation.) By comparison,
looking only at the Harvard women who are married to Harvard men, our mean estimated
spouses’ salaries are much lower at $123,900.
  55
     It is unclear whether this suggests that this number over- or under-states the earnings received by the
1990 cohort. If there is a strong earnings gradient in experience, mean 1990 cohort salaries may be lower;
but if recent cohorts have greater representation among high-paying positions, 1990 salaries may be higher.
  56
     As discussed below, our initial salary estimates reﬂect “gender-neutral” values. This average uses a
back-of-the-envelope calculation of “gendered” salaries by applying our motherhood wage gap values to our
initial gender-neutral salaries (thus ignoring the diﬀerences in labor supply by parental status). See below
for greater detail on how we calculate these wage gap ratios.


                                                    50
     Furthermore, given the high rate of intermarriage by graduate degree, this may be
especially important if we are systematically understating the earnings of MBA men. Goldin
& Katz ﬁnd especially high salaries for the MBA men57 , and likewise, Bertrand et al. (2010)
ﬁnd mean and median earnings of $337,000 and $177,000, respectively. By comparison, we
estimate average salaries of $120,800 for Harvard-graduate spouses holding MBAs.

      Thus, potential underestimation of earnings for husbands holding MBAs may help
explain the especially low labor force participation rates observed among our sample of
Harvard MBA women. Yet given the size of the level diﬀerences, and the fact that they
remain after controlling for spouse’s graduate degree, it seems highly unlikely that it would
explain the full eﬀect. Furthermore, in a sensitivity analysis in which we instrument for
spouse’s salary using distribution dummies, and force into the top 5 % those spouse’s with
job titles suggesting especially high earnings, the degree coeﬃcients are unchanged.58

      Taking these salary estimates as our starting point, note that since we did not provide
gender or parental status to our career consultant, our values reﬂect “gender neutral” salaries.
(We did not want him to incorporate his own statistical discrimination into these numbers.)
To translate these salaries into “gendered” wages for our population of Harvard women, we
use the following approach. (Because most of the Harvard spouses work in generally male
ﬁelds, we do not adjust their salaries.)

   • To provide a population at roughly the same stage of their careers as our Harvard
     sample, we use an NSCG sample of men and women ages 30 to 45 (and otherwise
     selected as in Appendix A). We then create detailed graduate degree and occupation
     groupings to capture the types of jobs observed among our Harvard women.

   • We calculate average weekly hours using the full sample of men and women in a given
     degree/occupation group. Assuming 50 weeks worked per year, we apply these numbers
     to our gender-neutral Harvard salaries to create “gender-neutral” wages.

   • Because much of the gender wage gap arises only after children (Bertrand et al., 2010),
     within each degree/occupation group we calculate separate measures of the gender
     wage gap for women with and without children. In particular, we use the NSCG
     data to calculate two ratios: the average experience-adjusted wages of women with
     children compared to the average wage overall, and likewise the average experience-
     adjusted wages of women without children compared to all. We apply these ratios to
     our “gender neutral” values to calculate “gendered” wages.
  57
    Personal communication with Lawrence Katz, December, 2008.
  58
    Before this adjustment, more than half of the men in this group are MDs (with mean estimated earnings
of over $300,000); in this adjustment we re-categorize 21 men, of which 19 hold MBAs.


                                                   51
    • For doctors, because the NSCG lacks area of specialty (e.g., pediatrics), to calculate
      “gender-neutral” hourly wages we rely on average weekly hours data per specialty as
      reported in the American Medical Association’s Physician Socioeconomic Statistics,
      2000-2002. Because this source does not provide salary data by gender and parental
      status, we must rely on the NSCG data to transform these into “gendered” wages.
      There exist large diﬀerences in gender distribution across medical specialties, however,
      and likewise large diﬀerences in salary by specialty.59 We therefore build the wage ratio
      for mothers by comparing their average wages to average wages for all female doctors.
      This eﬀectively assumes that the distribution across specialties is the same for female
      doctors, regardless of parental status, and that the scaling ratio is 1.0 for non-moms.

    • For MBAs, the NSCG captures too few women who work in high-level management
      positions to distinguish across sectors (we group ﬁnance and consulting, high tech and
      other science-related industries, and all other ﬁelds). Because high-level MBAs work
      longer hours, we use average hours for this combined set to calculate gender-neutral
      wages. To scale these into “gendered” wages, we then use wage ratios calculated
      separately for the three sectors, after combining the high- and non-high level MBAs.60

The ﬁrst panel of Table A-3 lists our initial gender-neutral salary estimates for the working
Harvard women, and our subsequent “gendered” wage values.

     To estimate wages for the non-working women and those with missing values, we follow
the same approach as in Section A.1.61 In this case, the wage equation controls include
graduate degree, years experience since completing that degree, 10th-year wage interacted
by degree, and region. The top panel of Table A-3 reports mean predicted log hourly wages,
both for the sample as a whole, and separately for those women working and those at home.




  59
     For instance, among our Harvard sample, 27 percent are pediatricians (with an average gender-neutral
estimated salary of $136,000) and 5 percent are surgeons (estimated salary of $219,000). By comparison,
among the full population of doctors reported in the Physician Socioeconomic Statistics, 2000-2002, 11
percent are pediatricians and 19 percent are surgeons.
  60
     This provides scaling ratios of 87 to 91 percent. These line up well with an estimated scaling ratio of 88
percent calculated using median hours and salary data for the MBA graduates of Chicago’s Booth School of
Business (Bertrand et al., 2010).
  61
     For 10 percent of those working, we lack 15th-year salaries because we lacked suﬃcient occupation data.
                                                      52
                     Table A-3: Harvard Sample Summary Statistics

                                     All     MD      PhD       JD       MBA        MA       None
Salary and Wage Estimates at 15th (2000$):
  If working:
     Gender-neutral salary (’000s)  115.2   166.5     70.0     136.1     138.6      66.1      80.7
                                    (74.9)  (59.5)   (27.5)    (69.5)   (107.4)    (39.8)    (51.8)
     ‘Gendered’ hourly wage         43.32   58.11    29.24     48.10     49.63     30.91     34.95
                                   (24.57) (20.92) (10.83)    (21.15)   (37.18)   (16.32)   (19.91)
  Predicted log wage:                3.61    4.00     3.33      3.77      3.76      3.29      3.44
                                    (0.32)  (0.16)   (0.16)    (0.21)    (0.27)    (0.19)    (0.12)
     If working                      3.63    4.00     3.33      3.78      3.78      3.30      3.45
                                    (0.33)  (0.17)   (0.16)    (0.22)    (0.29)    (0.19)    (0.12)
     If at home                      3.53    4.03     3.36      3.74      3.71      3.25      3.41
                                    (0.28)  (0.11)   (0.18)    (0.17)    (0.21)    (0.18)    (0.13)
  Additional proxies for own wage:
     Top 10 graduate program (%)     47.5    34.4     53.0     44.4      70.3      40.4        -
                                    (50.0)  (47.7)   (50.1)   (49.8)    (45.9)    (49.2)       -
     Extra Degree (non-MA) (%)       2.2     3.9       0.9     2.6        2.2       1.2        -
                                    (14.7)  (19.4)    (9.2)   (15.8)    (14.6)    (10.9)       -
Conventional Elements of the Labor Supply Decision (X):
  Total children                     1.88    1.84     1.74     1.94      1.88      1.86      1.97
                                    (0.79)  (0.67)   (0.78)   (0.74)    (0.85)    (0.88)    (0.79)
  Proxies for spouse’s earnings:
     Salary (’000, 2000$)           119.3   141.8     93.8    129.4     133.6     107.7     101.0
                                    (77.4)  (83.0)   (58.9)   (87.6)    (76.7)    (75.1)    (58.4)
     Top 10 graduate (%)             48.3    36.2     48.5     45.1      64.2      43.0      56.0
        institution                 (50.0)  (48.3)   (50.2)   (49.9)    (48.2)    (49.8)    (50.0)
     Spouse’s graduate degree: (%)
        MD                           11.9    43.5      6.0      3.6       8.0    7.2      4.3
                                    (32.4)  (49.7)   (23.8)   (18.6)    (27.2)  (26.0)   (20.3)
        PhD                          12.6    13.6     41.0      7.7       5.1    10.8     5.5
                                    (33.2)  (34.4)   (49.4)   (26.7)    (22.0)  (31.2)   (22.9)
        JD                           18.2     9.1     15.4     49.0       6.5     7.2     12.9
                                    (38.6)  (28.8)   (36.2)   (50.1)    (24.8)  (26.0)   (33.6)
        MBA                          16.8     9.7      4.3     11.2      46.4    16.3     14.7
                                    (37.4)  (29.7)   (20.3)   (31.6)    (50.1)  (37.0)   (35.5)
        MA                           10.7     2.6     17.1      4.6      11.6    21.1      9.8
                                    (30.9)  (16.0)   (37.8)   (21.0)    (32.1)  (40.9)   (29.8)
        No degree                    29.8    21.4     16.2     24.0      22.5    37.3     52.8
                                    (45.7)  (41.2)   (37.0)   (42.8)    (41.9)  (48.5)   (50.1)
  Private high school (%)            35.7    32.7     32.6     35.8      40.6    36.7     35.3
                                    (47.9)  (47.1)   (47.1)   (48.1)    (49.3)  (48.4)   (48.0)
  Live in same region                36.1    40.1     30.5     36.4      32.8    36.7     37.5
     as grew up (%)                 (48.0)  (49.2)   (46.3)   (48.2)    (47.1)  (48.4)   (48.6)
                                                                         Continued on next page




                                           53
                            Table A-3 – continued from previous page
                                        All     MD     PhD     JD    MBA                        MA        None
 Proxies for Taste-Based Elements, θ = (ζ, ψ):
   Changed name at marriage (%)        57.1     50.6   39.3   56.6    73.9                      52.4       66.9
                                      (49.5)   (50.2) (49.1) (49.7)  (44.1)                    (50.1)     (47.2)
   Age gap with spouse:
     Older (%)                          7.4      9.7    6.0    7.1     5.8                       7.2        8.0
                                      (26.2)   (29.7) (23.8) (25.8)  (23.5)                    (26.0)     (27.2)
     Years, if not older                1.2      0.8    1.1    1.3     1.4                       1.4        1.0
                                       (2.6)    (2.0)  (2.3)  (3.3)   (2.7)                     (2.6)      (2.3)
   First child before school (%)        3.4      0.6    0.9    5.1     2.9                       6.0         -
                                      (18.1)    (8.1)  (9.2) (22.1)  (16.8)                    (23.9)        -
   Played sports in college (%)        31.2     29.9   17.9   26.7    39.1                      38.1       33.1
                                      (46.4)   (46.0) (38.5) (44.4)  (49.0)                    (48.7)     (47.2)
   Minority (%)                        16.6     24.5   11.6   17.0    21.1                      11.6       12.5
                                      (37.3)   (43.1) (32.2) (37.7)  (41.0)                    (32.1)     (33.2)
   Undergraduate Major: (%)
     Biology                            9.9     39.5   11.6    1.1     3.1                       2.7       2.2
                                      (29.9)   (49.0) (32.2) (10.6)  (17.5)                    (16.3)    (14.7)
     Other sciences & engineering       5.1      4.1   20.0    2.3     0.8                       4.1       4.4
                                      (21.9)   (19.9) (40.2) (14.9)   (8.8)                    (19.9)    (20.6)
     Psychology                        10.4     10.2   10.5    8.0    10.2                      13.6      10.3
                                      (30.5)   (30.4) (30.9) (27.1)  (30.3)                    (34.4)    (30.5)
     Economics/business                 8.8      2.7    2.1    6.3    27.3                       4.1      11.0
                                      (28.4)   (16.3) (14.4) (24.3)  (44.7)                    (19.9)    (31.4)
     Political science                  6.9      2.0    2.1   17.0     8.6                       3.4       4.4
                                      (25.3)   (14.2) (14.4) (37.7)  (28.1)                    (18.2)    (20.6)
     Other social studies               6.3      1.4    3.2    8.5    10.9                       6.1       6.6
                                      (24.3)   (11.6) (17.6) (28.0)  (31.3)                    (24.1)    (25.0)
     English                           21.0     12.2   22.1   26.7    14.1                      23.1      26.5
                                      (40.7)   (32.9) (41.7) (44.4)  (34.9)                    (42.3)    (44.3)
     History                           10.9     10.9    8.4   14.2    10.9                       6.8      12.5
                                      (31.1)   (31.3) (27.9) (35.0)  (31.3)                    (25.3)    (33.2)
 Sample Size:                          934      154    117    196     138                       166       163
 (% of total):                                 (16.5) (12.5) (21.0) (14.8)                     (17.8)    (17.5)
 Reported mean (and standard deviations) of a subset of the controls included in the speciﬁcations in Table 6.
 (See the notes to Table A-7 for the full set of controls.)


B.3     Other Variable Deﬁnitions

See Appendix Section A.2 as a starting point for how we deﬁne speciﬁc controls. For those
variables distinct to the Harvard sample (or that are created in a slightly diﬀerent way), we
deﬁne each by the following means:

   • For women with more than one graduate degree, we categorize the professional degrees
     (JD, MBA, or MD) as the primary degree, or deﬁne the primary degree based on its
     alignment with their occupation. For instance, women with an MD/PhD who are
     practicing doctors are categorized as an MD. We deﬁne an LLM, masters of law, as
                                                    54
  a JD for those practicing law with no additional law degree. When controlling for
  extra degrees, we exclude those MAs that appear to be an intermediate step towards
  a completed PhD.

• We deﬁne gender, as well as race and ethnicity, as best estimated from yearbook photos
  and graduates’ names.

• For MDs, JDs, and MBAs, we deﬁne top-10 graduate programs using the U.S. News
  and World Report professional school rankings for 2001. Because we often lack speciﬁc
  ﬁeld for many PhDs and MAs, we deﬁne top-10 status based on the U.S. News and
  World Report 2001 rankings for top research universities. Likewise, for the spouses,
  we deﬁne the top 20 undergraduate programs using the 2001 rankings of the top 15
  research universities and the top 5 liberal arts schools (excluding all-women’s colleges).

• We deﬁne an undergraduate major as small if fewer than 50 individuals graduated in
  that major, using the full sample of graduates from the classes of 1988 through 1991
  that we can observe in the graduation yearbooks.

• We deﬁne own and spouse’s age based on year of graduation from college, assuming
  all were 22 at the time. We deﬁne spouses to be of the same age if, by this measure,
  they are the same age, or +/ − 1 year.

• We use Peterson’s Private Secondary Schools and the yearbook information on the
  high school attended to distinguish which graduates attended a private school.

• We classify the top 25 cities, using 1990 population, as our measure of ‘big’ cities.

• We deﬁne a person as having grown up in a ‘low-density’ state if their state of residence
  in high school had a year 2000 density of fewer than 100 people per square mile.

• To estimate whether the ﬁrst child is born before graduate school, we estimate average
  schooling lengths as follows: for PhDs we assume 8 years for the humanities, 7 years for
  the sciences, 10 years for education, and 6 years for economics (Russo, 2004; Berger,
  2007). We assign a length of 8 years for those with an unknown ﬁeld, but, as with
  all degrees, we bound the length to have begun at the year of college graduation. For
  professional non-business masters we assume 2 years, except for architecture degrees (3
  years) and British degrees (1 year). For those with an MA or MS in an undeﬁned ﬁeld,
  where some of these degrees will reﬂect 2-year programs and others longer, unﬁnished
  PhDs, we assume an average length of 2.5 years. Most of the women estimated to have
  had their ﬁrst child before entering graduate school attended programs with concrete
  lengths (JDs and speciﬁc MA programs).


                                           55
     Lastly, Table A-4 lists the ﬁrms included in Working Mother Magazine’s 2001 list of
“Best Places” to work, and the Yale Law Women’s 2004 list of “Top-10 Family Friendly
Firms”.

C     Selection into Parenthood

One worry in considering the eﬀect of work environment on mothers’ labor force participation
is that work environment may inﬂuence the decision to have children. If some women in non-
family-friendly jobs respond by foregoing children, the average taste for kids among those
who become mothers will be higher among mothers from a non-family-friendly environment.
If this is then positively correlated with taste for time at home, mean labor force participation
rates among those women will be driven downwards because of this stronger taste for time
at home.

       A ﬁrst, indirect, test of whether work environment inﬂuences the decision to have
children, is to compare across graduate degrees the proportion of women who are mothers.
If, for instance, MBAs are more likely to work in a non-family-friendly environment, this
may translate into a smaller proportion having children.

      Using the NSCG sample reﬂected in Table 1, we test whether the proportion of mothers
varies by graduate degree. Compared to all women with a graduate degree, only women
with a PhD are signiﬁcantly less likely to have children. MBAs are in fact more likely to be
mothers than any other degree group other than MDs.

      Likewise, using the Harvard sample reﬂected in Table 1 we ﬁnd the exact same pattern.
Across graduate degrees, MDs are most likely to have children, followed closely by MBAs
(both rates signiﬁcantly higher than the average overall), and PhDs are signiﬁcantly less
likely to be mothers. Thus, by this admittedly weak test, we ﬁnd no evidence that work
environment inﬂuences the decision to have children.

      For the Harvard longitudinal sample we can test this more directly. Expanding this
sample to include women with no children (but who otherwise ﬁt the criteria discussed in
Section 4.2), we ﬁnd that women who were in non-family-friendly work environments 10 years
after graduation are equally likely to have children as those who were in family-friendly jobs.
The proportion is likewise almost exactly equal just among the women with MBAs. Thus
we again ﬁnd no evidence that work environment inﬂuences the propensity to have children.

      A second consideration is whether there is evidence of selection into parenthood on
ability. If mothers are systematically positively selected, this will increase their marginal
beneﬁt of working and thus raise their labor force participation. If the level of selection
                                               56
                             Table A-4: Family-Friendly Firms

Abbott Laboratories          First Tennessee Bank                     Patagonia
ABN AMRO North America       Fleet Boston Financial                   Paul Hastings*
AFLAC                        Ford Motor                               Pearson Education
Allstate Insurance           Genentech                                Pﬁzer
American Airlines            General Mills                            Phoenix Companies
American Express             General Motors                           The PNC Financial Srvs Grp
American Home Products       Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher*                 PricewaterhouseCoopers
Arnold & Porter**            GlaxoSmithKline                          Principal Financial Group
Arthur Andersen              Goldman Sachs                            Procter & Gamble
Bank of America              Hewlett-Packard                          Prudential Financial
Bank One                     Hoﬀman-La Roche                          Republic Bancorp
Baptist Health South Florida Household International                  Ropes & Gray*
Bausch & Lomb                IBM                                      SAS Institute
Bon Secours Richmond Health Inova Health System                       S.C. Johnson & Son
Booz Allen Hamilton          Johnson & Johnson                        Schering-Plough
BP America Upstream          JPMorgan Chase                           Sears, Roebuck and Co.
Bristol-Myers Squibb         KPMG                                     Security Beneﬁt Group
BryanLGH Medical Center      Kraft Foods                              Simpson Thacher*
Carlson Companies            Lincoln Financial Group                  The St. Paul Companies
Cigna                        Liz Claiborne                            State Street Corporation
Cinergy                      Lucent Technologies                      Sun Microsystems
Cisco                        Marriott International                   Synovus Financial
Citigroup                    MBNA America Bank                        Target
Cleary Gottlieb*             McDonalds Corporation                    Texas Instruments
Computer Associates          Merck & Co.                              TIAA-CREF
Corning                      Merrill Lynch                            Toms of Maine
Covington & Burling*         MetLife                                  TRW
Cravath, Swaine & Moore*     Morgan Stanley                           Union Paciﬁc Railroad
DaimlerChrysler              Morrison & Foerster                      United Airlines
Debevoise & Plimpton*        Mutual of Omaha                          USAA Life Insurance Co.
Deloitte & Touche            New York Life Insurance                  The Vanguard Group
Discovery Communications     The New York Times                       Verizon/Verizon Wireless
Eastman Kodak                Northern Trust                           Vivendi Universal
Edward Jones                 Northwestern Memorial                    Wachovia
Eli Lilly                    HealthCare                               West Group
Ernst & Young                Novant Health                            Wilmer Hale*
Fannie Mae                   Novartis Pharmaceuticals                 Zurich North America
NOTES:
Law ﬁrms marked with * reﬂect those included on the 2004 list of ‘Top 10 Family-Friendly Firm’, as des-
ignated by the Yale Law Women. The remaining ﬁrms are those included on the 2001 Working Mother
Magazine’s list of ‘top 100’ places to work. Firms listed with ** appear on both lists. Working Mother
ranks corporations both by the number and types of work-family beneﬁts oﬀered, and by the propor-
tion of employees who use them. We use the October 2001 rankings as roughly representative of the
period 10 to 15 years after graduation for our cohorts. The Yale Law Women’s listing can be found at
http://media.gibsondunn.com/fstore/pubs/YaleTop10.pdf, and is based on a 2004 student-run survey.


                                                57
varies across graduate degrees, this may drive some of the observed variation in work rates.

      To test for such possible selection, using the NSCG sample reﬂected in Table 1, we
compare mean father’s education between mothers and non-mothers. Both overall and within
each degree, mothers come from a more educated background. The mean level diﬀerence
between fathers’ education is largest for women who get an MD (approximately 1 year
of schooling, signiﬁcant at the 10 percent level), and roughly half as big for JDs, PhDs,
and MBAs.62 Thus in the NSCG sample we ﬁnd some evidence of positive selection into
parenthood, which is strongest for MDs and may explain part of their higher labor force
participation.

    To test for this in the Harvard sample, for those women with a graduate degree we
compare the proportion who attended a top-10 graduate program. By this admittedly noisy
measure, in this sample we ﬁnd no evidence of selection into parenthood on ability. The
mean proportion who attended a top-10 graduate program is almost exactly equal among
mothers and non-mothers, both for the sample as a whole and within each graduate degree.

     Because the Harvard longitudinal sample focuses on mothers who have their ﬁrst birth
more than 10 years after graduation, we also consider whether there is evidence of selection
on ability into ‘late’ motherhood. For MBAs (and to a lesser extent MAs), we do ﬁnd
some evidence of positive selection. Whereas among ‘early’ MBA mothers only 56 percent
attended a top-10 program, a signiﬁcantly higher 79 percent of late mothers did so.

      Comparing these late mothers to non-mothers, we generally ﬁnd no diﬀerence in the
proportion who attended a top-10 program by the family-friendliness of their 10th-year work
environment. The one exception is again among MBAs. Among those who worked in a non-
family-friendly environment, 89 percent of the women who ultimately had children attended
a top-10 program, compared to 71 percent of non-mothers (signiﬁcantly diﬀerent at the 10
percent level). There is no such diﬀerence among the MBAs who worked in a family-friendly
environment.

      In combination, these two ﬁndings suggest that within the longitudinal sample of Har-
vard mothers, the MBAs are an especially high-ability group. This selection may therefore
bias downwards the level diﬀerence in labor force participation between these MBAs and the
mothers with other graduate degrees.
 62
      The p-values for these diﬀerences lie just above standard signiﬁcance cut-oﬀs.




                                                      58
D     Other Tables

Tables A-5 and A-6 list the coeﬃcients on the prediction of graduate degree type, given
characteristics observable at graduation from college. The ﬁrst lists these results for the
NSCG sample, the second for the Harvard sample.

      Table A-7 then reports the marginal eﬀects for the controls included in the labor supply
probits reported in Table 6. The ﬁrst two columns reﬂect the probits using the NSCG sample,
and the last two columns the Harvard sample. Within each set of columns, the ﬁrst lists
results corresponding to Line (2) of each panel of Table 6, and the second the results for
Line (3).




                                             59
                   Table A-5: Predicting Graduate Degree: NSCG Sample

                                            MD                 PhD         JD         MBA            MA
Undergraduate Major: (excluded = English)
 Biology                                  0.236**             0.096*     -0.072**    -0.065**      -0.128*
                                          (0.065)            (0.045)      (0.010)     (0.014)      (0.054)
 Engineering &                                                 0.056     -0.043**     0.096+        -0.059
   computer science                                          (0.056)      (0.009)     (0.052)      (0.070)
 Other sciences                            0.018              0.158*     -0.032**     -0.042*       -0.016
                                          (0.025)            (0.062)      (0.008)     (0.016)      (0.063)
 Psychology                                0.033             0.144**     -0.035**    -0.048**        0.010
                                          (0.031)            (0.055)      (0.008)     (0.015)      (0.056)
 Economics                                                   -0.059+       -0.016     0.263**     -0.219**
                                                             (0.031)      (0.010)     (0.061)      (0.059)
  Political Science                                           -0.019      0.081*       -0.024      -0.130+
                                                             (0.046)      (0.039)     (0.025)      (0.075)
  Other social studies                             -0.024     -0.007     -0.037**     -0.041*      0.183**
                                                  (0.016)    (0.035)      (0.010)     (0.017)      (0.046)
  History                                           0.005      0.050        0.049      -0.011      -0.216*
                                                  (0.038)    (0.074)      (0.040)     (0.040)      (0.101)
Small major                                      -0.026**    -0.036+        0.002       0.019     0.097**
                                                  (0.007)    (0.020)      (0.014)     (0.021)      (0.036)
Liberal arts college                              -0.015+     -0.029        0.003      -0.020      0.079+
                                                  (0.009)    (0.024)      (0.014)     (0.018)      (0.042)
Private undergraduate                              0.023*     0.033        0.003        0.019     -0.105**
  institution                                     (0.011)    (0.021)      (0.010)     (0.015)      (0.033)
Minority                                           0.024+      0.031       0.023       -0.012     -0.113**
                                                  (0.014)    (0.025)      (0.015)     (0.016)      (0.038)
Region in High School: (excluded = West)
  Northeast                                        -0.006      -0.046      0.006       0.026         0.042
                                                  (0.014)     (0.029)    (0.020)     (0.035)       (0.059)
  Mid-Atlantic                                    -0.021*      -0.016     -0.003      -0.028       0.089+
                                                  (0.010)     (0.029)    (0.015)     (0.020)       (0.048)
  Midwest                                           0.001      -0.027      0.003      0.023         -0.003
                                                  (0.014)     (0.028)    (0.016)     (0.027)       (0.050)
  South                                            -0.013      -0.026     -0.005       0.001         0.075
                                                  (0.011)     (0.028)    (0.014)     (0.024)       (0.047)
Sample Size                                        1404        1404       1404        1404          1404
Pseudo R2                                            0.31       0.08       0.24         0.24         0.10
Adjusted R2                                          0.18       0.04       0.13         0.18         0.11
NOTES:
Each column reﬂects the coeﬃcients from a diﬀerent probit regression in which the dependent variable is
whether each woman i holds a degree of type j, where j is equal to the degree type listed at the top of
the column. We also include as right-hand side variables: additional measures of undergraduate school type
(e.g., research university), mother’s and father’s education, citizenship status, whether the respondent lived
outside the U.S. in high school, and age at arrival in the U.S.. (For predicting MDs, we grouped engineering
and computer science with other sciences, and economics and political science with other social studies.)
We report the marginal eﬀects (with standard errors in parentheses). Signiﬁcance is deﬁned as **, *, and +
signiﬁcant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. The foot of the table reports the pseudo R2 for the
probit itself, and the adjusted R2 if we instead use OLS.


                                                    60
                  Table A-6: Predicting Graduate Degree: Harvard Sample

                                      MD        PhD                  JD        MBA          MA         None
Undergraduate Major: (excluded = English)
  Biology                           0.613**      0.032            -0.203**     -0.061     -0.131**    -0.143**
                                    (0.066) (0.041)                (0.019)    (0.037)      (0.025)     (0.022)
  Other sciences &                    0.047    0.310**            -0.146**    -0.088*       -0.051      -0.038
     engineering                    (0.075) (0.095)                (0.028)    (0.038)      (0.050)     (0.053)
  Psychology                          0.087     -0.006            -0.094**     0.046         0.032      -0.030
                                    (0.060) (0.032)                (0.035)    (0.052)      (0.049)     (0.041)
  Economics                         -0.069+ -0.057*               -0.100**    0.371**     -0.104**       0.003
                                    (0.041) (0.023)                (0.035)    (0.077)      (0.030)     (0.048)
  Political science                  -0.064    -0.055*             0.241**     0.080      -0.105**     -0.088*
                                    (0.047) (0.024)                (0.078)    (0.065)      (0.031)     (0.035)
  Anthropology                      0.218**     -0.042            -0.158**    -0.086*      0.192*       -0.041
                                    (0.080) (0.026)                (0.025)    (0.034)      (0.075)     (0.044)
  Other social studies              -0.094*     -0.036              -0.002     0.188*       -0.029      -0.021
                                    (0.038) (0.031)                (0.057)    (0.080)      (0.048)     (0.051)
  History                             0.091     -0.019               0.029      0.041     -0.085**      -0.022
                                    (0.060) (0.030)                (0.050)    (0.050)      (0.032)     (0.041)
Small major                           0.010    -0.052*               0.070    -0.073*      0.108+       -0.007
                                    (0.048) (0.021)                (0.056)    (0.030)      (0.056)     (0.045)
Played sports                        -0.002    -0.047*              -0.041      0.036      0.064*       -0.014
  in college                        (0.030) (0.020)                (0.031)    (0.028)      (0.032)     (0.028)
Private high school                   0.018     -0.005              -0.002     0.031        -0.008      -0.027
                                    (0.029) (0.020)                (0.030)    (0.026)      (0.027)     (0.027)
Minority                             0.077+ -0.068**                 0.035      0.051       -0.020      -0.045
                                    (0.044) (0.017)                (0.042)    (0.038)      (0.036)     (0.033)
Region in High School: (excluded = California)
  Northeast                          -0.011     -0.039              0.032       0.029        0.041      -0.047
                                    (0.044) (0.029)                (0.058)     (0.047)     (0.048)     (0.039)
  Mid-Atlantic                        0.004     0.004               0.055       0.020       -0.032      -0.040
                                    (0.044) (0.034)                (0.058)     (0.045)     (0.041)     (0.038)
  District of Columbia              -0.076+      0.014             0.203*       0.016       0.021     -0.119**
                                    (0.042) (0.049)                (0.096)     (0.065)     (0.063)     (0.028)
  South                              -0.055      0.021             0.202*       0.080     -0.115**     -0.077+
                                    (0.045) (0.049)                (0.092)     (0.072)     (0.032)     (0.040)
  Midwest                            -0.023      0.003              0.125       0.049      -0.090*      -0.048
                                    (0.049) (0.041)                (0.080)     (0.062)     (0.038)     (0.044)
Sample Size                            829        829                829         829          829        829
Pseudo R2                              0.24      0.17               0.14         0.15        0.12        0.07
Adjusted R2                            0.22      0.08               0.09         0.10        0.06        0.01
NOTES:
Sample excludes those women that we cannot observe in the graduation yearbooks. We also include as
right-hand side variables majoring in arts or cultural studies, undergraduate year and dorm, attendance at
a private high school, whether an individual grew up in a top-25 city or in a low-density state, or in the west
(other than CA) or outside the U.S. See the foot of Table A-5 for additional notes.




                                                    61
                     Table A-7: Full Labor Supply Probit Marginal Eﬀects

                                    NSCG                                      Harvard
                          + Xs                + θs               + Xs                   + θs
                      coeﬀ.     (s.e.)   coeﬀ.     (s.e.)    coeﬀ.     (s.e.)     coeﬀ.      (s.e.)
                     Conventional Elements of the Labor Supply Decision, (X):
Log wage             -0.006    (0.041)  -0.010    (0.045)   0.149+ (0.078) 0.125+           (0.076)
Extra degree (non-MA)                                       0.114*    (0.051)    0.097*     (0.047)
Top 10 grad school                                           0.033    (0.030)     0.027     (0.029)
Total Kids:
  2nd child        -0.075** (0.025) -0.079** (0.025)      -0.115** (0.026) -0.088**         (0.026)
  3rd child         -0.068* (0.034) -0.078* (0.035)       -0.133** (0.045) -0.134**         (0.046)
  4th+ child        -0.125 +   (0.071) -0.144* (0.073)      -0.034    (0.077)    -0.033     (0.077)
Spouse Information:
  < FT               0.091*    (0.036)  0.091*    (0.036)
  Job requires BA in: (excluded = no BA required)
    Science        -0.161** (0.038) -0.174** (0.039)
    Soc. Sci.        -0.034    (0.053)  -0.034    (0.054)
    Other          -0.161** (0.038) -0.156** (0.038)
  Log salary                                               -0.059* (0.028) -0.056*          (0.026)
  Top 10 graduate school                                   -0.061+ (0.036)       -0.052     (0.034)
  Graduate degree: (excluded = None)
     MD                                                    -0.117+ (0.070) -0.172*          (0.079)
     PhD                                                     0.035    (0.047)     0.014     (0.049)
     JD                                                     -0.073    (0.051)    -0.077     (0.052)
     MBA                                                    -0.078    (0.054)    -0.072     (0.053)
     MA                                                      0.020    (0.046)    -0.003     (0.048)
Private HS                                                 -0.062* (0.030) -0.057+          (0.030)
Same region as       0.045*    (0.023)   0.031    (0.025)    0.036    (0.027)     0.029     (0.027)
    grew up
                 Taste-Based Elements of the Labor Supply Decision, θ = (ζ, ψ):
Changed last name at marriage                                                  -0.105**     (0.026)
Age gap with spouse:
  Older                                                                         -0.132+     (0.072)
  Yrs if not older                                                             -0.039**     (0.012)
  Yrs if not older, sq (x10−2 )                                                  0.238*     (0.110)
Child before grad school                                                        0.097**     (0.036)
Played college sports                                                            -0.053     (0.032)
Minority                               0.075** (0.027)                            0.048     (0.033)
Age                                     0.064+ (0.039)
            −2
Age sq (x10 )                          -0.091+ (0.052)
Sample Size               1404                1404                 934                  934
Pseudo R  2                0.10               0.14                0.21                  0.28
                                                                                Continued on next page




                                            62
                             Table A-7 – continued from previous page
                                  NSCG                                  Harvard
                       + Xs only          + θs            + Xs only                                     + θs
                      coeﬀ.   (s.e.)  coeﬀ.    (s.e.)    coeﬀ.   (s.e.)    coeﬀ.                               (s.e.)
NOTES:
Each double set of columns reﬂects the results from a diﬀerent probit regression of labor force participation. The
ﬁrst two sets report the results in the NSCG sample, the second two sets for the Harvard sample. Within each set,
the ﬁrst columns report the coeﬃcients when only conventional elements of the married women’s labor supply model
(X) are included, corresponding to the results reported on Line (2) of each panel of Table 6.The second set reports
the results when we also include proxies for unobserved taste (θ, corresponding to Line (3)). In the NSCG regressions
we also include as right-hand side variables the following factors: year of graduation (from graduate school), age
at high school and college graduation, undergraduate major and whether it was a small major, undergraduate and
graduate school type (e.g., private, research university, liberal arts college), detailed mothers’ and fathers’ education,
citizenship, age at arrival in U.S. and reason for coming, and current region and region in high school. In the Harvard
regressions, we also include: year of graduation (from undergraduate and graduate school), whether the individual
has an MA in addition to their primary degree, undergraduate major and whether it was a small major, whether
their husband attended a top-20 undergraduate institution, undergraduate dorm, region in high school and whether
they grew up in a big city and/or in a low-density state, and current region. We report the marginal eﬀects (with
standard errors in parentheses). Signiﬁcance is deﬁned as **, *, and + signiﬁcant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.




                                                     63
