                    NBZB WORKING PAPER SERIES




              COMPARABLE 'VRTH IN ThE PUBLIC SECTOR


                        Ronald   0. Ehrenberg

                         Robert    S. Smith


                      Working Paper No. lb7l




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONO.aC RESEARCH
                    1050 ssachusetts Avenue
                       Cajubridge,   MA 02138
                          September 1981.




This paper is prepared for the NBER Conference on Public Sector
Compensaton, Williamsburg, VA, NoveS,er 198!s. Professor of
Economics and Labor Economics at Cornell University and Research
Associate at the NBER, and Professor of Labor Economics at Cornell.
University respectively. We are mst grateful to Daniel Sherman
and Richard Chaykivski for their assistance in obtaining and mnip—
uJ.ating the Census of Population Dues used in the paper. Without
implicating them for what rema, we are grateful to numerous
colleagues at Cornell and the NBER and to Helen Remnick for their
comments on an earlier draft. Our specific debts to other individ-
uals are acknowledged throughout the paper. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies and
project in Government Budget. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                        NBER Working Paper #ib7i
                                                        September 198l


                       Comparable Worth in the Public Sector


                                        ABSTRACT

          Proponents   of   comparable worth assert that within a firm jobs can be
valued    in terms of the skill, effort and responsibility they require, as

well as the working conditions they offer, and that jobs that are of comparable

worth to the firm should receive equal compensation. After documenting the

major    push that has occurred for comparable worth in    the state and local

sector, Section II of our paper discusses the case       for and against
comparable   worth from the perspective of analystica]. economists.

          The reminder of the paper is empirical in nature and focuses on

issues   that arise when one attempts to implement comparable worth.         Section

III   addresses attempts by various states to infer if     comparable    worth "wage
gaps" exist from   job   evaluation studies they have conducted and      tests how

sensitive their results are to the statistical methods used to infer discri-

mination. Section I'! estimates whether male/female comparable worth wage

gaps nay partially be compensating differentials for differences in oppor-

tunity for occupational nobility. Finally Section V presents estimates of

systems of demand curves for state and local government employees and tests

whether within occupational groups male/female substitution occurs as

male/female wage rates change and whether substitution occurs across occupa-

tions as occupational wages change. These estimates are then used to simu-

late what the likely     effect   of a comparable worth wage policy would be on

employment of females in the state and local sector.


                                                        Ronald 0. Ehrenber
                                                       Robert S. Smith
                                                       NYSSILR
                                                       Cornell University
                                                       Ithaca, NY 11.850
                                                        (607) 256—3026
I. Introduction

     Some two decades after the passage of the Equal Pay Act of 1963 and

Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act, which together prohibit (among

other things) sex discrimination in wages on any given job and sex discrim-

ination in access to employment opportunities, it is still common to

observe that on average females earn less than males, females are distri-

buted across occupations in a quite different manner than males, and

earnings in occupations that are dominated by females tend to be lower than

earnings in those dominated by males, even after one controls for tradi-

tional proxies for productivity.' The frustrations generated by these

outcomes have led to pressure for the adoption of the principle of

able worth, a principle that at least one participant in the debate has

called "the women's issue of the 1980s.h'2

     Put in simplest terms, proponents of comparable worth assert thiit jobs

within a firm can be valued in terms of the skill, effort, and responai—

bility they require, as well as the working conditions they offer. Two

jobs would be said to be of comparable worth to a firm if they were

comparable in terms of these characteristics. the principle of comparable

worth asserts that within a firm, jobs that are of comparable worth to the

fin, should receive equal compensation.

     While   some efforts to implement comparable worth have taketi place in
the private sector, the major push for comparable worth has occurred in the
state and local government sector.3 By the mid 1960s over a dozen states
had passed comparable worth legislation covering state employees (Table I),

although   these laws were rarely   enforced.   Starting with a 1974   State   of
                                     2



Washington study, a number of states have undertaken formal job evaluation

studies to see how their compensation systems mesh with the principle of

comparable worth (Table 1). In several cases, this has led to "voluntary"

implementation of comparable worth through the legislative and collective

bargaining processes (e.g., Minnesota), or to court ordered implementation

(Washington).5 Table 1 summarizes the status of comparable worth initia-

tives in the fifty states and the District of Columbia, as of the summer of

1984. It is worth noting that by this date nine states had begun the

process of implementing some form of comparable worth in their employees'

compensation systems.

     Comparable worth initiatives have also been undertaken at the local

level. Table 2 presents data on 45 cities, counties and school districts

that had either undertaken a study of the issue, had at least one group of

employees in litigation over the issue, had passed a local ordinance, or

were contemplating implementing or had implemented comparable worth wage

adjustments by the summer of 1984. Many of these units were in the states

of California, Minnesota and Washington. Comparable worth wage adjustments

were implemented in San Jose, California after a well—publicized strike of

municipal employees and this undoubtedly influenced the spread to other

California units. }tinnesota passed a law in April 1984 requiring political

subdivisions to do job evaluations and then to revise their compensation

structure in accord with comparable worth. Finally, the early Washington

comparable warth study mentioned above attracted attention to the issue in

that state.
                                     3


     Given the growing importance of the concept of comparable worth in the

public sector,6 a theoretical and empirical analysis of some of the issues

it raises is obviously in order. We begin in the next section with a

discussion of the cases for and against comparable worth, from the per-

spective of analytical labor economists. These are discussed in the

context of simple labor market models and we stress the key assumptions

that influence whether the policy might be considered desirable. Ulti-

mately we conclude that the debate over comparable worth must involve a

consideration of the trade—off between efficiency and equity.

     The next two sections ignore the objections to the principle of

comparable worth and, assuming one wants to implement it, discuss some of

the conceptual and operational problems involved. Previous studies,

primarily by noneconomists, have addressed many of the problems in this

area (e.g., the existence of sex bias in describing or evaluating jobs, the

difficulty of devising evaluation schemes, and the problem of rater

reliability) so our discussion on these issues will be brief. Rather, our

focus will be on two issues.

    First, in Section III we address the attempts by various states to

conduct comparable worth job evaluation studies in which wages are related

to total job evaluation points and then discrimination inferred if, on

average, female—dominated occupations receive lower wages than male—

dominated occupations with comparable total evaluation points. We ask if

it is reasonable to simply sum up points over the different job evaluation

factors (e.g., training, job responsibility, working conditions) to get a

total score for each job which wages are then related to——for this assumes
                                     4



employers "value' an additional point of each factor equally. Using a

hedonic wage equation approach, we use data from job evaluation studies

conducted in the states of Minnesota, Washington and Connecticut to

estimate empirically if the weights these states actually assign to each

factor are equal and, if not, hDv this affects estimates of male/female

"comparable worth gaps. We also test in this section whether functional

form assumptions affect these estimates.

     Total compensation on a job includes opportunities for occupational

mobility and subsequent wage growth. The above—mentioned state studies

ignore this, implicitly assuming that male/female current wage differen-

tials for given job evaluation point scores are not compensated for by

opportunities for wage growth. To test if this assumption is true would

require longitudinal earnings data for.male and female public employees

whose initial job evaluation scores are equal. While such data are

unavailable, Section IV uses data on state and local government employees

in New York State from the 1/100 sample of the 1970 Census of Population to

illustrate how one might indirectly test this assumption. These data

permit us to identify individuals' industry and occupation of employment in

both 1965 and 1970, as well as their 1969 earnings levels. Mean earnings

by 3—digit public sector occupation in New York State are constructed from

these data and used to obtained estimates of male/female public sector

differentials in occupational mobility in the state.

    Section V switches to a different issue; some of the unanticipated (by

proponents) side effects of implementing comparable worth in the public

sector. Comparable worth wage adjustments (henceforth CWWA) would likely
                                     5


alter at least four types of relative prices that public employers face.

First, for any given function (e.g., police) and within any major occupa-

tional group (e.g., clerical) the average wage of female employees would

rise relative to the average wage of male employees, as some female

employees received CWWA. Second, across major occupational groups, the

average wage of employees in heavily "female" occupations (e.g., clerical)

would rise relative to the average wages of employees in heavily "male"

(e.g., crafts) occupations, as more employees in the former would receive

C1JWA. Third, across functions, the average wage in heavily female domi-

nated functions (e.g., elementary education) would rise relative to the

average wage in heavily male dominated functions (e.g., firefighters), as

employees in the former would again be more likely to receive CWWA.

Finally, holding constant the existing distribution of public employees,

the average wage of public employees would rise relative to the prices of

other goods and services.

     It is natural to ask how such relative wage changes would affect the

composition of public employment. To the extent that public employers'

employment decisions are sensitive to their employees' wage rates, one

would expect to observe the four sets of relative wage changes leading

respectJvely to the substitution of some male for some female employees

within a function—occupation group, the substitution of some employment in

male dominated occupations for some employment in female dominated occupa-

tions (within a function), the substitution of some employment in male

dominated functions for some employment in female dominated functions, and

a decline in the aggregate level of public employment. For all these
                                       6


reasons, CWWA might be expected to lead to a decline in female employment.
        Section V provides estimates of the extent to which some of those
types   of adjustments might occur in the state and local sector. Existing

estimates    of the demand for labor in the public sector are supplemented by

new estimates of the determinants of male/female and occupational employ-

ment ratios, obtained from 1910 and 1980 Censuses of Population data.

Based upon these estimates, a crude simulation of the potential effects of

CWWA on female employment in the public    sector   is presented. Finally,

Section    VI summarizes our findings and presents some brief concluding
               -

remarks.


II.   The Cases For and Against Comparable Worth7

      Consider the simplest possible stylized competitive labor market

model. In a competitive labor market a firm hires employees in an occupa-

tion or job category until the category's marginal product equals its real

wage. A category's marginal product represents its "worth' to an employer.

However, this is not necessarily fixed over time, but rather depends upon

the number of employees hired in the category and all other job categories,

the quantity of capital available to employees to work with, the production

technology, and the quality of employees in the various job categories.

The worth of a job then can not be determined independent of the qualifica-

tions of its incumbents and may well change over time. This suggests that

job evaluation surveys cannot be a one—shot event, but rather must be

constantly updated; the wbrth of a job to an employer is not necessarily

constant over time.8
                                         7


       Now move to the level of the labor market as a whole. The aggregation

of individual firm's demand curves for        each   occupation leads to market

demand curves for the occupation. The supply of labor to each occupa-

tion/job category will depend upon workers' qualifications, the pecuniary

and nonpecuniary forms of compensation every job offers and the distribu-

tion of preferences across workers for the various jobs. If there are no

barriers to occupational mobility, a worker will move between jobs until

the "net advantage" he or she perceives from each is equalized. Such

movements load to an equilibrating structure of occupational wage differen-

tials; this depends upon the distribution of workers' qualifications and

"tastes" for the various jobs.

       In this stylized competitive world, all of the factors that comparable

,,orth advocates believe should affect wages (skill, effort, responsibility,

and working conditions) would affect wages, since these factors would

influence the underlying demand and supply schedules. However, the weight

the market woul4 place on each factor in determining wages would reflect

the entire distribution of employeest tastes for, and employers' valuation

of, each factor, not the weight assigned by a job evaluation scheme.

       If in such a world females clustered into lower—paying occupations

than males who had comparable productivity related characteristics (e.g.,

education), this would reflect only systematic differences in tastes

between males and females for the nonpecuniary characteristics offered by

the various jobs. For example, married females with children might have

strong   preferences   for jobs that do not   require travel, long hours, or work

that   must be brought hone in the evenings. Given their preferences, males
                                        8


and females would have made optimal career choices and no government

intervention would be required.

      Of course, this conclusion presupposes the validity of the assumptions

of   the   model and there are a number that proponents of comparable worth

seriously challenge. The first is the assumption that there are no

barriers to occupational mobility. If women are systematically excluded

from high paying occupations, one cannot claim that the structure of

earnings is the result of voluntary choice. A market economist would re-

spond that an appropriate long—run remedy in this case would be to break

down occupational barriers through actions including rigorous enforcement

of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act, However, such actions would provide

only for gradual improvement of the welfare of the discriminated against

group, as they would have to wait for vacancies to occur in the higher

paying male jobs. In addition, for jobs that require training, this policy

would benefit primarily new entrants whose tine horizons are sufficiently

long to enable then to profitably undertake the necessary training.

      In the absence of a policy that could I) create tI1et!   jobs   for all

qualified females who want them, 2) identify the older women who historic

discrimination prevented from making different occupational choices early

in their lives and who now could not afford to profitably undertake the

necessary investment if the barriers to entry were bràken, and 3) would

provide resources to these women now so that they could undertake the

training, it could be argued that a policy calling for comparable worth

might make sense. Its justification would be based on equity considera-

tions; one would have to conclude that these would outweigh any efficiency
                                           9


losses that might result. The latter include any decreased female employ-

ment caused by the increased wages in these female occupations (see Section

V).9

        The second assumption challenged is that wages in female dominated

occupations are determined in competitive markets. There is considerable

evidence that employers in some female dominated occupations, such as

public school teachers and hospital nurses, appear to have monopsrny

power.'° As is well—known, in      this   circumstance there is a range over

which    one can "legislate" a higher wage without suffering any employment
loss. Whether the wage that would be set under a comparable worth wage
policy would fall in such a range cannot be determined a priori and, in any
case,    the vast majority of   females are not employed in these occupations.
A remedy that insures that employers in these markets actively compete for

workers might make more sense than comparable worth."

        The case for comparable worth thus seems to rest on the argument that

the current occupational distribution of female employees is based on

discriminatory barriers which existing legislation has not broken down.

Even if one could enforce these laws, breaking down barriers does not help

experienced older workers who have invested heavily in occupation—specific

training and whose time horizon is now too short to profitably undertake

new occupational investments, Comparable worth is one of several policies

that epuld provide a remedy for these workers.12        Whether it is a desir-

able policy depends upon one's perceptions of how the benefits it provides

contrast with the efficiency losses it induces. Just as with one's

perception about the value of the minimum wage, given the trade—of fs
                                         10


involved, ultimately one's position on comparable worth must depend on

value judgments.



111.    Comparable Worth Job Evaluation Studies

       Suppøse one ignores the objections to comparable worth posed by

economists and decides that a governmental unit's compensation structure

should be determined solely by this principle. The first task one would

face would be to devise a job evaluation scheme to measure the worth of

each job. Numerous evaluation schemes currently exist, but there are a

host of problems that make them less than satisfactory for use in a

comparable worth study.13 Others have discussed these problems, which

include possible sex biases in the description of jobs, the evaluation of

jobs and the determination of which job characteristics should be valued;

the statistical reliability of rater's evaluations; and the correlation of

job ratings (or the lack of such) across different evaluation schemes.'4

Nonetheless, as Table 1 indicates, several states have already conducted

formal job evaluation studies and used them to draw conclusions about

whether their female employees are underpaid relative to their male

employees whose jobs are evaluated to be of comparable worth.

       The typical study used is based upon the factor point method.'5 The

characteristics of jobs are described and then a rater, or group of raters,

assigns point scores to each job on a number of dimensions. In the widely

used Hay Point method developed by Hay Associates, these dimensions include

"know—how,"   "problem solving,"   "accountability," and tiworking condi—

tions.ITIG The   points a job receives for each category are summed to get a
                                     11


total score, or measure of worth, for the job. The magnitudes of the wage

adjustments required by a comparable worth policy are obtained by either

directly computing how much less each female dominated job pays than male

dominated jobs with the same total point score, or by estimating a wage

equation in which male dominated jobs' wages are specified to be a function

only of their total point scores and then computing how much wages in

female dominated jobs lie below this estimated equation.

     This methodology raises two issues: First, how sensitive are the

estimates of the individual occupational "comparable worth gaps", and the

average gap across occupations, to different functional form assumptions

about the male wage equation. If functional form assumptions influence the

results, careful consideration must be given to functional form and methods

to "statistically" choose the correct form used.17

     Second, is it reasonable to sum the individual factor point scores to

get a total score? To do so implies that the marginal value a governmental

unit gets from an additional point is the same across factors. A more

general approach would be to estimate hedonic wage equations in which the

wage in a male dominated occupation was specified to be a function of the

individual factor point scores in the occupation; the resulting regression

coefficients would be estimates of the marginal value the government unit

placed on an additional point on each factor. If the marginal effects of

factor points on salaries differ across factors and if male and female jobs

with the same total factor point scores have a different distribution of

individual factor point Scores, then basing "comparable worth gap" esti-

mates solely on total hay Points may lead to erroneous conclusions.'8
                                     12


     This section uses data from job evaluation studies conducted in

Minnesota, Washington, and Connecticut to see how robust these studies'

results are to these modifications. Our calculations are meant to be

illustrative; the specific estimates we obtain of comparable worth gaps may

differ from those the studies themselves found because of differences in

the samples we use and the functional form assumptions we make.

     A. Minnesota

     Minnesota is one of the few states that has actually begun to imple-

ment "comparable worth" pay adjustments for ts employees. A Council on

the Economic Status of Women that had been monitoring the status of

state—employed women since 1916 found in 1981 that state job classifica-

tions remained heavily segregated by sex, female employees tended to be

overrepresented in low—paying clerical or service occupations, and the gap

between average earnings of state—employed males and females was alui,st

$5,000. This led the Council to establish a Task Force on Pay Equity to

examine salary differences between male and female jobs.

     The State of Minnesota, in conjunction with flay Associaten, had begun

an evaluation of all state government jobs in 1919. Each position was

awarded Hay Points in four areas: Know—How, Problem—Solving, Accounta-

bility, and Working Conditions, as well as a total Hay Point score. These

evaluations were used by the Task Force which conducted analyses of the

maximum monthly salary for )88 positions in which at least 10 employees

were employed and which could be classified as either male (at least 70%

male incumbents) or female (at least 70% female incumbents) positions.

These analyses were primarily visual inspections of ncatt.ergrama and
                                     13


concluded that in almost every case the pay for female jobs was less than

the pay for male jobs with equal total Hay Point scores (see Council on

the Economic Status of Women (1982)). In most cases, female jobs also

received lower pay than male jobs with lower Hay Point totals. Estimates

of the cost of implementing pay equity, by raising salaries in each of the

female dominated classes to the lowest (highest) salary of a male dominated

class with the same number of flay Points (or the next lowest—rated male job

when no male job with the same number of points existed) were calculated to

be in the range of 2 to 4 percent of the totil salary base, or 20 to 40

million dollars.

     Salaries of state employees in Minnesota are determined, for the most

part, through collective bargaining. After reviewing the above findings,

nd conducting some analyses of their own, the State of Minnesota appro-

priated a total of 22 million dollars and distributed this sum among the

various bargaining units in proportion to their payrolls in the female

dominated classes.19 Each unit then bargained with the state over which

specific occupation titles would receive comparable worth wage adjustments

from these funds. The adjustments were paid in two stages (over $7

million in July 1983 and over $14 million in July 1984). Although in

practice only the "female—dominated" occupations have received such

adjustments, there is nothing in the law that restricts comparable worth

adjustments to these classes, the law requires that reanalyses and

reevaluations of the need for additional comparable worth adjustments be

undertaken every two years and a commitment has been made to fund addi-

tional adjustments during the 1985—87 period.
                                     14


     The data from Minnesota are a convenient place for us to start, both

because the Hay Point system is one of the (if not the) most widely used

job evaluation system in the country and because Minnesota has already

begun to implement comparable worth adjustments based partially on the

original study. We obtained data from the original study, as of October

1981, for 188 job titles, on the number of incumbents (nj), the percent

female (PEN1), the total Hay Point Score (HPTj) and the maximum monthly

salary for the class (s).20 The State of Minnesota Department of Employee

Relations also provided us with a computer printout that listed, as of

November 1983, the individual factor point scores (Know-How (HP1j), Problem

Solving (HP2j), Accountability (H23j), and Working Conditions (uP41)) for

every state occupation title.21 Of the 188 job titles in the original

study, we were able to match factor job point scores to 150 job titles and

this subset of job titles became the sample we used in our analysis.22

     Table 3 presents some descriptive statistics from the factor point

score data that highlight a number of points. First, on average, male jobs

were more highly rated than female jobs: Second, average point scores and

the range of variation of point scores for the first three factors far

exceed the comparable variables for the fourth factor (Working Conditions).

Indeed, the small range of variation in this factor, the large number of

observations that have zero scores for it, and its small maximum value in

the sample of 29, as compared to a maximum of 400 for Know—How points,

reinforces the notion that one cannot simply add all factor point scores

together to get a total store.2.3 Third, focusing on the Individual factor

point scores as a share of total Hay Points, there are differences by sex;
                                               15


female jobs rank relatively high on the first (Know—How) factor and

relatively low on all other factors.

     Finally, and perhaps most importantly, in these Minnesota data there

actually are not four truly independent job factors.24 The botto, panel of

Table 3 presents a correlation matrix of the individual factor point scores

and the    total   Hay Point Score; it is striking that the correlations among

the first three factors scores and between each of them and the total

scores all exceed .94. Only the relatively unimportant (in magnitude)

working condition score is at all orthogonal to, or relatively uncorrelated

with, the other factor scores. These results suggest that with these

Minnesota data it will be difficult to disentangle the marginal effects of

individual factor points on wages and that wage equations that use the

total factor point scores as         the   sole explanatory variable are unlikely to

yield results very different from those that use the individual factor

point scores.

     These conjectures are borne out in             Tables   4   and presents
                                                                       5.      Table   4

estimates   separately for the male and female occupations of monthly maximum
occupational salary equations of the form


     (1)

     (2)
                Si       B0 + B111P11 + B2HP21 + BSHP3i + 04HP41 +

     (3)             —      +
                                y1flP41+ 25i + c        (MP5 —         11P11   + HP21 + HP31)
                                     16


     Here      is a random error term and we have progressively regressed

monthly salaries on total Hay Points, the four individual factor point

scores, and the fourth factor point score plus the sum of the first three.

To see whether the results are sensitive to functional form assumptions, a

second set of estimates in Table 4 (equations (4)—(6)) use the logarithm of

monthly salary as the dependent variable; this is obviously only one of

many nonlinear functional forms with which one might experiment.

     Because of the severe collinearity problems the results in Table 4

should not be stressed too heavily. They do suggest, however, that the

implicit weights assigned to individual factor point scores by the collec-

tive bargaining process differ across factors. For example, columns (2)

and (5) suggest that only the first and last factor point scores signifi—

êantly affect wages.25

     What are the magnitudes of the "comparable wage gaps" implied by the

various estimates. That is, how sensitive are estimates of "comparable

wage gaps" to £he functional form used and to whether individual factor

point scores or total flay Point Scores are used in the analysis. For each

female occupation, we can compute what the occupation would have been paid

if it had been paid according to a given male wage equation. The resulting

percentage underpayment figures weighted by the number of employees in the

occupation can then be aggregated across occupations to come up with a mean

(over the female occupations) "comparable worth wage gap" estimate.

     These estimates are presented in the top row of Table S for six

specifications of the male wage equatIon; they vary between —14.6 and —20.0

percent, a range that might be considered sufficiently narrow to be useful
                                         17



for public policy. Moreover, as the bottom rows of the table suggest, the

relative ranking of which female occupations are underpaid the most appears

to be insensitive to the estimation method used. The correlation across

female occupations of the various estimated wage gaps is at least .81.

Thus, the various methods yield very similar estimates about which of the

female occupational classes should receive the largest "comparable worth"

adjustments.

     In   sum, the estimates of "comparable worth gaps" implied by the
}linneaota   data were relatively insensitive to the functional forms used and
to the use of individual factor point scores instead of total Hay Points.
As we shall see, this is   also characteristic of the other two data bases we

examine   in this section. Because the results for the three states are so
similar, our discussions of the Washington and Connecticut data are
relatively brief.
     B) Washington26
     Washington was the first state to undertake a formal factor point job
evaluation study, with the explicit objective of comparing salaries on male
dominated (more than 70% male) and female dominated (mote than 70Z female)
jobs. The study Was    conducted   in 1974 by the Willis consulting firm and
covered 121 job classifications. Its major conclusion was that female
dominated jobs tended to pay some 20 percent less than comparable valued

male Jobs. The study was updated iii    1976 and additional job categories

surveyed. The failure of the governor and state legislature to implement

the type of wage adjustments called for by the study led tD the litigation

that resulted in a December 1983 federal district court order mandating
                                                 18


implementation of these adjustments (AFSCME v. State of Washington). This

decision is currently under appeal.

        The Willis job evaluation system is similar to the Hay system and

awards points to jobs on the dimensions "knowledge and skill," " mental

demands,'       "accountability," and "working conditions."27 Table 6 contains
descriptive statistics from           the   factor point scores for the 121 occupations
in   the original Willis study. While in this sample female dominated jabs

tend to have higher ratings than male jobs, most other patterns are similar

to those found in the Minnesota data. Again, the fourth factor (working

conditions) has a very small range of variation relative to the other

factors and the other three factors are very highly correlated. So, as

with the Minnesota data, there are really only two independent dimensions

of   jobs   actually being evaluated by the Willis system and one, working

conditions, is obviously measured with considerable error.

        Table 7 contains estimates of minimum salary equations similar to

those presented earlier for Minnesota.28 Maximum salary and mid—point of

the occupation's salary range were also available to us and because similar

results were obtained when they were used as the dependent variable, these

equations are omitted for brevity. Based upon these estimates and those in

Table 7, along with the factor point scores of the female occupations, one

can compute a set of estimated comparable worth gaps for each occupation as

before.

        Estimates      of   the unweighted mean percentage wage gaps are found in

Table    a.29    The   range is    even narrower here than it   was in the Minnesota
data,   varying from 21.9 to 23.1 percent when the minimum salary data are
                                     19


used. Moreover, the correlation across estimation methods of the estimated

individual female occupational gaps is again very high; exceeding .89 in

all cases. The estimated comparable worth gaps are again relatively

insensitive to the functional- form and the decomposition of the factor point

scores used.

     C) Connecticut3°

     At the directive of the state legislature, Willis Associates was hired

 to undertake a pilot job evaluation study of some 120 state occupations in

1979—1980. The study covered male—dominated, female—dominated and mixed

(30 to 70 percent male) occupations and was similar to the one Willis

conducted for Washington. It concluded that female—dominated jobs were

paid some 10 to 20 percent less than male jobs with comparable levels of

Willis points in the sample.

     Based upon this and subsequent studies, a decision was made to

undertake, a comprehensive evaluation of all state positions. The resulting

job evaluation data will be provided to state employee unions who can use

it in future negotiations over wage scales. Although the state may

consider comparable worth in framing its bargaining position, it will

continue to consider a number of additional criteria, including market

conditions. As of 1983 the comprehensive evaluation had not yet been

completed, but the state had already agreed (in negotiations with three

unions whose members were priiárily females) to set aside 1 to 2 percent of

payroll per year into a fund that would eventually be used to finance

individual inequity adjustments.
                                     20


     Tables 9, 10 and 11 provide estimates similar to those obtained for

the other states, using data from the Willis study for 84 occupations that

were either male or female dominated. The descriptive statistics in Table

9 confirm by now familiar patterns; little variation in working condition

points relative to other factors, differential weighting by sex of the

importance of the different factors in the total score, and the extremely

high correlation of the first three factors. The latter again suggests

there are only two real factors——working conditions and everything else.

     Table 10 presents estimates of male and female average annual salary

equations.31 These estimates strongly suggest (at least for males) that

different weights should be applied to the different factors;indeed working

conditions receives a negative weight in the male equations.32 Based upon

these estimates, one can again estimate the mean comparable worth gap

generated by each method, as well as the correlation of the gap estimates

for individual occupations across methods, and these are found in Table 11.

The mean percentage gap estimate ranges between 15.4 and 20.2 percent,

which is broader than the Washington range but about the same range as

found in the Minnesota data. The correlation ot   the   individual occupa-

tional wage gap estimates across estimation methods, although high, is not

as high as before; for these data we observe correlations as low as .73.

     D) Summary

     In sum, our analyses of data from the Minnesota, Washington and

Connecticut comparable worth job evaluation studies suggests that in those

three cases estimates of the average differential, or the ranking of

differentials across occupations, are not very sensitive to the functional
                                       21


form used or whether total job points are decomposed into their individual

factor point scores. While these results should be gratifying to pro-

ponents of comparable worth, we stress that they hold for particular

samples of data. It is incumbent upon future studies of other governmental

units to perform sensitivity analyses of the type we have undertaken

here.33



IV.     Occupational   Mobility

        Total Compensation on a job includes both pecuniary and nonpecuniary

forms of compensation. The above mentioned studies focus on wages and

working conditions; the latter obviously poorly measured by the various

evaluation systems. Fringe benefits tend to be ignored because most

individuals employed i0 a bargaining unit presumably receive the same

package of benefits, although some benefits may vary with seniority and

rank.

        Another, possibly important omission, is the studies failure to

include opportunities for occupational mobility and subsequent wage growth.

If male workers in government have fewer opportunities for occupational

mobility than female workers, the observed current wage gaps of the

previous section may merely be compensating wage differentials and would

not call for any comparable worth adjustments.

        To test if this occurs requires one to have longitudinal earnings data

and job evaluation scores for a sample of male and female public employees.

Such data is not readily available. However, it is possible to provide

evidence that is suggestive, using data from the 1/100 sample of the 1970
                                    22


Census of Population. We illustrate how this can be done with data from

New York State.

     The 1910 CensuS of Population includes information on an individual's

industry and occupation of employment in both 1965 and 1970, his or her

1969 earnings level, and whether he or she was a state or local government

employee in 1970. If one assumes that government employees who remained in

the same 3—digit industry between 1965 and 1970 were also government

employees in 1965 then we may focus on this group's occupational

mobility.34 Mean earnings in 1969 by 3—digit public sector occupation can

be constructed from the Census data and then the ratio of 1969 mean

earnings in an individual's 1970 occupation to 1969 mean earnings in an

individual's 1965 occupation used as a measure of occupational mobility.35

     Table 12 presents the results of regressions in which the logarithm of

this variable is regressed on whether the individual is a state or a local

government employee, the individual's age (as of 1975), the logarithm of

the 1969 mean earnings in his or her 1965 occupation (to control for

initial job level), weeks worked intervals for 1969 (as a measure of labor

market attachment), and the individual's sex. These results suggest

that, as defined, occupational mobility is lower for state employees than

local employees, declines over the relevant age range with age, is lower

for individuals initially in high earnings occupations and is lower for

individuals with weak labor force attachment, Crucially, it is also lower

for females than for males.36

    Although our data are crude, this latter result suggests that observed

male/female earnings differentials for jobs with equal job evaluation
                                         23


scores probably are not compensating earnings differentials for better

female occupational mobility prospects. Indeed, these results suggest that

the male/female comparable worth gap may be larger than has been estimated

by the analyses in the previous section. As noted above, however, precise

tests would require much more detailed data. 3



V. Employment Adjustments

        As noted in the introduction, CIQWA   would likely alter at least four

types of relative prices that public employers face. First, for any given

function (e.g., police) and within any major occupational group the average

wage of female employees would rise relative to the average wage of male

employees, as some female employees received CWWA. Second, across major

occupational groups, the average wage of employees in heavily "female"

occupations would rise relative to the average wages of employees in

heavily    "male" occupations, as more employees in the former would receive
CWWA.     Third,   across functions, the average wage in heavily female domi-
nated functions     would rise relative to the average wage in heavily male

dominated functions, as employees in the former would again be more likely

to receive CWWA. Finally, the average wage of public employees would rise

relative to the prices of other goods and services.

        To the extent that public employers' employment decisions are sensi—

tive to their employees' wage rates, these changes should lead respectively

to the substitution of some male for some female employees within a

function—occupation group, the substitution of some employment in male

dominated occupations for some employment in female dominated occupations
                                         24


(within   a function), the substitution of some employment in male dominated

functions for some employment in female dominated functions, and a decline

in the aggregate level of public employment      For all these reasons, CWWA

should lead to a decline in female employment.

     This section reports our attempts to esttmate the extent to which some

of these adjustments might occur and then to simulate the potential

employment effects of a CWWA. Unfortunately, data are not currently

available to us on a detailed function by occupation by sex breakdown, so

the estimates discussed below typically aggregate employees across occupa-

tions within a function, or across functions within an occupation.38 These

types of aggregations make it difficult to estimate substitution

elasticities.

     Published   data   permit us to estimate the extent to which the ratio of

male to female public administration employees varies across SMSA's with

the ratio of male to female earnings in the industry. Public administra-

tion employees are employed in executive and legislative offices; general

government (n.e.c.); justice, public order and safety; and the adminis-

tration of various government programs. While many government employees

are employed in these categories, public administration does not include a

number of governmental functions, such as hospitals and education. As a

result the category represents less than half of all state and local

government employment.39

    Table 13 presents estimates based on published SMSA level data from

the 1970 and 1980 Census of Population volumes. In each case the logarithm

of the ratio of male to female public administration employees (LRE) is
                                         25


    regressed on the logarithm of the ratio of male public administration

    ewiployees' median earnings to female public administration employees'

    median earnings (11W), the logarithm of total public administration

    employment (LT), and the logarithm of the ratio of the male to female labor

    force (LRL).   The latter two variables are included as crude controls for

    differences in the occupational mix and male/female public administration

    applicant ratio across SNSAs.

         Columns U) and (2) report estimates based on the 1980 data; it is

    not possible to separate out federal employees from state and local

    employees in these data and total government figures are used. While as

    expected the sex ratio in the labor force is positively related to the sex

    ratio in government employment, the latter is also positively associated

    with the sex ratio in wages in that year. That is, there is no evidence in

    the 1980 data that higher female wages are associated with lower female

    employment levels.

         In contrast, the 1970 data do suggest that the association between

    male/female employment and wage ratios is negative (Ccl. 3). However, this

    appears to be true primarily for federal employees (CoT. 4), where a 10

    percent increase in the male/female wage ratio is associated with all B

-
    percent decrease in the employment ratio. State and local government
    employees (CoT. 5) display no such association.

         The difference in results btween the 1970 and 1980 data is puzzling.

    One possible explanation is that it is due to different SMSAs being

    included in each year's sample. When the 1980 equations are reestimated n

    the subsample of 118 SMSAs that appeared in the 1970 sample, however, one
                                        26


still observes a positive relative wage coefficient.4° Attempts to appeal

to omitted variable bias also did not prove fruitful, as when a fixed

effects model was estimated using data from both years (cot. 5), no

significant coefficients were obtained.

     Independent of the results, these analyses of the published Census

data are unsatisfactory for a number of reasons. They permit only the

crudest control for differences in the occupational mix across areas. They

contain no information on the characteristics of male and female employees

that might affect their relative productivity (e.g., education and age) and

hence relative employment levels. They do not permit us to separate state

from local employees. Finally, they cover only a small fraction of all

state and local government employees.

     Many of these problems can be remedied using individual data from the

A sample of the 1980 Census of Population; a 5 percent sample for each

state. We aggregated state-employees' data by state and local government

employees' data by SMSA to get samples of 49 and 177 observations respec-

tively.41 The data were stratified into education and noneducation

employees and, within each of these "industries", into 4 occupational

groups; professional and managerial employees (occupation codes 001—199),

technical, sales and administrative support employees (o.c. 203—389),

service (including protective service) employees (O.C. 403—469) and all other

(including craft, repair, laborer, and transportation equipment operator)

employees (O.C. 473—889).
                                              27


        Suppose that within each of then occupational groups the quantity of

labor services produced (I.) is given by the constant elasticity of substi-

tution function


        (4)   L —                +
                    AIIQJ4HB

Where     QMQF      is   a measure of the quality of males (females) employed in

the occupation, 14(1) is a measure of male (female) employment in the

occupation and A,B and S are parameters. If the only cost of labor is the

wags rate, it is well—known that cost minimization leads to the relative

demand equation



     (5)      log(M/F) =         +
                            a0       a1log(W/W) + a2log(Q/Q1)

where W(Wy) is the male (female) wage and a1 is an estimate of minus

the elasticity of substitution between males and females in the occupation.

     Table 14 presents estimates for state employees of this relative demand

equation for each of the four occupational groups in education and nonedu—

cation. Equations are estimated with both relative employment and relative

person hours as the dpendent variable. Each equation includes the

logarithm of male to female earnings in the industry—occupation cell (LR2)

and, as proxies for the relative quality of males and females in the

occupation, the logarithms of the ratio of average age (LR4) and average

education level (L1t5) of males to females in the industry—occupation cell.

In addition, to control for supply factors, some equations include the

logarithm of a measure of the overall male/female wEge ratio in the state

(LZ1) and the logarithm of the male/female labor force ratio in the state
                                        28


(LU).   We expect the former to be negatively and the latter to be posi-


tively associated with male/female relative employment in the industry—
                                                                       -

occupational cell.

     Where significant, the control variables (LR4, LRS, LZl, LZ2) all have

the expected sign. Unfortunately,     the evidence on the substitutability of
males for females is much weaker. For noneducation, when relative employ-

ment is the dependent variable there are no significant relative wage

elasticities. When   relative   person hours (which probably is preferable) is

used, male/female substitution appears to occur only in the 'other"

category, where a 10% increase in the wage ratio is associated roughly with

a 6.5% decrease in the hours ratio. Elasticities in this range and larger

are observed for state employees in education in the technical and adminis-

trative support and "other" categories. Rowever, here seemingly perverse

positive relative wage coefficient. are found in the professional category.

     Table 15 presents estimates of the relative wage coefficients from

similarly specified equations- for local government employees, with SMSAS as

the units of observation. To avoid errors induced by averages constructed

from very small samples, the analyses here are restricted to SNSAs in which

at least 4 (or B) individuals of each sex were contained in the data for

each occupation—industry cell. While it would have been preferable to

require a larger minimum number of observations in each cell, the tabula-

tion of the resulting sample sizes from these restrictions that is found at

the bottom of Table 15 suggests even these restrictions substantially

reduce the number of observations available.
                                     29


     The results in this table are not strongly supportive of the vithin—

occupation male—female substitution hypothesis. There is some evidence for

both education and noneducation that substitution takes place among

technical and administrative support employees. However, for education

employees, in some specifications relative wages arc positively associated

with relative employment levels for both the professional and "other"

categories.

     Taken together, the results in Tables 14 and 15 are not strongly

supportive of the hypothesis that within broad occupational groups

male/female employmentratios are negatively associated with male/female

wage ratios, whether this reflects the failure of substitution to exist,

heterogeneity induced by using broad occupational categories, or the

omission of other important explanatory variables is unclear. Unfortu-

nately sample sizes within cells in these data are usually too small to

permit teøts of substitutability within finer occupational groups.

     If one assumes that substitution between miles and females is not

possible within these broad occupational groups, one can aggregate across

sexes within groups to come up with estimates of the average wage paid in

each occupation (wj). The data also permit the computation of the share of

the payroll paid to each occupational group (s1). One can thus estimate

êbare equations (derived from translog expenditure functions) of the form

                4
     (6) S =                   ,          1   1,2.3.4
               1E1a1logw3

to test whether substitution of employees across   occupations   odeurs in

response to changes in wages in the different occupations.42
                                         30


     If such substitution occurs, given estimates of how CWWA would change

the average wage in each occupation, one can then compute the resulting

changes in factor   shares   and, holding the total employment budget constant,

the change in total and female employment in each occupation. To these

changes, one can add estimates of the employment changes caused by the

response   of the employment budget to the CWWA induced change in the average
wage in the sector and thus obtain an estimate of the overall effect of
CWWA on female employment in the sector.
    As is well—known, the output constant own wage elasticity of demand
(Di) for each occupation is given by

                         +   —
            Di —   (a1
And each of these elasticities should be negative.43 In addition, to

satisfy the homogeneity property——that a doubling of all wages would not

alter the share spent on each occupation——it is necessary that



     (8) a1+a12+a34a4O                        foreachj.

Finally, to satisfy the symmetry property——that the Allen Elasticity of

substitution of occupation I for occupation j be equal to the elas-

ticity of occupatlDn j for occupation i ——it must be the case that


     (9)
            ajjaj1           forall 1.J.
                                     -
                                         31


The restrictions summarized in (7)—(9) provide a convenient way of testing

if the data are consistent with the share equations specified in equation

(6).

       Tables 16 and 17 provide estimates, for the state and local government

samples respectively, of the occupational, share equations derived from the

translog expenditure function. In each case estimates are provided of the

unconstrained system, of the system with homogeneity imposed, and of the

system with both homogeneity and symmetry imposed. Since the four occupa-

tional shares must sum to unity, the coefficients of any wage variable must

sum across equations in each system to zero. Hence, we infer the value of

the coefficients of the last equation from estimates of the first three.

The estimates are obtained using an instrument for each of the wage

variables and an estimation method that takes account of the correlation of

the error terms across equations.4

       These estimates provide mixed support for the translog specification.

On the one hand, in 3 of the 4 systems (education/state, noneducation/ state,

education/local) one cannot reject the hypothesis that the homogeneity and

symmetry restrictions ((8) and (9)) are satisfied. On the other hand, the

majority of the individual regression coefficients are statistically

insignificantly different from zero in all of the systems estimated. One

senses that this contributes to the above results. Moreover, the own wage

elasticities of demand they imply when symmetry and homogeneity are imposed

(Table 18) are negative in only 9 of the 16 cases.

       The mixed nature of these results suggest that one should take

predictions they generate with a grain    of salt.   Nonetheless they can be
                                          32



used, along with knowledge of the share of expenditures on each category,

the proportion of bouts worked by females in each category, the male and

female wages in each category, female employment in each category, and an

assumption about what CWWA would do to female wages, to generate predic-

tions    about the effect of CWWA on female employment due to substitution
away from female dominated   occupations, holding       the total employment budget
constant. The appendix sketches somewhat formally how this is done.
Illustrative simulations appear in Table i9 where we have assumed CWWA
would raise the wage of all female employees by 20 percent.46

     Although   the implied percentage   changes   in   female   employment in each

occupation varies across industry (education or noneducation) and sector

(state or local), the implied average change in overall female employment

Is remarkably   similar across industry   and sector. The 20 percent       CWWA is


predicted to reduce female employment in education by almost 6 percent and
female   employment in noneducation by   about 5.5 percent. These figures are
the averages for all observations in the       sample; as the bottom rows of the

table    suggest the predicted losses vary across observations, with the range
of predicted losses being larger for local government employees.
     We must stress, however, that these simulations assume that the total
employment budget remains constant in the face of the CWWA. This is
roughly equivalent to assuming that in the aggregate the wage elasticity of
demand for state and local government employees is unity. That is, they
assume that any given increase in the average wage of state and local
government employees wouid result in an equal percentage decrease in

aggregate   state and local government employment.
                                          33


        In fact, studies of the aggtegate (by function) wage elasticity of

demand for state and local government employees typically find wage

elasticities of demand that are less than unity.47 Thus, an increase in

the average wage would increase the total employment budget; the calcula-

tions in Table 19 therefore overstate the decline in female employment that

would occur.

        Some idea of the magnitude of the overstatement can be obtained from

the following crude calculations. Based on knowledge of the ratios of male

to female wages and of male to female hours in each industry/sector, we

calculate that a 20 percent increase in wages for females would increase

the average wages of state education, state noneducation, local education

and local noneducation employees by about 8, 7.5. 11.5 and 5.5 percent,

respectively.48      It is reasonable to take —.5 as   a "best" estimate of the

aggregate     wage elasticity of demand for noneducational ewployees in the
state and local sector and —.75 as the comparable estimate for educational
employees.49       These elasticities imply employment budget increases for

state education, state noneducation, local education and local noneducation,

respectively, of 2, 3.75, 2.9 and 2.75 percent. Such increases would

reduce the female employment declines predicted by Table 13 by roughly

half.

        In   sum, our simulations suggest that the decline In female employment

caused by a 20 percent CWWA for all female employees in the state and local

sector would be quite small, probably falling in the range of 2 to 3

percent. These somewhat surprisingly small estimates are a direct result

of our inability to find much substitutability of malet' for females within
                                      34



major occupational groups, or much substitutability across major occupa-

tional groups as relative wages change.50



VI. Concluding Remarks

     At the theoretical level, we conclude that the case for comparable

worth rests on the argument that the current distribution of female

employees is based on discriminatory barriers which existing legislation

have not broken down. If this argument is valid, the desirability of

comparable worth depends upon one's perceptians of how the benefits it

provides contrasts with the efficiency losses it induces and, given the

trade—of fs involved, ultimately one's position on comparable worth must

depend on value judgements.

     Turning to the public sector, our empirical analyses in Section III

suggest that existing estimates of comparable worth wage gaps in the states

of Connecticut, Minnesota, and Washington are relatively insensitive to the

functional forbi of the earnings equation estimated and to whether total job

points are decomposed into their individual factor point scores. While

these results should be gratifying to proponents of comparable worth, we

stress the need to perform sensitivity analyses of the type we have

undertaken for studies of other governmental units in the future.

These results are based on job evaluation systems (flay or Willis) that

purport to measure four distinct characteristics of jobs; in the case of

the Hay System these are "Know—How," "Problem—solving," "Accountability"

and "Working Conditions". As described in Section III, the latter charac-

teristic is obviously measured with substantial error and the first three
                                          35


are so highly correlated that it is unlikely that they capture more than
                          -

one dimension of a job.       As a result, we must be somewhat skeptical about

what these job evaluation systems are actually measuring and, if job

evaluation systems are to be used in comparable worth studies, suggest

that more thought be given to their design.

     Our   analyses in Section IV called attention to the need to focus on
forms of compensation in addition to current wages and working conditions

in judging the "total" compensation of a job. In particular, we stressed

the need for longitudinl earnings data for individuals initially in each

job category to test if observed occupational wage differentials are

partially compensating differentialI for different opportunities for

occupational mobility.

     Finally, our analyses in Section V found little evidence that intra—

occupational male/female employment ratios in the SLO sector are sensitive

to intraoccupational male/female wage ratios or that the SLO occupational

distribution of employment is sensitive to the SLG occupational distri-

bution of wages. These results imply, in our simulations, that the decline

in female employment caused by a CWWA for all female SLG employees would be

surprisingly small. Indeed, we estimate that a 20 percent CWWA for all SLO

female employees would lead to only a 2 to 3 percent decline in female

employment.

     Opponents of comparable worth night claim these estimates are muth.

too low and point to problems in our empirical analyses. These include

using broad definitions of occupations (only 4), aggregating all noneduca—

tion employees into one group, aggregating all governmental units in an
                                     36


SMSA together, basing analyses often on small sample sites, and using wage

variables that are subject to considerable measurement error. Our analyses

were dictated by the nature of the Census data we used and we hope to

undertake analyses in the future of other data bases (see footnote 38)

what would provide larger sample sizes1 greater functional breakdown., and

data at the individual governmental level. Moreover, now that several

states have begun to adopt comparable worth, the employment effects of the

policy may be directly inferred after a few years from their experiences.

However, while our personal priors were that we would find larger estimates

of potential job loss for females, it seems reasonable at least temporarily

to take our current findings at face value.
                                          37




                                     Footnotes



     1. See, for example, Donald Treiman and Heidi Hartmann, eds. (1981).

     2.     This statement   is attributed in a number of places to former EEOC

Chair Eleanor Holmes Norton.

     3. Zxplanations for why this occurred include that public decision

makers are more likely to be swayed by public, opinion calling for such

policies than are private profit maximizing firms and that increases in

female wages in the public sector caused by comparable worth wage adjust-

ments are likely to lead to only small employment losses because the demand

for public employees is likely to be inelastic. Empirical evidence for

Australia, where a similar policy was implemented, provides some support

for the latter claim (see Robert 0. Gregory and Robert C. Duncan (1981)),

see Section V for evidence we offer for the United States.

     4. Tables 1 and 2 and the next two paragraphs draw heavily on

research being conducted by our colleague Alice Cook. We are most grateful

to Professor Cook for sharing her materials with us; and she should not be

held responsible for our interpretations of them. For earlier evidence on

the spread of comparable worth in the state and local sector, see Alice

Cook (1983) and National Committee on Pay Equity (forthcoming).

     5. In AFSCME V.    State of Washington. lot details see "Immediate Halt
to Bias in Wages in Statd of Washington Ordered, New York TImes, December

15, 1983.
                                        38


     6.lJbile   our empirical analyses focus on the state and local sector,

there is considerable interest in the federal sector as well. Nearings on

comparable worth have been conducted   by several   Congressional committees,

for example, U.S. House of Representatives (1982).

     7. See Barbara Bergmann (1984) and Mark Killingsworth (1984a, 1984b,

1984c), respectively, for more complete analytical treatments of the cases

for and against comparable worth.

     8. That job evaluation scores must be reconsidered as internal and

external conditions change has long been recognized by institutional

economists. For a recent discussion, see Donald Schwab (1984).

     9. Another possible efficiency loss is the reduced incentive females

would have to obtain training for the higher paying "male" occupations,

since increasing the wage in "female" occupations via comparable worth wage

adjustments reduces the return to training investments.

     10. See Ronald Ehrenberg and Joshua Schwarz (forthcoming) for

citations to the literature.

     11. This point has been made by Killingsworth (1984W.

     12. Another remdy would be lump sum payments that are specified as a

function of years of service in the occupation. This would have the

advantage of making the size of the remedy a function of the magnitude of

the loss and would not reduce employment of women in the occupation.

     13. See Donald fleiman (1979) for a discussion of current job

evaluation schemes.

     14. See Treiman and Hartman, eds. (1981) and Schwab (1984).

     15. See Treiman (1979).
                                          39


     16.   These are defined as     follows:
           "Know How is the sum total of every kind of skill; however
           acquired, needed for acceptable job performance"

           "Problem Solving is the original "self—Startingt' thinking
           required by the job for analyzing, evaluating, creating.
           reasoning, arriving at, and making conclusions"

           "Accountability is the answerability     for   an action and for the
           consequences thereof"

           "Working Conditions are made up of physical effort, environment
           and hazards".


See Treiman (1929), pp. 161—165 for elaborations of these definitions and

copies of the Hay System Guide Charts for assigning points for each of the

factors.

     17. See G. Box and D. Cox (1964), for example.

     18. Others have suggested similar approaches, for example, Treiman

and Hartmann (1981) and Pierson, et al. (1984). Some, however, resist any

determination of factor weights that use existing wage scale data, arguing

that these weights will reflect the net effects of any market discrimina-

tion that exists. See, for e,çample, K. C. Blumrosen (1979).

     19.   The discussion in this paragraph comes from a November 10, 1983

telephone conversation with James Lee of the Minnesota Department of

Employee Relations and from an August6, 1984 letter from Helen Remick.

     20. Council on the Economic Status of Women (1982), Appendix I.

While only maximum    salary   data were available for Minnesota, results we

report below for the State of Washington suggest that the une of average or

minimum wage scale data would not appreciably change the results.
                                     40


     21. Minnesota Department of Employee Relations (1983).

     22. Eleven of the titles in the original study did not appear in the

latter list. Twenty—seven others were either upgraded or downgraded so

that the total Hay Point Scores for the title did not match on the two data

sources. It is interesting to note the male job titles were much more

likely to be upgraded than female titles (11.5% vs. 3.5%). This may

reflect systematic errors that led to the undergrading of male jobs in the

original evaluations or systematic attempts to overgrade male jobs to

protect customary wage differentials in the latter. Without further

information one cannot conclude whether either hypothesis is correct.

     23. The Bay Point System used in Minnesota assigns working condition

points only to non—exempt jobs and defines most clerical jobs as having

normal working conditions (and therefore zero working condition points).

This is an example of how existing job evaluation plans may be sex biased

and leads one to consider how systematic sex based measurement errors might

influence estimates of comparable worth wage gaps. Donald Schwab and Dean

Wichern (1983) address this issue and discuss the usefulness of reverse

regression methods in ascertaining if such measurement errors exist.

     24. That compensable factors in factor point systems are often

redundant has long been recognized. See Schwab (1984) for citations to the

literature. That the Hay Poidt System (in these data) leads in actuality

to only two factors, at least one which is subject to considerable measure-

ment error (see !bove), is probably less well—known.
                                     41



     25. Somewhat strikingly, adding the percentage of female employees in

an occupation (YEN) to either the male or female wage equations, results in

that variable's having a negative coefficient (columns (la), (4a)). Even

in female—dominated occupations, an increase in the female share of

employment leads to lover wages.

     26. See Helen Remick (1980) (1984), for a more complete discussion of

the Washington study.

     21. See Remick (1980) for a discussion of the Willis system.

     28. Percent female in the occupation was not available in these data.

     29. The unweighted mean is used here because occupational, employment

levels were not available.

     30. The next two paragraphs are drawn from material in Cook (1983)

which should be consulted for more details.

     31. Salary informatian were obtained from charts in Norman D. Willis

(1980) which plotted annual compensation versus total Hay Points for broad

job families. Since compensation was rounded to the nearest two hundred

dollars there, it is not surprising that the R2 in Table 10 are smaller

than the comparable ones in Tables 4 and 7. In several cases where a male

and a female job a) were in the same job family, b) had identical Willis

points and c) paid different salaries, it proved impossible for us to

assign the salaries to each job. As a result, six male and six female jobs

in the original survey were excluded from our sample.

     32. Formal F tests of whether the implicit weights on each factor

differ in the male wage equations, are found in Appendix table 1 for all

three states.
                                       42


        33. A study that does this for a sample of job titles in Michigan, as

well as contrasting the results of two different job evaluation methods, is

Arthur Young (n.d.). fleiman (1964) has stressed that factor weights can

have substantial effects on the rankings of jobs if the factors are not

highly correlated.

        34. This creates obvious selection bias problems as we are ignoring

the opportunity for mobility out of the government sector.

        35. While the 3—digit census occupation breakdown is the most

detailed one available in the data, its categories are actually quite

broad. In our sample only 16 percent of the individuals changed occupa-

tions over the five—year period.

        36. Given our knDwledge of the relative steepness of male and female

age—earnings profiles in the population this result is not unexpected.

        37. Another nonwage factor that may be important is turnover coats.

If two job titles rated to be of comparable worth required the same

firm—specific training investments, but turnover was higher in the first

position, employers would necessarily pay lower wages to employees in that

job title. To test if this was a contributing factor to estimated compar-

able worth wage gaps requires data on quit rates by job title. One must be

cautious in drawing inferences here; as is well known low wages also Jead

to higher quits, which makes it difficult to infer the direction of

causation.

        3B. We currently are negotiating with the EEOC for more detailed data

on a function/occupation/sex breakdown and hope to use these data in later

work.
                                                     43


       39. Only 27 percent of the government employees in the New York data

used in Section IV were employed in public administration.

       40.       See Table 13, notes a and b.
       41.       the A sample contains data for 50 states and 180 SMSAS. At the

time these analyses were undertaken, however, the data tape for Colorado

(and its 3 $MSAs) was not available at Cornell.

       42. Implicit in this formulation is the notion that public sector

decision makers           have well—defined utility functions that depend on the per
capita employment             levels of various categories of public employees and that

the parameters of those functions do not vary systematically across areas

with public employee            wages. For discussions of this approach and analyses
that   use functional, rather than occupational data,                see Orley Ashenfelter

and   Ronald Ehrenberg (1975) and Ronald Ehrenberg (1973).
       43. See Daniel ifamermesh (forthcoming).
       44. See Daniel Hamermesh and James Grant (1979).
       45. the need for insrumental variables can be                  illustrated in the

two—occupation        case. Let Mi(Fj) be the number of male (female) hours
employed in occupation i and Wxj(WFj) the wage rate of males (females)
in occupation i. Then the shares (Sj)                     and   average wages (Wj) in the
two occupations are given by

             —                          +       +
                 (WHIM1 + WF1F1)/(wMlMl   WF1F1                   + WF2F2)


             —            +
                 (Wxf12       WF2F2)F( WH1M1 + W11F1 +            + WFZF2)


                          +                +
                 (W11M1       WF1FI)/(Ml       F1)
                                          44



      112 — (WN2M2   + WF2FZ)/(M2 + F2)


It is obvious that each Sj is positively correlated with its own wage rate

and negatively correlated with the other wage rate; these correlations

would bias the coefficient estimates of equation (6).

      To remove these mechanical correlations, instruments for the occupa-

tional wage rates are created by regressing these wage rates on median

income in the area, area population, male and female wages in the area

(state data only), and mean ages and education levels of males and females

in the occupation. The system is then estimated using the 3SL5 option in

MS.
      46. This figure is consistent with the CW wage gap estimates pre-

sented in section III for Connecticut, Minnesota and Washington. A lower

figure would yield proportionately lower employment loss estimates.

      47. See Threnberg and Schwarz (forthcoming), Table 3 for a summary of

the results from all these studies.

      48. These are crude calculations that ignore the interoccupational

substitution that would take place.

      49. Ehrenberg and Schwarz (forthcoming)1 Table 3.

      50. We should stress that these simulations also ignore the possi-

bility that CWWA may increase the attractiveness of "female" occupations to

males and reduce the extent to which females are excluded from "male"

occupations (since the wage advantage in "male" jobs would no longer

exist). These factors would create additional, conflicting, pressures on
                                    45


female employment levels. They also ignore any effects of the increased
total public sector employment budget on private sector employment levels.
                                              46


                                          References

Orley Asbenfelter and Ronald C. Ehrenberg, "The Demand for Labor in the

       Public Sector" in Daniel S. Namermesh, ed., Labor in the Public and

•      Nonprofit Sectors (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,

       1975).

Barbara Bergmann, "Why Wage Realignment Under the Rubric of 'Comparable Worth'

      Makes Economic Sense" in Heidi Hartmann, ed., New Directions for

      Research on Comparable Worth (Washington, D.C.: National Academy

       Press, 1984).

K. G. Blumrosen, "Wage Discrimination, Job Segregation, and Title VII of

      the Civil Rights Act of 1964," University of Michigan Journal of Law

      Reform 12 (1919), pp. 397—502.

0.   Box and    D. Cox, "An   Analysts   of Transformation," Journal of the Royal

      Statistical Society, Series B, 26 (1964), pp. 211—252.

Alice Cook, Comparable Worth: The Problem and States' Approaches to Wage

      Equity (Industrial Relations Center, University of Hawaii at Manoa,

      February 1983).

Council on the Economic Status of Women, Pay Equity and Public Employment

       (St. Paul, Minn., March 1982).

Ronald 0. Ehrenberg, "the Demand for State and Local Government Employees,"

      American Economic Review 63 (June 1913), pp. 366—379.

Ronald G. Ehrenberg and Joshua Schwarz, "Public Sector Labor Markets" in Orley

      Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, eds. • Handbook of Labor Economics

       (North Holland Press, forthcoming).
                                                 47



Robert Gregory and Robert Duncan, "Segmented Labor Market Theories and the

     Australian Experience of Equal Pay for Women," Journal of Post

     Keynsian Economics 3 (Spring 1981), pp. 403—429.

Daniel Hamermesh, "The Demand for Labor in the Long Run" in Orley

     Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics

     <North Holland Press, forthcoming).

Daniel Ifamermesh and James Grant, "Econometric Studies of Labor—Labor

     Substitution and Their Implications for Policy," Journal of Human

     Resources 4 (Fall 1919): 518—542.

Heidi Hartmann, ed., New Directions for Research on Comparable Worth

     (Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1984).

Mark Killingsworth,      "The Case for and Economic Consequences of Comparable
     Worth: Analytical Empirical and Policy Questions," In Hartmann, ed.,
     New Directions for Research on Comparable Worth (l9SAa).

Hark Kflhingsworth, "Statement on Comparable Worth" (Testimony before     the
     Joint   Econpioic Committee of the U.S. Congress, April 10, 1984) (1984b).

Mark Killingsworth, "Heterogeneous Preferences, Compensating Wage Differen-

     tials and Comparable Worth" (mimeo, June 1984) (1984c).

Minnesota Department of Employee Relations, "Summary of Evaluations by

     Title" (unpublished computer print—out, November 11, 1983).

National   Committee on Pay Equity, Wbo's Working for Working Women: A
     Survey of State and Local Government Pay Equity Activities and
      Initiatives (Washington, D.C., 1984).
                                       48



David Pierson, Karen Koziara and Russell Johannesson, "A Policy Capturing

     Application in a Union Setting," in Helen Itemick, ed., Comparable

     Worth and Wage Discrimination (1984).

Helen Remicic,   "Eeyond Equal Pay for Equal Work: Comparable Worth in the
     State of Washington," in Ronnie Ratner, ed., Equal   Employaent Policy
     for Women (Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press, 1980).

Helen Remick, "Major Issues in A Priori Applications," in Helen Remick,

     S., Comparable Worth and Wage Discrimination (Philadelphia, Pa.:

     Temple University Press, 1984).

Donald Schwab, "job Evaluation Research and Research Needs" in Hartmann,

     ed., New Directions for Research on Comparable Worth (1984).

Donald Schwab and Dean Wichern, "Systematic Bias in job Evaluation and

     Market Wages: Implications for the Comparable Worth Rebate,"

     journal of Applied Psychology 68 (1983): pp. 60—69.

Donald Treiman, Job Evaluation: An Analytic Review (Washington, D.C.:

     National Academy of Siences, 1979).

Donald Treinan, "Effects of Choice of Factors and Factor Weights in Job

     Evaluations" in Helen Rerrimick, ed., Comparable Worth and Wage

     Discrimination (1984).

Donald Treiman and Heidi Hartmann, eds., Women, Work and Wages: Equal Pa

     for Jobs of Equal Value (Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press,

     1981.

U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Post Office and Civil Service,

     Pay Equity: Equal Pay for Work of Comparable Value (Washington,

     D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1982).
                                     49


Norman D. Willis and Associates, State of Connecticut Objective Job

     Evaluation Pilot Study, February 1980.

Arthur Young, A Comparable Worth Study of the State of Michigan Job

     sifications (Report submitted to the Office of Women and Work,

    Michigan Department of Labor, no date).
                                      Table I
                 Status of coaparable Worth lnItLatives hi State.
                     .S the District of Coluobia. S,iaor 19B4
                         (1)                  CII)               (lit)                 (IV)
                 Zaisteate of a        ZflsteAce of
                 "Conorabte Vocth'     State Legislation       Ealatence           I.pleeeritatlon
                 Job Evaluaticit        .1.tit'g to        -      of                    of
Stat.            Study                 Carable Worth           Lttigatioa          Coeparabi. Worth

£hbon
Alaska               tn—a                Tee—Art965               Yes



Arkansas             No                  tn—A—1935                No                    lb

California           No                  Tea—L-1949               Ito                   No
                                                1—1983

Colorado             No                         No                No                    No

Casnecticut          Yes—b                      No                lee                   Te.—l

Deiaare              No                  Yes—A—lOS)               No                    No

D.C.                 No                         No                1o                    No

florida              Yes-c               Tes-C—19B4               we                    No

                                                                  No                    lb
C.oria               No                  Tes—A-1966

Ianti                ta—c                fls—A-l95l               to.                   No

Idaho                Tn—b                Yee—A—1969               No                    Yes—4

Illinois             Yes—b               Tn—C—1984                Tee                   No

Indiana              No                  Tes—D-1984               No                    No
                               -



lava                 Tn—s                Tes—A—1953               !4o                   Ye.—2

Xan..s               Yes—a                      No                lie                   No


lentucky             Toe—b               Tc.—A—1966               No                    U.

tai.iaaa             Ye.—.                      No                No                    Tes—2

Usia.                tes—a,b             Tn—A—1954                No                    14o


                     Tee—b               Ye.—A-1965               No                    Ito
KanLand
lIa..achusotts       Yes—a               Ies—A—1943               Yes          -
                                                                                        No

Nichilan             Te.—b               Tes—A—1962               Ten                   No
                                                                           -
Minnesota            Yes—b               Te.—A-19M                No                    Yes—L
                                               1904

ltissi.sippi
Missouri             Mo                  Tes-C—19$4                No                    No

Moatana              Yes—b                      No                 lb                    lb
Nebraska             Yes—b                      No                 No                    No


Nevada               No                         No                 No                    No

                                                lb                 lb                    No
5ev Rapsblro         Yea—a

                                         Ye.—D—1953                No                    No
1kv Jersey           Tcs—b

No.1 Mnlco           Tee—a                      lb                 No                    Tes—2

Nov York             You—a                      )1o                So                    No
                                             Table I (coin lnh.ed)
                                      (1)                  (ii)            (Lit)            (1W)
                          Eilte'in-uf is             Es iLvct• or
                          "Cooparable Worth"         State Legislation   E'lsttac*     l.plt.ontatioq
                          Job   Evalustion          Ulating to              of                ci
State                     SOJJY                     C.cpnrjbIc Worth     Lit Iv'tloo   CcepariTh%u Wnrth
North Carolina                  Ito                        lo               No              No

Norti. Dakots                   Tel—b                                       1°              Yes—S

01.10                           Teat                       Jo               No              No

C&labcsa                        No                    Yes-A—19&$            No              No

Or.goa                          Tn-s                   ks—A-1983            No              No

Peuiasy     Ivan.               Yes—b                      No               Yes             No

Ibod. Island                    Yes—a                      No               No              No

South Carolina                  Ito

South Dakota                    No                     Tes.A-1966           No              No

tennt.s.t                       Ta—.                       Plo              No

Texas                           No                         No               No              No
Utah                            No                         No               No              No

Venont                          Yes—b                      No

Virginia                        Toe—b                      No               No              No

Va.hington                      Yes—b                  Yes.-F—1983          Yes             Tes—3

Vest Virginia                   No                         No               Ito             No

Viecoasin                       Ye.—.                  Ye.—A—196S           No              No

Vyoning                         No                         No               No              No


Sources Authors' intarpretat2ot. of material coatainod inunpublised tables prepared by
        Professor Alice Cook (Cornell Univera ity. based upon responses to questionnaires
        she mailed in Novber 1983 to state personnel directors, heads of cosittees
        on the status of votea and pijblic etployee witon leaders.

where
*             no respoasa to the questionnaire
aad
1—a           formal eocparable worth" job evaluation study is underway
    b         format "cospar.blo worth" job evaluation study was coopleted
              tabulation of fetate/male pay dif fereritials by broad occupational classes hes
              been confleted
              the stat. is contenplating • job evaluation study
Il—A          state statute that mandaLes eçual pay instate etployei't for jobs of
              conparable worth exists (y1ar adopted)
        S     state statute that calls for periodic reviews of salaries i.. job ciasea
              dooinsted by vonen
        C     legisistioti introduced (or being drafted) but not yet enacted
        D     fuads appropriated to study the issue
             requires political subdivisions to do lob evaluations and it.stitute
              law
        salary stncture based on comparable worth
    F   lay require. i.plenv'.tation of cospar obte worth
llI—Te• st least oae Iroup of state etptoyees is in litigation over the issue
1W—I          ipiesented. or gearirmu p to lap Icment • throi;h the collective b,rgaining
              process •   over, numb crofyars
              inpieuented. or gcarin up to lapkisent. through tile legislative process.
              over a rhsI*er of yeats
    3         to be Imp lemtated tIcough court order
    4         Ji.plt;.ented by tI,. SLat.,. I.ut attnwsuiikcL force, to i.tFliseu,cC,Il.iriC
              not tc',IIy t-oiu;..rahb .orth
    3         tmptrmcntn4cnp'fl'.tti,fl basedanaractor peint •y,ttm to iitI'lnwC ovrrnll
              equity. not traity cnndder.J n nntarahlv w,rtl,
                                         Table 2

                Comparable Worth Initiatives in Selected Local Coveruments
                                     as of Summer 1984


         Cities                                Counties                   School Districts

Phoenix, Ariz. (l)(3)                     Alameda, Ca. (1)              Tucson, Ariz. (1)
Berkeley, Ca. (3)                         Contra Costa, Ca. (1)(3)      Carlsbad, Ca. (1)(3)
Fresno, Ca. (1)                           Humboldt, Ca. (l)(3)          Chico, Ca. (1)(3)
Los   Angeles,   Ca. (2)                  Santa Clara, Ca. (1)(2)(3)    Los Angeles. Ca. (1)(2)
Mountain   View,   Ca. (1)                San Mateo, Ca. (3)            Manhattan Beach, Ca. (I
Palo Alto, Ca. (2)                        Sono,ua, Ca. (1)              Pittsburgh, Ca. (1)(4)
San Prancisco, Ca. (1)                    Mennepin, Minn. (1)           Sacramento, Ca. (3)
San Jose, Ca. (1)(4)                      Nassau, N.Y. (1)(2)           Vacaville, Ca. (3)
Santa Cruz, Ca. (1)(3)                    Fairfax, Va. (2)              Anoka Hennepen, lfinn.
                                          King, Wash. (3)
S. Lake Tahoe, Ca. (1)                    Pierce, Wa. (1)(3)            Minneapolis, Minn. (1)
Colorado Springs, Col. (1)(3)             Thurston, Wa. (1)              Woodland Hills
                                                                        (Pittsburgh, Pa.) (3)
Minneapolis, Minn. (1)                    Dane, WIse. (1)
St. Paul, Miun. (1)
Portland, Ore. (1)
Philadelphia, Pa. (2)
Virginia Beach, Va. (1)(3)
Olympia, Wash. (1)
Renton, Wash., (1)(3)
Seattle, Wash. (1)
Spokane, Wash. (l)(3)
Madison, Wisc. (1)



(1) "comparable worth" job evaluation study underway or completed
(2) at   least one group of employees is in litigation over the issue

(3)   comparable worth wage adjustments contemplated or implemented
(4) comparable worth wage adjustments ftaplementcd     after a strike

Source: Authors'      interpretation of material contained in unpublished tables prepared
           by   Professor Alice Cook (Cornell University), based upon responses to
           questionnaires she mailed in November 1983 to state personnel directors.
           heads of committees on the status of women and public employee union
           leaders.
                                                     Table 3

                                Descriptive Statistics: Minnesota Data


                      Male Jobs (N102)                                       Female Jobs (N=48)
          Mean (Std          Dcv.)          Mm.      Max.          Mean (Std. Dev.)                 Mm.      Max.
aPi       168.7       (63.3)                 76      400           118.8       (40.3)               66          230

HP2        50.9       (33.5)                 10       200           27.6       (18.1)                8          87

11P3       60.1       (41.0)                 16       264           32.7       (20.1)               12          100

1124         5.4      ( 7.2)                  0        29            .1.4      C    3.4)             0           14




UPIF           .609   (      .043)                                        .677 (     .052)
HP2F           .164   ( .036)                                             .141 (     .030)
IIP3F          .197   (      .039)                                        .171 (     .027)
1W4P           .030   (      .041)                                        .010 (     .026)



                                            Correlation Matrices
                       Male Jobs                                               Female Jobs
          an          1122           11P3      UP4                 1121       BP2            11P3     1124


m'i       1.00                                                     1.00

1W2        .98        1.00                                          .99        1.00

11P3       .94            .97        1.00                           .97            .97       1.00

1424      —.60        —.58           —.52      1.00               —.24         —.21          —.19        1.00

Nfl        .99            .99         .98     —.55                  .99            .99        .98     —.18


where: HP1   —   Know—How        Points
         UP2 —   Problem—Solving Points
         RP3 —   Accountability Points
         RP4 — Working Condition Points
         Nfl — Total flay Points
        14231 — Share of Category 3               Points in   Total Hay     Points
Source: Authors' calculations from cbta in Pay_Equity and Public Erm1ovtent
          (Council on the Econoraic Status of Wcnen , St. I'jul • Nsnn. • rci I Jfl)
          and Swrnary of Evahtati.'os l%v TLtIe (State of Minneaotn Uepartrtnt of
          Employee Keljtions Computer i'ri:it—Utit, November 8, 1983).
                                                                                                  TabI. 4
                                                           Letiosted Co*parable Worth Salary Zq,ationt IUni,esota Data
                                                                          (absolutt value t •tatL.tic.)

                                                              (Ia)            (2)                       (3)              (4)                  (4a)                   (5)
txptsnatoryloep.n4eot                         (I)                                                                                   Lnarithm of Xonthl,      Xnfva SalaryS
Variable. VarIab1o                                          Monthly Mnimu,s Salary

Vale E,,atIons (a102)

          C                           2012.06 (40.7)   20*9.03 (39.6)        803.33 (6.0)         1009.49   01.6)
                                                                                 -
                                           3.27 (25.5) .1 3.30 (25.6)                                                 .153 (22.0)          .261    (22.7)
        Rn
                                                                                                                                                                  .491       (6.0)
                                                                                                                                       .
        I.,'                                                                  5.73 (3.6)
                                                                                                                                                                 —.328       (1.6)
        1472                                                                   2.47(0.6)
                                                                              0.30 (0.2)                                                                                     (0.4)
        Hp)
                                                                               5.56 (1.9)            3.463 (LI)                                                   .194       (1.3)     .026     (0.23
                                                                                                                                                                         -             .151
                                                                                                     3.278(21.1)                                                                               (17.9)
        1125

        YE!1                                              —7.08      (2.7)

                                                                                  .874                  .865            .829                 .839                   .863                  .630
        it2                                   .863            .873

                                                                                                            .
                                                                                      .
TeaIe Egiations (48)
                                                                                                    729.09 (33.9)   617.680 (408.3) 691.921 (201.0) 660.206 (96.7)                   677.293 (385.3)
         C                                732.60 (36.2)   853.57 (10.3) 669.68 (7.5)
                                                                                .
                                                            3.47 (34.2)                                                .235 (27.7)     .232 (28.!)
        liFT                               3.30 (33.8)
        liFt                                                              4.61 (3.0)
                                                                                                                                                                 —.161       (0.6)
        luz                                                               3.52 (1.0)
        P73                                                               1.29 (0.7)
                                                                                                                                                                  .516 (2.7)            .373      (1.90)
        824                                                                    5.51       (2.2)       4.76 (2.0)
                                                                                                      3.51 (33.1)                                                                                (27.2)
        lu's                                                                                                                                                 .

                                                           —1.61                                                                           —.252     (2.2)
        n.M                                                          (1.8)

                                                                                                        .961             .944                 .948                  .933                  .945
        2                                     .962            .964                .963

                                                                   been   uttip1ie4 by       100.
 LAI1   coetfictentu In log snisry equation. ban
  vl,crs:         C    —
                            Intercept
               liFT    —    totni         Points
                                    Hay
               11' I— XsltM—ltOU       Points
               ILP2 —       ProbIt—Sovi'Z Points
               14r3    —    ACCOUntSSIIStI Points
                       —    IorkinI Condition Potnts
                       —.   iu'I 4 II?! 4 1173
                       —              Y-.r rt;t.iyees
                                            Table S
                  Estimates of Percentage "Comparable Worth Gap"
                for Minnesota Data: Alternative Estimation Methods



Mean Percentage Cap                 —16.8      —18.3   —14.6    —16.1    —16.7   —20.0


Correlation of Differentials                    .97     .93      .98      .99     .97

Across 48 Female Job Classes                            .82      .94      .97     .99

                               D3                                .93      .93     .8L

                               D4                                         .98     .93

                               D5                                                 .97


where differentials are computed for each female job class using Hay Point score
for the class and the coefficients from the male wage equations in Table 4.

  uses equation (1)     5 uses      equation (2)       D5 uses equation (3)

  uses equation (4)     D4 uses equation (5)              uses equation (6)
                                                 Table 6
                               Descriptive Statistics: Washington Data
                              MALE (nn63)                                          PEMALE (n=58)
          Mean           Std. Day.      Mm.        Max.          Mean           Std. Dcv.     Mm.        Max.

WILl      115.0               46.7       61.0      244.0         143.8            59.1          61.0     280.0
WIL2       32.1               24.1        8.0      106.0             42.8         34.0          8.0      140.0
WIL3       38.8               28.9   .   11.0      140.0             49.5          37.1         11.0     160.0
W1L4        8.7                5.2        0.0       20.0              4.4           5.4         0.0       17.0

WaiF       .610                                                      .616
WIL2F      .150                                                      .165
WIL3F      .180                                                      .194
WIL4F      .059                                                      .024



                                         Correlation Matrices
                                                ME JOBS
                       WILl              WIL2              WItS                  WIL4             WILT
                                                           .


WILL                    1.0
WIll                     .98             1.0
WIL3                     .96              .96              1.0
              •

WIL4                    —.48             —.49              -.43                  1.0
WILT                     .99              .99                  .98               —.43             1.0


                                                                                    -       .
                                                FEMALE JOBS

                       WILl              WIL2              WIL3                  WIL4             WILT

WILl                    1.0

W1L2                     .99             1.0
WIL3                     .95              .94              1.0

W1L4                    —.07             —.09              —.11                   1.0

UILT                     .99              .99                  .97               —.05             1.0

                      knowledge and skill points           WILA —
where: WILl
                                                                       - working  condition points
                  —

       Will  —        mental demands points                WILT          total Willis points
        W1L3 —        accountability points                WILJF       - share of category 3 points in
                                                                            total Willis points
Source: Authors' calculations from data in State of Wastdnt6n Comparabic Worth
        Study Phase Two. December 1976 (Norman I). Willis & Associates • Decenber
         1976) • and private correspondence from Dr. Helen Itemick (2/3/64) indicating
        which occupations were male (or female) dominated.
                                                                  Table 7
                                 Eatinted Coparab1e Worth    Minimum   Salary Equations; Washington Data
                                                      (absolute value t statistic.)
Explanatory/Dependent                            Minimum Salary                                 I.og of Minimum Salary
Variables /Variable                  Cl)              (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)
Male Equations (rn.63)
              C                  443.33 (14.2)    462.76 (4.7)     447.01 (8.9)    621.67 (151.0)    620.92 (47.5)   620.68 (93.8)
         WILT                      1.57 (10.9)                                        .193 (10.2)
         WILl                                        .91 (0.6)                                          .152 (0.7)
         WILl                                       7.29 (2.2)                                          .761 (1.7)
         1111.3                                   —2.05 (1.2)                                          —.203(—O.9)        .269 (0.7)
         W1L4                                       2.80 (.93)       1.29 (0.4)                         .431 (1.1)        .194 (9.2)
         WILS                                                        1.S7 (9.8)


         a2                          .662             .693             .662             .629             .651              .629


Female Equation (n53)
              C                  352.82 (16.1)    252.60 (3.6)     370.46 (15.8)   602.64 (198.4)    582.36 (62.7)   605.22 (187.0)
         WILT                      1.26 (15.1)                                        .177 (15.4)
         WILl                                       3.32 (2.9)                                          .576 (3.8)
         WIL2                                     —1.37 (0.8)                                          —.338 (1.4)
         W1L3                                        .33 (0.4)                                          .003 (0.0)
         111L4                                    —2.96 (2.0)      —2.37 (1.2)                         —.469 (1.8)        —.356 (1.3)
         WILS                                                        1.25 (15.4)                                           .176 (15.7)


         a2                          .804             .826             .815             .809             .842               .821

11l coefficients in log salary equations have been multiplied by 100.
where;       C—      intercept
          WILT —     total Willis points
          WILl — knowledze     and skill points
          1111.2 —   mcntal deGland points
          W1L3 —     accountability    points
          WIL4 —     working condition points
          1111.3 —   WILL + W1L2 + WIL3

Sources of data:
          (1) State of Washington. Coiparable Worth Study; Phase Two,              Occesther 1976 (Norman D. Willis and
              Associates, Decetbar 1916).

           (2) state of Washington. Department of Personnel, Compensation Plan (January 1, 1974).
           (3) Privatc correspondence from Dr. Helen Rcmick (February 3. 1984).
                                     Table 8

         Estimates of the Unweighted Mean Percentage "Comparable
      Worth Cap" for Washington Data: Alternative Estimation Methods


                                       Mean Percentage Caps
                     (A).                          (B)                      C)
Method          Minimum Salary             Maximum       Salary       Midpoint Salary

                    23.1                         22.5                       23 •   2

                    21.9                         22.7                       23.6

                    22.5                         22.8                       23.7

                    22.8                         22.5                       22-

                    21 •   9                     .22.9                      22 •   8

                    22.2                         23.0                       23.9


where the differentials at the minimum salary level are computed for each
female job class in method      using the Willis Point Scores far the class
and the coefficients from the male wage equations in column j of Table 7.
Analogous computations are done for the maximum and midpoint salary levels
using coefficients from male maximum and midpoint salary level equations
which are specified similarly to those in Table 7.



           Correlation of Comparable Worth Caps at the Minimum
                Salary Level Across 58 Female Job Classes


                               D2                                     D5               U6

                               .95         .96              .96       .89              .90
D1                                                                •



                                           .98              .92       .95              .95
U2
                                                            .92       .92              .95
D3
                                                                      .95              .96
D4
                                                                                       .99
 D5
                                                   Table 9
                              Descriptive       Statistics: Connecticut Data

                          MALE (n=43)                                     FEMALE (n41)
          Mean         Std.   Dcv.      Mm.        Max.      Mean       Std. Dcv.   Mm.     Max.
WILl      118.16         32.05          61.0       184.0      107.02      36.01      61.0   212.0
WIL2       32.37         17.60            8.0       70.0       26.29      17.78      8.0     92.0
W1L3       42.14         20.11          11.0        80.0       36.21      23.61      11.0   122.0
WIL4           8.19       6.03            0.0       17.0        4.07       5.87       0.0    17.0
WILT      200.88         61.74          91.0       336.0      173.36      77.01      91.0   437.0


WILlY           .603                                             .639
W1L2Y           .150                                             .140
WIL3F           .200                                             .195
WIL4F           .047                                             .028




                                          Correlation Matrices
                              Male Jobs                                     Female Jobs
          WILl          WIL2            WIL3       W1L4      WILl        WIL2       W1L3    W1L4

WILl      1.00                                                1.00
WIL2       .95           1.00                                  .97        1.00
WIL3       .95            .95           1.00                   .95         .98       1.00
WIL4      —.20          —.24            —.12       1.00        .04         .05        .04    1.00
WILT       .98            .97             .98      —.10        .99         .99        .98     .1!


where: WILl —    knowledge and skill, points                  W1L4 — working condition points
        WIL2 - mental demand         points                   WILT — total, Willis points
        Wits   - accountability points                       WILJF — share of category .1 points
                                                                     in total Willis points


Source: Authors' calculations from data in State of Connecticut Objective Job
         Evaluation Pilot Study (Norman D. Willis & Associates, February 1980).
                                                                         Table 10

                                       Estimated Co.ipsrable Worth Salary Equations: Connecticut Data
                                                       (absolut, value t       statistics)
                                                   Annual    Salary                                  LogQrithmof Salary
                                       (1)                  (2               (3)              (4)            (5)               (6)
l4sle Equations (n—43)
               C                7892.191 (9.8)     7915.740      (5.1) 9370.069(12.0) 910.953(169.9)       909.185(89.5)   920.772(177.3)
          WILT                      32.916 (8.6)                                             .226 (8.9)
          WILl                                       58.011 (2.4)                                             .427 (2.7)
          W1L2                                       22.515 (0.4)                                            .051 (0.2)
          1111.3                                     —2.513      (0.1)                                       .028 (0.1)
          1111.4                                   —108.585      (2.7) —116.299 (3.1)                       —.736 (2.8)     —.764 (3.1)
          WILS                                                             31.590 (9.7)                                       .217 (10.0)

          12                         .637             .732                  .737             .653             .746            .748
Persia Equations (n41)
            C                   7379.954(18.3)     6851. 129     (6.2)   7350.930(17.7) 900.923(259.1)     891.796(95.6)   900.783(252.1)
          WILT                      24.722(11.6)                                    •
                                                                                             .196 (10.7)
          WILl                                       34.716 (1.8)                                             .369 (2.3)
          WIL2                                       34.403 (0.6)                                             .105 (0.2)
          W1L3                                        2.142 (0.1)                                             .001 (0.0)
          WIL4                                       28.755 (1.0)          28.938 (1.0)                       .195 (0.8)      .191 (0.8)
          was                                           .
                                                                           24.756(11.4)                                       .197 (10.5)

          i2                         .769             .756                  .765             .738             .731            .733

'All coefficients iii the log salary equations have been aultiplied by 100. The salary figures are for
 Step 4 of the applicable salary ranges.
ithere:            C—   intercept
            WILT    —   total Willis points
            WILl    —   knovledge and skill points
            WIL2    —   aental demand points
            WIL3    -   accountability points
            W1L4    -   working condition points
            WILS    —   WILL + W1L2 + V1L3

Sotirce of data: State of Connecticut Objective Job Evaluation Pilot Study (Nor,nan P. Willis and Associates.
                          February 1980).
                                Table 11
             Estimates of Percentage "Comparable Worth Cap"
           for Connecticut Data: Alternative Estimation Methods

                                                  15                        B6

Mean Percentage Cap           —15.4   —15.4      —19.6    —19.4   —20.2    —19.3

Correlation of           D1                .98      .79     .84      .79      .84
  Differentials Across
  41 Female Job          D2                         .73     .81      .75      .83
  Classes
                         15                                 .98      .98      .95
                         D4                                          .98      .98
       -
                         D5                                                   .98


where the differentials are computed for each female job class using the
Nay Point scores for the class and the coefficients from the male wage
equations in Table 10.

   uses equation j for j — 1 to 6
                                               Table 12

             Determinants of Relative Occupational Nobility Over
           the 1965—1970 Period for SW Employees in New York State
                       (absolute value of t                  statistic)

                                                                 LR1
                                         (1)                                   (2)

  C                                   .476 (11.9)                           .488 (12.1)

STATE                             —.013 (3.0)                             —.013 (2.9)

ACE                               —.003 (2.1)                             —.003 (2.2)

ACE2                                  .002 (1.6)                            .003 (1.7)

1465                              —.083 (14.5)                            —.086 (14.9)

WORK1                                                                     —.023 (2.7)

WORX2                                                                       .012   (2.3)

WORK3                                                                       .009   (1.1)

SEX                               —.019      (4.8)                        —.020 (4.7)


  i2                                  .044                                  .047


      4944 for all equations
AGE2    coefficients        have been multiplied by 100.

where C —         intercept     tent
      STATE —     1 — state    employee, 0 =         local   government employee
        ACE —     individual's    age
      ACE2 — age squared
      11165 — logarithm of mean earnings of SLC employees in New York
              State in 1969 inthe individual's 1965 3—digit occupation
   WORK1 —        1       work 27—39 weeks in 1969, 0 —          other
              —                                                  other    omitted category is
   WORK2          1 —     work 40—47 weeks in 1969. 0 =                   work 50—52 weeks in
   WORK3 —        1   n   work 48—49 weeks in 1969, 0 =other )            1969
        SEX —     1       female, 0     male
        LR1   —
                  logarithm of the ratio of mean earnincs of SLC employees in New
                  York State in 1969 in the Individual's 1970 3—digit occupation
                  to mean earnings of SLG employees itt 1969 in the individual's
                  1965 3—digit occupation
Source: Authors' calculations from data from the 1/100 sample for New
         York State of the 1970 Census of Pqjdation. Tue analyses are
              confined to individuals ages 20 to 70 i 1970. who were SW
              employees in both years, and who worked at least 27 weeks in 1969.
              Of this group, roughly 16 percent changed 3—digit occupations
              between 1965 and 1970, so in 84 percent of the cases LRI takes
              on the value of zero.
                                                                 Table 13

                               Male/Foal. Public        A4inistration Relative       Employnent Euations
                                       1970 aud 1980 Census of Population — SMSA Level Data
                                                  (absolsat. value of t statistic)

                                                                                                                            1970    & 1980
                                 1980 Data                                        1970 Data                                   Data
                       LRZ8OI                 11E802           LRE7OI               LRE703                     1fl704         ALREI
                        (1)                    (2)               (3)                 (4)                        (5)                (6)
      C             .201 (0.6)            .533 (2.1)          1.352 (4.2)          .686 (2.0)         1.754 (4.0)       —.448        (4.1)
                    .705      (23)
LRWBO2                                    .819
LRTh1                                                        —.488 (1.8)
Ltt1703                                                                          —.811 (3.2)
LRWIO4                                                                                                —.059 (0.1)
ALLIJI                                                                                                                  —.229 (0.7)
13801              —.040 (1.4)           —.05! (2.2)
LT7OI                                                        —.073 (2.8)
13703                                                                            —.017 (0.6)
Lt704                                                                                                 —.114 (2.9)
aT!                                                                                                        -                .128     (1.2)
LELSO               .646 (1.8)            .811 (3.1)
IaL7O                                                         .853 (2.8)          1.260 (3.4)              .278 (0.7)
ALRL                                                                                                                        .234 (0.5)
 K2.                .107                  .170                .149                 .135                    .083             .021
 ii                    lAB                    148              118                  118                        118            118

vbere:

          UK44
                   —
                       logarithn of the ratio of male          to feiale public administration employees in the SMSA
                         — 80 (1980) or 70 (1970)
                         —      all
                              I —    public adoinistration employees
                              2—full—year public administration employees
                              3—All federal public administration employees
                              4— all state and local public administration employees

          LRWJI —      logarithm of     the    ratio   of male public administration employees' median earnings to female
                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                             public
                       administration     employees' median earnings
                   — 1ogarithi of total public ad,.inistration employment                  in   the SM$A

           LRL1
                   —
                       logarithm of the ratio of the male to            female labor      force in the SMSA
              6— 1980 value           of the variable m4nus 1970        value   oC the variable

a(b) When estimation was restricted                      to the sample of 118 SMSA's that were present in the 1970 data.
     the LRWSOI (LBW802)               coefficient fell to      .634 (.600)     with a t
                                                                                     statistic of 1.8 (1.7).

Source: Author's calculations from data in:

              1) iao Census of Population: Detailed Populflion Clmracteritstlcs (individual state volumes,
                   tables 120, 231);

              2)    1972 City and       County Data Book trable 3);

              3) 1910 Census          of Population:       Characteristic, of the Population (individual state volumes,
                 Tables 168,          159).
                                                                                       table 14

                                                         Within Occupation Relative Employment and Hours Equation.:
                                                        -  1980 Census of Population State Employee Data. By State
                                                                              (absolute value    t statistics)
                                                      Noneducation                                                                          Education
                             (1)                (2)                    (3)                 (4)                   (I)                (2)                       (3)                   (4)
Employrient            -



  113                      .846    (L3)       .387    (0.9)      —.   383
                                                                       (0.8)           —.429     (2.3)      1.503 (2.1)'         —.584 (1.8)'            .046 (0.1)           —.613       (2.0)'
                      —.118        (0.1)    —.154 (0.2)           .609 (0.8)             .678 (1.1)         1.581 (1.4)          —.699 (1.2)             .811 (1.4)           1.043       (2.2)'
  LR5                      .116    (0.1)     1.871 (1.6)         1.605 (1.6)            1.720 (2.6)'        3.332 (1.4)           .723 (0.5)            1.176 (1.1)           —.697       (0.7)


  113                      .623    (1.5)      .224    (0.5)      —.154 (0.3)           —.431     (1.3)      1.393      (2.0)'    —.484 (1.5)            —.014 (0.0)           —.645 (2.0)'
  114                 —.308        (0.3)    —.313     (0.5)       .594 (0.8)             .802    (1.3)      1.740      (1.6)     —.673 (1.2)             .796 (1.4)           1.064       (2.1)'
  LR                  —.    761    (0.6)     1.261 (1.0)         1.82 (2.0)'            1.845    (2.8)'     2.603 (1.0)          1.128 (0.9)            1.261 (1.2)           —.768       (0.7)
  LZ1                —1.284        (1.8)'     .091 (0.1)        —1.76!       (1.8)'   —2. 368    (1.8)'      .875 (0.9)         —1.184 (1.3)            —.066 (0.0)            .084       *0.0)
  122                  1.628       (3.5)'     .678    (1.5)      —.601       (0.9)     1.522     (1.8)'      .622 (1.0)          1.127    (2.0)'         .352 (0.4)           —.379 (0.4)

  a2                       .185               .016                .149                   .117                .420                 .165                   .000                  .08t
Hours
  LR3                      .803 (1.2)         .390 (0.7)         —.047       (0.0)     —.660     (1.8)'     1.117 (1.3)          —.670    (2.2)'        —.193       (0.4)    —1.108       (2.6)'
  114                      .026 (0.0)       —.031 (0.0)           .647 (0.8)            1.108    (1.6)      1.918      (1.6)     —.135 (0.2)            1.218 (2.0)'          1.891 (3.0)'

  LaS                      .038 (0.0)       2.448 (1.8)'         2.110 (1.9)'          2.301     (3. 2)*    4.759 (1.8)'         1.673 (1.4)             .842 (0.7)          —2.212 (0.8)

  a1                       .000               .041                .023                   .141                .355                 .088                   .028                  •   221

  113                      .776    (1.4)      .152 (0.3)          .264 (0.3)           —.657 (1.8)'          .975 (1.4)          —.594    (1.9)'       —.239        (0.5)    —1.015       (2.3)'
  LR4                 —.179        (0.1)    —.218 (0.3)           .669       (0.9)     1.257     (1.9)*     2.125      (1.9)'   —.081     (0.2)         1.183       (1.9)'    1.905       (3.0)'
  1.1(5               —.959 (0.7)           1.695 (1.2)          2.377       (2.3)'    2.425     (3.4)'     3.556 (1.4)          2.016    (1.7)'         .982 (0.8)          —1.310 (0.9)
  121                —1.359        (2.      —.111 (0.1)         —2.013       (1.9)'   —2. 758    (2.0)'     1.113 (1.2)          —.801    (0.9)        —.490        (0.4)    —1.614 (0.7)
  122                  I. 796 (3.8)'         1.010    (2.0)'     —.438       (0.6)     1.560     (I. 7)'     .810 (1.3)           .990    (1.8)'         .581       (0.7)      .825 (0.6)

                           .201               .109                .154                   .181                .444                 .114                   .000                  .195

*Statistically significantly different from zero at .05 level; one—tail test.
where     (I)   Professional        and Managerial Enployees
          (2) Technical. Sales and Adnittistrative Support F.nployees
          (3) Service (including protective service) Enployees
          (4) other (Including craft, repair, laborer and transportation equipment operators) Employees
and
          LR3   —         of the rat to of average hourly earning, of male employees in the category to average hourly earnings of female
                    logarithm
                enployees in the category
          LR4 — logarithm of the ratio of the average of males to the average age of females in the category
          Las — logarithm of the ratio of average education level of males to the average education level of females in the category
          LZ1 —     logarithm of the ratio of male mean eek1y earnings of                full—year full—tie workers in the state to female mean weekly
                -   earnings of full—year full—time worker, in the state
          122 —                                                                          the state to female civilian labor force          in     the state
                    logarithm of the ratio of male civilian labor force in
                                                                                    Table 15
                                      Within Occupational Relative Employment and flours Elasticities With Respect to
                                         Relative Wages: 1980 Census of Population Local £cployee Data, by 8145k
                                                              (absolute value t statistics)
                                 -                Noneducation           -
                                                                                                                                        Education
                        (I)              (2)                       (3)                   (4)                    (1)             (2)                   (3)              (4)
Eployment
   M                  .089    (0.5)   —.296    (I .7)*         .169 (0.9)           —.186      (0.7)          .856 (2. 1)*   —.014    (0.2)         .057    (0.3)    .296 (0.9)
   Ab                 .089    (0.5)   —.277    (I.7)*          .173 (1.0)           —.309      (1.1)          .725 (1.9)*    —.095    (0.3)         .060             .273 (0.9)
                                                                                                                                                            (0.4)
   Ba                —.091    (0.5)   —.102 (0.4)            —.015 (0.0)            —.185      (0.5)          .737 (1.9)*    —.936    (1.8)         .029            1.230 (3.O)*
                                                                                                                                                            (0;1)
   Bb                —.135    (0.7)    .013 (0.0)            —.015 (0.0)            —.320      (0.9)          .606 (1.6)     —.951    (I .8)*       .028    (0.0)   1.211 (2.2)*

flours
    La               —.044    (0.2)   —.239    (1.3)          .155 (0.3)            —.242      (0.9)          .535 (1.3)     —.117    (0.4)         .116 (0.7)      —.040    (0.1)
   Lb                —.046    (0.3)   —.221    (1.3)          .150 (0.6)            —.361      (1.4)          .396 (1.0)     —.134    (0.4)         .116 (0.7)      —.059    (0.2)
   Ba                —.199 (1.0)       .060 (0.2)            —.158 (0.5)            —.383      (1.0)          .417 (1.0)     —.981    (1.9)*        .097 (0.4)       .957 (2.5)*
   ab                —.240 (1.3)       .175 (0.7)            —.159 (0.5)            —.512      (1.4)          .278 (0.7)     —.983    (1.8)*        .096 (0.3)       .978 (2.5)*
where    A   —   confined to 8MM'. with more than 4 males and 4 feiiales in the occupation in the data
         B   —
                 confined to SMSS's with tore than 8 males and 8 females in the occupation in the data
         a   —
                 logarithms of relative age and relative education levels also included in the analysis
         b   —   logarithzus of relative age, relative education levels, and male/female labor force ratio                   included in the analyses
        Occupational categories are      defined as in Table 14.
and   he sample sIzes are                                Noneducation
                                                     _______________                    Education
                                                                                   ____________________
                                                       (1)   (2)   (3)       (4)   (1)   (2)      (3)   (4)
                                              A        168   145   160        85   176    41      149   71
                                              3        136   95    128        49   175    24      103   41
                                                                                         Table     lb
                                             Estimates of      State Co,'erm.ent Translog Cost Pbnctioas Stats Major Occupatfoa
                                                                        Croup Data:       Instrumental Variables
                                                                             (absolute value t statistics)
                                                      Education    (n—49)                                                           Noneducatiou    (n49)
                          LVI                   LWZ                    LW3                   LW4                LVI               LWZ                 LV3              LW4
I.    No   Restrictions
            51           .196 (0.7)           .034    (t.8)*       —.183     (1.d)        —.220    (1.0)     —.277    (0.1) —1.802 (1.5)           1.367 (0.7)      —.067    (0.0)
            52        —.005 (0.0)            —.085    (0.7)         .022 (0.2)             .041 (0.3)         .212    (0.5)   .179 (0.6)           —.184    (0.4)   —.062    (0.3)
            53        —.136 (1.0)            —.201    (2.2)        —.2a4     (2.4)*        .056 (0.6)         .549    (0.4)1.209 (1.2)             —.922    (0.6)   —.038    (0.0)
            54        —.054                  —.065                 —.043                   .123              —.484              .596               —.261             .167


II.    Boioeneity
            SI        —.085 (0.5)             .3Z0 (1.8)           —.183 (1.0)            —.068 (0.3)         .934 (0.9)      —1.142 (1.2)         —.224 (0.5)       .432 (0.7)
            52         .052 (0.4)            —.085 (0.7)            .022 (0.2)             .010 (0.8)        —.012 (0.1)        .056 (0.3)          .112 (1.0)      —.155 (1.1)
            S3           .027 (0.3)          —.201 (2.3)            .204 (2.4)*           —.030 (0.4)        —.408 (0.6)        .506 (0.8)          .336 (1.0)      —.434 (1.0)

            54           .009                —.054                 —.043                   .088              —.538              .580               —.224             .157


III.       Ho.,oeneity   and    Svtotry
            SI           .045 (0.2)           .061    (0.5)        —.066 (1.0)            —.039 (0.8)        —.039 (0.1)       —.138 (0.7)          .052 (0.2)       .126 (0.8)

            S2           .061 (0.5)          —.004 (0.0)           —.076 (1.3)             .020 (0.5)        —.138 (0.7)        .122 (0.7)          .017 (0.1)      —.001 (0.1)

            53        —.066     (1.0)        —.079    (1.3)         .201 (4.     l)       —.057    (1 .7)*    .052    (0.2)     .017 (0.1)          .1.75   (1.0)   —.243    (2.1)
                                              .020                  .057                   .076               .126             —.001               —.243             .118

SI)                                          professional and managerial employees
S2)        Share of payroll spent       on   technical, sales and administrative support employees
                                             survice employees
$4)                             all other employees
LWI  logarithm of the average hourly wage in category 1
Estthatcs under the dotted lines re implied by the adding                        up   property.
     F Tests       Education                 Noneducation
           HO    HA
           Ii    I          F(3.132)—1.46                      F(3.132)—0.57
           III I            F(6, 132)1.12                      F(6. 132)—i. 70
                                                                                   Table 17
                                                      Estinatee of Local Goverttment Tranelog Cost Function. SMSA Level
                                                           Major Occupational Croup Data: Instrunental Variables
                                                                        (absolute value t statistics)
                                                      Education (n.177)                                                       Noncducation   (n—171)
                          TAiL                   LW2                LW3               1314               1.141               V.12               1.143           LW4
I.    No    Restrictions
            81        —.488      (1.6)         .410   (l.9)       .047    (0.2)     .037 (0.3)         .279 (1.2)          .487 (1.2)        —.687   (1.4)    .415 (0.8)
            82         .221      (1.9)'       —.057   (0.7)      —.098    (1.2)    —.049     (1.0)    —.021      (0.1)     .735 (2.8)*       —.495   (1.6)    .063 (0.1)
            83         .213 (1.4)             —.227   (2.2)'      .045 (0.4)       —.039     (0.6)    —.270      (1.9)*   —.277     (1.1)     .575   I.9)*   —.267    (0.9)
            54         .052                   —.126               .006              .051               .012               —.945.              .607           —.213

II.    Rotogeneity
            Si        —.500      (1.8)*        .414   (1.9)*      .047 (0.2)        .040     (0.3)     .097 (0.4)         —.357     (1.4)    —.242 (0.3)      .503 (1.0)
            82         .195      (I.9)        —.051   (0.6)      —.099    (1.2)    —.044     (0.9)    —.126 (019)          .250 (1.4)        —.240 (0.8)      .116 (0.4)
            $3         .226 (1.6)             —.229   (2.2)'      .046 (0.4)       —.041     (0.6)    —.161      (1.3)     .133 (0.8)         .359 (1.3)     ..311 (1.0)
            $4         .079                   —.134               .006              .045               .210               —.026               .123            .308

Ill.       Hotogeneity and       Syetry
            SI        —.522      (I.9)         .216   (2.1)'      .222 (1.6)        .083     (1.0)    —.020      (0.2)    —.208     (2.4)'   —.085   (1.0)    .313    (2.8)'
            52         .216 (2.1)             —.002   (0.0)      —.148    (2.8)'   —.065     (2.1)'   —.208      (2.4)'    .360     (3.6)'    .010 (0.1)     —.161 (1.4)
            83         .222 (1.6)             —.148   (2.8)'     —.021    (0.3)    —.051     (1.3)    —.085      (1.0)     .010 (0.1)         .233 (1.0)     —.158 (0.2)

            54         .083                   —.065              —.05 1             .033               .313               —.161              —.158            .006

The          and LW are    defined as in Table 16.
       S
F   terts        Education                Noneducation
HO     HA

II I             F(3.516)0.93             P(3.516)—4.47(R)
Ifl I            F96,516)—0.89            F(6.516)—2.52(a)
R    • reject    I   at .03 level.
                                       Table 18
          Estimates of Own Wage Elasticities of Demand for State and Local
                        Government Enployees by Occupation
                              (mean share of payroll)

                               State Government                  Local Government
                         Education      Noneducation       Education       Noneducation

Professional et al.     —.207 (.731)      —.633 (.453)            (.820)     —.791 (.280)

Technical et al.        —.880 (.147)      —.276 (.267)    —.961   (.068)      .961 (.205)

Service                 1.593*(.080)       .303 (.152)   —1.191   (.078)      .750 (.301)

Other                    .850 (.042)       .050 (.12b)     .005   (.034)     —.757 (.214)


Derived from own wage coefficients in Tables 16 and 17 (homogeneity and symmetry
constrained specifications), mean share of payroll pent on the category, and
equation (7) in the text.

*Estfnated based on statistically significant regression coefficient.
                                    Table 19

  Implied Percentage Effects of a 20 Percent CWWA For All Females on the
           Employment of Females in State and Local Governments
                 Due to Occupational Substitution; Total
                      Employment Budget Held Constant


                                State Employees            Local Employees
                           Education   Noneducation   Education    Noneducation
Mean Percentage
Change in Female
Employment in
Professional                —6.2          —8.7         —15.6           —12.5

Technical & Support         —4.9          —6.8             21.5        —   3.9
Service                     —6.0            2.8            14.4        —     2.2
Other                       —7.4            2.6            10.4              5.5


Overall                     —5.9          —5.5         —   5.9         —
                                                                           5.4

  a)   Minimum Change
       Observation          —4.3          —3.3         —    1.3            0.1

  b)   Maxtiium Change       .
       Observation          —9.3          —7.1         —12.1           —11.9


Source: Authors' calculations using the method described in the Appendix,
         the coefficients from the homogeneity and symmetry constrained
         regressions reported in Tables 16 and 17 and the underlying
           Census -data.
                                      Appendix Table 1

                    P tests to Test Alternative Functional Forms
                 for the Male Equations in Various State Data Sets


                                 Salary Equations                   Log Salary Equations
Sample                     (1)          (2)          (3)            (1)          (2)        (3)

Connecticut            4.32*          11.97*        0.68        4.42*           11.96*    0.89    -




Minnesota              2.23           0.00          3•3Ø*       6.57*           0.66      9•5Q*

Washington (Mm.)       1.83           0.01          2.70        1.21            0.05      1.76

Washington (flax.)     2.63           1.46          3.23*       1.30            0.77       1.56

Washington (Ave.)      2.24           0.62          3.02        1.32            0.21      1.84




*Reject the null hypothesis (Ho) in favor of the alternative hypothesis (Ha)
 at the .05 level of significance.

 Le DV be the dependent variable and UP represent either Hay or Willis points.
 Remembering that EPT   HPI + 1122 + 1123 + 1124 and 1125 1121 + 1122 + 1123, the
 equation estimated in each case is

         DV      + a1RP1 + a2HP2 + a3HP3 + a41124. Then

 (1)     Ro:a1   82   a3         a4                         Ua:no constraints on a1, a2, a3, 84

 (2)     Ro:a1   82 — a3         a4                         Ha:a1         a2 — a3, a4 free to vary

 (3)     Ho:a1 = a2   a3                                    Ha;no constraints on a1, a2, a3, a4
