                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




TOWARDS AN EFFICIENT MECHANISM FOR PRESCRIPTION DRUG PROCUREMENT

                                            Kyna Fong
                                          Michael Schwarz

                                        Working Paper 14718
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14718


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2009




We would like to thank Jeremy Bulow, Robin Lee, Preston McAfee, Michael Ostrovsky, Andy Skrzypacz,
Joel Sobel and seminar participants at Chicago GSB, Columbia Department of Economics, NBER
Summer Institute and Stanford GSB for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Kyna Fong and Michael Schwarz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Towards an Efficient Mechanism for Prescription Drug Procurement
Kyna Fong and Michael Schwarz
NBER Working Paper No. 14718
February 2009
JEL No. D44,I11

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper applies ideas from mechanism design to model procurement of prescription drugs. We
present a mechanism for government-funded market-driven drug procurement that achieves very close
to full static efficiency -- all members have access to all but at most a single drug -- without distorting
incentives for innovation.


Kyna Fong
UC, Berkeley
50 University Hall, MC 7360
Berkeley, CA 94720-7360
kyna.fong@stanford.edu

Michael Schwarz
2397 Shattuck Ave
Berkeley, CA 94704
and NBER
mschwarz@yahoo-inc.com
 Towards an Efficient Mechanism for Prescription Drug
                                        Procurement∗

                            Kyna Fong†                 Michael Schwarz‡

                                           February 1, 2009


                                              Abstract

           This paper applies ideas from mechanism design to model procurement of pre-

        scription drugs. We present a mechanism for government-funded market-driven drug

        procurement that achieves very close to full static efficiency – all members have access

        to all but at most a single drug – without distorting incentives for innovation.

      Prescription drugs are an essential component of modern healthcare. In the U.S. drug
spending has skyrocketed in recent years – while in 1980 it amounted to $12 billion, less than
5% of total health care expenditures, in 2006 that number has increased to $216.7 billion,
over 12% of total expenditures. The Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
currently projects drug spending to rise to $446.2 billion in 2015, approximately 2.2% of
projected U.S. GDP.1 Those statistics suggest that even minor efficiency improvements in
the drug procurement process can lead to significant welfare gains.
      Lessons learned from markets for typical healthcare services such as doctor consultations
and hospital stays are largely not applicable to markets for prescription drugs. In contrast
  ∗
     We would like to thank Jeremy Bulow, Robin Lee, Preston McAfee, Michael Ostrovsky, Andy Skrzypacz,
Joel Sobel and seminar participants at Chicago GSB, Columbia Department of Economics, NBER Summer
Institute and Stanford GSB for helpful comments.
   †
     UC Berkeley and Stanford University, contact: kyna.fong at stanford.edu. Part of this research was
conducted during an internship at Yahoo! Research.
   ‡
     Yahoo! Research and NBER, contact: mschwarz at yahoo-inc.com
   1
     Source: CMS Data and CBO Projections.

                                                   1
to healthcare services, prescription drugs are often supplied by patent-protected monopolists
and feature marginal costs that are a very small fraction of price. In this respect, prescription
drugs bear a stronger resemblance to information goods such as music and software than to
doctor visits and hospital stays.
       This paper offers a conceptual framework for efficient design of government-funded pre-
scription drug procurement. We emphasize that this paper is intended primarily as a thought
exercise rather than a specific policy proposal. We address a basic question – whether ef-
ficiency is attainable in the market for prescription drugs in the presence of monopolists –
and then use a highly stylized model to establish a benchmark answer in the affirmative.
Our main objective is to use economic theory to develop a framework for thinking about
prescription drugs.
       For drugs that are zero marginal cost, the socially efficient (static) outcome is for all
individuals who derive a positive expected marginal benefit from a drug to have access
to that drug: in other words, static efficiency entails universal access.2 Due to patent
protection, however, drugs are often sold by monopolists, and in the benchmark monopoly
pricing case, the profit-maximizing price leads to deadweight loss. One contribution of this
paper is to describe a novel market-based mechanism for government drug procurement
that approaches static efficiency without introducing additional distortions to incentives for
innovation (relative to the benchmark monopoly pricing case).
       One might argue that appropriately chosen government price controls can accomplish
the same goal. The government achieves static efficiency by providing all drugs for free
to its citizens. In conjunction, the government can choose appropriate prices such that
incentives for innovation are unchanged, thus leading to a Pareto gain in welfare. However,
such an arrangement features two major drawbacks: (1) it lacks the power of the market to
dynamically correct for inaccurate pricing, imposing strong informational requirements on
   2
     We assume away externalities. In some cases, drug consumption imposes positive or negative external-
ities. For example, the use of vaccines may prevent an epidemic while the use of antibiotics may create
drug-resistant strains of bacteria.



                                                   2
the government, and (2) it creates perverse incentives for drug manufacturers to manipulate
prices via lobbying.
      In the U.S. lawmakers consider the drawbacks of centralized price interventions serious
enough to exceed their benefits. The Medicare Modernization Act of 2003, which has es-
tablished a universal drug benefit for the elderly in the form of Medicare Part D, explicitly
prohibits the government from negotiating drug prices. Michael Leavitt, the U.S. Secretary
of Health and Human Services, has written that, “government should not be in the business
of setting drug prices or controlling access to drugs. That is a first step toward the type of
government-run health care that the American people have always rejected.” He describes
government price-setting as a situation in which “one government official would set more than
4,400 prices for different drugs, making decisions that would be better made by millions of
individual consumers.”3 At least in the U.S., a market-driven procurement mechanism that
avoids price controls might be a politically palatable way to improve efficiency.
      In fact, the U.S. has a long history of using market forces to accompany government
subsidization of prescription drug purchases. In the case of Medicaid, which provides health
insurance for low-income Americans, in 1990 the federal government instituted a “best-price
rule” that ties prices paid by Medicaid to prices paid by private payers. Another example of
policy tying U.S. government subsidies in healthcare to market forces is the advantageous tax
treatment of employer-provided health insurance. Although in both instances the intention
of the government subsidies was to increase access to prescription drugs, studies show that
those interventions have instead led to the perverse effect of raising prescription drug prices
and in fact reducing access to drug coverage. Morton (1997) is the first to point out that
the Medicaid best-price rule has put upward pressure on drug prices, and Duggan & Morton
(2006) offers conclusive evidence of that. Using entirely different methods and data, Schwarz
(2006) finds that the above policies not only have increased drug prices but, by increasing
drug prices, have likely reduced the number of people with access to drugs, perversely the
  3
      Source: Opinion editorial, Washington Post, January 11, 2007.



                                                     3
opposite effect of what policymakers intended.
       In the presence of monopoly-supplied drugs, the main difficulty in designing a market-
driven mechanism is that, as long as a monopolist faces a population of consumers with
heterogeneous values, he is likely to set his monopoly price above the reservation price of
some consumers, leading to potentially large deadweight losses. Even when the purchase
of drugs is subsidized in the form of traditional insurance, the same problem persists when
monopolists control prices (Newhouse 2004). Intuitively, if the government subsidizes 50%
of each drug purchase, monopolists will double prices in response and deadweight losses will
remain unchanged.
       In this paper, we show that there exists a government-funded, market-driven drug pro-
curement mechanism that gives all consumers access to all but at most a single drug, with-
out introducing additional distortions to innovation. Despite monopoly pricing power, static
near-efficiency can be achieved.4,5
       In our model we assume that drugs have no substitutes and that each drug is sold by
a monopolist. Although in practice drugs may have therapeutic substitutes, the setting in
which all drugs are supplied by monopolists generates the largest concerns about efficiency
and hence is an important benchmark to consider.
       Let us describe the intuition behind the market-driven drug procurement mechanism con-
sidered herein. Recall that deadweight losses arise because the demand curve is downward-
sloping, i.e. different consumers have different willingness to pay. If in fact all consumers
were identical, then a monopolist would set price equal to the universal willingness to pay
and serve the whole market. The key idea we leverage is to “homogenize” demand.
       To illustrate that idea, consider a world in which all individuals have the same probability
of disease. The essential source of demand heterogeneity then arises from different tastes
   4
     The additional deadweight loss from taxation is zero so long as the funding for the mechanism equals
the amount the government spends on subsidizing drug coverage under the status quo.
   5
     The idea that mechanisms excluding one efficient trade can achieve near efficiency has been proposed
in a very different setting by McAfee (1992). Specifically, in McAfee (1992) one of many identical items is
excluded, whereas in our setting one of many drugs (which are not substitutes) is excluded from coverage.



                                                    4
and wealth. For true monopoly drugs, which have no substitutes, we argue that demand
heterogeneity takes a specific form: although different consumers may have different willing-
ness to pay for a given drug, the ratio between willingness to pay for any two monopoly drugs
is constant across all consumers.6
       This assumption about the special structure of the demand for drugs is theoretically
grounded. In particular, the assumption is motivated by the literature on the value of life,
which offers a theoretical and empirical framework for thinking about investments in safety
(see Viscusi (1993) for a survey). The main idea is that if a fire detector and an air bag are
equally likely to save a life, then any consumer should place equal reservation prices on both
devices. In our context, we argue that drugs or insurance for drug coverage can be viewed
as particular cases of safety devices that “produce” life or, more accurately, health. Hence,
heterogeneity in demand for drugs arises simply from heterogeneity in willingness to pay
for health. This special demand structure is exactly what allows us to construct a market
mechanism that “homogenizes” demand.
       The structure of the mechanism at a high level conveniently resembles that of Medicare
Part D in the U.S., which is also government-funded and market-driven with private prescrip-
tion drug plans (PDP’s) serving as intermediaries between consumers and drug companies.
The government first fixes a per-member budget (subsidy) B to give to each PDP. Drug
companies announce prices at which the companies are willing to sell their drugs to PDP’s.
Drug plans then procure drugs from drug companies and assemble formularies, i.e. the set
of drugs that a given PDP will cover, within the budget constraint B. Consumers choose a
PDP in which to enroll based on formulary comprehensiveness. The drugs that are not on
a formulary continue to be available on the open market at market prices.
       Fixing the subsidy serves to homogenize demand: each person now has the same budget
to be spent on her behalf, and thus the willingness to pay for access to a given drug becomes
   6
    Specifically, we mean the ratio is constant across all consumers with the same probability of disease (i.e.
either all healthy consumers, or all consumers who have already developed the disease).




                                                      5
uniform across all people.7 Thus, the subsidy forces drug companies to “compete” with one
another to get on PDP’s formularies; as a result, a monopolist can only charge as much as the
relative social value of his product warrants, thus making near efficient outcomes possible.
       This mechanism imposes much lower informational requirements on the government than
administering price controls. In order to specify an optimal per-person budget B, the gov-
ernment needs only information about aggregate profits of all drug companies. Furthermore,
in Section 2.1 we argue that the ramifications on drug access of choosing a budget size that
is too high or too low are relatively small. In addition, the mechanism generates a natural
feedback loop. If in a given year many drugs are left off formularies, then the government
knows to increase the budget size in the next year; on the other hand, if all drugs are
covered, then the government may consider lowering the budget size. The mechanism also
allows budget size to be used as a convenient tool for calibrating incentives for innovation
in the pharmaceutical industry.
       Kremer has described a patent buyout mechanism that achieves near efficiency in the
presence of monopolists (Kremer 1998). Buying out patents hinges on the notion of a
two-part tariff.8 By transferring lump sums of the appropriate size to inventors (would-be
monopolists) in exchange for patents, the government attains static efficiency because the
invention can then be made available at marginal cost.
       The major difficulty with implementing such a system lies in determining the size of
the lump sum. Kremer’s mechanism extracts the relevant information from a market of
private parties, giving them weak incentives to reveal this information truthfully at the cost
of introducing a small inefficiency. He points out that the main problem with his mechanism
is that it is susceptible to manipulation. The expected joint payoff to a patent holder and
any third party whom he controls can be arbitrarily large, making collusion very attractive.
   7
     This is a consequence of consumers having the same relative valuations for all drugs. Given the same
budget and the same probabilities of disease, consumers will allocate their budget across drugs (or insurance
for drugs) in the same way.
   8
     Lakdawalla and Sood (2006) also focus on two-part tariffs; in particular, they describe how the two-part
design of health insurance contracts combats the inefficiency that results from healthcare providers having
market power.


                                                     6
In the context of prescription drugs, manipulation is a serious concern since there are only
relatively few pharmaceutical companies and they would be regular repeated participants in
patent buyout auctions. The mechanism we describe cannot be manipulated in this fashion.
        While Kremer’s (1998) patent buyout mechanism relies on the notion of a two-part tariff,
the mechanism we describe does not – in fact, it can be implemented using either linear
pricing or two-part pricing. Instead, the mechanism relies on a fundamentally different
idea, homogenizing demand, which can be leveraged in drug procurement due to the unique
demand structure for drugs.
        There are several features of the prescription drug market that our model ignores com-
pletely. We assume that consumers are rational and capable of identifying the highest-value
formulary, and we restrict attention to the scenario of pure monopoly drugs, which have no
substitutes. We also assume that consumers either have identical probabilities of contracting
each disease, or that a mechanism for perfect risk adjustment is available. Furthermore, we
assume that the marginal costs of producing drugs and the costs of dispensing drugs are
negligible, thus assuming away the importance of existing pharmacy networks. Nonetheless,
our highly stylized model may offer a useful framework for thinking about drug procurement.



1         Model

1.1        The Environment

There is a finite number N of diseases n ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N }. Each disease is treated by a unique
drug, and a treatment requires exactly one unit of a drug (drugs have no substitutes). Each
drug is sold by a patent-protected monopolist.9 Drugs are produced at zero marginal cost,
and drug companies maximize expected profits.
        For each disease n, let θn ∈ (0, 1] be the probability that an individual contracts the
    9
    If each drug company owns several drugs, we can rephrase our analysis in terms of each company’s
portfolio of drugs rather than single drugs, and all the results would remain the same.




                                                 7
disease. Let vn ≥ 0 be the ex-post effectiveness of drug n. We can think of vn as the increase
in future “health” units (measured, for example, in quality-adjusted life years) that the drug
provides to an individual who has developed the disease. Without loss of generality, label
drug N as a maximally valuable drug, i.e. vN = maxn vn . Finally, define zn = θn vn as the
expected benefit of drug n.
       Consumers’ utility is strictly increasing in future “health” or life quality and is quasi-
linear and strictly increasing in money. Consider some consumer a. Consumer a’s willingness
to pay for insurance that covers drug n is related to the probability of disease (θn ) as well
as the drug’s ability to increase the quality of her future life-years (vn ). Let ua be consumer
a’s willingness to pay for insurance coverage of an additional unit of future life quality.10 We
assume that ua is distributed in the population according to some probability distribution
ρ(·) with cumulative distribution function P (·). So, we can write a consumer’s willingness
to pay (in dollars) for insurance that covers drug n as ua θn vn = ua zn .11
       The population consists of a unit mass of consumers, although all results still hold for a
single consumer or any finite number of consumers.12 We assume that consumers have access
to a market for actuarially fair insurance, which is available “à la carte” on an individual drug
basis. Thus, thinking about a consumer’s willingness to pay for actuarially fair insurance
coverage of a drug is equivalent to thinking about her willingness to pay for that drug.
       There are potentially two sources of heterogeneity in willingness to pay for drugs: differ-
ences in health status and differences in willingness to pay for health. We focus on the latter
by assuming that all consumers have the same probability θn of contracting any disease n, or
equivalently that a perfect risk adjustment mechanism is available.13 Assuming perfect risk
  10
     Assuming ua to be constant is a reasonable approximation for small probability events.
  11
     We assume that the per-unit drug prices faced by individual consumers on the open market are equal
to (or not lower than) the per-unit prices faced by insurance companies that sell actuarially fair insurance.
Risk-averse consumers strictly prefer to purchase actuarially fair insurance for drugs. Consequently, if a
consumer chooses not to purchase actuarially fair insurance for a particular drug, then she will choose not
to purchase that drug in the event she does get sick.
  12
     We model consumers as a continuum whose mass is normalized to unity because speaking about the
proportion of consumers with access to a drug is more natural than speaking about the probability that a
consumer has access to a drug.
  13
     Risk adjustment plays an essential role in the design of Medicare Part D and many other insurance


                                                     8
adjustment focuses attention on an already complicated benchmark for prescription drug
procurement without additional complications due to adverse selection. Furthermore, when
all drugs are supplied by monopolists, it is theoretically possible to construct a perfect risk
adjustment mechanism (see Fong & Schwarz (2009)).
    Finally, there is a perfectly competitive market of risk-neutral prescription drug plans
(PDP’s), which engage in Bertrand-style competition. PDP’s serve as intermediaries between
consumers and drug companies. Each PDP assembles a formulary of drugs to which its
members have access. If a drug is not covered by a consumer’s PDP, the consumer has the
option of purchasing the drug, or actuarially fair supplemental insurance for that drug, on
the open market.
    Consumers have private information about their willingness to pay for health ua . How-
ever, the distribution ρ(·) is common knowledge. In addition, the expected benefits of each
drug zn = θn vn are common knowledge among consumers, drug companies, and PDP’s.14
The government, however, does not know the values of each drug.


1.2     A Simple Example

Before presenting the mechanism in detail and proving general results, we first present a
simple example to illustrate the main ideas.
    Consider a world in which there are N = 151 drugs, 100 of which provide value of one to
consumers who have developed the associated disease, i.e. vn = 1, and 51 of which provide
value of two to consumers who have developed the associated disease, i.e. vn = 2. We
have a unit mass of consumers indexed by a, and in this world, we assume that all are
healthy and develop each disease independently with identical probability θn = 0.01 for all
n. However, consumers do not have the same willingness to pay for drugs due to differences
programs.
   14
      The assumption that consumers know the relative values of every drug is not necessary for our results to
hold. Instead it is sufficient to assume that consumers are capable of selecting the most valuable formulary
from amongst those offered by PDP’s. That assumption would be satisfied in a world in which trustworthy
entities provide consumers with formulary rankings based on value.



                                                      9
in preferences and in wealth. In particular, we assume that the marginal willingness to pay
for coverage of an additional unit of future health, ua , is uniformly distributed between 0
and 100. Conditional on consumers being healthy then, the willingness to pay for actuarially
fair insurance coverage of any drug is uniformly distributed between 0 and vn .
   Notice that each drug company faces a linear, downward-sloping demand curve. In
the benchmark case of the open market, each drug company acts as a profit-maximizing
monopolist and sets its price at 50vn . As a result, actuarially fair insurance costs 0.5vn per
drug, and half of the population, i.e. those with willingness to pay above 0.5, purchases
insurance and receives drugs if needed. Expected profits to each monopolist are 0.25vn ,
and the total amount spent by consumers is (0.25 × 100) + (0.5 × 51) = 50.5. In such a
market, half the population is excluded from all drugs. Even if the government subsidizes
the purchase of drugs by covering half their costs, monopolists will double prices in response
and half of the population will continue to be excluded.
   Alternatively, consider the following market-based, government-funded drug procurement
mechanism. The government commits to a maximum budget of 50 for procuring drugs for
the whole population. However, the value of each drug is not known to the government.
Hence, it delegates drug procurement and formulary assembly to two private competing
prescription drug plans (PDP’s), who know the value of drugs, and gives each PDP a budget
of 50 scaled by market share.
   Through a centralized procurement auction, each drug company is asked to specify the
price at which it is willing to sell its drug. PDP’s can purchase actuarially fair insurance for
drugs at those prices, and each PDP uses those prices to decide which drugs to cover on its
formulary subject to the budget constraint. Drug companies can choose not to participate in
the auction, and if a drug company opts out, or if its drug is not included on the formulary, the
company has the right to sell its drug on the open market at its monopoly profit-maximizing
price. In the procurement auction, even though the profit-maximizing market price is 50vn ,
each company is willing to bid a price as low as 25vn because doing so implies an expected


                                               10
profit of 0.25vn , the same profit the company obtains from opting out of the procurement
auction and selling on the open market. Notice, however, that in equilibrium not all drugs
can be fully covered because meeting all drug companies’ outside option profits of 0.25vn
exceeds the budget, i.e. (0.25 × 100) + (0.5 × 51) > 50.
       In equilibrium, all companies must bid at the exact same price-to-value ratio because
otherwise companies bidding at lower ratios can shade upwards and just undercut companies
bidding at higher ratios. As a result, the only equilibrium involves all drug companies bidding
a price of exactly 25vn . Actuarially fair insurance for each drug then costs 0.25vn . Due to
competition for membership, each PDP assembles its formulary to maximize social value –
for example, it is an equilibrium for each PDP to include all of the 100 value-1 drugs as well
as 50 of the value-2 drugs randomly chosen from the 51.15
       Under this alternative mechanism, the entire population can have access to all but a
single drug, yielding over 99% efficiency, while total spending remains unchanged. Notice
that the approximate efficiency result is not a coincidence. We have chosen the budget to
                   P −1
be exactly equal to Nn=1 rn , which is the maximum budget that satisfies Proposition 1 in

Section 2.1. In Figure 1, this budget is the highest value for which the mechanism achieves
exactly first-best.

       Even though both the total spending on drugs and the profits to drug companies remain
the same as under the benchmark monopoly regime, the share of the population with access
to almost all drugs doubles. Because drug companies’ profits are unchanged, incentives for
innovation remain unchanged as well.


1.3        The Mechanism

We now describe the mechanism in detail. While it is publicly-funded, implementation is
private – private prescription drug plans (PDP’s) receive government subsidies but must
compete to attract members.
  15
       Note that any other formulary with the same social value is also an equilibrium.


                                                      11
       The government first sets a fixed per-member subsidy B for PDP’s to use in assembling
formularies. Each PDP then assembles a formulary of drugs to which members have access
at marginal cost (which we assume to be zero). PDP’s do not have the option of charging a
membership premium. If a member wishes to buy a drug not on her PDP’s formulary, she
has the option to purchase the drug (or actuarially fair drug insurance) at market prices.16
       Prices are set for all PDP’s via a single procurement auction. In the auction each drug
company submits a bid bn , indicating the minimum price the company is willing to accept for
its drug. This creates a vector of bids b = (b1 , b2 , . . . , bN ). Given the fixed budget constraint
B and the bid vector b, each PDP assembles a formulary. Any unused budget becomes a
PDP’s profit. PDP’s compete for membership, and since consumers choose PDP’s with the
most valuable formulary, each PDP assembles the most valuable formulary possible within
the budget in order to attract members.
       A formulary consists of a set of drugs that the PDP covers. To avoid integer constraints,
we allow PDP’s to offer partial coverage. Having a partially covered drug on the formulary
means that the drug is covered for a randomly selected fraction, strictly between zero and
one, of the PDP’s members. In particular, if the remaining budget is  and the next drug
                                                                                                        
the PDP wants to cover has bid b̂ > , then the PDP covers that drug for a fraction                     b̂
                                                                                                             of
members (in equilibrium at most one drug is partially covered).17 To break ties, we assume
that in assembling formularies PDP’s have a lexicographic preference for maximizing the
number of fully covered drugs.18
       The strategic component of the mechanism lies in the procurement auction – the bids
submitted directly determine formulary compositions of PDPs. Thus, analysis surrounds
equilibrium bidding behavior in the auction.
  16
      Note that instead of PDP’s, it would be analytically identical to assume consumers assemble their own
“à la carte” formularies.
   17
      Partial coverage of drugs is not unheard of. Drug plans routinely cover certain drugs on a case-by-case
basis, although these decisions aren’t meant to be random.
   18
      Removing this tie-breaking assumption would have no effect on the expected social value of equilibrium
formularies. Including it allows us to focus on the equilibrium formulary that has the maximum number of
fully covered drugs.



                                                     12
    The auction format we consider is a sealed bid (simultaneous-move) auction. Each drug
company n submits a private bid bn ∈ [0, ∞) to the auctioneer, or chooses not to participate.
Note that drug companies do not learn any information about other bids. One way to view
the sealed bid auction format is as a model of unstructured negotiation where monopolist
drug companies have all the bargaining power.



2     Analysis

In this section, we lay the necessary groundwork and then analyze equilibrium behavior.
    The drug procurement mechanism we have described in the previous section is voluntary.
A drug company can choose not to participate and instead to sell its drug on the open market
as a monopolist. We characterize a drug company’s participation constraint by defining a
company’s reserve fee in the procurement auction: that fee is the minimum “per-person
profit,” i.e. ratio of expected total profit to population size, that the company requires in
the auction. Denote drug company n’s reserve fee by rn . In Lemma 1, we show that this
reserve fee is proportional to the expected health benefit zn of drug n.
    We first consider per-person budgets B that are “sufficiently large” to satisfy all drug
companies’ participation constraints and to achieve full efficiency (in theory), i.e. B ≥
PN
  n=1 rn . We show that in this case almost all drugs are available to all consumers (at zero

cost). Later in Section 2.1, we consider the case when the budget is small and show that the
mechanism performs well in that case also.
    We claim that under a sealed bid procurement auction, the mechanism achieves near
efficiency. The following theorem makes our claim formal.

                        PN
Theorem 1. Let B ≥         n=1 rn .   In any Nash equilibrium of the sealed bid (simultaneous-
move) procurement auction, the expected social value of the equilibrium formulary is greater
than or equal to a formulary that fully covers N − 1 drugs, i.e. a formulary that fully covers
all drugs but one (which may be the drug with the highest reserve fee).


                                                13
       Before proceeding to the proof, we introduce some preliminary notation and results. Let
bid bn denote the price for which drug company n indicates it is willing to sell one unit of
its drug. Notice that bn implies that in expectation, the per-person price of covering drug n
is θn bn . To make a non-negative profit, a PDP must choose a formulary where the sum of
per-person prices of all drugs on the formulary does not exceed the budget B.
                                                                                                      θn bn
       It is convenient to consider normalized bids, defined for drug company n as en =                rn
                                                                                                            .   A
normalized bid is equal to the expected per-person price of drug n, scaled by the reserve fee
rn , which is proportional to drug n’s expected health benefit. Focusing on normalized bids
is more convenient analytically, as doing so places drug companies’ bids on the same “scale”
of expected per-person price per unit of expected benefit. Normalized bids are particularly
useful because, given that PDP’s assemble formularies to maximize total expected benefit,
a PDP will never include a drug with some normalized bid without also including all drugs
with lower normalized bids. Notice that to satisfy a company’s participation constraint, the
normalized bid must be at least 1, i.e. θn bn ≥ rn .
       We now explicitly characterize a drug company’s reserve fee, i.e. rn . Recall that if a
drug company does not participate in the auction, it sells its drug on the open market as a
monopolist instead. Because our model considers only drugs without substitutes, the profit
the drug company receives from not participating in the government mechanism is exactly
equal to the monopoly profits the company would receive in the absence of any government
intervention. We can show that a company’s total monopoly profit is in fact linear in its
drug’s average expected benefit, i.e. zn = θn vn , and hence each company’s reserve fee rn is
linear in zn .19 Formally, we have the following lemma:

Lemma 1. There exists a constant K > 0 such that rn = Kzn for all n ∈ {0, 1, . . . , N }.

Proof. This proof follows Schwarz (2006). Denote the profit-maximizing monopoly price
  19
     Since all PDP’s are identical and consider the same bids from drug companies, in equilibrium all formu-
laries will be the same. If a drug is covered on any formulary, it will be covered on all formularies and hence
be available to the entire population. Thus, to match its outside option, a drug company need only submit
a bid that is equal to its outside option profits (i.e. open market monopoly profits) divided by the entire
population.


                                                      14
by ψ ∗ . Recall that a market for actuarially fair insurance exists and that a consumer is
willing to pay ua θn vn for insurance coverage of drug n. When the price of drug n is set
at ψn , the demand for insurance coverage for drug n is equal to the mass of consumers for
whom ua θn vn exceeds θn ψn , i.e. ua vn ≥ ψn . We can write (expected) conditional demand as
            R∞
D(ψn ) = θn ψn /vn dP (ua ). That represents the fraction of consumers who are willing to buy
insurance coverage for drug n, when the price of drug n is ψn . So ψ ∗ solves the following
profit maximization problem:

                                              Z   ∞
                                  max ψn θn            dP (ua )
                                   ψn         ψn /vn



Notice that demand depends only on the ratio between price ψn and effectiveness vn . There-
fore each drug company maximizes its expected profits by serving the same proportion of
the population, i.e. choosing the same ratio of price ψn to effectiveness vn . As a result,
a drug company’s total monopoly profit is linear in its drug’s average expected benefit zn .
Therefore, for any n, the company’s reserve fee rn is also linear in zn .

   The proof of Theorem 1 relies on three additional lemmas.

                                                                     B
Lemma 2. If drug company n submits a normalized bid of e =          PN         , then in any equilib-
                                                                      i=1 ri

rium drug n will be fully covered. As a result, submitting a normalized bid of en < e is a
strictly dominated strategy for any company n.

Proof. If all drug companies submit a normalized bid of e, then full coverage of all drugs will
just fit within the budget. Hence, a normalized bid of e guarantees drug n is fully covered
on the formulary, and bidding any lower leads only to a strictly lower payoff. (Note that
bidding e satisfies drug company n’s participation constraint since B ≥ N
                                                                       P
                                                                         i=1 ri .)


Lemma 3. There exists a constant ζ > 0 such that for any equilibrium bid for any drug, the
probability of that drug being at least partially covered is greater than or equal to ζ.




                                                  15
Proof. Recall from Lemma 2 that ern is a lower bound on the expected payoff to drug
company n. We now determine an upper bound on that payoff.
   If drug n is partially or fully covered, a strict upper bound on its maximum payoff is
B + rn , since B is the maximum payoff drug n receives from its covered portion and rn is
a strict upper bound on the maximum payoff drug n receives from its uncovered portion.
On the other hand, if drug n is not covered, the maximum payoff is rn . Thus, if ζ is the
probability of being at least partially covered, a strict upper bound on drug company n’s
payoff is ζ(B + rn ) + (1 − ζ)rn = ζB + rn .
   Hence ζ must be large enough that, for all n, ζB + rn > ern , i.e. ζ > (e − 1) rBn ≥ 0.

   Before stating the next lemma, we need to introduce two definitions. First, for a given
vector of bids, define d as the sum of reserve fees of all fully uncovered drugs plus the reserve
fees of all partially covered drugs multiplied by the uncovered share of those drugs. In other
words, d measures the total profits earned by drug companies on the open market (not
covered by the formulary). One consequence then is that the sum of all drug companies’
profits combined is equal to B + d.
   Secondly, since d is a random variable in any mixed strategy equilibrium, define d¯ as the
expected value of d.

Lemma 4. If d¯ is greater than the monopoly profit of the most valuable drug, i.e. d¯ > rN ,
then in any equilibrium, for any equilibrium realization of bids, there is at least one drug
that has zero coverage and there are at least two drugs that are not fully covered (but may be
partially covered).

Proof. First, we remark that with probability one there is at most one partially covered drug
in equilibrium. Consider any two drugs with a positive probability of not being fully covered.
The probability of both drugs having the same normalized bid is an event of measure zero
because otherwise any of the bidders could strictly increase its payoff by lowering its bid by
an arbitrarily small amount in this event. Thus, without loss of generality we assume that


                                               16
there is at most one partially covered drug in any equilibrium formulary realization.
   Suppose there exists an equilibrium realization of bids such that all drugs are covered at
least partially and therefore at least N − 1 drugs are fully covered. Since any drug that is
fully covered under a particular realization of bids receives a profit that is greater than or
equal to the expected profit that the drug receives in equilibrium, it follows that B +rN must
be greater than or equal to the total expected profit of the drug companies, which is equal
       ¯ Hence, it follows that d¯ ≤ rN , which contradicts the assumption of the lemma.
to B + d.



Proof. (Theorem 1) We prove Theorem 1 by showing that d¯ must be smaller than the
reserve fee of the most valuable drug. We begin by assuming the contrary and then arrive
at a contradiction.
   Suppose that d¯ is greater than the reserve fee (i.e. monopoly profit) of the most valuable
drug. Lemma 4 then tells us that under any equilibrium realization of bids at least one
drug has zero coverage and at least two drugs are not fully covered. But as long as there is
always one fully uncovered drug for any equilibrium vector of bids, we show below that there
must exist an equilibrium action that leads to a drug not being covered with arbitrarily high
probability, hence contradicting Lemma 3.
   Consider the range of normalized bids that are consistent with an equilibrium (a mixed
strategy involves a drug company randomizing over a range of normalized bids). Denote
the supremum of that range for drug company n as emax
                                                  n . If the set is unbounded, let

emax
 n   = ∞. Also, let emax = maxn emax
                                 n   so that emax is the highest normalized bid encountered
in equilibrium.
   Now consider some drug company i for whom emax
                                              i   = emax . As company i’s bid approaches
emax , the probability that drug i will have zero coverage approaches one. However, this
violates Lemma 3. Hence, we have a contradiction and therefore conclude that d¯ must be
less than the reserve fee of the most valuable drug.



                                             17
2.1    Small Budgets

We have shown that sufficiently large budgets yield near efficient outcomes. We now show
that when the budget is small, the mechanism performs very well.
   We begin by defining a “first-best” benchmark for comparison. Recall that in our model
we consider a world in which the government does not know the values of each drug. Let us
now consider a counterfactual world in which the government knows exactly the values of
each drug (and hence the monopoly profits each drug would generate on the open market).
Moreover, the government has the power to make lump-sum take-it-or-leave-it offers to drug
companies in exchange for any of its citizens being able to consume a company’s drug when
needed. In this benchmark world, the government assembles the most valuable formulary
subject to two constraints: (1) the cost per person does not exceed the budget B, and (2)
each drug company receives exactly its monopoly profits (thus ensuring that participation
is voluntary and there are no distortions to innovation). We will refer to the value of that
formulary as first-best.
   In our model, because the government is not informed about the values of each drug,
first-best may not be achievable. For small budgets, however, Proposition 1 shows that in
fact the first-best formulary value is achievable.

                            PN −1
Proposition 1. Let B ≤        n=1   rn . In the unique equilibrium of the sealed bid procurement
auction, the expected social value of the equilibrium formulary is exactly equal to first-best,
i.e. the maximum formulary value achieved in the benchmark world in which the government
knows exactly the values of each drug and has the power to make lump-sum take-it-or-leave-it
offers to drug companies.

   For small budgets, the mechanism we have described leads to a formulary in which all on-
formulary drugs are covered at exactly a normalized bid of one. By paying for on-formulary
drugs an amount that is equal to the profits that would have been generated under monopoly
pricing, the mechanism provides access to on-formulary drugs for all of the population, and


                                                18
                Value of
               Formulary       Achievable under First-Best
                                                                      At most
                                Lower bound under the Mechanism    one drug left off
                Sum of
               all drugs'
                values




                                                                  "Large"
                                                                  Budgets
                                         "Small"                  (Thm 1)
                                         Budgets
                                          (Prop 1)



                                                             rN                    Budget B



Figure 1: Illustration of formulary value achieved by mechanism, as a function of budget B

not just the fraction that can afford those drugs at monopoly prices.
   The proof of Proposition 1 is straightforward. If the budget is not large enough to meet
all drug companies’ reserve fees, then competition to get on the formulary will drive each
company to bid down to a level that generates expected profits equal to its reserve fee
of monopoly profits. No drug company can get on the formulary with a normalized bid
higher than one because it will be undercut by some other drug company. Meanwhile, no
company will submit a normalized bid less than one because its participation constraint will
be violated.

   Figure 1 presents an illustration, under both “small” budgets (Proposition 1) and “large”
budgets (Theorem 1), of the formulary value achieved by the mechanism relative to first-
best. Notice that when the budget is small, those two values are identical – the formulary
value attained by the mechanism is equal to the first-best. When the budget is large, the
formulary value attained by the mechanism falls below the first-best, but only by an amount
less than or equal to the value of a single drug.




                                                     19
2.2       Incentives for Innovation

Determining what level of profits correspond to “optimal” incentives for innovation is outside
the scope of this paper, and we remain agnostic about what profit levels are optimal – that
is the topic of a separate, well-developed literature.20
    We can show, however, that the mechanism performs well at preserving relative incentives
                                                               P −1
for innovation across drugs. When the budget is small, i.e. B < Nn=1 rn , then from Section

2.1 above we know that incentives for innovation are exactly unchanged – all drug companies
receive exactly their monopoly profits.
                                                          PN
       Now consider the case of large budgets B ≥            n=1 rn .    We can show that total profits
are distributed across all drug companies in close proportion to expected benefit. Fix any
equilibrium and let eavg
                     n denote the expected normalized profit to drug company n. We know

                                               B
from Lemma 2 that eavg
                   n > e, where e =          PN         is a lower bound on the normalized profit any
                                              n=1 rn

drug company can receive. To understand the distribution of profits across drug companies,
we are interested in how much drug companies’ expected profits deviate from that lower
bound and compute the following ratio:

                                       qP
                                            N     avg
                                            n=1 (en rn    − ern )2
                                                                     ,
                                                B + d¯

where the numerator, i.e. the square root of the sum of squared residuals between drug
companies’ expected profits and the lower bound, is normalized by total profits across all
drug companies.
       As a corollary of Theorem 1, we show that this ratio goes to zero as the value of the largest
drug becomes small relative to the sum of the values of all drugs. To do so, we consider
the worst-case scenario. The numerator takes its maximum value when all drug companies
have expected normalized profits of exactly en = e except for one company, which receives
all remaining profits. Thus, in the worst-case the total deviation of expected profits divided
  20
    For example, see Boldrin and Levine (2006), Garber,ones and Romer (2006), Hopenhayn, Llobet and
Mitchell (2006), and Scotchmer (1999).


                                                   20
                                                      rN                                       r
by total profits, i.e. the ratio above, is exactly   B+d¯
                                                         ,   which is less than or equal to   PN N      .
                                                                                               n=1 rn

Thus, as the value of the largest drug becomes small relative to the sum of the values of
all drugs, the total deviation of expected profits among drugs from the lower bound goes to
zero.
   Hence, the mechanism described in the above section continues to do well at preserving
relative incentives for innovation even when the budget is large. In fact, Proposition 2 in
the next section shows that under an ascending clock auction format, relative incentives for
innovation across drugs are perfectly preserved even when budgets are large. Notice that
the budget size B serves as a convenient tool for calibrating the strength of incentives for
innovation in prescription drug markets.


2.3     Extension

The previous section assumes that PDP’s are risk neutral players. The mechanism described
in the above section could easily be modified so that we can get the same efficiency results
even if PDP’s were risk averse and unable to diversify the risk. In particular, the modification
would involve changing the bid format to per-person prices.
   Thus far the bid format we have been considering is a conventional linear price: the bid
specifies the price that drug companies charge to PDP’s per unit of the drug. An alternative
bid format is a per-person price: the bid specifies the price that drug companies charge to
PDP’s per consumer covered by the PDP regardless of whether that consumer will need the
drug. Collecting a per-person price for a consumer obligates the drug company to provide
the drug for free in the event the disease is contracted. Note that the results of the previous
section continue to hold if bids are submitted as per-person prices rather than linear prices.
   Per-person pricing improves risk-sharing. Linear prices create uncertainty about how
much PDP’s will have to pay to drug companies and hence create artificial risk for both
PDP’s and drug companies, which produce drugs at zero marginal cost. Under per-person




                                               21
pricing, that uncertainty disappears.21
       We also point out that, in the mechanism described in the previous section, generically
all equilibria are in mixed strategies (see Appendix A.1). The fact that no pure strategy
equilibrium exists may be seen as an undesirable property. However, mixed strategy equi-
libria arise due to the simultaneous-move nature of the mechanism; in mechanisms where
players move sequentially, pure strategy equilibria can be attained.
       In this section, we consider auctions in which drug companies bid in terms of per-person
prices rather than linear prices, so PDP’s need not be risk neutral. To avoid ties, we assume
that for all i 6= j, vi 6= vj . We consider two sequential-move auctions: the ascending clock
auction and the descending clock auction. We prove that each auction features a unique
equilibrium in pure strategies that achieves near efficiency.
       Fix some pmax ∈ [B, ∞). The rules of the auctions are as follows:22

    • Ascending Clock Auction. The clock begins at per-person price p = 0 and increases
         continuously until p = pmax . Each drug company n chooses a level at which to leave
         the auction, and that becomes its per-person bid pn . There is no re-entry permitted.
         Upon observing a dropout at p, a bidder can drop out only at a level strictly higher
         than p. Ties are broken in favor of later bidders.

    • Descending Clock Auction. The clock begins at per-person price p = pmax and decreases
         continuously until p = 0. Each drug company n chooses a level at which to leave the
         auction, and that becomes its per-person bid pn . There is no re-entry permitted. Upon
         observing a dropout at p, a bidder can drop out only at a level strictly lower than p.
         Ties are broken in favor of later bidders.

       The following propositions show that, like the sealed bid auction, both clock auctions
  21
     Admittedly, in reality the risks generated by linear drug pricing are easily diversifiable. Nonetheless, it is
theoretically interesting that such risks can be avoided using per-person pricing. For the auctions considered
in this section, per-person pricing makes the analytical treatment simpler and more transparent.
  22
     For completeness, we include non-participation as a viable action in both auctions (although it is not
important for equilibrium analysis). So the action space for bidders in each auction consists of either
submitting a per-person bid p ∈ [0, pmax ] in the auction or not participating at all.


                                                        22
lead to near efficient outcomes. Unlike the sealed bid auction, however, those outcomes are
achieved in unique, pure-strategy equilibria. Proofs are relegated to the Appendix.

                                                              PN
Proposition 2. (Ascending Clock Auction) Let B ≥                 n=1 rn .   The unique subgame
perfect equilibrium of the ascending clock auction is a pure strategy equilibrium in which all
drugs are fully covered on the formulary except for the most valuable drug, which is partially
covered. Moreover, the total profit of each drug company n is in constant proportion to its
drug’s expected health benefit zn .

In the ascending clock auction, the most valuable drug, or the drug with the highest expected
benefit zn , is only partially covered on the formulary. The intuition is that in the ascending
clock auction, the last bidder to bid, i.e. the company with the most valuable drug, can bid
arbitrarily high (up to the maximum bid pmax ) so that it collects not only the excess budget
but also some monopoly profits from the open market since its drug is only partially covered.
Other bidders cannot act to lower the payoffs of this highest-value drug company, because
it has the last-mover advantage – it can always threaten to undercut previous bidders and
get its drug fully covered on the formulary.

                                                              PN
Proposition 3. (Descending Clock Auction) Let B ≥                n=1 rn .   The unique subgame
perfect equilibrium of the descending clock auction is a pure strategy equilibrium in which all
drugs are fully covered on the formulary except for one drug, which is partially covered. The
partially covered drug is not the most valuable drug.

The intuition is similar to the ascending clock auction. The main differences are that it is
(a) not the highest-value drug that is left partially covered and (b) not necessarily the last
company to bid that is left partially covered. Instead, the identity of the drug company that
remains partially covered depends on the distribution of drugs’ values. What drives these
differences is that in the descending clock auction, a given bidder’s maximum bid is bounded
from above because bidders with lower-value drugs bid later. So no company can submit a
higher bid than what a company with a higher value drug has already submitted.

                                               23
       Although both clock-auctions achieve near-efficiency, covering all drugs but at most one,
we show in Appendix A.3 that the descending clock auction generally leads to a formulary
with higher social value than the ascending clock auction.



3        Concluding Remarks

There are several intuitive approaches for increasing access to prescription drugs using
government-funded market-driven mechanisms. One approach is for the government to use
market prices as benchmarks for the prices it pays, as in the case of Medicaid. Another
approach is for the government to directly subsidize health insurance by making its purchase
tax-deductible, as in the case of employer-provided health insurance. Research has shown,
however, that both those approaches may have the unintended effect of raising drug prices
and thus reducing rather than increasing the number of people with access to prescription
drugs (Morton (1997), Schwarz (2006), Duggan & Morton (2006)).
       Yet a third approach, which we study in this paper, is to make monopolists “compete”
for scarce portions of a fixed subsidy, as in the case of Medicare Part D.23,24 We show that
at least in theory this third approach may lead very close to universal access: we describe
a market-driven mechanism with fixed government subsidies in which all consumers have
access to all but at most one drug.
       The structure of the mechanism we describe is similar in many ways to the current form
of Medicare Part D. Medicare’s drug benefit is a government-funded, market-driven federal
entitlement program in which private prescription drug plans receive fixed per-member sub-
sidies from the government but must compete through assembling formularies and setting
premiums to attract members.
       There are several major points of distinction. First, our efficiency results hinge on creating
  23
    For details on the design of Medicare Part D, see McAdams & Schwarz (2007).
  24
    Notice that this logic has interesting antitrust implications. Because non-substitue drugs compete with
one another based on cost effectiveness, a merger between two drug companies can put upward pressure on
prices paid by Medicare even if no two drugs, one from each company’s portfolio, are substitutes.



                                                    24
competition between monopolists for coverage by PDP’s. Hence, it is crucial that every drug
face the threat of being left off the formulary. The design of Medicare Part D, however,
removes that threat for various drugs. By law the government requires coverage of “all or
substantially all” drugs within various “protected” classes of drugs and has created a pathway
for identifying and protecting additional medications (see the Medicare Improvements for
Patients and Providers Act, 2008).
       Moreover, the mechanism we describe depends critically upon consumers choosing PDP’s
based on formulary comprehensiveness. PDP’s then assemble formularies to maximize ex-
pected health benefit. In contrast, the current implementation of Part D makes it difficult
for beneficiaries to compare comprehensiveness. To assist seniors in choosing the right drug
plans, the government-run online Medicare Prescription Drug Plan Finder ranks plans based
only on information about drugs that beneficiaries are currently taking (or know they are
likely to take). The government provides no information about formulary comprehensive-
ness.25
       The mechanism we describe highlights the importance of formulary comprehensiveness
in determining efficiency, suggesting a novel way to measure a drug’s market penetration.
The current measure predominantly used by the pharmaceutical industry is the percentage
of people diagnosed with the relevant condition who take that drug. Our analysis suggests
another meaningful measure of market penetration, namely formulary penetration: the per-
centage of formularies that include that drug, which thus reflects the percentage of people
who have access to that drug.
       The analysis in this paper applies principles of economic theory to prescription drug mar-
kets using a highly stylized model. As we have emphasized, this paper is intended primarily
as a thought exercise rather than a blueprint for market design. Our main objective is to
offer a conceptual framework for efficient design of government-funded drug procurement.
  25
       Even obtaining the list of drugs covered by a particular PDP is difficult.




                                                        25
A      Appendix

A.1     No Generic Pure Strategy Equilibrium under Sealed Bid Auc-

        tion

Lemma 5. A pure strategy equilibrium in the sealed-bid auction does not generically exist.

Proof. Suppose there exists a pure strategy equilibrium in which each drug company submits
a bid of bn . One potential outcome is that all drugs are fully covered on the formulary. In
this case, any drug company can profitably deviate by changing its bid to bmax (≥ B) so that
its drug becomes partially covered and collects not only a portion of the budget B but also
a portion of monopoly profits on the open market. So there is no pure strategy equilibrium
in this case.
    The other potential outcome is that some drugs are fully covered on the formulary, and
some drugs are not. That implies that some drug companies are submitting normalized
bids strictly greater than 1 and getting on the formulary. Hence, any drug company whose
drug is not fully covered on the formulary can profitably deviate by changing its bid to just
undercut the normalized bid of an on-formulary drug and thus become fully covered on the
formulary at a normalized bid level greater than 1.
    Hence, no generic pure strategy equilibrium exists.


A.2     Proofs of Proposition 2 and 3

In the following proofs, we label bidders in the order that they bid. So the first bidder to
bid is bidder 1, the second bidder to bid is bidder 2, and so on so that the last bidder to bid
is bidder N . In the ascending clock auction, bidder N will turn out to be the highest value
bidder (i.e. the bidder with the most valuable drug); meanwhile in the descending clock
auction, bidder N will turn out to be the lowest value bidder (i.e. the bidder with the least
valuable drug).


                                              26
    When we refer to bidders in terms of their drugs’ values, we use parentheses. For example,
the reserve value for the most valuable drug is r(1) and the reserve value for the least valuable
drug is r(N ) .
    Recall that we have set up our model so that there are no ties. First, ri 6= rj for all i 6= j
so that no two bidders have both the same bid and the same normalized bid. Secondly, in
the rules of the sequential-move auction formats, we have indicated that ties are broken in
favor of later bidders – so if two drug companies submit bids at the same normalized level,
the later bidder has priority for inclusion on the formulary.

                                                                       PN
Lemma 6. In a clock auction (ascending or descending) with B ≥            n=1 r(n) ,   there does not
exist an equilibrium in which all bidders bid e = 1.

Proof. Suppose all bidders are bidding e = 1. Consider the last bidder to bid. This bidder
has incentive to deviate and bid as high as possible, which allows it to collect both the
excess budget and a positive fraction of monopoly profits. Notice that if a bidder bids at a
normalized level higher than e = 1 and receives any of the budget, then that bidder receives
a total payoff strictly higher than monopoly profits (i.e. the bidder’s reserve fee).
   To be more specific, in the ascending clock auction the last bidder can deviate to bmax and
                         P −1
take excess budget B − N                                                                 
                            n=1 rn =  (≥ rN ) in addition to a positive fraction (1 − bmax ) of

monopoly profits. Similarly, in the descending clock auction the last bidder can deviate to the
                                                    P −1
second last bidder’s bid and take excess budget B − N  n=1 rn (≥ rN ), in addition to a positive

fraction of monopoly profits. Thus all bidders bidding e = 1 is not an equilibrium.

                                                                       PN
Lemma 7. In a clock auction (ascending or descending) with B ≥            n=1 r(n) ,   there does not
exist an equilibrium in which some bidder receives none of the budget.

                     PN
Proof. Since B ≥       n=1 r(n) ,   there always exist a small enough  > 0 such that if drug
company i bids  above its reserve fee ri , then in any equilibrium drug i will at least be
partially covered on the formulary. In the worst case, all other drug companies bid at
                                                                                  P
normalized levels slightly lower than that of drug company i and excess budget B − n6=i rn −

                                                 27
0 > 0 remains for drug company i to receive at least partial coverage. Since any drug
company i always has the option of bidding arbitrarily close to its reserve fee in order to
gain partial coverage and receive a payoff strictly higher than its reserve fee, there does not
exist an equilibrium in which some drug company receives none of the budget.



Lemma 8. In any equilibrium of a clock auction (ascending or descending) with B ≥
PN
  n=1 r(n) , exactly one bidder gets less than full coverage.


Proof. First we show that at most one bidder gets less than full coverage. Suppose there is
an equilibrium in which at least two bidders are less than fully covered. Lemma 7 tells us
that these bidders must be receiving some of the budget and hence they must be partially
covered. However, at most one bidder can be partially covered since there are no ties.
   Now we show that at least one bidder gets less than full coverage. Suppose there is an
equilibrium in which all bidders are fully covered. To be an equilibrium, the entire budget
must be depleted. The last bidder can achieve a higher payoff by deviating and increasing
its bid, thereby becoming partially covered, collecting the remaining portion of the budget
and receiving extra payoff from the open market.

Lemma 9. The unique equilibrium of the ascending clock auction involves all bidders bidding
at the same normalized level e∗ except for the bidder with the highest value drug, who bids
bmax . That last bidder is partially covered on the formulary while all the other bidders are
fully covered. All bidders receive normalized profits of e∗ .

Proof. First, we characterize the normalized bid e ≥ 1 such that if the first N − 1 bidders all
bid at normalized level e, then the optimal bid for bidder N is to bid bmax and be partially
covered on the formulary. The only other bid worth considering is for bidder N to bid e and
be fully covered. Bidding bmax is preferred so long as

                                                         P
                                                   B − e n6=N rn
                                     X                          
                      erN ≤ (B − e      rn ) + 1 −        max
                                                                   rN
                                   n6=N
                                                        b

                                               28
                                                 B
                                   B + rN (1 − bmax  )      ∗
                           =⇒ e ≤ P       P           rn = e .                            (A.1)
                                   n rn −   n6=N rn bmax



Recall that rN = r(1) . Notice that e∗ is the (maximum) value of e that exactly satisfies the
above inequality. If the first N − 1 bidders all bid at e∗ or lower, then the optimal bid for
bidder N is indeed to bid bmax , which leads to expected normalized profits of e∗ .
   Now consider the first N − 1 bidders. A key observation is the following: the maximal
payoff a bidder j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N − 1} can hope to receive from bidding e > e∗ and being
                                                                             B−e∗ n6=j rn
                                                                        h         P       i
partially covered is strictly bounded from above by (B − e∗ n6=j rn ) + 1 −
                                                              P
                                                                                 bmax
                                                                                            rj .
That payoff is never higher than the payoff from being fully covered on the formulary at e∗ :

                                                    B − e∗ n6=j rn
                                                          P       
                                        X
                       ∗            ∗
                      e rj ≥ (B − e      rn ) + 1 −        max
                                                                     rj
                                    n6=j
                                                         b

                                                       B
                                        B + rj (1 − bmax   )
                               =⇒ e∗ ≥ P       P            rj .
                                        n rn −    n6=j rn bmax

Plugging in (A.1) for e∗ , we get

                                       B                         B
                         B + rN (1 − bmax  )      B + rj (1 − bmax   )
                     =⇒ P        P         rN  ≥ P       P            rj
                          n rn −  n6=N rn bmax    n rn −    n6=j rn bmax



which is always true since the LHS numerator is larger than the RHS numerator, while the
LHS denominator is smaller than the RHS denominator. Equality holds if and only if j = N .
Therefore, if any bidder j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N − 1} has the opportunity to be fully covered at a
normalized bid of ē ≥ e∗ , then bidding ē is always preferred to bidding at some e > ē and
being partially covered.
   We now use backwards induction to prove that it is a subgame perfect equilibrium for
each bidder j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N − 1} to bid exactly e∗ . Consider bidder N − 1, the second last
bidder to bid. Suppose that all previous bidders have bid e∗ . If bidder N − 1 bids e∗ , then
bidder N will bid bmax and hence bidder N − 1 will be fully covered on the formulary at e∗ .
On the other hand, if bidder N − 1 bids anything higher than e∗ , then bidder N will match

                                              29
that bid and bidder N − 1 will be partially covered. Hence, bidder N − 1 prefers to bid e∗
and be fully covered. Suppose instead that some previous bidder has bid e > e∗ . Then both
bidder N − 1 and bidder N will choose to match e and be fully covered on the formulary
(leaving the previous bidder that has bid e > e∗ to be partially covered).
   Now, consider bidder N − 2. An identical argument holds. Suppose that all previous
bidders have bid e∗ . If bidder N − 2 bids e∗ , then we know from above that bidder N − 2
will be fully covered on the formulary. On the other hand, if bidder N − 2 bids e > e∗ , then
bidder N − 2 will be partially covered. Hence, bidder N − 2 prefers to bid e∗ and be fully
covered. Suppose instead that some previous bidder has bid e > e∗ . Then bidder N − 2
prefers to match e and be fully covered.
   Continuing the backwards induction for all bidders j = N − 3, N − 4, . . . , 1, we find that
bidder 1 prefers to bid e∗ and be fully covered rather than bid some e > e∗ and be partially
covered. Hence, we conclude that it is a unique subgame perfect equilibrium for all bidders
1, 2, . . . , N − 1 to bid e∗ and for bidder N to bid bmax .



Lemma 10. The unique equilibrium of the descending clock auction involves all bidders but
one being fully covered and one bidder being partially covered.

Proof. From Lemma 8 we know that in any pure strategy equilibrium, exactly one bidder
gets less than full coverage. Our first step is to show that this bidder cannot be completely
uncovered. One way a bidder can receive no coverage is by bidding bmax (≥ B). In the
descending clock auction, no bidder bids bmax in equilibrium because doing so requires that
bidder to move first and effectively eliminate itself from the auction completely. The only
other way in which some bidder j can get no coverage is if it bids at a finite level and all
the other drugs bid such that the budget is exactly depleted and bidder j has the highest
normalized bid. But in this case, since B ≥ N
                                           P
                                             n=1 r(n) , bidder j has a profitable deviation to

a lower normalized bid near 1 that guarantees a spot on the formulary. Hence in any pure
strategy equilibrium, exactly one bidder gets partial coverage.

                                                 30
   Our second step is to show that in any equilibrium, a later bidder never bids at a normal-
ized level below that of an earlier bidder. This is obvious if the earlier bidder is fully covered
on the formulary in equilibrium since then the later bidder can match that bid and therefore
be fully covered on the formulary as well. If instead the earlier bidder is not fully covered
on the formulary in equilibrium (and hence is the only bidder not fully covered), then it is
optimal for the later bidder to match the earlier bidder and hence obtain full coverage on
the formulary.
   Our third step is to prove that any equilibrium takes the following form: for some j ∈
{2, . . . , N }, (a) bidders 1 through j − 1 bid at some normalized level e1 ≥ 1 and are fully
covered, (b) bidder j bids at some higher normalized level e2 > e1 and is partially covered,
and (c) all remaining bidders j +1 through N bid at normalized level e2 and are fully covered.
To prove that, we show that in any equilibrium, for any two bidders k and k + 1, if both
bidders are fully covered on the formulary, then both bidders must be bidding at the same
normalized level. Suppose not and that bidder k is bidding at a lower normalized level than
bidder k + 1. Then we claim that bidder k has a profitable upward deviation, at least by
, that keeps bidder k still fully covered on the formulary. The only concern when bidder k
deviates upward is if bidder k + 1 now revises its bid downward to undercut bidder k. Even
if bidder k + 1 does so, however, we know there is some other bidder j that, in the original
equilibrium, is partially covered and bidding higher than what bidder k + 1 was originally
bidding. That bidder j will still prefer to be partially covered because (a) either j < k so
bidder j has already bid and the conclusion is trivial, or (b) j > k + 1 and bidder j faces a
larger excess budget than before.
   Our final step is to show that there exists an equilibrium and it is unique. That is, there
exists an equilibrium of the form described above with a unique identity of bidder j that is
partially covered and unique normalized bids e1 and e2 .
   Suppose bidder 1 has chosen some normalized bid e1 . We assume e1 is appropriate in the
sense that it leads to subgame behavior that resembles the form of the equilibrium described


                                               31
above. In particular, e1 is not too high, so that bidder 1 will be on the formulary26 ; and e1 is
not too low, so that any bidder j > 1 bidding optimally at a normalized level higher than e1
will always be matched by all remaining bidders that follow bidder j.27 Instead, e1 satisfies
the constraint that at least one later bidder will have incentive to bid at a normalized level
higher than e1 , and that later bidder will be the one that is partially covered. By continuity,
we know such an e1 must exist.
       The identity j of the partially covered bidder is uniquely determined in the subgame as
the first bidder willing to bid at some e2 > e1 . By our constraints on e1 , this then leads
to all remaining bidders bidding e2 and being fully covered. We know that such a bidder j
must exist because in the extreme, if bidders 1 through N − 1 bid at the same level (and are
all on getting on the formulary), then bidder N will prefer to bid some e2 > e1 and take the
remaining budget in addition to partial coverage.
   Conditional on e1 , bidder j chooses its normalized bid e2 > e1 as follows. Let Bj =
B − e1 j−1
      P             PN
        n=1 rn − e2    n=j+1 rn . Then bidder j chooses e2 to solve



                                                              Bj
                                          max Bj + (1 −            )rj
                                          e2 ≥e1             e2 rj

subject to the following three constraints:

   1. All remaining bidders prefer to bid e2 (so that bidder j ends up being partially covered).

   2. Bidder j cannot bid higher than the bid of the bidder just before, so for rj−1 > rj ,

                                                             rj−1
                                                   e2 ≤ e1
                                                              rj


   3. Bidding at e2 > e1 must lead to a higher payoff for bidder j than bidding at e1 and
  26
       The minimum constraint is that there exists some j such that e1 <   P B
                                                                            n6=j   rn .
  27
    If e1 is too low, then it can happen that some bidder j > 1 bids higher than e1 and some even later
bidder k > j bids even higher than bidder j. Clearly, this is suboptimal for bidder 1.




                                                     32
      getting fully covered on the formulary:

                                                          Bj
                                     e1 rj ≤ Bj + (1 −         )rj .
                                                         e2 rj


Since e2 can be arbitrarily close to e1 and B is sufficiently large, we know that given e1 , a
solution e2 exists and, by monotonicity, is unique.
   Finally, we show that bidder 1’s choice of e1 is unique. This follows immediately from
bidder 1’s payoff e1 r1 being strictly increasing in e1 because bidder 1 simply chooses the
highest e1 possible, subject to the constraints detailed above. That unique e1 makes bidder
j just indifferent between bidding e1 (full coverage) and bidding e2 (partial coverage).




A.3     Comparison between Ascending and Descending Clock Auc-

        tions

Lemma 11. As bmax increases, the social value of the formulary obtained in the unique
equilibrium of the ascending clock auction converges towards N
                                                            P
                                                              n=1 zn − maxn zn . Meanwhile,

as bmax increases, the social value of the formulary obtained in the unique equilibrium of the
descending clock auction remains unchanged and is strictly greater than N
                                                                          P
                                                                            n=1 zn − maxn zn .

   Therefore, for any set of drug values {zn }n , there exists a b∗ such that if bmax ≥ b∗ , then
the formulary obtained in the unique equilibrium of the descending clock auction has a social
value strictly greater than that of the ascending clock auction.

Proof. In the unique equilibrium of the ascending clock auction, we know that all drugs are
fully covered on the formulary except the highest value drug, which is the last to bid. From
the proof of Lemma 9, we know that the highest value drug always bids bmax and has a
fraction x covered on the formulary, where the numerator of x equals the remaining budget
(which does not increase nearly as fast as bmax ) and the denominator equals bmax . Hence, as



                                                33
bmax increases, the fraction x converges to 0 and the social value of the formulary converges
towards N
         P
           n=1 zn − maxn zn .

   In the unique equilibrium of the descending clock auction, we know that all drugs are
fully covered on the formulary except for one drug, which is partially covered and which is
not the highest value drug. From the proof of Lemma 10, we know that the equilibrium does
not depend on bmax and hence as bmax increases, the social value of the formulary does not
change.



References

Boldrin, Michele & David Levine. 2006. “Growth and Intellectual Property.” NBER Working
    Paper Series.

Cornelli, Francesca & Mark Schankerman. 1999. “Patent Renewals and R&D Incentives.”
    Rand Journal of Economics 30:197–213.

Duggan, Mark & Fiona Scott Morton. 2006. “The Distortionary Effects of Government
    Procurement: Evidence for Medicaid Prescription Drug Purchasing.” Quarterly Journal
    of Economics 121:1–30.

Fong, Kyna & Michael Schwarz. 2009. “Per-Person Pricing and Alternative Risk Adjustment
    Schemes in Prescription Drug Procurement.”.

Garber, Alan, Charles Jones & Paul Romer. 2006. “Insurance and Incentives for Medical
    Innovation.” Forum for Health Economics and Policy 9(2):4.

Hopenhayn, Hugo, Gerard Llobet & Matthew Mitchell. 2006. “Rewarding Sequential Inno-
    vators: Prizes, Patents, and Buyouts.” Journal of Political Economy 114(6):1041–1068.

Kremer, Michael. 1998. “Patent Buyouts: A Mechanism for Encouraging Innovation.” The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(4):1137–1167.


                                             34
Lakdawalla, Darius & Neeraj Sood. 2006. “Health Insurance as a Two-Part Pricing Con-
    tract.” NBER Working Paper 12681.

McAdams, David & Michael Schwarz. 2007. “Perverse Incentives in the Medicare Prescrip-
    tion Drug Benefit.” Inquiry . Forthcoming.

McAfee, Preston. 1992. “A Dominant Strategy Double Auction.” Journal of Economic
    Theory 56(2):434–450.

McClellan, Mark, I. Spatz & S. Carney. 2000. “Designing A Medicare Prescription Drug
    Benefit: Issues, Obstacles, and Opportunities.” Health Affairs 19(2):26–41.

Morton, Fiona Scott. 1997. “The Strategic Response by Pharmaceutical Firms to the Medi-
    caid Most-Favored-Customer Rules.” The RAND Journal of Economics 28(2):269–290.

Newhouse, Joseph. 2004. “How Should Medicare Pay For Drugs?” Health Affairs 21(1):89–
    102.

Schwarz, Michael. 2006. “Do Tax Subsidies and Medicaid Increase Access to Essential Med-
    ications?”.

Scotchmer, Suzanne. 1999. “On the Optimality of the Patent Renewal System.” Rand Jour-
    nal of Economics 30:181–196.

Viscusi, W. Kip. 1993. “The Value of Risks to Life and Health.” Journal of Economic
    Literature 31(4):1912–1946.

Wright, Brian D. 1983. “The Economics of Invention Incentives: Patents, Prizes, and Re-
    search Contracts.” American Economic Review 73:691–707.




                                           35
