NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTRODUCTION TO “CHINA’S GROWING ROLE IN WORLD TRADE”
Robert C. Feenstra
Shang-Jin Wei
Working Paper 14716
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14716

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2009

This is an introductory chapter to the volume, "China's Growing Role in World Trade." A table of
content with information on the contributing authors to each chapter and the discussants appears at
the end of this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Robert C. Feenstra and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Introduction to “China’s Growing Role in World Trade”
Robert C. Feenstra and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 14716
February 2009
JEL No. F1
ABSTRACT
Over the last three decades, the value of Chinese trade has approximately doubled every four years.
This rapid growth has transformed the country from a negligible player in world trade to the world's
second largest exporter, as well as a substantial importer of raw materials, intermediate inputs, and
other goods. This paper provides an overview of the microstructure of Chinese trade, its macroeconomic
implications, trade disputes with other WTO member countries, and the role of foreign firms.

Robert C. Feenstra
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
rcfeenstra@ucdavis.edu
Shang-Jin Wei
Graduate School of Business, and
School of International and Public Affairs
Columbia University
Uris Hall 619
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
shangjin.wei@columbia.edu

In less than three decades, China has grown from having a negligible role in world trade
to being one of the world’s largest exporters, as well as a substantial importer of raw materials,
intermediate inputs, and other goods. This tremendous growth is seen by some observers as
posing a threat to China’s trading partners.1 But since trade is a positive-sum rather than a zerosum game, this growth must bring opportunities as well. For industrial countries, China presents
the opportunity of a low-cost labor force. Whether the goods are simple toys sold by Mattel, or
personal computers sold by Lenovo (the Chinese owner of what used to be IBM’s PC division)
or sophisticated components for the European Airbus, a large part of Chinese exports involves
contracting manufacturing in China for goods that are designed elsewhere. This phenomenon is
known as “processing trade,” and involved importing inputs into China, which are assembled
there and then exported again. This role that China plays in contract manufacturing means that its
own success is intricately tied to the fortunes of its trading partners.
Even while China acts as a manufacturing base for firms worldwide, its sheer size and
rapid growth also creates challenges for many countries. On the export side, China is a
formidable competitor in many markets, overlapping in its export composition with other
countries such as India, Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan, the Philippines and Thailand. These
countries often attribute declines in their own export demand to competition from China. And on
the import side, too, China’s impact is felt worldwide. Its demand for raw materials, especially to
fuel the investment boom of recent years (including the 2008 Olympics), creates market pressure
and higher prices for building materials. Likewise, the slowdown in China’s industrial
production in the midst of the 2008-2009 global crisis has contributed to a dramatic fall in the
commodity prices. The industrial production in China is also believed to have led to pollution in

1

Even Samuelson (2002) presents a case where the United States could be harmed by growth in China, if this
growth occurs in products where the U.S. has a comparative advantage.

2
the country, which can spill over international borders, too. So the challenges created by China’s
rapid growth and expanding trade are both domestic and international in scope. The goal of this
volume is to investigate these issues raised by China’s growing role in world trade.
Some of the major trends in China’s exports and imports are summarized in Tables 1-10.
In Table 1, we list the nominal value (in billions of U.S. dollars) of exports and imports
attributed to “ordinary” versus “processing” trade, along with the share of export and import
values in these categories. As their names suggests, “ordinary” trade includes imports that enter
the country and are not destined to be incorporated into exported goods, or exports that did not
rely specifically on imported inputs. Conversely, “processing” trade includes imports that enter
the country duty-free and will be incorporated into exported goods, and exports that rely on these
processing imports. These two categories do not exhaust the value of trade: besides ordinary and
processing trade, there are also international aid flows, contracting projects, goods on lease,
barter trade, and other categories of trade flows. But ordinary and processing trade make up the
vast majority of trade flows, and together account for over 95% of exports and over 80% of
imports.
As shown in Table 1, the nominal value of exports and imports has risen by roughly 10
times over 1992 – 2006 in both the ordinary and processing trade categories. That growth is
especially rapid in the later years, however: the value of trade roughly doubled in the first seven
years, to 1999, and then grew by nearly five times over the next seven years, to 2006, for a
remarkable 25% annual growth rate in the last seven years. Despite this very rapid growth, the
shares of processing trade does not change that much. On the export side, the share of processing
trade rose from 47% in 1992 to a high of 57% in 1999, and then fell back to 53% by 2006.
Likewise, on the import side, with the share of processing trade rising from 39% in 1992 to a

3
high of 49% in 1998, and then returning to 41% by 2006. These results show that the very rapid
growth in both exports and imports is roughly balanced between ordinary and processing trade,
and both of these categories will be important in the chapters that follow.2
A further distinction that can be made in the trade data is between imports or exports
made by foreign-invested enterprises (FIEs), or those made by all other firms, including Chinese
state-owned enterprises, town and village collectives, and private firms. The foreign-invested
enterprises include both joint ventures between foreign and Chinese firms and, in later years,
wholly-owned foreign enterprises. In Table 2, we report the share of ordinary and processing
trade accounted for by FIEs and all other firms. For both exports and imports, FIEs accounted for
only 5% of ordinary trade in 1992, and 39% and 45 % of processing exports and imports,
respectively. So joint ventures with foreign firms accounted for very little of ordinary trade
flows, and less than half of processing trade flows in early years. But the presence of joint
ventures and wholly-owned foreign firms increased in both types of trade, so that by 2006, FIEs
account for 28% and 32% of ordinary exports and imports, respectively, and 84% and 85% of
processing exports and imports, respectively. That indicates a very dominant presence of foreign
firms in processing trade, and a substantial presence in ordinary trade, too. The chapters by
Wang and Wei and by Blonigen and Ma document the growth of foreign firms in the Chinese
economy, and their special presence in processing trade activities. The chapter by Branstetter and
Foley compares U.S. firms in China with those from other source countries.
A final way of breaking down the trade data is by type of product. The most commonly
used trade classification today is the Harmonized System (HS), used by most countries. The
2

The chapters by Amiti and Freund, Wang and Wei, Deng and Harrigan, Feenstra and Hong, and Blonigen and
Ma, all make use of detailed trade statistics from China Customs Statistics (various years), which include a
breakdown by ordinary versus processing trade. These detailed Harmonized System trade data can be purchased by
contacting: George Shen, General Manager, CCS (China Customs Statistics) Information Center, Hong Kong;
Tel.+852 9472 6072 / Fax.+852 2891 2963 / georgeshenhkg@yahoo.com.

4
Chinese customs authorities records both exports and imports at HS numbers with up to 8 digits,
such as: “Live pure bred breeding horses,” HS 01011100; “Mulberry feeding silk-worm
cocoons,” HS 50010010; and “Antiques of an age exceeding one hundred years,” HS 97060000.
A number of chapter in this volume make use of such disaggregate trade categories. To give an
initial impression of the importance of each major type of product, in Table 3 – 10 we record the
values and shares of ordinary and processing exports and imports by major industries. These
industries are as follows:
Animals, Food – animals, vegetable products and foodstuffs (HS 01 – 24)
Minerals, Wood – mineral and wood products, stone & glass (HS 25–27, 44–49, 68–71)
Chemicals, Plastic – chemicals & allied industries, plastics & rubbers (HS 28 – 40)
Textiles – textile products, with leather & fur items (HS 41–43, 50–63)
Footwear, Headgear – footwear and headgear articles (HS 64 – 67)
Metals, Articles – base metals & articles of base metal (HS 72 – 83)
Machinery, Electrical – machinery and electrical products (HS 84 – 85)
Transportation – transportation equipment (HS 86 – 89)
Miscellaneous Manufacturing – miscellaneous manufactured articles, including
cameras, clocks, toys, musical instruments, and furniture (HS 90–92, 94–96)
Omitted3 – arms (HS 93), antiques (HS 97), special categories (HS 98–99)

For ordinary exports in Tables 3 and 4, the largest dollar increase in exports is in textiles,
which increased from about $14 billion to $108 billion over 1992 – 2006, with most of the
growth taking place subsequent to China’s membership in the World Trade Organization (WTO)

3

The trade omitted from Tables 3 – 10 is less than one percent of the total value in each table. Exports of antiques
may be under-reported to evade controls on such goods. See Fisman and Wei (forthcoming) for evidence of underreporting on exports by China and other countries to the United States.

5
at the end of 2001, when the country could begin to enjoy the benefit of the end of the Multifiber
Arrangement and the Agreement on Textile and Clothing. This is a subject studied in the chapter
by Brambilla, Khandelwal and Schott. By 2006, the other largest export industries are machinery
and electrical ($76 billion), metals and articles of metal ($65 billion), chemicals and plastics ($40
billion), minerals and wood ($39 billion) and miscellaneous manufacturing ($32 billion), which
includes toys. Note that Chinese food and animal products exports continued to grow in absolute
value after its membership in the WTO in 2001, in spite of the fear that its agriculture could be
decimated by foreign competition once its tariff and quota protection was reduced. The reason
behind the agricultural expansion is analyzed in the chapter by Huang, Liu, Martin and Rozelle.
When measured by the share of ordinary exports, textiles has a declining share, as do the
resource-based industries of minerals and woods and animals and foods, despite a rising nominal
value of exports in each case. Conversely, the greatest increase in export shares are for the
machinery and electrical industry, which triples from 6% to 18% of exports over 1992 – 2006;
and metals and articles of metal, which doubles from 6% to 12% of exports over 1992 – 2004,
and then to 16% by 2006. Overall, ordinary exports are more diversified across industries than
the pattern seen in processing exports, shown in Tables 5 and 6.
For processing exports, machinery and electrical products experienced phenomenal
growth, from $9 to $323 billion over the period, or from 22% to 63% of the total value.
Telecommunications equipment, a subset of machinery and electrical products, is one example of
a processing export that has experienced very substantial growth. Besides machinery and
electrical, most other categories of processing exports experience a growth in their value of
roughly ten times over the 14 years, so their shares stay roughly constant. The two most
significant exceptions are textiles and footwear and headgear, whose combined exports expand

6
from $17 billion to $48 billion, so their combined share falls substantially from 43% to 10%. (In
addition, miscellaneous manufacturing has a declining share). While these traditional export
industries still expand in dollar terms, it is at a rate slower than the total for processing exports,
and much slower than the more technologically advanced products in the machinery and
electrical industry. These industry trends in processing exports are studied in the first two
chapters in the volume, by Amiti and Freund and by Wang and Wei.
Turning to ordinary imports, in Tables 7 and 8, these show the highest value and growth
in minerals and woods: imports of those products rise from $5 billion to $118 billion, and its
import share more than doubles from 16% to 35%. These imports are likely used for construction
in China, as well as intermediate inputs needed in other industries. Their rising value and share
are indicative of the pressure exerted by China on world markets for such construction and
investment materials. Most other categories of imports have roughly constant shares, with import
values rising roughly six or seven times over the 14 years.
Finally, in Tables 9 and 10 we report the values and shares for processing imports by
major industries. Such imports are brought into the country duty-free, and must be incorporated
into goods that are subsequently exported. Often, the major industries of the import and export
products are the same. So it is not surprising to see that a rapid growth in the value and share of
processing imports within the machinery and electrical industry, which mirrors its very rapid
growth in processing exports. Conversely, textiles also has a falling share (though rising value),
which again is similar to what we found for processing exports of those products. Besides those
two cases, most other industries in Table 10 have constant or slightly declining shares. The
exception is miscellaneous manufacturing, whose share of processing imports doubles from 6%
to 12%. Overall, the trends we see in processing imports will be determined by the production of

7
processing exports, and the difference between these two categories of trade indicates the value
added in processing activities. Because processing exports rely on imports, the value added in
this activity is less than for ordinary exports or domestic production. This difference in value
added and in the employment created by processing versus ordinary trade is studied in the
chapter by Feenstra and Hong.

The Microstructure of Chinese Trade
The volume begins with several chapters that take a detailed look at the microeconomic
structure of Chinese trade, by which we mean the details of how China’s exports compare with
other countries in terms of product quality and variety, firm ownership, contractual trade, and the
impact of government policies.
From trade statistics, a striking feature about Chinese exports is its apparent similarity to
exports by the United States, Japan, and Europe, where this similarity appears to be increasing
over time. For example, during the period from 1996 to 2005, the fraction of HS 6-digit product
lines exported (by at least US$ 1 million) by both the high-income countries and China rose from
71.3% to 86.3%. This is a surprising finding, since China’s factor endowments, with a vast pool
of cheap labor, is not the same as those of the high-income countries. Both Rodrik (2006) and
Schott (2008) document this apparent rise in sophistication in China’s exports. If China has truly
managed to export higher quality products than their endowment would imply, this could
represent competitive pressure on firms in the developed world outside traditional laborintensive sectors.
The first chapter in the volume, by Amiti and Freund, challenges the findings of the
existing literature on the product quality and variety of China’s exports. They begin by noting
that while Broda and Weinstein (2006) find that China was the largest contributor to growth in

8
U.S. varieties, most of that growth was in the early (1972 – 1988) period. Furthermore, while
Schott (2008) and Rodrik (2008) both argue that China’s exports are in high-quality sectors,
more typical of a highly-developed country, that conclusion does not take into account the large
amount of processing exports in sectors that may be labeled as high-tech industries.
Since 1992, Amiti and Freund find a substantial reallocation of China’s exports away
from apparel, textiles, footwear and miscellaneous manufacturing (including toys), and towards
electrical machinery, office machines (which includes computers) and telecommunications. But
these are precisely the sectors that rely most heavily on processing trade. That fact that China
exports rose in these sectors means that its skill-content of exports also rose, making it appear
closer to the export structure of a highly-developed country. But that effect vanishes when
processing trade is omitted. In that case, there was no change in the average skill intensity of
China manufacturing exports. Rather, it was a rising skill intensity of processing imports that
appears to explain the same change for processing exports, but not for the rest of exports. Note
that processing trade is disproportionately located in government policy zones. The next chapter
by Wang and Wei suggests that, once a separate policy zone effect on export sophistication is
accounted for, the processing trade effect only shows up in the form of a high unit value within a
product category.
Wang and Wei uses more detailed micro data than that of the previous chapter to study
the factors behind this apparent rise in sophistication. As suggested in the chapter by Amiti and
Freund, this phenomenon could be nothing but a statistical mirage due to processing trade. For
example, while both the United States and China may export notebook computers, the Chinese
producers may have to rely more on importing the most sophisticated components, such as
processors (CPUs) made by Intel or ADM in the United States. In such a case, the Chinese

9
producers could specialize in the unsophisticated stage of production, even though the final
product is classified as sophisticated when it shows up at the customs. If one were able to
classify a product further into its components, China and developed countries might be found to
produce different components. In this case, they would not compete directly with each other. So
under this scenario, there is very little for the developed countries to worry about.4
On the other hand, the Chinese authorities at both the regional and central levels, have
been actively promoting quality upgrades in China’s product structure through tax and other
policy incentives. A particular manifestation of these incentives is the proliferation of economic
and technological development zones, high-tech industrial zones, and export processing zones
around the country. Their collective share in China’s exports rose from less than 6% in 1995 to
about 25% by 2005. These policy incentives could increase the sophistication of China’s exports,
though they are unlikely to be efficient (unless learning by doing confers a significant positive
externality). If policy is the primary driver for rising sophistication (rather than the mis­
measurement induced by processing trade) then China may indeed represent a more direct
competition with producers in developed countries.
Foreign-invested firms in China straddle these two explanations. The share of China’s
total exports produced by wholly foreign-owned firms and Sino-foreign joint ventures has risen
steadily over time, from about 31% in 1995 to more than 58% by 2005. These foreign-invested
firms may choose to produce and export much more sophisticated products than would
indigenous Chinese firms. In this scenario, while China-made products may compete with those
from developed countries, the profits from such activities go to the GNPs of developed countries.
Of course, the presence of foreign firms may help indirectly to raise the sophistication of Chinese
4

Koopman, Wang and Wei (2008) find that the share of domestic value in Chinese exports is only on the order of
50%, and the share is lower in sectors that are normally labeled as sophisticated such as telecommunication
equipment, and in exports by foreign invested firms.

10
exports through various spillovers to domestic firms. These three possible scenarios can
reinforce each other. For example, a foreign-invested firm may engage in processing trade while
located in a high-tech zone.
Taking into account all these possibilities, Wang and Wei report evidence that neither
processing trade nor foreign invested firms play the key role in generating the increased overlap
in the structure of exports by China and the high-income countries. Instead, improvements in
human capital and government policies in the form of tax-favored high-tech zones appear to
contribute most to the rising sophistication of China’s exports. Since most processing trade takes
place inside an incentive zone, it is not easy to identify the separate roles of processing trade and
government incentives without the kind of detailed micro data used in this chapter. By explicitly
analyzing the independent role of government policies in the form of high-tech and other
incentive zones, this chapter goes beyond the analysis of Amiti and Freund.
An analysis of unit values in trade by Wang and Wei adds further insights. Processing
trade is positively associated with higher unit values. In the absence of data on value added from
imported inputs versus domestic inputs, it is difficult to say whether processing trade has
generated any skill upgrading for China. However, after controlling for processing trade, exports
by foreign-invested firms tend systematically to have higher unit values, suggesting that they
produce higher-end product varieties (beyond promoting processing exports). High-tech zones
and other policy zones set up by the government are likewise associated with higher unit values
(beyond promoting processing trade). Therefore, both foreign investment and government policy
zones have helped to raise product sophistication, but through somewhat different channels.
For the range of export varieties, or the extensive margin of trade, Amiti and Freund find
that its growth over the 1997 – 2005 period has been surprisingly modest. Depending on whether

11
they focus on China’s exports to the world or to the U.S., and on which country’s data are used,
they find that the growth in exports due to expanding variety cannot explain more than onequarter of the overall export growth. That means that the remaining three-quarters or more of the
export growth over the decade is explained by the intensive margin, i.e. rising exports in product
categories that China was exporting all along. We should expect this growth in the intensive
margin bring a drop in prices for imports of China’s trading partners, which they confirm for the
U.S.: over 1997 – 2005, they find that average export prices from China to the U.S. fell by 1.5%
per year, whereas prices from the rest of the world to the U.S. rose by 0.4% per year.
Falling prices from China is a terms of trade gain for the countries importing these goods,
but poses a challenge to the other countries exporting such goods on international markets. The
next two chapters in the volume investigate the impact that China’s growing trade has had on its
trading partners and other exporters, both in the Asia region and beyond.
Harrigan and Deng adopt a simple version of the Ricardian model with stochastic
technologies, due to Eaton and Kortum (2002). In that framework, the market share achieved by
each country in their trading partners will depend on that country’s size, technical capability, and
transport costs to its partners. An improvement in China’s technical capability increases the
market share in partner countries by an amount that is rising in its initial market share: China
gains the most in those markets that it already serves most strongly. Likewise, other exporting
countries lose the most in those market already served by China. Harrigan and Deng find some
support for this hypothesis for several of China’s neighbors – South Korea, Taiwan, and Japan –
in their sales to China’s top 20 markets.
Harrigan and Deng further investigate how China’s exports to nearby versus distant
markets vary with weight and transportation mode. They confirm a version of the “Washington

12
apples” hypothesis, whereby China’s export prices of goods net of transport costs rise to more
distant markets: goods shipped farther are higher quality, or of higher value relative to weight.
The mode of transport also depends on weight, and in theory, heavy goods should only be sold in
nearby markets and air transport only used for distant markets. Interestingly, they find that air
transport from China is used predominantly by private and foreign firms, not the state-owned or
collectives, and primarily for their shipments of processing exports. That finding is consistent
with a high value of time being placed on processing trade (Harrigan, 2006).
Hanson and Robertson also investigate the impact of China’s growing trade on other
exporters, and consider 10 developing countries that are similar to China in their share of
manufacturing in GDP and exports: Hungary, Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan, the Philippines,
Poland, Romania, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Turkey.5 They adopt the conventional “gravity”
specification of international trade flows, whereby exports in a sector depend on the range of
products in that sector, production costs, partner GDP, and the country’s distance (and hence
trade costs) to its partners. As China grows, its export sales will divert demand away from other
exporters selling to the same markets. In the gravity equation, this potential diversion is captured
by the “supply capacity” of China, which in turn should reflect the range of products it exports
and its production costs. Hanson and Robertson consider a counter-factual exercise where the
“supply capacity” for China is held constant at its 1995 estimated value, and then project the
increase in exports for the 10 other developing countries selling to a large set of importers in
2005. That is, they are using the gravity equation to estimate how the exports of the 10
developing countries would have evolved had China not grown over 1995 – 2005.

5

India to also similar to China in its manufacturing share of GDP and exports, but Hanson and Robertson omit that
country due to its own strong growth in recent years.

13
In their results, Hanson and Robertson find a modest impact of China on the competing
exporters. For all manufacturing industries, the counterfactual difference in export demand in
2005 does not exceed 2.8%, for the Philippines, and could be as low as 0.2%, for Mexico.6 The
impacts are somewhat larger when excluding all resource industries, or when focusing on
particular manufacturing industries. In the combined group of apparel, footwear, electronics and
toys, for example, the increase in exports sales for several countries (Pakistan, Poland and
Romania) is about 5%; followed by 4% for Mexico; 3% for Turkey; and about 2% for Hungary,
Malaysia, the Philippines, and Thailand.7 One reason that these estimates are modest in size is
that the counterfactual exercise whereby China’s “supply capacity” is held constant is limiting
the growth in the range of products exported from China, and limiting the change with its
production costs. From the chapter by Amiti and Freund, we know that the extensive margin of
China’s exports did not rise that much over 1997 – 2005. The counterfactual exercise used by
Hanson and Robertson allows for the intensive margin China’s export to grow in response to
higher import demand or lower tariffs, but holds constant the extensive margin of exports as well
as production costs. But since the extensive margin did not rise that much over 1997 – 2005, this
counterfactual still allows for substantial growth in Chinese exports relative to what actually
happened. This helps to understand why the counterfactual growth in export sales by other
developing countries is not that large.

The Macroeconomic Implications of China’s Trade
The second set of chapters shifts the focus to the macroeconomic consequences of
China’s trade. There is no doubt that the boom in China’s exports during the past decades is large

6

Table 6, column (1). This range of estimates ignores Sri Lanka, which is found to benefit from China’s growth,
and therefore exports less in the counterfactual exercise where China’s supply capacity is held constant.
7
Table 6, column (7)

14
enough to have significant impacts on its domestic employment and production, as well as on the
price levels of its trading partners and pressure for exchange rate adjustment. The big
macroeconomic question is the sustainability of the current international equilibrium, whereby
China (and other countries) are financing the current account deficits of the United States (and
some other countries). In a series of papers, Dooley et al (2003, 2004a,b,c) argue that China is
willing to finance the current account deficits of the U.S. because it generates urban employment
there. In their view, this system is sustainable so long as expanding exports continue to generate
employment gains in China, and they suggest these desired gains are on the order of 10–12
million persons per year, with about 30% of that coming from export growth. Feenstra and Hong
investigate whether such employment increases have actually occurred in China due to export
growth, relying on input-output analysis to quantify the link between exports and employment.
Like other chapters in the volume, Feenstra and Hong make the distinction between
processing and ordinary (i.e. non-processing) exports. Processing exports cannot be expected to
generate the same employment gains as ordinary exports, particularly when we take into account
the direct plus indirect use of labor in each industry: the indirect use comes from labor used to
produce the intermediate inputs used in exports. Static estimates of the employment gains
generated from $1,000 of exports are about 0.44 person-years for ordinary exports and 0.13
person-years for processing exports, for 2000. But applying these coefficients to the very large
increase in exports since 1997 vastly overstates the actual employment gains, by an order of
magnitude or more. In other words, the static estimates of employment gains from the inputoutput tables are unreliable as predictors of future employment growth. Feenstra and Hong argue
this finding is due to technological change as well as the shifting composition of industries:

15
exports have shifted toward industries with high labor productivity, implying lower employment
gains from any given increase in exports.
Making corrections for the shifting composition of industries, as well as for technological
change (proxied by the growth in wages), the predictions from the input-output analysis can
match the actual employment growth more closely. Feenstra and Hong find that the predictions
of Dooley et al (2003, 2004a,b,c) are quite close to what occurred in China: employment grew
by 7.5–8 million per year over 1997–2002, with export growth explaining about 30% of that
increase, and the other employment gains coming from non-traded goods like construction.
Surprisingly, the domestic demand for traded goods did not add anything to employment over
this period: the increase in demand was offset by productivity growth, leading to negligible job
gains from domestic demand for tradable. Exports grew much faster over the 2000-2005 period,
and so did domestic demand, though the breakdown between nontraded and traded goods is not
available. Feenstra concludes that exports have become increasingly important in stimulating
employment in China, but that the same gains could be obtained from growth in domestic
demand, especially for tradable goods, which has been stagnant until at least 2002.
The macroeconomic consequences of China’s growth on its second-largest trading
partner – Japan – are the focus of the chapter by Broda and Weinstein. They begin with a
quotation from the Ministry of Finance in Japan, drawn from a widely-read editorial in the
Financial Times, arguing that China and other East Asian countries bring a “deflationary force”
in the global economy, due to their high “supply capacity.” The words used here mirror the
discussion of China’s “supply capacity” in the chapter by Hanson and Robertson. But in this case
the officials in Japan are not worried about the impact of China’s rising export sales on other
exports of other developing countries; rather, they are concerned about the impact of low prices

16
from China on Japan itself. China’s share of imports in Japan rose starting in 1990, and the U.S.
share fell from 1998. At the same time, from 1992 to 2002 the import price index for Japan fell.
This coincidence of events has led officials in Japan to believe that the rising imports from China
have contributed to deflation.
Broda and Weinstein argue that this belief is misplaced, and in fact, that the fall in import
prices is due more to technical issue of the construction of the import price index than to any
deflationary pressures from China. When adopting the same formula that is used for the
consumer price index, import prices rise instead; the same is true when using superlative
formulas (the Tornqvist or Fisher Ideal indexes) constructed over import unit-values.
Furthermore, statistical analysis shows that the unit-values from China did not fall faster than
those from countries exporting to Japan (though the Chinese unit-values are lower). Broda and
Weinstein find, however, that the quality and variety of Chinese exports to Japan rose
considerably, but even these effects have only a very small impact on Japanese deflation.
As China’s trade surplus explodes in recent years, the role of Chinese exchange rate in
generating this surplus has become an intense subject of debate. In particular, has China’s
currency been kept artificially low to give its exporters a competitive edge? Would Chinese trade
adjust in a responsive way to an RMB appreciation? In Chapter 8, Cheung, Chinn, and Fujii
provide an analysis of these issues. Their chapter has two parts. First, they assess whether the
Chinese real exchange rate is consistent with long run equilibrium by casting the question in a
setting of a cross-country comparison. Second, they estimate the elasticities of China’s trade to
real exchange rate on both a multilateral and a bilateral (i.e., vis-à-vis the United States) basis.
When assessing the level of real exchange rate, Cheung, Chinn and Fujii’s most
important claim is that there is a distinction between finding undervaluation and proving

17
undervaluation. In terms of point estimates, the Chinese currency is shown to be substantially
undervalued from a variety of specifications, sometimes on the order of 50%. However, none of
the point estimates is obtained with much precision. The estimates are typically within two
standard deviations from the regression line (conditional mean). In other words, despite the large
value of the point estimates, one cannot reject statistically the null hypothesis that there is no
undervaluation of the Chinese currency. This does not prove there is no undervaluation, because
one equally cannot reject statistically the hypothesis that there is a 50% undervaluation. What
Cheung, Chinn, and Fujii show is that, given the nature of the noise in the relationship between
exchange rates and other variables, there is considerable amount of uncertainty associated with
the battery of statistical tools they use. Perhaps future development of statistical tools would
allow one to make more precise statements. Frankel, in discussing this chapter, argue that
Cheung, Chinn and Fujii might be overly conservative in acknowledging a lack of precision of
the estimates. If several different procedures all point to the same conclusion of an RMB
undervaluation, perhaps the uncertainty about this conclusion is smaller than each of the
procedures taken alone.
In the second part of the chapter, Cheung, Chinn and Fujii examine whether and how
Chinese trade flows respond to its exchange rate (holding constant other determinants of trade).
Economic theory would predict that when the RMB appreciates, Chinese exports are likely to
decline, and its imports are like to increase. While Cheung, Chinn and Fujii confirm the effect on
the exports in the data, they find it difficult to corroborate the predicted effect on imports. In fact,
the imports appear to decline also in response to an RMB appreciation. They try a number of
fixes, such as separating processing imports from ordinary imports and adding cumulative FDI as
a control variable. These modifications do not change the estimated relationship on the import

18
side. A likely remedy in the future is to use much more disaggregated trade data as in some of
the other chapters in this volume.

Sectoral Issues and Trade Policies
The third set of chapters in the volume investigates various important sector-level issues.
It begins by examining the use of “non-traditional” trade protectionist tools, in particular,
antidumping investigations, both against China and by China. This is followed by a chapter that
reflects on the country’s experience under the Multifiber Agreement (MFA) and the Agreement
on Textile and Clothing (ATC). China’s agricultural trade reform and rural prosperity is the
subject of the third chapter, and an investigation into the relationship between China’s trade and
the environment concludes this section.
On December 1, 2001, China became a full-fledged member of the World Trade
Organization (WTO), after an arduous 14-year period of negotiations with existing members of
the GATT/WTO. Because of China’s size, and its rising share in world trade, its share in
international trade disputes naturally increases over time, and in fact at a pace that is more than
proportional to the growth of its share in world trade. China’s WTO membership makes many
policy makers and economists anxious about whether the WTO’s relatively new dispute
settlement mechanism could be stretched beyond its capacity.
Using several newly compiled data sets, Bown provides a rich and systematic look at the
incidence and characteristics of trade disputes involving China since its WTO membership. The
discussion is placed in a comparative framework: how discriminatory treatment against China by
other countries has evolved as compared to the period prior to its membership, and how China’s
own use of antidumping measures compares to their use by other countries.

19
Bown reports a number of interesting findings. Antidumping is one of the increasingly
popular tools of protectionism used by countries around the world, in part because of the success
of the GATT and the WTO in achieving negotiated reductions in tariff rates. Before China
acquired its membership in the WTO in December 2001, its exporters faced substantial
discriminatory treatment relative to other exporting countries during 1995-2001: Chinese
exporters were more likely to face antidumping charges than exporters from most other countries,
relative to the volume of their exports. For example, while Chinese exports accounted for only
8% of the US imports, its share in US antidumping investigations was 13%. Similarly, while its
share in the European Union’s imports was only 6%, its share in the EU antidumping
investigations was 14%. We do not know from the data whether Chinese exporters were actually
dumping more that other producers. But because China was defined as a non-market economy,
these importing countries used benchmark cost calculations that were biased towards finding
dumping by Chinese producers. Partly as a result of this, antidumping cases against Chinese
exporters were three to four times more likely to be successful than those against other producers.
Some of the “new” countries using antidumping tools were even more aggressive. For example,
Argentina and Brazil targeted 21% and 16%, respectively, of all of their antidumping cases
against China, even though China only accounted for 4% and 2%, respectively, of their import
shares.
When China was negotiating its entry into the GATT/WTO during 1991-2001, one might
hypothesize that China’s trading partners may strategically target antidumping cases in sectors in
which China had higher tariffs, as a way to pressure China to increase the scope of its own trade
liberalization. If this is true, it could give a relatively benign interpretation. Bown formally tests
this hypothesis but finds no support in the data. In other words, it is unlikely that China’s trading

20
partners employed antidumping investigations systematically as a tool to encourage China to
undertake bigger trade liberalizations in the corresponding sectors.
After 2001, the year China joined the WTO, other countries appear to have increased
their actions against Chinese exports, including the use of China safeguards. For example, both
the United States and the European Union have increased the share of Chinese exporters in their
overall antidumping investigations against foreign producers. Antidumping, tariff barriers and
other trade protection tools are substitutes. Because the Chinese membership in the WTO has
placed new limitations on the use of other more traditional protectionist tools, and because
antidumping cases against China could still invoke the non-market economy clause for the
purpose of calculating exporters’ costs, it is perhaps not surprising to see the rise of antidumping
cases against China. Interestingly, although Chinese textile and garment exports were growing at
a phenomenal rate, its trading partners have not raised the frequency of using the antidumping
tool against the Chinese in this sector. Part of the reason is that they could use China-specific
“special safeguards” to directly impose quantitative restrictions on Chinese exports, as discussed
in the next chapter.
Bown then turns to examining China’s own use of antidumping investigations against
exporters from other countries. Ironically, China had no antidumping and safeguard provisions
prior to mid-1990s. They were imported by China as part of “international best practices”. It
launched its first antidumping case in 1997 (one of the editors of this volume was a consultant on
behalf of the Canadian and US exporters involved in this case), and its first safeguard
investigation in 2002. China has since become one of the top five users of antidumping measures
in the world. Just as for its trading partners, the use of antidumping is a substitute for other
protectionist instruments for China. While its WTO accession obligations require it to

21
progressively reduce tariff rates across the board, antidumping appears increasingly more
attractive to import competing firms seeking government relief. In the data, Bown finds that
industries that had the biggest tariff reductions during the WTO accession are more likely to seek
antidumping measures against foreign producers in subsequent years.
Around the time that China’s WTO membership took effect, some observers were
worried that China will be involved in a huge number of trade disputes both as a complainant
(plaintiff) and as a respondent (defendant). This could then pose the risk of overwhelming and
even paralyzing the WTO dispute settlement mechanism (as distinct from the antidumping
regulations). So far, this has not turned out to be case. China has not been an active participant in
WTO litigations against other countries. Similarly, it has been relatively infrequently on the
defensive side in WTO litigations. However, the United States has brought several new cases
against China in 2008. It will be interesting to see if this signals a change in strategy in general
by China’s trading partners. Moreover, China has signed up as an “interested third party” in
cases involving other complainant and respondent countries. As of 2006, China has been very
active in 40 different disputes in this indirect capacity. One possible interpretation is that China
is actively learning about the dispute settlement mechanism, and preparing to become a more
active initiator of cases against other countries (as well as a respondent in cases against itself). In
this sense, the past may not be a reliable predictor of the future.
The specific trade policies of the textile and apparel industry are discussed in the next
chapter, by Brambilla, Khandelwal and Schott. Under the GATT, exports of textiles and apparel
to developed countries were restricted under the Multifiber Arrangement (MFA), renamed as the
Agreement on Textiles and Clothing (ACT) under the WTO. These quotas were eliminated in
2005 at which time exports from China surged. As a result, special “safeguard” quotas were re­

22
imposed against Chinese exports in both the United States and Europe. While such safeguard
quotas are normally not permitted under the WTO, a special provision agreed to upon China’s
entry to the WTO in 2001 allowed for their use in textiles and apparel.
Brambilla, Khandelwal and Schott document the evolution of China’s export in textiles
and apparel since before its accession to the WTO. They argue that China had faced quotas that
were more binding than for many other exporters. For example, they find that the “fill rate” in
quota categories, which equals exports divided by the base quota, was 88% for China, similar to
that in Bangladesh, Cambodia, India, Indonesia and Pakistan. But all other countries had fill rates
that were lower, indicating that the quotas were less binding. In addition, China was not eligible
for any growth in its quotas, as most other countries enjoyed.
All that changed when China joined the WTO in 2001. Then it could benefit from the
phased reduction in quota levels that other exporters had already experienced. Phase III of the
reduction in quotas occurred in 2002, which was the first time that China was eligible for the
reductions since joining the WTO. China’s overall textile and apparel exports increased by 306%
that year, which amounted to nearly three-quarters of the total export increase from all countries.
By comparison, in 2005, China’s exports increased by 271%, while global exports fell slightly.
In both years, most of the increase in Chinese exports occurred in the intensive margin (selling
more within existing categories of goods) rather than the extensive margin. Furthermore, they
find some evidence that the increase in exports was accompanied by quality downgrading, as
expected when quotas expire.
Thus, the growth in Chinese exports really dates from 2001, and reflects past treatment
under the MFA and ACT that put China in a disadvantaged position. From this perspective, the
surge in China’s textiles and apparel exports after the MFA/ACT expired in 2005 was not

23
surprising. Countries that were impacted most by the growth in Chinese exports in 2005 include
those in Central America, Oceania, East Asia, and Sub-Sahara Africa. The largest South Asian
exporters – Bangladesh, India and Pakistan – were not impacted to the same degree. The fact that
both the United States and Europe re-imposed special safeguard quotas on Chinese exports in
2006 will limit its future export growth to those developed countries (while the safeguards are
due to expire in 2008, they may be renewed up to 2013). That may allow other countries to re­
establish their export position. But for these other developing countries exporting textiles and
apparel, the more important trend for the future will be China’s shift away from labor-intensive
goods and towards more capital and skill-intensive industries. Already, China’s former
production in textiles and apparel is shifting to lower-wage countries, such as Vietnam, which
joined the WTO in 2007. For these reasons, fears that China will permanently displace other
exporters of textiles and apparel are probably misplaced.
Under its WTO accession, China had to agree to radical reductions in agricultural tariffs.
As the pre-WTO tariff levels were high on many products, most economists and other observers
predicted that agriculture was going to be one area in which Chinese producers were not going to
be competitive, so that rural income was going to fall and rural poverty was likely to rise after
the accession. Fortunately for Chinese rural households, these predictions did not turn out to be
true. In fact, agricultural growth continued, which poses a puzzle. Chapter 11 by Huang, Liu,
Martin, and Rozelle provides an answer to this puzzle.
China agreed to major reductions in agricultural tariffs as a part of the conditions for
gaining the WTO membership, and it followed through on these liberalization promises after the
accession, so the phrase-in were completed by 2005 as scheduled. The key resolution to the
puzzle is to recognize that the high pre-accession tariff protection was largely offset by a long list

24
of policy distortions such as a high agricultural tax and a low state mandatory procurement price,
that generally were unfavorable to rural households and agricultural production. As a result of
the domestic policy distortions, the net rate of protection before the WTO membership was in
fact negative for many crops. Coinciding with the WTO accession, the Chinese have undertaken
numerous domestic reforms that gradually remove these anti-agricultural policy distortions. The
net effect of trade and domestic policy reforms is a positive boost to many agricultural producers.
The basic tool that Huang et al use to gauge the net effect of policies is the Nominal Rate
of Assistance (NRA), which is based on a comparison between domestic prices of agricultural
products and corresponding international prices. The NRA was negative for farmers that
produce rice and many other import-competing commodities until around 1995. The NRA
continued to improve even after the WTO accession. In addition to removing discriminatory
policies against agriculture, the Chinese government also invested in the development and
dissemination of agricultural technology which improved farmer’s productivity. Huang, Liu,
Martin and Rozelle give the example of investment in R&D for plant biotechnology; the growth
of government sponsored R&D was 5.5% per year between 1995 and 2000. They report that
China now ranks among the global leaders in agricultural biotechnology, with public spending in
this area second only to the United States. Therefore, in the period leading up to the WTO
accession and in the period since the WTO membership, farmers have gained on net from the
whole package of policy reforms and public investment more than they have lost from the
reductions in agricultural tariffs.
The final chapter in this section, by Dean and Lovely, deals with China’s environment.
Here again, conventional wisdom points towards a very negative prognosis: press reports of the
pollution in China and the cost to human health and both frequent and disheartening. Without

25
questioning that existing pollution levels (i.e. the stock of pollution) in China are very high, Dean
and Lovely argue that a different picture is obtained if one focuses instead on the pollution
intensity of industries (i.e. the flow of pollution) over time. In fact, Chinese industrial emissions
of water pollution (measured by the chemical oxygen demand, or COD), and air pollution
(measured by soot and dust particles) have been declining since 1995, while sulfur dioxide
shows only a small increase. What factor can explain the decline in emissions for three out of
these four pollutants?
Dean and Lovely use the emissions data to calculate the pollution intensity of 33 Chinese
sectors, for 1995 and 2004. Using that information, they can compute whether the decline in
aggregate industrial emissions reflects the same decline at an industry level (a “technique”
effect), or reflects a shift towards cleaner industries (a “composition” effect). They find that the
pollution intensity of production has fallen over time for all four pollutants, and across nearly all
sectors. Thus, there is evidence in favor of a shift towards cleaner production techniques. That
may very well reflect the increasing attention given to environmental regulation by government
agencies in China, though these agencies are still small and underfunded compared to the scale
of the environmental problem.
In addition, Dean and Lovely find that there has been a shift towards cleaner industries in
China. From 1995 to 2004, the water pollution intensity of exports fell by 84%, and the drop in
air pollution intensity is nearly as large. Most of that drop is due to the technique effect rather
than a composition effect, however. By re-weighting the pollution intensities using processing
exports rather than ordinary exports, they find that processing exports are cleaner than ordinary
exports for all four pollutants. In addition, ordinary or processing exports are cleaner than the
respective imports. They then develop a model to assess the role that production fragmentation

26
through processing trade plays in explaining the pollution intensity of Chinese trade, and find
empirical support for the hypotheses arising from the model.

Foreign Investment and Trade
Foreign direct investment is another area in which there has been substantial changes in
China. The country metamorphosed from being closed to foreign investment in the 1970s to now
being the single largest developing country host of foreign direct investment. Foreign invested
firms are an important of China’s trade story, accounting for more than half of its total exports
and imports. Moreover, in recent years, China’s modest but increasing outward direct investment
has started to attract attention and sometimes anxiety. The last set of chapters examines various
issues with regard to foreign direct investment.
The chapter by Blonigen and Ma examines the degree to which foreign invested firms
have spurred the growth of domestic Chinese firms. Do Chinese firms catch up with foreign
invested firms in terms of export volume, product composition and product quality? Blonigan
and Ma examine these questions systematically by utilizing the same detailed data at the level of
product, region, firm ownership type (as well as other dimensions).
Over the last twenty years, as the Chinese trade volume rises, the share of exports by state
owned firms has declined steadily, while the share accounted for by foreign invested firms has
been rising steadily. Blonigen and Ma employ two approaches to investigate this topic for the
period 1997-2005. First, within a typical 6-digit product code, they ask whether Chinese firms
take up an increasing big share. Second, for a given product, they ask whether the quality gap
between the variety produced by domestic Chinese firms and that by foreign invested firms
narrows over time.

27
One might guess the answer to the first question from the aggregate data: if the share in
total exports by FIEs has been rising, it is also likely to be on an upward trend within a product
code, on average. This indeed turns out to be true, but Blonigen and Ma do not stop here. They
also ask which factors could either speed up or slow down the expansion of export shares by
FIEs across products, by exploring cross-product variations in policies that may encourage
technological transfers, and variables that may proxy the degree of competition between FIEs
and Chinese firms.
The answer to the second question is “not really.” That is, there is no evidence of a steady
narrowing in export quality (measured by difference in unit values) between FIEs and domestic
firms. By this metric, Chinese firms appear to be “falling behind,” rather than “catching up,” as
the unit values of their exports appear to become progressively lower relative to the unit value of
the same product produced by FIEs.
The government policies toward FDI are not neutral across sectors. FDI in various sectors
can be placed in three categories: (a) encouraged, (b) neutral, and (c) restricted. In the
“encouraged” sectors, while there is no reduction in the quality gap between domestic and
foreign firms, the share by domestic firms in those sectors’ total exports actually declined. This
suggests that the sector-biased FDI encouragement policies do not systematically help domestic
firms to catch up with FIEs, at least not by the criteria that Blonigen and Ma use.
The chapter by Branstetter and Foley sets out to dispel four commonly held perceptions
regarding US FDI in China. The first question: Is the U.S. FDI in China large? The answer is no.
This can be understood from two levels. First, U.S. multinational firms’ investment in China is
only a small fraction of their total overseas investment. In 2004, for example, their China
operation’s shares in their total overseas affiliate sales and assets were mere 1.9% and 0.7%,

28
respectively. Second, U.S. FDI in China as a share of China’s total inward FDI is also small. In
fact, the most important source “country” for FDI in China is Hong Kong. However, this does
not mean that FDI is unimportant for China. As we have previously noted, China is among the
world’s top recipient of FDI.
The second question: Is U.S. FDI in China heavily export-oriented? The answer from
Branstetter and Foley is no. They use data on benchmark surveys of US multinational firms, and
compute sales to local market versus exports. They found no evidence that US affiliates in China
are more export oriented than elsewhere. The notion that US firms invest in China and then sell
their products back to the U.S. en mass does not turn out to be supported by a careful look at the
data. Note, however, the authors are not rejecting the possibility that there could be a good deal
of indirect exports by U.S. affiliates in China back to the U.S. For example, U.S. affiliates could
sell machineries and other intermediate inputs to local Chinese firms or other unaffiliated FIEs in
China, which in turn may export to the U.S. and other markets. Checking out this possibility
would require data that go beyond what these authors have.
The third question is: does investment by U.S. multinational firms in China displace their
investment in the U.S.? The answer is again no. Branstetter and Foley examine whether a U.S.
firm’s investment in the U.S. tends to contract whenever it expands its investment in China, and
find no evidence supporting this notion. In fact, firms that increase employment in China also
appear to increase, not decrease, employment in other locations. This suggests that investment in
China tends to be a complement to investment in the U.S. and other locations.
Finally, the fourth question is: are U.S. firms aggressively engaging R&D in China? At a
first glance, the answer may be yes. By the end of 2004, multinational firms had established
more than 700 R&D centers in China. Global companies like Microsoft make repeated

29
statements about engaging world-class research in its China-based R&D centers. But after
examining data on counts of patents registered in the U.S. by multinational firms, including those
with investors who reside in China, Branstetter and Foley conclude that most multinational firms
engage relatively little true cutting-age research in China. Even for Microsoft, China-generated
patents accounts for only 4% of the stock of all its patents (though the China share in its flow of
new patents may be higher and rising). As of now at least, most of the China-based R&D centers
probably focus on customizing technologies developed elsewhere to the Chinese market.
China’s investment in resource-rich countries in Africa and Latin America, and its
attempt to acquire various US companies, have generated attention to its overall outbound FDI.
China’s newly established sovereign wealth fund – the China Investment Corporation – has
further focused the spotlight on its overseas investment activities. The chapter by Cheng and Ma
provides a timely and systematic analysis of China’s outbound FDI during 2003-2006. They
reach a number of interesting findings.
First, in spite of the international attention, China’s outbound FDI is quite small,
accounting for less than 2% of global FDI flow in 2006. Second, while the attention has been
focused on China’s overseas investment in resource sectors, business services turn out to be the
biggest area of its investment. It is possible that overseas business services are an important input
into the Chinese exports. The importance of business services investment by Chinese firms
simply reflects the importance of exports for the Chinese economy. Cheng and Ma caution,
however, that the true sector composition of the Chinese outbound FDI may be different from the
official data as a significant fraction of its outbound FDI is reported to go to tax havens. In all
likelihood, these investment projects wind up elsewhere, but their true destination and sector
composition are not well recorded. Third, the destination country’s GDP (but not income),

30
foreign reserve, and currency appreciation, are all positively related to China’s FDI in that
country.

Conclusions
While Chinese GDP doubles once every eight years, its exports and imports have been
growing at an even more impressive pace, roughly doubling in value once every 3-4 yeas. This
poses both opportunities and challenges for China and for the rest of the world. Magazines and
airport bookstores are filled with publications with sometimes outlandish claims about the causes
and consequences of China’s growing trade in the world. This book, by putting together a group
of prominent empirical trade economists, aims to clarify a number of misconceptions and
enhance our understanding of issues related to China’s trade.
In the pages to follow, readers will find detailed analyses of the microstructure of trade,
the macroeconomic implications, sector-level issues and foreign direct investment. While the
topics are diverse, a common feature is a careful examination of micro data that is conducted
under the guidance of economic theories. Some conventional wisdom is overturned; many new
data patterns are documented. While this volume is unlikely to be the last word on China’s trade,
it hopefully will inspire more follow-up research and contribute to well-informed discussion of
China’s role in world trade.

31
References
China Customs Statistics, various years. [Dataset]. Beijing, China: Customs General
Administration, Statistics Dept. [producer]; Hong Kong, China: CCS (China Customs
Statistics) Information Center [distributor].
Fisman, Raymond, and Shang-Jin Wei, forthcoming, “The Smuggling of Art, and the Art of
Smuggling: Uncovering Illicit Trade in Cultural Property and Antiques,” American
Economic Journal – Applied Economics. An early version appeared as NBER Working
Paper 13446, 2007.
Harrigan, James, 2006, “Airplanes and Comparative Advantage,” NBER Working Paper no.
11688.
Koopman, Robert, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2008, “How Much of Chinese Exports is
Really Made in China? Assessing Domestic Value Added When Processing Trade is
Prevalent,” NBER working paper no. 14109.
Rodrik, Dani, 2006, “What’s so Special about China’s Exports?” China & World Economy,
14(5): 1-19, Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
Schott, Peter, 2008, “The Relative Sophistication of Chinese Exports,” Economic Policy 53,
January, 5 – 49.
Samuelson, Paul, 2002, “Where Ricardo and Mill Rebut and Confirm Arguments of Mainstream
Economists supporting Globalization,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(3),
Summer, 135 – 146.

32

Table 1: China’s Exports and Imports, By Ordinary and Processing Trade
(Billions of U.S, dollars and Share of total value)
Billions of U.S. dollars
Export

Share of total export or import value

Import

Export

Import

Year

Ordinary

Processing

Ordinary

Processing

Ordinary

Processing

Ordinary

Processing

1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

43.7
43.2
61.6
71.4
62.8
78.1
74.2
79.2
105.2
111.9
136.2
182.0
243.6
315.1
416.3

39.6
44.2
57.0
73.7
84.3
99.7
104.4
110.9
137.6
147.4
179.9
241.8
328.0
416.5
510.4

33.6
38.0
35.5
43.4
39.4
39.0
43.7
67.0
100.1
113.5
129.1
187.7
248.2
279.7
333.2

31.5
36.4
47.6
58.4
62.3
70.2
68.6
73.6
92.6
94.0
122.3
162.9
221.7
274.0
321.5

0.51
0.47
0.51
0.48
0.42
0.43
0.40
0.41
0.42
0.42
0.42
0.42
0.41
0.41
0.43

0.47
0.48
0.47
0.50
0.56
0.55
0.57
0.57
0.55
0.55
0.55
0.55
0.55
0.55
0.53

0.42
0.37
0.31
0.33
0.28
0.27
0.31
0.40
0.44
0.47
0.44
0.45
0.44
0.42
0.42

0.39
0.35
0.41
0.44
0.45
0.49
0.49
0.44
0.41
0.39
0.41
0.39
0.39
0.42
0.41

Source: China Customs Statistics (1992-2006)

33

Table 2: China’s Exports and Imports,
by Foreign Invested Enterprises (FIE) and all other firms
(Share of total export or import value)

Share of export or import value in ordinary or processing trade
Export

Import

Year

Ordinary
FIEs
Other

Processing
FIEs
Other

Ordinary
FIEs
Other

Processing
FIEs
Other

1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

0.05
0.09
0.07
0.06
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.16
0.19
0.22
0.23
0.24
0.26
0.27
0.28

0.39
0.48
0.54
0.57
0.63
0.64
0.66
0.67
0.71
0.72
0.75
0.79
0.81
0.83
0.84

0.05
0.06
0.05
0.12
0.17
0.22
0.22
0.25
0.26
0.27
0.27
0.29
0.29
0.29
0.32

0.45
0.53
0.59
0.63
0.67
0.68
0.70
0.72
0.74
0.75
0.77
0.81
0.83
0.84
0.85

0.95
0.91
0.93
0.94
0.88
0.87
0.86
0.84
0.81
0.78
0.77
0.76
0.74
0.73
0.72

0.61
0.52
0.46
0.43
0.37
0.36
0.34
0.33
0.29
0.28
0.25
0.21
0.19
0.17
0.16

Source: China Customs Statistics (1992-2006)

0.95
0.94
0.95
0.88
0.83
0.78
0.78
0.75
0.74
0.73
0.73
0.71
0.71
0.71
0.68

0.55
0.47
0.41
0.37
0.33
0.32
0.30
0.28
0.26
0.25
0.23
0.19
0.17
0.16
0.15

34
Table 3: Ordinary Exports By Major Industries (Billions of U.S. dollars)
Year

Animals,
Food

Minerals,
Wood

Chemicals,
Plastics

Textiles

Footwear,
Headgear

Metals,
Articles

Machinery,
Electrical

Transport

Misc.
Manufact.

1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

9.1
8.0
10.5
10.1
9.6
10.4
10.1
9.7
11.5
11.8
13.3
16.2
16.8
19.9
22.8

7.8
6.9
8.2
11.1
10.5
12.2
10.4
10.4
14.2
15.2
16.5
21.2
27.8
34.4
39.0

3.9
4.1
5.8
8.2
7.6
8.9
8.7
9.2
11.2
12.2
14.4
18.5
24.9
33.0
40.3

13.9
14.9
22.8
22.1
18.1
24.9
22.9
23.9
31.1
32.5
41.3
55.2
67.8
84.1
108.2

0.9
1.1
1.7
2.1
2.0
2.6
2.6
2.8
3.6
4.0
5.0
6.4
8.3
10.8
13.1

2.6
2.4
3.7
6.0
5.0
6.5
6.7
7.4
10.4
10.1
11.8
15.9
30.1
40.5
65.2

2.8
3.0
4.4
6.3
5.1
6.0
6.1
8.4
12.0
14.1
18.9
27.8
39.4
53.6
76.4

0.8
0.6
0.8
1.2
1.0
1.1
1.1
1.5
2.7
3.1
3.6
5.5
8.1
12.0
17.0

1.5
1.8
3.3
4.0
3.6
5.1
5.1
5.7
8.0
8.4
11.0
14.7
19.5
25.4
32.4

Source: China Customs Statistics (1992-2006)

Table 4: Ordinary Exports By Major Industries (Share of Total Value)
Year

Animals,
Food

Minerals,
Wood

Chemicals,
Plastics

Textiles

Footwear,
Headgear

Metals,
Articles

Machinery,
Electrical

Transport

Misc.
Manufact.

1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

0.21
0.18
0.17
0.14
0.15
0.13
0.14
0.12
0.11
0.11
0.10
0.09
0.07
0.06
0.05

0.18
0.16
0.13
0.16
0.17
0.16
0.14
0.13
0.13
0.14
0.12
0.12
0.11
0.11
0.09

0.09
0.10
0.09
0.11
0.12
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.11
0.11
0.11
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10

0.32
0.35
0.37
0.31
0.29
0.32
0.31
0.30
0.30
0.29
0.30
0.30
0.28
0.27
0.26

0.02
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.03

0.06
0.06
0.06
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.10
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.12
0.13
0.16

0.06
0.07
0.07
0.09
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.11
0.11
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.17
0.18

0.02
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.04

0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08

Source: China Customs Statistics (1992-2006)

35
Table 5: Processing Exports By Major Industries (Billions of U.S. dollars)
Year

Animals,
Food

Minerals,
Wood

Chemicals,
Plastics

Textiles

Footwear,
Headgear

Metals,
Articles

Machinery,
Electrical

Transport

Misc.
Manufact.

1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

0.8
0.9
1.9
2.3
2.9
2.9
2.5
2.5
2.7
3.1
3.5
3.7
4.9
5.8
6.6

1.7
1.8
2.5
2.9
3.3
4.2
3.8
4.3
5.5
5.5
6.7
8.0
10.7
14.1
17.0

2.0
2.2
3.0
4.2
4.8
5.7
6.4
6.7
8.0
8.5
9.7
11.7
15.4
20.3
24.7

13.1
13.5
15.7
18.8
21.9
24.0
22.9
22.7
25.0
24.9
24.7
27.3
31.3
33.9
38.4

4.1
5.1
5.6
6.0
6.4
7.2
7.1
6.9
7.1
7.1
7.1
7.6
8.3
9.2
10.0

1.8
2.0
2.9
5.9
5.2
6.7
5.6
5.0
6.0
5.7
6.8
8.5
12.1
14.4
16.1

8.6
10.6
15.2
20.8
25.2
31.4
36.4
42.8
59.5
68.7
93.9
139.7
199.9
258.3
323.4

1.4
1.1
1.8
2.7
3.0
3.9
5.0
4.7
6.1
5.9
6.5
9.6
12.2
15.4
19.9

6.0
6.9
8.4
10.1
11.6
13.6
14.6
15.3
17.8
17.8
20.9
25.3
32.8
44.8
53.6

Source: China Customs Statistics (1992-2006)

Table 6: Processing Exports By Major Industries (Share of Total Value)
Year

Animals,
Food

Minerals,
Wood

Chemicals,
Plastics

Textiles

Footwear,
Headgear

Metals,
Articles

Machinery,
Electrical

Transport

Misc.
Manufact.

1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

0.02
0.02
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01

0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03

0.05
0.05
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05

0.33
0.30
0.28
0.26
0.26
0.24
0.22
0.20
0.18
0.17
0.14
0.11
0.10
0.08
0.08

0.10
0.11
0.10
0.08
0.08
0.07
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.02

0.05
0.05
0.05
0.08
0.06
0.07
0.05
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.03

0.22
0.24
0.27
0.28
0.30
0.31
0.35
0.39
0.43
0.47
0.52
0.58
0.61
0.62
0.63

0.03
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04

0.15
0.16
0.15
0.14
0.14
0.14
0.14
0.14
0.13
0.12
0.12
0.10
0.10
0.11
0.10

Source: China Customs Statistics (1992-2006)

36
Table 7: Ordinary Imports By Major Industries (Billions of U.S. dollars)
Year

Animals,
Food

Minerals,
Wood

Chemicals,
Plastics

Textiles

Footwear,
Headgear

Metals,
Articles

Machinery,
Electrical

Transport

Misc.
Manufact.

1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

3.0
1.8
2.8
5.7
5.5
4.5
4.7
5.4
7.6
7.6
7.8
12.3
17.6
17.2
17.9

5.3
7.2
5.1
5.8
7.5
10.8
9.2
14.3
27.9
26.2
28.4
42.5
69.7
90.1
117.7

6.4
3.8
4.3
6.3
6.5
6.2
7.2
12.2
16.7
18.5
22.0
29.6
40.7
47.4
53.6

1.4
0.5
1.1
1.3
1.0
0.6
0.6
0.9
1.9
2.1
2.5
3.6
5.9
6.3
7.9

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.3

4.2
8.2
4.8
3.5
3.4
3.0
3.4
6.1
8.8
11.0
13.6
22.1
25.1
29.2
26.5

9.3
11.6
13.0
15.8
10.9
10.4
14.5
22.8
29.8
36.3
42.1
58.3
67.0
65.7
77.2

2.8
3.5
3.1
3.3
3.3
2.2
2.6
2.9
3.8
6.4
7.2
11.8
13.0
12.8
19.6

1.2
1.2
1.2
1.6
1.2
1.2
1.5
2.4
3.2
5.2
5.1
7.3
8.9
10.2
12.0

Source: China Customs Statistics (1992-2006)

Table 8: Ordinary Imports By Major Industries (Share of Total Value)
Year

Animals,
Food

Minerals,
Wood

Chemicals,
Plastics

Textiles

Footwear,
Headgear

Metals,
Articles

Machinery,
Electrical

Transport

Misc.
Manufact.

1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

0.09
0.05
0.08
0.13
0.14
0.12
0.11
0.08
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.06
0.05

0.16
0.19
0.14
0.13
0.19
0.28
0.21
0.21
0.28
0.23
0.22
0.23
0.28
0.32
0.35

0.19
0.10
0.12
0.15
0.16
0.16
0.16
0.18
0.17
0.16
0.17
0.16
0.16
0.17
0.16

0.04
0.01
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.12
0.22
0.14
0.08
0.09
0.08
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.10
0.10
0.08

0.28
0.30
0.37
0.36
0.28
0.27
0.33
0.34
0.30
0.32
0.33
0.31
0.27
0.24
0.23

0.08
0.09
0.09
0.08
0.08
0.06
0.06
0.04
0.04
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.05
0.05
0.06

0.04
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04

Source: China Customs Statistics (1992-2006)

37
Table 9: Processing Imports By Major Industries (Billions of U.S. dollars)
Year

Animals,
Food

Minerals,
Wood

Chemicals,
Plastics

Textiles

Footwear,
Headgear

Metals,
Articles

Machinery,
Electrical

Transport

Misc.
Manufact.

1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

0.8
0.9
2.0
2.8
2.0
2.2
1.9
1.4
1.6
1.7
1.9
2.2
2.6
3.2
3.5

3.1
3.5
4.6
5.3
6.1
7.3
6.3
6.3
7.5
6.8
7.8
9.3
13.1
16.5
19.2

5.4
6.3
8.8
10.6
11.3
12.4
13.0
12.8
14.8
14.6
17.8
21.2
26.2
31.5
36.5

9.9
10.7
13.7
16.1
17.5
18.0
15.2
15.0
17.2
17.0
17.3
18.9
21.0
20.9
21.6

0.5
0.5
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.5

3.0
4.2
4.9
6.0
6.1
6.9
7.0
7.5
9.3
8.8
10.3
13.2
18.0
20.8
25.9

6.1
7.5
9.9
13.4
15.1
18.9
21.0
26.1
36.8
39.5
58.6
82.0
113.9
145.1
174.1

0.2
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.4
0.6
0.7

1.9
2.1
2.3
2.8
2.9
3.0
2.8
2.9
3.8
4.0
7.1
14.5
24.7
33.6
37.9

Source: China Customs Statistics (1992-2006)

Table 10: Processing Imports By Major Industries (Share of Total Value)
Year

Animals,
Food

Minerals,
Wood

Chemicals,
Plastics

Textiles

Footwear,
Headgear

Metals,
Articles

Machinery,
Electrical

Transport

Misc.
Manufact.

1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

0.03
0.02
0.04
0.05
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01

0.10
0.10
0.10
0.09
0.10
0.10
0.09
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06

0.17
0.17
0.19
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.19
0.17
0.16
0.16
0.15
0.13
0.12
0.11
0.11

0.32
0.29
0.29
0.28
0.28
0.26
0.22
0.20
0.19
0.18
0.14
0.12
0.09
0.08
0.07

0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.10
0.11
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08

0.19
0.21
0.21
0.23
0.24
0.27
0.31
0.36
0.40
0.42
0.48
0.50
0.51
0.53
0.54

0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.06
0.06
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.06
0.09
0.11
0.12
0.12

Source: China Customs Statistics (1992-2006).

38
Table of Contents for
China’s Growing Role in World Trade
Edited by
Robert C. Feenstra and Shang-Jin Wei
1. Introduction
Robert C. Feenstra and Shang-Jin Wei
Part I. Microstructure of International Trade
2. An Anatomy of China’s Export Growth
Mary Amiti and Caroline Freund
Discussant: Bin Xu
3. The Rising Sophistication of China’s Exports: Assessing the Roles of Processing Trade,
Foreign invested Firms, Human Capital and Government Policies
Zhi Wang and Shang-Jin Wei
Discussant: Galina Hale
4. China’s Local Comparative Advantage
Haiyan Deng and James Harrigan
Discussant: Chong Xiang
5. China and the Manufacturing Exports of Other Developing Countries
Gordon Hanson and Raymond Robertson
Discussant: Irene Brambilla
Part II. Macroeconomic Issues
6. China’s Exports and Employment
Robert Feenstra and Chang Hong
Discussant: Michael Dooley
7. Exporting Deflation? China’s Exports and Japanese Prices
Christian Broda and David Weinstein
Discussant: Joshua Aizenman
8. China’s Current Account and the Exchange Rate
Yin-Wong Cheung, Menzie Chinn and Eiji Fujii
Discussant: Jeffrey Frankel
Part III. Sectoral Issues and Trade Policies
9. China’s WTO Entry: Antidumping, Safeguards, and Dispute Settlement

39
Chad Bown
Discussant: Thomas Prusa
10. China’s Experience under the Multifiber Arrangement (MFA) and the Agreement on Textile
and Clothing (ATC)
Irene Brambilla, Amit Khandelwal and Peter Schott
Discussant: Joseph Francois
11. Agricultural Trade Reform and Rural Prosperity: Lessons from China
Jikun Huang, Yu Liu, Will Martin and Scott Rozelle
Discussant: Kym Anderson
12. Trade Growth, Production Fragmentation, and China’s Environment
Judith Dean and Mary Lovely
Discussant: Arik Levinson
Part IV. Foreign Investment and Trade
13. Please Pass the Catch-up: The Relative Performance of Chinese and Foreign Firms in
Chinese Exports, 1997-2005
Bruce Blonigen and Alyson Ma
Discussant: Raymond Robertson
14. Facts and Fallacy about U.S. FDI in China
Lee Branstetter and C. Fritz Foley
Discussant: Stephen Yeaple
15. China’s Outward FDI: Past and Future
Leonard Cheng and Zihui Ma
Discussant: Nicholas Lardy

