                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            MATERNAL SMOKING AND THE TIMING OF WIC ENROLLMENT

                                       Cristina Yunzal-Butler
                                         Theodore J. Joyce
                                         Andrew D. Racine

                                        Working Paper 14728
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14728


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2009




The research was supported by a grant from the USDA Food and Nutrition Research Program to the
National Bureau of Economic Research (# 59-5000-6-0102). We thank Karen Dalenius from the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for help with the PNSS file and special thanks to WIC Program
administrators in various state offices. These include Najmul Chowdhury (North Carolina), Patrice
Wolfla (Indiana), Nancy Hoffman (Missouri), Penny Roth (Illinois) and Lisa Armstrong (Virginia).
 We would also like to acknowledge input from John Karl Scholz at the University of Wisconsin, Elizabeth
Frazao from the Economic Research Service and Jay Hirschman at the USDA Food and Nutrition
Bureau. All opinions are those of the authors and do not represent those of the various state WIC
programs, the CDC or the USDA.¸ The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Cristina Yunzal-Butler, Theodore J. Joyce, and Andrew D. Racine. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Maternal Smoking and the Timing of WIC Enrollment
Cristina Yunzal-Butler, Theodore J. Joyce, and Andrew D. Racine
NBER Working Paper No. 14728
February 2009
JEL No. I38

                                             ABSTRACT

We investigate the association between the timing of enrollment in the Special Supplemental Nutrition
Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) and smoking among prenatal WIC participants.
We use WIC data from eight states participating in the Pregnancy Nutrition Surveillance System (PNSS).
Women who enroll in WIC in the first trimester of pregnancy are 2.7 percentage points more likely
to be smoking at intake than women who enroll in the third trimester. Among participants who smoked
before pregnancy and at prenatal WIC enrollment, those who enrolled in the first trimester are 4.5
percentage points more likely to quit smoking 3 months before delivery and 3.4 percentage points
more likely to quit by postpartum registration, compared with women who do not enroll in WIC until
the third trimester. Overall, early WIC enrollment is associated with higher quit rates, although changes
are modest when compared to the results from smoking cessation interventions for pregnant women.


Cristina Yunzal-Butler                              Andrew D. Racine
Department of Economics (Alumnus)                   Albert Einstein College of Medicine Children's Hos
Graduate Center, CUNY                               Division of General Pediatrics
365 Fifth Ave, 5th Fl                               1621 Eastchester Road
NY, NY 10016                                        Bronx, NY 10461
cyunzal@gc.cuny.edu                                 and NBER
                                                    aracine@montefiore.org
Theodore J. Joyce
Baruch College
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016-4309
and NBER
Ted_Joyce@baruch.cuny.edu
                                               Introduction


       Tobacco exposure during pregnancy has been recognized as one of the leading

preventable causes of adverse birth outcomes since the Surgeon General’s report of 1964 called

attention to the association between smoking during pregnancy and low birth weight.

Subsequent reports expanded the list of adverse associations to include placental complications,

fetal and perinatal mortality, SIDS, and other effects [1].

       As public awareness of the dangers of tobacco has grown, the number of women who

smoke during pregnancy has declined. In 2004, only 10.2 percent of women smoked during

pregnancy, a 48 percent drop from 1989 [2]. While the decline is substantial, it conceals

significant variations in smoking by race/ethnicity and socioeconomic status. For instance, 13.8

percent of white women smoked during pregnancy in 2004 compared with 8.4 percent of blacks

and 2.6 percent of Hispanics. Differences by maternal education are also stark. Twenty-four

percent of high school dropouts (9-11 years of schooling) smoked during pregnancy, whereas

women with 12, 13-15, and 16 or more years of schooling smoked at rates of 14.9, 8.4, and 1.5

percent, respectively [2]. Moreover, these figures underestimate the true prevalence of prenatal

smoking [3]. The simple yes/no screen for prenatal smoking on birth certificates is less likely to

elicit accurate responses than more detailed inquiries on frequency and timing, and all self-

reports of maternal smoking, regardless of how specific the questions, are less sensitive than

screens based on biological markers [4-6].

       Estimates of the magnitude of the effect of prenatal tobacco exposure vary with the

outcome examined, the study design, the population studied, and the period when the

investigation was conducted. For example, case control studies using Washington State birth

certificate data estimated that smokers during pregnancy have twice the risk of placenta praevia,



                                                                                                     2
a relationship confirmed in a cohort study from the Swedish Medical Birth Registry that

examined records of 1.8 million deliveries in that country from 1973- 1990 [7, 8]. An increase in

the odds of premature rupture of membranes associated with smoking has been estimated

between 1.6 and 2.1 [9, 10]. Most importantly, estimates of the average reduction in birth weight

associated with smoking during pregnancy range on the order of 250 grams, and these reductions

are dose dependent [11]. Given the documented prevalence of prenatal smoking among poor

women and the magnitude of its effects on birth outcomes, interventions that reduce maternal

smoking have the potential to significantly improve birth outcomes among poor and near-poor

women.

         One of the largest federally sponsored programs that specifically targets this population

of pregnant women is the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and

Children (WIC), which combines nutritional support with counseling and enhanced referral

services to improve the health of pregnant women and their offspring. A crucial feature of WIC

counseling is its emphasis on smoking prevention and cessation. In this study, we examine

smoking among pregnant women who participate in WIC. We test whether greater exposure to

WIC during pregnancy is associated with decreases in the prevalence of smoking, smoking

cessation and postpartum relapse. Data are from selected states that participate in the Pregnancy

Nutrition Surveillance System (PNSS). The PNSS provides large samples of women with

information on the exact date of enrollment in WIC along with screens for smoking before,

during and after pregnancy. 1

         WIC participants are a particularly apt group on which to focus. First, over 40 percent of

all births in the U.S. are to women on WIC, the vast majority of whom have incomes below 185

1
  The Pregnancy Nutrition Surveillance System (PNSS) monitors the health and nutritional status of low-income pregnant women
and infants in federally funded programs. The overwhelming majority of women in the PNSS are enrolled in WIC:
http://www.cdc.gov/pednss.


                                                                                                                          3
percent of the federal poverty level. Second, the prevalence of smoking is much greater among

WIC participants than the national average. In 2006, 44.7 percent of white non-Hispanic women

in the PNSS smoked 3 months prior to pregnancy, 27.3 percent reported smoking three months

before delivery, and 35 percent smoked postpartum. Comparative figures for black non-Hispanic

women pre-pregnancy, pre-delivery and postpartum are 17.8, 9.3 and 17.3 percent, respectively.2

           A third reason to focus on WIC and smoking is the growing debate on whether the

reported association between WIC and improved birth outcomes is causal [12-17]. There is

little evidence in the clinical literature to suggest that nutritional supplementation in a developed

country like the US is protective against preterm birth and fetal growth retardation [18, 19].

Those who defend a causal association between WIC and improved birth outcomes argue that

WIC provides more than nutritional support [14, 17]. Health education and timely referrals, they

argue, may be the more effective aspects of the program. Counseling on the dangers of smoking

is cited as important example. To date, however, little evidence has emerged that links prenatal

participation in WIC with decreases in maternal smoking.

           In this paper, we provide the first population-based assessment of the association between

prenatal WIC participation and maternal smoking using information about smoking that is

substantially more detailed than what has been available from previous studies of WIC [20-23].

We describe the prevalence of smoking among WIC recipients before, during and after

pregnancy, and we create indicators of smoking cessation and relapse. Generating population-

level estimates of the correlation between early exposure to WIC and smoking behavior during

pregnancy and after delivery provides an important test of one important aspect of WIC’s role in

advancing maternal and infant health.



2
    http://www.cdc.gov/pednss/pnss_tables/pdf/national_table11.pdf



                                                                                                    4
                                                Background

Efficacy of Smoking Interventions

       Public maternity health clinics, many of which offer on-site WIC programs, ought to be

promising venues to encourage smoking cessation among poor women, yet projects described in

the literature yield mixed results. In the 1986 Smoking Cessation in Pregnancy project, pregnant

smokers on WIC and in public health clinics received short counseling sessions and self-help

literature [24]. In the eighth month of pregnancy, the treated group had significantly higher self-

reported quit rates compared with the control group (13% versus 9.5%). However, “verified” quit

rates, obtained by analyzing urine specimens for cotinine, were not significantly different (5.9%

versus 6.1%).

       A randomized trial looked at the impact of including smoking cessation advice in

prenatal care. Urine specimens were analyzed to verify quitting. There were no significant

effects of counseling in preventing relapses during pregnancy or at the six-week postpartum

follow-up [25]. Another trial randomly assigned pregnant women who had smoked earlier in

pregnancy but had quit by the first prenatal visit to receive either usual physician advice or more

structured advice along with individual relapse counseling [26]. Researchers found no difference

either in relapse rates during pregnancy, or at one year postpartum. Other researchers reported

higher verified quit rates for pregnant smokers receiving interventions, with one of two treatment

groups having significantly higher quit rates than the control group (14% versus 2%). [27].

       A more recent program randomized six community health centers serving WIC

participants to either special intervention or usual care [28]. Intervention clinics provided tailored

cessation services and systematic follow-ups. The mean abstinence rate in intervention clinics




                                                                                                      5
(26%) significantly exceeded that in usual care clinics (12%). This effect was not sustained at 3-

and 6-month postpartum follow-ups.

       A summary of the literature on prenatal smoking interventions found that effective

programs used “designated providers” who were enlisted specifically to provide anti-smoking

advice [29]. The authors noted that “minimal contact programs that relied on existing staff” had

inconsistent results. Successful programs provided plenty of reinforcement, including one-on-

one contact, home visits, and printed materials. A more recent review reinforced these points: a

brief cessation session of as little at 5 to 15 minutes when delivered by a trained provider can

achieve significant increases in prenatal smoking cessation when compared to routine advice on

the dangers of smoking [30].

       It is unclear, however, whether WIC, as currently structured, can deliver even the brief

but focused services that effective intervention programs entail. A 2001 GAO report to Congress,

while not specifically focused on smoking cessation, found that among six WIC agencies

studied, individual counseling averaged 4 to 17 minutes [31]. Agencies are mandated to offer

only two sessions every six months. However, recipients are not required to attend any sessions,

whether they are nutrition- or smoking-oriented [12, 32].



                                             Methods

       Data are from the Pregnancy Nutrition Surveillance System (PNSS), a public health

monitoring system overseen by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). State

participation in the PNSS is voluntary; currently, only 22 states and three tribal governments

submit records to the CDC. The PNSS was created to assess maternal nutrition needs and the

prevalence of adverse birth outcomes among low-income women. Ninety-nine percent of the




                                                                                                   6
PNSS records are sourced from prenatal and postpartum WIC interviews of participating states,

with the remainder coming from other public health programs. Clinics collect the data, which

are then aggregated at the state level before being submitted to the CDC on a quarterly basis.3

PNSS combines the advantage of administrative data and its detailed information on the timing

of WIC enrollment with that of survey data and its information on health outcomes and

behaviors. PNSS data on maternal health and behaviors are richer than those available from

birth certificates, which have been the primary source of outcomes in previous prenatal WIC

evaluations using secondary data [21-23, 33-37].

           Access to PNSS records was granted on a state-by-state basis. We requested data from

ten states with the largest caseloads: Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Missouri,

North Carolina, New Jersey, Ohio, and Virginia. The North Carolina Division of Public Health

granted access to NC data, while the CDC provided records for the nine other states.

           We eventually dropped Georgia due to missing pregravid smoking records, and Illinois

due to incomplete information on the timing of WIC enrollment. Information on late-pregnancy

and/or postpartum smoking is missing for Florida, Indiana, and New Jersey. Our results therefore

include estimates with and without these three states, depending on the smoking outcome.

           We limit the sample to singleton-birth women who enrolled in prenatal WIC, excluding

those who do not sign up until the postpartum period, as these women would have no

information on pregravid smoking. This sample of 1,925,387 women is further restricted to those

who have a complete set of indicators on smoking before pregnancy and smoking at WIC

registration. We also drop women who enroll in WIC less than five weeks into their

pregnancies. In doing so, we assume that there may be measurement error; because the first

missed period is typically not detected until four weeks after the last one, it seems implausible
3
    http://www.cdc.gov/pednss/what_is/pnss/index.htm


                                                                                                    7
for a woman to be able to detect pregnancy as well as seek prenatal care and WIC appointments

within five weeks of conception. These exclusions, along with an additional 60 women dropped

due to missing ages, result in another 156,417 (8.8 percent of the final count) women removed

from the regression samples. Table 1 shows the set of states and years used in our various

analyses and the number of WIC participants by trimester of WIC enrollment. In the full sample

(including FL, IN, and NJ), we have almost 1.8 million observations.



Smoking outcomes

       WIC participants are asked about smoking at various points when they register during

pregnancy and at their postpartum visit. At prenatal enrollment, women are asked about: (1)

smoking and number of cigarettes smoked per day three months before pregnancy; (2) current

smoking and number of cigarettes per day; (3) a multiple-choice question about the change in

smoking from the point just prior to pregnancy. The latter question allows the women to choose

among responses such as “I quit as soon as I was pregnant”, “I reduced/increased my smoking”

or “I tried to quit but failed”. Buescher (1997) writes that inclusion of partially favorable

answers increases smoking disclosure by pregnant women [3]. In assigning smoking status at any

point, we therefore assume that there are no false positives – that is, we only need one

affirmative response to classify a woman as a smoker, even if other variables show otherwise.

Over 16,000 women (less than 1 percent of the regression sample or 1.5 percent of the final tally

of pregravid smokers) who were initially counted as pregravid nonsmokers but were smokers

during pregnancy are also reclassified as pregravid smokers. (Not reclassifying does not

significantly change results.) At postpartum enrollment, women are asked about: (1) smoking

during the last three months of pregnancy and (2) smoking as of the postpartum period. In North




                                                                                                8
Carolina, there is no explicit question about smoking during the last 3 months of pregnancy.

PNSS files in North Carolina are linked to birth certificates, however; we use the smoking

indicator on birth certificates as a proxy for late-pregnancy smoking. (Regressions using this

indicator do not significantly differ when North Carolina is excluded from the sample.)

         The screen for smoking is substantially more detailed than what has been available from

linkages of administrative data and birth certificates.4 We describe not only the prevalence of

smoking among WIC recipients before, during and after pregnancy, but also create indicators of

smoking cessation and relapse. The prevalence of smoking is simply the proportion of all

women who report smoking at a specific point around pregnancy. To measure quitting, we

analyze the subset of women who report smoking both three months before pregnancy and at the

interview for prenatal WIC enrollment. These same women are asked at the postpartum

interview whether they currently smoke and whether they smoked three months before delivery.

Thus, a woman is characterized as having quit if she smokes at the prenatal interview, but reports

not smoking three months before delivery. We create a second indicator of quitting if she

smokes at the prenatal interview, but not at postpartum. We then associate quitting to the timing

of WIC enrollment.

         Participation in WIC may also prevent relapse. Our indicator of relapse is derived from

the subset of women who smoked three months before pregnancy but who report not smoking at

the prenatal interview. A woman is characterized as having relapsed if she reports smoking at




4
  Arguably the most influential study of WIC based on linkages between birth certificates and administrative data is the 1992
article by Devaney, Bilheimer, and Schore [21]. Remarkably there was no indicator for smoking. More recent linkages have
relied on the dichotomous question, “Did you smoke during pregnancy?” which is available on birth certificates. There is no
indication on the timing of smoking or whether the woman has changed the amount she smokes. Thus, a woman who smoked in
the first trimester but then quit should technically answer yes but it is unclear how many do [20, 22, 23].




                                                                                                                            9
the postpartum interview.5 If WIC facilitates quitting and protects against relapse, then we

would expect that women who enroll early in pregnancy will be more likely to quit or not relapse

than women who enroll later and who have less exposure to the nutritional and health education

messages provided by WIC.



Quality of the smoking measures

        In the absence of biological markers, we have sought to validate the smoking prevalence

data obtained in the PNSS sample through comparisons to previously published data from other

sources and through associations with observable biological consequences of tobacco exposure

among PNSS newborns.

a. Comparisons with BRFSS and birth certificates

        Research suggests that the accuracy of smoking classification can be improved by

inquiring about pre-pregnancy smoking, which women are more likely to report, as well as

letting smokers convey behavioral changes, such as quitting during pregnancy or decreasing the

amount smoked, via multiple-choice questions [5]. Results from a randomized trial show that

such questions significantly improve disclosure rates compared with a dichotomous (yes/no)

format, such as those found on birth certificates [6]. The PNSS not only incorporates multiple-

choice questions, but also elicits information on quantity smoked before and during pregnancy.

Further, women who return to enroll postpartum are again asked about late-pregnancy and


5
  There is more than one possible category of relapsers. One consists of smokers who quit by prenatal WIC
enrollment and are marked as having resumed by postpartum registration. Another is the group of women who were
still smoking at prenatal WIC, reported quitting sometime within the last 3 months of pregnancy, and resumed
postpartum. We chose the first category because of the clearer sequence between exposure to WIC and changing the
smoking decision. That is, a woman quits before prenatal WIC, has a chance to hear reinforcing antismoking advice
by enrollment, then has the period until the postpartum interview to stay quit or relapse. For the second category,
capturing smokers who quit during WIC exposure is more difficult as these women may have very little time to quit
between enrollment and the last 3 months of pregnancy. This would be particularly problematic for 3rd-trimester
participants, e.g. those enrolling in the 8th month of pregnancy who only had until month 9 to quit.


                                                                                                                10
current smoking, potentially enhancing disclosure among women who relapse after prenatal WIC

registration. Comparisons of the smoking prevalence among our PNSS population with those

from other sources such as the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System6 indicate that for

women of comparable socio-economic status, our measures are very similar to those reported

elsewhere (data available upon request).



b. Smoking and birth weight

            An indirect way to assess the quality of the smoking measure in the PNSS is to estimate

its association with birth weight and other birth outcomes. The impact of prenatal smoking on

birth weight is one the most consistent and widely accepted epidemiological findings in the

literature [1]. We should find, therefore, that the adjusted mean differences in birth weight

among women who report no smoking should exceed those of women who smoked three months

before pregnancy since not all pregravid smokers quit. Similarly, women who report smoking

before but not during pregnancy should have higher mean birth weights than those who continue

smoking during pregnancy. Similar patterns should hold when we stratify by the intensity of

smoking. The presentation of this evidence begins with Figure 1, which shows the unadjusted

mean birth weight by four levels of smoking: 1) non-smokers; 2) women who smoked only

before pregnancy; 3) women who smoked before pregnancy and at WIC enrollment but who

reported not smoking in the last three months before delivery; and 4) women who smoked before

pregnancy, at WIC enrollment and in the last 3 months of pregnancy. There is essentially no

difference in mean birth weight between non-smokers and those who smoked three months

before pregnancy but who reported not smoking thereafter. This provides some confidence for

the accuracy for our smoking screen since we would expect no difference in birth weight
6
    http://www.cdc.gov/brfss/


                                                                                                  11
between non-smokers and pregravid smokers, if the latter truly stopped when pregnant.        By

contrast, the difference in mean birth weight between non-smokers and women who smoked

three months before delivery is substantial, about 200 grams, which accords well with the

epidemiological literature. Women who report smoking at the WIC enrollment but who claim to

have stopped by the third trimester show a deficit in birth weight that is approximately one-third

as large as that among women who reported smoking in the 3 months before delivery. This

difference also accords with the epidemiological literature. In a study that used a randomized

design with a biological marker to screen for smoking, women who stopped before the eighth

month of pregnancy had infants whose birth weights were less but did not differ significantly

from those who quit smoking before randomization [38]. This relationship between smoking and

birth weight persists across race and ethnicity.

            In Figure 2, we repeat these comparisons for the incidence of low birth weight (< 2500

grams), preterm birth (< 37 weeks gestation) and small for gestational age (SGA).7 The pattern

observed for mean birth weight is evident for low birth weight and SGA but not preterm birth,

which again largely conforms to the literature. The association between prenatal smoking and

preterm birth is much less pronounced than its association with fetal growth retardation [18].

            As a further indication that our smoking screen has credible accuracy, we show the

adjusted mean differences in birth weight, birth weight controlling for gestation, and SGA by the

timing of smoking and smoking intensity (Table 2). There is impressive consistency along

several dimensions: (1) women who report smoking 10 or fewer cigarettes per day experience

the smallest birth weight deficits; (2) this dose-response holds regardless of whether smoking is




7
    We used the cutoffs as reported by Alexander, et al. (1998) [39].


                                                                                                     12
ascertained before, during or after pregnancy; and (3) the pattern persists in the full sample of

states and when we limit the sample to Missouri, North Carolina and Ohio (columns 2-4).8

            In sum, biologically verified screens for smoking based are indisputably the preferred

standard. Nevertheless, detailed questions at various points around pregnancy are more practical

for large populations and administrative data bases. The smoking screen in the PNSS appears

superior to birth certificates and provide associations with birth outcomes that are consistent with

more refined screens.

Empirical Model

            We are interested in the association between exposure to WIC and smoking. If WIC’s

nutritional and health education messages are effective, then the longer a women is enrolled in

WIC during pregnancy, the less likely she should smoke, the more likely she should quit, or the

less likely she should relapse if she had quit before enrolling in WIC.9 A linear version of our

empirical model is as follows (we have suppressed subscripts for simplicity):

             (1)                 S = α0 + α1WIC1 + α2WIC2 + Xβ + e.

Let S be an indicator of smoking; let the WICk variables indicate the trimester of pregnancy a

woman enrolled in the program. We expect α1 < α2 < 0 for smoking participation and relapse

and the reverse for desirable outcomes such as quitting. The omitted group consists of women

who do not sign up for WIC until their third trimester. We also adjust for characteristics of the

mother such as race/ethnicity, age, marital status, pre-pregnancy BMI, parity, poverty level,




8
    These states have data for both gestation and smoking outcomes.




                                                                                                     13
participation in Medicaid/TANF/Food Stamps, household size, and include state and year fixed

effects (X). Finally, let e be the error term. 10

          Although the statistical estimation of Equation (1) is straightforward, obtaining unbiased

estimates of treatment effects associated with WIC is quite challenging. In econometric terms,

the coefficients on WIC, α1 and α2, estimate the average effect of treatment on the treated under

two assumptions: first, that the decision to participate in WIC, conditional on X, is uncorrelated

with smoking or the change in smoking prior to pregnancy; and second, that the expected gains

to participation in WIC are constant across individuals or if they are not, then women have no

way of anticipating the gains [41, 42]. These are strong assumptions and would be violated if,

for example, women who enroll early in WIC are more health-conscious and more likely to quit

than women who enroll later. Alternatively, women with more serious smoking problems may

seek out WIC earlier in an effort to obtain help with their addiction. Ideally, we would like to use

instrumental variables to purge these forms of selection bias, but we lack a credible instrument.

Indeed, we know of no study that has been able to instrument convincingly for WIC

participation.

          Our identification strategy, therefore, takes several practical approaches. First, we are

limited to only women on WIC, and thus, we compare the effect of early as opposed to late

exposure to WIC on maternal smoking. One advantage of this comparison is that everyone is

eligible for WIC and everyone participates. Stigma or other barriers to participation in publicly

funded nutrition programs are thus unlikely to be factors in our analysis. Second, we have very

large samples that enable us to analyze smoking separately for non-Hispanic whites, non-



10
  Because there has been little change in smoking in the states and years of our sample, we do not include cigarette prices in this
model. Following Levy and Meara (2006), we tested changes in smoking around the time of the 1998 Master Settlement
Agreement [40] Consistent with the authors’ findings, we did not find any significant difference in smoking after the settlement.


                                                                                                                               14
Hispanic blacks, and Hispanics.11 Third, we use falsification checks as a means of flagging

potential contamination from omitted variable bias. The clinical literature indicates that most

pregnant smokers quit when they realize that they are pregnant; these women are often referred

to as “spontaneous quitters” [25, 43-45]. Spontaneous quitting should be unrelated to the timing

of WIC enrollment. Any association between early WIC enrollment and spontaneous quitting is

likely due to selection bias, since quitting precedes enrollment. We have two indicators of

spontaneous quitting. This first is a dichotomous indicator that is one if the woman smoked

three months before pregnancy but reports not smoking at time of WIC enrollment. One

limitation of this indicator is that we don’t know when the woman quit. Thus, we also use a

second indicator. At WIC enrollment, women are asked if they smoke, and if so, whether they

have reduced their smoking or quit altogether. One of the possible responses is, “Stopped

smoking before my first prenatal care visit.” 12 We use this second indicator as a measure of

spontaneous quitting and associate it with timing of WIC enrollment.

                                                      Results

         The four smoking series in Figure 3 show the prevalence of smoking at different points

around pregnancy by week of enrollment in WIC. Consider women who enroll in WIC in the

13th week of pregnancy. Approximately 45 percent smoke three months before pregnancy; 35

percent continue to smoke when questioned at prenatal enrollment into WIC; approximately 26

percent report smoking three months prior to delivery and 28 percent smoke at the postpartum

interview. Much of the data in Figure 3 previews the results. First, the prevalence of smoking at

any point is always greater among women who enroll in WIC in the first trimester but


11
   The standard regression in the literature pools all races and ethnicities and includes dichotomous indicators for
each. Our specification is equivalent to a fully interacted model by race and ethnicity. The difference is potentially
important because smoking varies dramatically by race and ethnicity.
12
   For most women, registration for prenatal care precedes enrollment in WIC.


                                                                                                                    15
differences with respect to timing of WIC enrollment remain relatively flat thereafter. Second,

the difference in the prevalence of smoking between the different series at each week of

enrollment reflects quitting. Again consider women who enrolled in WIC in the 13th week of

pregnancy. The difference in smoking from the period three months before pregnancy to the

point of WIC enrollment implies a quit rate of about 22 percent [(45-35)/45], which most likely

represents spontaneous quitting. By contrast, the difference in smoking between those who

smoke at enrollment and those who smoked three months before delivery is a margin over which

WIC may be effective at promoting cessation. If WIC effectiveness on quitting is dose-

dependent, however, we might expect the two series to converge as women enrolled in WIC later

in pregnancy. In other words, if greater exposure to WIC’s nutritional and health-educational

messages is more effective than less exposure, then the percentage point decline in smoking, the

vertical distance between the two series, should be greater the earlier a woman enrolls in WIC.

In fact, we observe about an 8-9 percentage-point difference between the prevalence of smoking

at WIC enrollment and the prevalence three months before delivery. The difference appears

unchanged throughout pregnancy, which suggests that WIC has little dose-dependent impact on

quitting, but we cannot discount the possibility that the program may exert a one-time threshold

effect at the time of enrollment. The important caveat is that these differences are unadjusted for

maternal characteristics. We turn next, therefore, to the multivariate analyses.

          In Table 3 we show adjusted differences in the prevalence of smoking before, during and

after pregnancy (α1 and α2 from Equation 1). Estimates are obtained by probit regressions.13

Based on the estimates in the first two panels, women who enroll in WIC in the first trimester are

2.7 percentage points more likely to be smoking before pregnancy and 2.3 percentage points

13
  We use the routine in Stata 9.2 to obtain marginal effects. In the case of dichotomous indicators such as the trimester of WIC
enrollment, the routine reports the difference in the probability of the outcome with the indicator on and then off holding constant
the other covariates at their mean values.


                                                                                                                                16
more likely to smoke at WIC enrollment than women who enroll in WIC in the third trimester.

This represents about a 10 percent difference based on the mean prevalence of smoking at each

point in time and suggests that early enrollees in WIC may be adversely selected with respect to

smoking. In the bottom two panels, we display the adjusted prevalence of smoking three months

before delivery and postpartum. Here we find no meaningful differences by the timing of WIC

enrollment. The lack of a difference implies that women who enroll early in WIC are more

likely to quit. In the next set of results we test this directly.

        In Table 4 we focus on quitting and relapse. Quitting is based on the sub-sample of

women who report smoking at prenatal WIC enrollment. Thirty-four percent of these women

report quitting between prenatal enrollment and three months before delivery, and 23.3 percent

report quitting between prenatal enrollment and the postpartum interview. The results in the top

two panels indicate that the probability of quitting before delivery is 4.5 percentage points

greater among first trimester enrollees and 3.2 percentage points greater among second trimester

enrollees relative to women who enroll in the last trimester. Overall, early enrollment in WIC is

associated with a quit rate that is approximately 14 percent greater than late enrollees

(0.045/0.344).    The results for postpartum quitting are similar. The behavior of whites and

blacks appear the same, but we find no association with the timing of WIC enrollment and

quitting among Hispanics.

        The bottom panel in Table 4 examines relapse. The sample includes women who report

smoking three months before pregnancy, but who report not smoking at the prenatal interview.

A woman in this sub-sample has relapsed if she reports smoking at the postpartum interview.

Consider the results for all women. The mean relapse rate is approximately 31 percent.

However, contrary to expectations, we find that first-trimester enrollment in WIC is associated




                                                                                                  17
with a 2 percentage point increase in relapse. Moreover, there are important racial differences.

White women who enroll in WIC in the first trimester are 3.6 percentage points more likely to

relapse whereas black women are 2.5 percentage points less likely to relapse. Although the

results for relapse appear inconsistent with those for quitting, they are not directly comparable

since they are based on two different samples of pregravid smokers. The quitting sample

includes all pregravid smokers who smoke at prenatal WIC enrollment whereas the relapse

sample is all pregravid smokers who report not smoking at enrollment. However, if one of

WIC’s objectives is to promote maternal health among participants, then relapsing appears to

offset some of the gains from quitting.

       Lastly, we examine quitting by the intensity of pregravid smoking (Table 6). Most

research indicates that light smokers (1-10 cigarettes per day) are more likely to quit during

pregnancy than heavier smokers. The mean level of quitting in our sample of WIC enrollees is

consistent with that finding. The pre-delivery quit rate among light smokers is 43.1 percent

compared with 23.1 percent for women who smoke more than half a pack (11-20 cigarettes) and

15.3 percent among women who smoke more than a pack per day (21+). However, within each

level of smoking, those who enroll in WIC in the first or second trimester are more likely to quit

than those who enroll in the third trimester. The same pattern obtains for postpartum quitting

(Table 5, middle panel). Turning to the results for relapse, we find that lightest smokers are less

likely to relapse than the heaviest smokers (22.1 versus 31.6 percent). Unexpectedly, early

enrollment in WIC is associated with greater relapse. For instance, consider women who smoke

up to a pack a day (11-20 cigarettes). Those who enroll in WIC early are 6.0 percentage points

more likely to relapse than those who enroll in the third trimester.




                                                                                                    18
       A major concern with any evaluation of WIC based on observational data is selection

bias. As noted above, we lack quasi-experimental variation in the assignment of WIC

enrollment with which to identify treatment effects. Instead, we use falsification tests as way of

uncovering possible biases. The outcome in each panel of Table 6 is whether a pregravid smoker

quit before enrolling in WIC. Evidence of no bias would be a lack of an association between

pre-WIC quitting and the trimester of WIC enrollment. The results are mixed. In the top panel

of Table 6 we show that that whites are less likely to quit if they enroll early in WIC, but we find

no evidence of an association in the lower panel in which women are asked if they quit by their

first prenatal care visit. For blacks we find evidence of an association suggestive of positive

selection bias. Black women who enroll in WIC early are more likely to report having quit prior

to enrollment. The magnitude of the association is relatively large when compared to the

coefficients on quitting among black women in Table 4. Thus, a substantial portion of the

association between early enrollment in WIC and a greater likelihood of quitting (and a smaller

likelihood of relapse) among black women is likely to have occurred without participation in

WIC.



                                            Discussion

       We have shown in a broad population-based sample of women enrolled in the WIC

program that smoking prevalence declines throughout the course of pregnancy while women are

enrolled in the program. Among women in MI, MO, NC, OH, and VA , the five states with

complete smoking records, the adjusted quit rate is 34.4 percent. Some of these women resume

smoking after delivery so that in the postpartum period 30.2 percent reported smoking.




                                                                                                  19
       Although these WIC-associated declines in smoking prevalence appear significant, they

are subject to important qualifications. First, and most importantly, most of the smoking

cessation during pregnancy in this sample occurs, as has been reported in other data, at the time

the women realize they are pregnant before they have enrolled in the WIC program. The

pregravid smoking rate among women within the five states with complete smoking records was

44.5 percent. By prenatal WIC enrollment, prevalence was at 33.7 percent, a decline of 10.8

percentage points. Three months before delivery, 25 percent of pregnant women smoked, so that

during the period of actual participation in the WIC program, there was a decline of 8.7

percentage points in smoking prevalence.

       Second, we have no non-WIC women in our sample whose smoking behavior we can

directly compare to the WIC participants. To understand how much of the smoking cessation

dynamics in our sample are potentially attributable to WIC participation, we must compare our

findings with what is known about changes in smoking behavior in general among pregnant

women. Reviewing national data from the 1985 National Health Interview Survey, Fingerhut, et

al. (1990) found that smoking prevalence before pregnancy was 52.5 percent among white

unmarried women, a figure nearly identical to the 54.5 percent among white women in our

sample [46] . In the Fingerhut study, 39.6 percent of these women quit smoking during

pregnancy, 27 percent early in pregnancy. In our sample among white women, smoking

prevalence declined from 54.5% to 41% by the time of WIC enrollment, a decrease of 25%.

Although we do not know what percent of women in Fingerhut’s sample participated in the WIC

program, the similarity of the changes in smoking prevalence between Fingerhut’s unselected

data and our own suggest that women’s decisions to alter their smoking behavior may have little

to do with WIC participation.




                                                                                                20
       Despite these reservations, our data do lend credence to the belief that WIC participation

has some influence on smoking behavior. Exploiting the timing of WIC enrollment, we were

able to demonstrate that first trimester enrollment in WIC is associated with rates of smoking

cessation that are 14% higher (4.5 percentage points on a mean quit rate of 34.4 percent; see

Table 3) than late WIC enrollment. When we restrict our sample to women who enroll early in

prenatal care we find identical results. This suggests that these incremental quit rates represent

true WIC effects beyond what might be expected from prenatal care participation alone.

However, the effect of such modest quit rates on birth weight is unlikely to be substantial.

Assume a mean incidence of low birth weight of 10 percent and a population attributable risk for

low birth weight associated with smoking of 0.20. Based on our estimates, early enrollment in

WIC increases quit rates by 4.5 percentage points. The expected declined in rate of low birth

weight associated with early WIC and attributable to smoking cessation would be 0.27

percentage point [0.20*10*(4.5/33.7)].

       This evaluation is important for a number of reasons. First, the eight-state sample from

which the data are derived represents one of the largest national population-based compendiums

of WIC participants published to date. Moreover, the screen for smoking in these data is much

more detailed than has been available from previous administrative databases. We also adjust

our estimates with a relatively rich set of covariates, each of which is interacted with indicators

of race and ethnicity in an effort to minimize selection bias inherent in observational design. In

addition, we use falsification tests that suggest no major contamination from omitted variables

among whites, but do point to positive selection among blacks. The strength of the data

combined with the analytic approach leads us to conclude that these findings likely represent as




                                                                                                  21
accurate a picture of the effect of WIC participation on smoking cessation as is currently

available from observational data.

       The second important aspect of the current study involves its public policy implications.

Smoking ranks as one of the most powerful risk factors for adverse birth outcomes that is

preventable with changes in maternal behavior during pregnancy and the prevalence rate of

tobacco use among women eligible for the WIC program is lamentably high, particularly among

white women. While controversy has arisen regarding the potential for the nutritional

supplementation provided by WIC vouchers to plausibly exert significant effects on birth

outcomes, increasing the rate at which women quit smoking would have clear benefits for

participants in this program. Our findings suggest earlier enrollment demonstrates a small but

significant advantage with respect to smoking cessation compared to later enrollment.

Nevertheless, the increased quit rates associated with early enrollment in WIC are unlikely to

explain the 2 to 3 percentage point declines in low birth weight attributed to WIC in recent

observational studies [13, 14, 17, 47].

       Compared with the impact of focused smoking cessation programs, the WIC effects on

smoking cessation described in our study are small. In a summary of 16 trials, Melvin, et al.

(2000) found that women who received low-intensity but focused advice to reduce prenatal

smoking were 70 percent more likely to quit than women who received routine prenatal care

[30]. In this study, we show that quit rates are approximately 14 percent greater among early

compared to late WIC enrollees. Since many of the studies reviewed in Melvin’s summary

involve focused counseling across multiple visits, the more modest findings in our study raise the

issue of how frequent and how targeted WIC smoking cessation counseling is in practice. From




                                                                                                 22
a policy standpoint this is important since it is questionable whether a differential of the

magnitude we have characterized would be likely to have a significant impact on birth outcomes.

       There are several limitations to this study that must be acknowledged. It is an

observational study limited to a sample from eight states. The problem of unobservables, while

mitigated by the analytic approach, cannot be eliminated completely. Without biological

markers of tobacco exposure the issue of potential misclassification will be impossible to avoid.

Heterogeneity in the content of WIC programs across states means that these findings are

averages within which some variation in WIC effectiveness is to be expected. PNSS does not

include information on the number of counseling sessions; the timing of WIC enrollment is

therefore a proxy for the intensity of exposure, as early enrollees have at least the opportunity to

receive more frequent interventions, compared with those who sign up closer to delivery.

Finally, the absence of smoking information from before pregnancy on those women who

enrolled in WIC after delivery denied us the opportunity to compare directly women enrolled in

WIC during pregnancy with women enrolled in WIC postpartum. Despite these caveats we

believe that the available evidence from this large population-based sample of WIC women

indicates that participation in WIC may have the potential to increase the rate at which women

quit smoking while pregnant but that there appears to be ample room to improve WIC’s

performance in this regard.




                                                                                                  23
                                          References

1.     U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences of Smoking:

A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and

Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health; 2004.

2.     National Center for Health Statistics. Health, United States, 2006. With Chartbook on

Trends in the Health of Americans. Hyattsville, MD; 2006.

3.     Buescher PA. Smoking in Pregnancy in North Carolina. North Carolina Medical Journal.

1997;58(5):356-60.

4.     Boyd NR, Windsor RA, Perkins LL, Lowe JB. Quality of measurement of smoking status

by self-report and saliva cotinine among pregnant women. Matern Child Health J. 1998

Jun;2(2):77-83.

5.     Kharrazi M, Epstein D, Hopkins B, Kreutzer R, Doebbert G, Hiatt R, et al. Evaluation of

four maternal smoking questions. Public Health Rep. 1999 Jan-Feb;114(1):60-70.

6.     Mullen PD, Carbonari JP, Tabak ER, Glenday MC. Improving disclosure of smoking by

pregnant women. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1991 Aug;165(2):409-13.

7.     Kramer MD, Taylor V, Hickok DE, Daling JR, Vaughan TL, Hollenbach KA. Maternal

smoking and placenta previa. Epidemiology. 1991 May;2(3):221-3.

8.     Monica G, Lilja C. Placenta previa, maternal smoking and recurrence risk. Acta Obstet

Gynecol Scand. 1995 May;74(5):341-5.




                                                                                               24
9.     Spinillo A, Capuzzo E, Colonna L, Solerte L, Nicola S, Guaschino S. Factors associated

with abruptio placentae in preterm deliveries. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 1994 Apr;73(4):307-

12.

10.    Williams MA, Mittendorf R, Stubblefield PG, Lieberman E, Schoenbaum SC, Monson

RR. Cigarettes, coffee, and preterm premature rupture of the membranes. Am J Epidemiol. 1992

Apr 15;135(8):895-903.

11.    U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Women and Smoking: A Report of the

Surgoen General. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for

Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health

Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health; 2001.

12.    Besharov D, Germanis P. Evaluating WIC. Evaluation Review. 2000;24(2):123-90.

13.    Bitler M, Currie J. Does WIC Work? The Effects of WIC on Pregnancy and Birth

Outcomes. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management. 2005;24(1):73-91.

14.    Bitler M, Currie J. The changing association between prenatal participation in WIC and

birth outcomes in New York City: What does it mean? Journal of Policy Analysis and

Management. 2005;24(4):687-90.

15.    Joyce T, Gibson D, Colman S. The changing association between prenatal participation

in WIC and birth outcomes in New York City. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management.

2005;24(4):661-85.

16.    Joyce T, Racine A, Yunzal-Butler C. Reassessing the WIC effect: Evidence from the

Pregnancy Nutrition Surveillance System. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management.

2008;27(2):277-303.




                                                                                              25
17.    Ludwig J, Miller M. Interpreting the WIC debate. Journal of Policy Analysis and

Management. 2005;24(4):691-701.

18.    Institute of Medicine. Preterm Birth: Causes, Consequences, and Prevention: National

Academies Press; 2007.

19.    Goldenberg RL, Culhane JF. Low birth weight in the United States. Am J Clin Nutr.

2007 Feb;85(2):584S-90S.

20.    Ahluwalia I, Hogan V, Grummer-Strawn L, Colville W, Peterson A. The Effect of WIC

Participation on Small-for-Gestational-Age Births: Michigan, 1992. American Journal of Public

Health. 1998;88(9):1374-7.

21.    Devaney B, Bilheimer L, Schore J. Medicaid Costs and Birth Outcomes: The Effects of

Prenatal WIC Participation and the Use of Prenatal Care. Journal of Policy Analysis and

Management. 1992;11(4):573-92.

22.    Lazariu-Bauer V, Stratton H, Pruzek R, Woelfel ML. A Comparative Analysis of Effects

of Early Versus Late Prenatal WIC Participation on Birth Weight: NYS, 1995. Maternal and

Child Health Journal. 2004;8(2):77-86.

23.    Buescher PA, Horton SJ. Prenatal WIC Participation in Relation to Low Birth Weight

and Medicaid Infant Costs in North Carolina--a 1997 Update: Center for Health and Statistics,

North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services; 2000.

24.    Kendrick JS, Zahniser SC, Miller N, Salas N, Stine J, Gargiullo PM, et al. Integrating

smoking cessation into routine public prenatal care: the Smoking Cessation in Pregnancy project.

Am J Public Health. 1995 Feb;85(2):217-22.




                                                                                                26
25.    Secker-Walker RH, Solomon LJ, Flynn BS, Skelly JM, Lepage SS, Goodwin GD, et al.

Smoking relapse prevention counseling during prenatal and early postnatal care. Am J Prev Med.

1995 Mar-Apr;11(2):86-93.

26.    Secker-Walker RH, Solomon LJ, Flynn BS, Skelly JM, Mead PB. Smoking relapse

prevention during pregnancy. A trial of coordinated advice from physicians and individual

counseling. Am J Prev Med. 1998 Jul;15(1):25-31.

27.    Windsor RA, Cutter G, Morris J, Reese Y, Manzella B, Bartlett EE, et al. The

effectiveness of smoking cessation methods for smokers in public health maternity clinics: a

randomized trial. Am J Public Health. 1985 Dec;75(12):1389-92.

28.    Pbert L, Ockene JK, Zapka J, Ma Y, Goins KV, Oncken C, et al. A community health

center smoking-cessation intervention for pregnant and postpartum women. Am J Prev Med.

2004 Jun;26(5):377-85.

29.    Floyd RL, Rimer BK, Giovino GA, Mullen PD, Sullivan SE. A Review of Smoking in

Pregnancy: Effects on Pregnancy Outcomes and Cessation Efforts. Annual Review of Public

Health. 1993;14:379-411.

30.    Melvin CL, Dolan-Mullen P, Windsor RA, Whiteside HP, Jr., Goldenberg RL.

Recommended cessation counselling for pregnant women who smoke: a review of the evidence.

Tob Control. 2000;9 Suppl 3:III80-4.

31.    General Accounting Office. WIC Faces Challenges in Providing Nutrition Services. U.S.

General Accounting Office; 2001.

32.    Fox MK, Hamilton W, Lin B-H. Effects of Food Assistance and Nutrition Programs on

Nutrition and Health: Volume 3, Literature Review. Washington, D.C.: Economic Research

Service, USDA; 2004.




                                                                                               27
33.     Ahluwalia IB, Hogan VK, Grummer-Strawn L, Colville WR, Peterson A. The effect of

WIC participation on small-for-gestational-age births: Michigan, 1992. Am J Public Health.

1998 Sep;88(9):1374-7.

34.     Schramm WF. WIC prenatal participation and its relationship to newborn Medicaid costs

in Missouri: a cost/benefit analysis. Am J Public Health. 1985 Aug;75(8):851-7.

35.     Schramm WF. Prenatal participation in WIC related to Medicaid costs for Missouri

newborns: 1982 update. Public Health Rep. 1986 Nov-Dec;101(6):607-15.

36.     Stockbauer J. WIC Prenatal Participation and Its Relation to Pregnancy Outcomes in

Missouri: A Second Look. American Journal of Public Health. 1987;77(7):813-8.

37.     Stockbauer JW. Evaluation of the Missouri WIC program: prenatal components. J Am

Diet Assoc. 1986 Jan;86(1):61-7.

38.     Hebel JR, Fox NL, Sexton M. Dose-response of birth weight to various measures of

maternal smoking during pregnancy. J Clin Epidemiol. 1988;41(5):483-9.

39.     Alexander GR, Kogan M, Martin J, Papiernik E. What are the fetal growth patterns of

singletons, twins, and triplets in the United States? Clin Obstet Gynecol. 1998 Mar;41(1):114-25.

40.     Levy DE, Meara E. The Effect of the 1998 Master Settlement Agreement on Prenatal

Smoking. Journal of Health Economics. 2006;25:276-94.

41.     Heckman J. Instrumental Variables: A Study of Implicit Behavioral Assumptions Used in

Making Program Evaluations. The Journal of Human Resources. 1997;32(3):441-62.

42.     Wooldridge JM. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data: The MIT Press;

2001.

43.     Quinn VP, Mullen PD, Ershoff DH. Women who stop smoking spontaneously prior to

prenatal care and predictors of relapse before delivery. Addict Behav. 1991;16(1-2):29-40.




                                                                                              28
44.    Sexton M, Hebel JR. A clinical trial of change in maternal smoking and its effect on birth

weight. Jama. 1984 Feb 17;251(7):911-5.

45.    Windsor RA, Lowe JB, Perkins LL, Smith-Yoder D, Artz L, Crawford M, et al. Health

education for pregnant smokers: its behavioral impact and cost benefit. Am J Public Health. 1993

Feb;83(2):201-6.

46.    Fingerhut LA, Kleinman JC, Kendrick JS. Smoking before, during, and after pregnancy.

Am J Public Health. 1990 May;80(5):541-4.

47.    General Accounting Office. Early Intervention: Federal Investments Like WIC Can

Produce Savings. U.S. General Accounting Office; 1992.




                                                                                              29
Table 1. Distribution of Prenatal WIC Participants With
Complete Records, by States and Timing of WIC Enrollment:
Singleton Births
                         First    Second       Third
                    Trimester Trimester Trimester         Total
FL (2000-2004)         69,062     110,537     61,878    241,477
IN (1995-2004)         88,939      89,320     48,108    226,367
MI (1996-2004)        103,474     120,918     68,821    293,213
MO (1995-2004)        140,589     101,944     51,409    293,942
NC (1996-2003)        115,757     120,140     62,392    298,289
NJ (2000-2004)         23,235      44,831     23,525     91,591
OH (1999-2004)        104,745     116,700     74,974    296,419
VA (2004)               9,276      12,208      6,188     27,672

Total               655,077     716,598    397,295   1,768,970




                                                                  30
Table 2. Adjusted Differences in Birth Weight and Fetal Growth Among Prenatal WIC Enrollees With
Complete Records, by Smoking Status
                                                                                   Birth weight |
                                      Birth weight: All Birth weight: MO,         gestation: MO,       Small for
                                                States            NC, OH                 NC, OH gestational age:
                                                    (1)                (2)                    (3) MO, NC, OH (4)

Smoked before pregnancy                       -113.6**              -112.9**             -112.7**            0.059**


Cigarettes/day before pregnancy
(ref: no cigarettes/day)
1-10                                           -83.5**               -89.1**              -91.0**            0.051**
11-20                                         -141.7**              -144.7**             -144.4**            0.083**
21+                                           -201.6**              -201.6**             -191.9**            0.114**

Smoked as of prenatal WIC                     -150.5**              -135.2**             -132.1**            0.069**

Cigarettes/day at prenatal WIC
(ref: no cigarettes/day)
1-10                                          -164.6**              -164.4**             -159.3**            0.087**
11-20                                         -233.8**              -231.2**             -219.0**            0.130**
21+                                           -237.7**              -215.1**             -209.7**            0.131**

Mean dep var                                   3,281.8                3,266.6              3,266.6             0.153
N                                            1,670,877               849,565              849,565            849,565

Smoked last three months of
pregnancy#                                    -194.0**              -196.5**             -187.7**            0.099**
Mean dep var                                   3,278.9                3,266.6              3,266.6              0.153
N                                            1,123,915               849,565              849,565            849,565

Cigarettes/day last 3 months of
pregnancy (ref: no
cigarettes/day)##
1-10                                          -178.2**              -180.6**             -177.3**            0.096**
11-20                                         -224.5**              -226.8**             -223.1**            0.135**
21+                                           -255.9**              -256.1**             -248.2**            0.160**
Mean dep var                                   3,286.4                3,269.3              3,269.3               0.2
N                                              852,236               554,515              554,515            554,515

                               ###
Smoked at postpartum WIC                      -158.8**              -152.2**             -144.6**            0.076**
Mean dep var                                   3,281.5                3,266.6              3,266.6            3,266.6
N                                            1,220,838               849,565              849,565            849,565

Cigarettes/day at postpartum
                               ####
WIC (ref: no cigarettes/day)
1-10                                          -167.1**              -168.2**             -164.8**            0.091**
11-20                                         -227.8**              -228.5**             -219.6**            0.131**
21+                                           -259.7**              -259.9**             -245.5**            0.148**
Mean dep var                                   3,287.9                3,269.3              3,269.3              0.165
N                                              927,815               554,515              554,515            554,515

+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01
#
 Data missing for FL, IN, NJ. ## Missing for FL, IN, NC, NJ. ## # Missing for FL. #### Missing for FL, IN, NC.



                                                                                                                        31
Table 3. Adjusted Differences in the Prevalence of Smoking Among
Prenatal WIC Enrollees, by Trimester of Enrollment#
                                   Smoked 3 Months Before Pregnancy
                                   All     White     Black    Hispanic
Trimester of WIC
Enrollment:
 First                            0.027**       0.018**     0.039**       0.017**
 Second                           -0.002+      -0.006**     0.006**         -0.001
 Third                                 ---           ---          ---           ---
Mean dep var                        0.394         0.545        0.245         0.102
N                               1,768,970       997,099     481,598       241,243

                                         Smoked at WIC Prenatal
                                   All     White      Black     Hispanic
Trimester of WIC
Enrollment:
 First                            0.023**      0.027**      0.019**       0.007**
 Second                            0.002*       0.003+       0.003+         0.000
 Third                                 ---          ---          ---            ---
Mean dep var                        0.289        0.410        0.168          0.060
N                               1,768,970      997,099      481,598       241,243

                                                                              ++
                                  Smoked Last 3 Months of Pregnancy
                                   All    White      Black     Hispanic
Trimester of WIC
Enrollment:
 First                              0.000         -0.001       0.002       0.004*
 Second                          -0.011**      -0.012**     -0.006**      -0.002+
 Third                                 ---            ---          ---         ---
Mean dep var                        0.250          0.337        0.125       0.044
N                               1,146,832       703,624      322,595       88,658
                                                                    ++
                                             Smoked Postpartum
                                   All        White      Black           Hispanic
Trimester of WIC
Enrollment:
 First                            0.005**         0.002     0.010**         0.005+
 Second                          -0.008**      -0.010**     -0.003*        -0.004*
 Third                                 ---           ---         ---            ---
Mean dep var                        0.302         0.399       0.167          0.079
N                               1,146,832       703,624     322,595         88,658
#
 Enrollees with complete records and singleton births.
+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01
Coefficients represent the change in the probability of the outcome, holding
other covariates constant at their mean values. See footnote 11 in the text.
++
    FL, IN, NJ excluded due to missing data.


                                                                                      32
Table 4. Adjusted Differences in Smoking Cessation and Relapse Among Prenatal WIC
Enrollees by Trimester of Enrollment#
                                 Smoked at WIC Enrollment: Quit 3 Months Before Delivery
                                    All          White          Black         Hispanic
Trimester of WIC
 First                                 0.045**          0.045**          0.048**            -0.005
 Second                                0.032**          0.030**          0.041**             0.004
 Third                                      ---              ---               ---              ---
Mean dep var                             0.344            0.299             0.501            0.672
N                                      386,323          305,428           64,918             9,572

                                        Smoked at WIC Enrollment: Quit Postpartum
                                      All         White         Black          Hispanic
Trimester of WIC
 First                                 0.034**          0.034**          0.031**            -0.010
 Second                                0.023**          0.022**          0.029**            -0.010
 Third                                       ---              ---              ---              ---
Mean dep var                              0.233            0.193            0.369            0.494
N                                      386,323          305,428           64,918             9,572

                                   Relapse: Quit Before Enrollment, Smoked Postpartum++
                                     All           White          Black         Hispanic
Trimester of WIC
 First                                 0.020**          0.036**         -0.025**            -0.038
 Second                                  0.000            0.006          -0.018*          -0.035+
 Third                                      ---              ---               ---              ---
Mean dep var                             0.308            0.301              0.33            0.323
N                                      123,941           88,063           27,968             5,071
#
 Enrollees with complete records and singleton births.
+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01
Coefficients represent the change in the probability of the outcome, holding other covariates
constant at their mean values. See footnote 11 in the text.
++
    FL, IN, NJ excluded due to missing data.




                                                                                                33
Table 5. Adjusted Differences in Smoking Cessation and Relapse by Pre-
Pregnancy Smoking Levels and Trimester of WIC Enrollment#
                                            Quit 3 Months Before Delivery
                   Cigarettes/day        1-10          11-20            21+
Trimester of WIC Enrollment:
 First                                     0.048**            0.052**      0.055**
 Second                                    0.035**            0.033**      0.036**
 Third                                          ---                 ---          ---
Mean dep var                                 0.431               0.231        0.153
N                                          140,155            160,390       54,266

                                                       Quit Postpartum
                   Cigarettes/day        1-10               11-20         21+
Trimester of WIC Enrollment:
 First                                     0.041**            0.033**      0.032**
 Second                                    0.028**            0.021**      0.021**
 Third                                          ---                 ---          ---
Mean dep var                                 0.259               0.153        0.139
N                                          140,155            160,390       54,266

                                                  Relapse Postpartum
                   Cigarettes/day        1-10            11-20            21+
Trimester of WIC Enrollment:
 First                                     0.018**            0.060**      0.079**
 Second                                      -0.003            0.022*         0.013
 Third                                           ---                ---          ---
Mean dep var                                  0.221              0.298        0.316
N                                           64,384             29,049         4,337
#
 Pregravid smokers only: MI, MO, NC, OH, VA. Enrollees with complete records and
singleton births. Quitting is based on the subsample of women who report smoking at
enrollment. Relapse is derived from the subsample of pregravid smokers who report
NOT smoking at prenatal enrollment.
+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01
Coefficients represent the change in the probability of the outcome, holding other
covariates constant at their mean values. See footnote 11 in the text.
++
  FL, IN, NJ excluded due to missing data.




                                                                                       34
Table 6. Falsification Tests: Adjusted Differences in Quitting Prior to WIC Enrollment#
                                              Quit by Prenatal WIC Enrollment
                                     All            White         Black               Hispanic
Trimester of WIC
 First                                -0.017**         -0.024**          0.019**            0.004
 Second                               -0.008**         -0.012**             0.006           0.005
 Third                                      ---              ---               ---             ---
Mean dep var                             0.243            0.224             0.301           0.347
N                                      510,264          393,491           92,886           14,649

                                           Quit Before First Prenatal Care Visit++
                                     All           White           Black           Hispanic
Trimester of WIC
 First                                  0.000            -0.006          0.033**           0.033*
 Second                                 0.001             0.000           0.008+           0.025+
 Third                                     ---               ---               ---             ---
Mean dep var                            0.326             0.332             0.306           0.312
N                                     458,012           360,972           77,059           12,114
#
 Pregravid smokers only: MI, MO, NC, OH, VA. Enrollees with complete records and singleton
births. A woman is classified as a quitter if she reports not smoking at WIC enrollment or reports
having quit before her first prenatal care visit.
+ p<0.10, * p<0.05, ** p<.01
Coefficients represent the change in the probability of the outcome, holding other covariates
constant at their mean values. See footnote 11 in the text.
++
  VA excluded due to missing data.




                                                                                                 35
                                Figure 1. Mean Birth Weight, by Smoking Status Before and During Pregnancy
                        3,500
                        3,400

                        3,300

                        3,200

                        3,100

                        3,000




     Birth weight (g)
                        2,900

                        2,800

                        2,700
                                       All                    White                      Black                     Hispanic
                                                Did not smoke before or during pregnancy
                                                Smoked before pregnancy, quit by WIC enrollment
                                                Smoked before pregnancy, at WIC, & quit 3 months before delivery
                                                Smoked before pregnancy, at WIC, & 3 months before delivery




36
                             Figure 2. Mean LBW, SGA, and Preterm, by Smoking Status Before and During
                                                            Pregnancy
                      0.25


                      0.20


                      0.15


                      0.10




     Proportion LBW
                      0.05


                      0.00
                                      LBW                                 SGA                                  Preterm
                                            Did not smoke before or during pregnancy
                                            Smoked before pregnancy, quit by WIC enrollment
                                            Smoked before pregnancy, at WIC, & quit 3 months before delivery
                                            Smoked before pregnancy, at WIC, & 3 months before delivery




37
                                   Figure 3. Smoking among Prenatal WIC Enrollees, by Weeks Pregnant When
                                                     Enrolled in WIC: MI, MO, NC, OH, VA

                         0.6


                         0.5


                         0.4


                         0.3




     Proportion smoked
                         0.2


                         0.1


                          0
                               5          9        13         17            21         25          29          33        37
                                                                    Weeks pregnant when enrolled


                                        3 months before pregnancy        At prenatal WIC       Last 3 months        Postpartum




38
