NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE ON THE SOCIAL CONTEXT OF WELL-BEING
John F. Helliwell
Christopher P. Barrington-Leigh
Anthony Harris
Haifang Huang
Working Paper 14720
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14720

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2009

This paper is part of the ‘Social Interactions, Identity and Well-Being’ research program of the Canadian
Institute for Advanced Research, and is also supported by grants from the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council of Canada. An earlier version was presented in October 2008 at a conference in
Princeton on "International Differences in Well-Being". This version is intended to become a chapter
in an Oxford University Press volume of the same name, edited by Kahneman, Diener and Helliwell.
We are grateful to conference participants for comments and advice. In revising the paper we have
been especially aided by the post-conference review by Richard Layard. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by John F. Helliwell, Christopher P. Barrington-Leigh, Anthony Harris, and Haifang Huang.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

International Evidence on the Social Context of Well-Being
John F. Helliwell, Christopher P. Barrington-Leigh, Anthony Harris, and Haifang Huang
NBER Working Paper No. 14720
February 2009
JEL No. D6,I3,J1,O0,O10,P51,P52
ABSTRACT
This paper uses the first three waves of the Gallup World Poll to investigate differences across countries,
cultures and regions in the factors linked to life satisfaction, paying special attention to the social context.
Our principal findings are: First, using the larger pooled sample, we find that answers to the satisfaction
with life and Cantril ladder questions provide consistent views of what constitutes a good life, with
an average of the two measures providing a clearer picture than either measure on its own. Second,
we find strong evidence for the importance of both income and social context variables in explaining
within-country and international differences in well-being. For most specifications tested, the combined
effects of a few measures of the social and institutional context are as large as those of income in explaining
both international and intra-national differences in life satisfaction. Third, the very significant influences
of both income and social factors permit the calculation of compensating differentials for social factors.
We find very large income-equivalent values for key measures of the social context. Fourth, the international
similarity of the estimated equations suggests that the large international differences in average life
evaluations are not due to different approaches to the meaning of a good life, but to differing social,
institutional, and economic life circumstances.

John F. Helliwell
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research
and Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver B.C. V6T 1Z1 CANADA
and NBER
john.helliwell@ubc.ca
Christopher P. Barrington-Leigh
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research
and Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997 - 1873 East Mall
Vancouver, B.C. V6T 1Z1 CANADA
cpbl@wellbeing.econ.ubc.ca

Anthony Harris
Nuffield College
New Road
Oxford OX1 1NF
UK
c.Anthony.p.Harris@gmail.com
Haifang Huang
Department of Economics
University of Alberta
8-14 HM Tory
Edmonton Alberta T6G 2H4 CANADA
haifang.huang@ualberta.ca

1. Introduction
Together, the chapters of this book argue that there are many useful and inter-related
ways of measuring well-being. The chapter by Diener, Kahneman, Tov and Arora argues
that there appear to be systematic differences between types of measure, with subjective
evaluations of life as a whole being more systematically related to life circumstances than
are measures of positive or negative affect. They focus on the relative strength of
linkages with income, while in this chapter we extend the analysis to estimate and
emphasize the importance of the social context as a determinant of well-being both
within and among nations. We find that life evaluations accommodate a robust
explanatory role for both income and social variables, and thereby permit precise
estimates of their relative importance as factors explaining international differences in
well-being.
We consider two different ways of evaluating life as a whole. One is the Cantril ladder
question used in the Gallup World Poll and the other is the more widely used assessment
of satisfaction with life (SWL), as used in several decades of the World Values survey,
and now also included in the recent waves of the Gallup World Poll. In our previous
work comparing the Cantril ladder with measures of life satisfaction (Helliwell 2008 and
Helliwell, Huang and Harris 2009) we argued that life evaluations provide a useful way
to assess the quality of development within and across communities and nations. A case
was made that previous doubts about the usefulness of comparing measures of subjective
well-being across cultures and over time are being resolved in favour of subjective
measures2.
In Helliwell (2008) we compared results from the first wave of the Gallup World Poll and
the World Values Survey, focusing on modeling differences among nations in average
scores from different measures of the quality of life. That paper also estimated two-level
regressions based on individual data, and argued that most of the cross-country variance
in survey measures of life satisfaction can be explained by measurable differences in life
circumstances in those countries, under the assumption that people all over the world
have similar basic preferences, and answer life satisfaction questions in roughly
comparable ways. In Helliwell, Huang and Harris (2009) we dug further into the data to
see to what extent the assumption of common preferences is justified. More particularly,
we used Gallup World Poll wave 1 data on the quality of life (as measured by the Cantril
2

First, earlier claims that each person has a psychological set-point for subjective well-being to
which he or she invariably returns (Brickman and Campbell 1971, Brickman et al 1978, Lucas et al 2003)
have been replaced by research showing that adaptation to most changes in life circumstances is partial in
nature (Lucas, Diener and Scollon 2006, Lucas 2007). Second, experimental evidence that retrospective
assessments of well-being differ from Bentham-like (Kahneman, Wakker and Sarin 1997) integrals of
momentary assessments (Kahneman 1999, Frederickson and Kahneman 2003, Kahneman and Riis 2005)
was held not to threaten the usefulness of retrospective evaluations of satisfaction, especially as the latter,
are what govern future decisions (Wirtz et al 2003). Third, in response to suggestions that freedom and
capabilities, which were held to be of fundamental value to well-being (Sen 1990, 1999), would be left out
of account by measures of life satisfaction, it was shown that measures of life satisfaction appear to differ
from assessments of positive and negative affect in just the ways that make life satisfaction an appropriate
measure. Indeed, in this paper we show that a sense of personal freedom is highly significant as a support
for higher measures of life satisfaction.

ladder) to estimate cross-sectional life evaluation equations in each of 105 countries. We
found that the results on a country-by-country basis were broadly consistent with the use
of two-level analysis in which coefficients are assumed to be the same for residents in all
countries. The coefficients were strikingly consistent among countries, cultures and
regions, although we found confirmation of several experimental results on cross-cultural
differences in reporting styles. While these differences were interesting, they were in
general not large enough to obscure the broad commonality of results. Thus it would
appear that the large international differences in life evaluations are not due to differences
in underlying preferences but rather to identifiable differences in life circumstances.
In the current chapter, we extend our earlier analysis in several key ways. We now have
three waves of data from the Gallup World Poll, thus increasing substantially the number
of countries represented in our analysis, and adding to the sample size for those countries
included in both waves. From our perspective, one of the most valuable features of the
second and third waves of the Gallup World Poll (conducted in 2007 and 2008) is that for
103 countries the survey included not just the Cantril ladder question on Life Today, but
also the standard life satisfaction question used in the World Values Survey and many
other national and international surveys.
The recent availability of both ladder and life satisfaction responses for large global
samples is of great value, as it permits important issues to be more systematically
evaluated. In our earlier comparisons of the wave 1 Gallup World Poll ladder data with
the World Values Survey data on life satisfaction, we found that the Gallup World Poll
ladder data had a tighter relation to income than did the World Values Survey satisfaction
with life (SWL) data. We hypothesized that this difference might be due to the ladder
framing of the Cantril ladder question. In particular, we suspected that the vertical nature
of the ladder, with the best possible life being that on the top rung, might encourage
respondents to think in more materialistic terms, and in a more relative way. We were
puzzled that the framing effects would be this large, so we strongly supported the
introduction of the SWL question into the Gallup World Poll, so as to be able to analyze
the differences between the questions for the same individuals within the context of the
same survey.
Our initial hypothesis was encouraged by our first results comparing SWL and ladder
responses from the same respondents, drawn from 53 countries in wave 2 of the Gallup
World Poll. We found, and reported in the conference version of this chapter, that SWL
responses were systematically higher than those for the Cantril ladder, and that the
amount by which the SWL responses exceeded the ladder responses was smaller in the
richer countries, even within separate groupings of industrial and developing economies.
This was just as we would expect if the ladder responses were more inclined to be
relative in nature, and more income-oriented, especially if the relative comparisons were
global in nature. Diener et al (this volume) also used the same data, found similar results,
and added another possible difference between the ladder and the SWL responses: that
satisfaction is an emotion, and is therefore likely to share some of the characteristics of
the answers to the more explicitly emotional questions, such as those relating to
happiness and measures of positive and negative affect. Given this apparent difference

2

between the results of SWL and ladder questions, some of the conference discussions
then turned to which, if either, was to be preferred. Kahneman argued that the ladder and
measures of affect were at opposite ends of a one-dimensional continuum between
emotional and cognitive measures, with SWL and happiness being interesting but less
informative intermediate measures. Helliwell put on an Aristotelian hat and argued that
SWL and the ladder had equivalent claims as life evaluations, but if a choice between
them had to be made it should favour life satisfaction, to avoid the possible framing
effects of the ladder and to provide more overlap with other surveys.
Recognizing the value of larger samples, we deferred our revised analysis for this chapter
to await the arrival of data from the 2008 wave 3 of the Gallup World Poll. This has
permitted us to almost double the number of countries with data for both SWL and the
Cantril ladder. The expanded coverage permits more precise and hopefully more robust
conclusions about the nature of the similarities and differences between SWL and the
Cantril ladder.
We find that with the larger global samples the SWL and ladder responses show very
similar correlations with presumed structural factors related to well-being. In addition,
the differences in framing and possible emotional content of the two questions seem to be
such that a simple average of the individual-level answers to the two questions is more
tightly correlated with the presumed structural determinants of well-being than is either
measure on its own. Thus we are now inclined to suggest that an average of the
individual-level answers to the life satisfaction and ladder questions provides a measure
that is more robust and informative than either on its own. The most encouraging feature
of our new results is that while the differences in the framing of the two questions may be
enough to make it useful to average the two measures, the separate and average measures
all provide consistent evaluations of the relative importance of the circumstances of life,
both within and among nations.
In the following section we make use of this new-found capacity to compare the
similarities and differences in these alternative measures of well-being. We shall make
principal use of the satisfaction with life and ladder data from the Gallup World Poll, but
shall also link these results with the life satisfaction data and analysis based on the World
Values Survey. In all cases we shall make special efforts to assess the importance of
variables measuring the quality and nature of the social context facing individuals and
nations.
First, a word of clarification about the key dependent variables we are using here to
evaluate well-being. For all waves of the Gallup World Poll we use the Cantril ladder
question asking respondents to evaluate their lives at present using a ladder with steps
numbered from zero at the bottom to 10 at the top, with 0 representing the worst possible
life and 10 the best possible life. For 93 countries in the second and third waves of the
Gallup World Poll, and for 92 countries in the fourth and fifth waves of the World Values
Survey3, we use the answers to the standard life satisfaction question, measured for
Gallup on a scale of 0 to 10, and for the World Values Survey on a scale of 1 to 10.
3

These two subsamples contain 63 countries in common.

3

We show in Figure 1 the distribution of individual responses for each of the three
alternative measures (Gallup ladder responses are pooled data from all three waves, while
the Gallup SWL responses, while also pooled, are available only in some of the wave 2
and wave 3 country surveys. The WVS satisfaction with life responses are drawn from
the largest sample possible from the surveys conducted around the late 1990s and the
early 2000s. The total sample size, sample means and the number of countries
represented are shown in each case. In Figure 2, for greater comparability, we show the
distributions only for respondents in countries with data for all three measures. Note that
for the Gallup ladder and standard life satisfaction responses shown in Figure 2, the
questions are being asked of precisely the same respondents, so that the only differences
should relate to question framing and placement.
The distribution shapes of the SWL responses from WVS and Gallup are more similar
than either is to the Gallup ladder. The distribution of the ladder responses has a larger
central tendency, with a strongly defined mode at the midpoint of the distribution, much
as one would expect to find if the ladder framing led respondents to think of their lives in
relative terms. The two SWL distributions, by contrast, have modes higher up in the
distribution (at least when the country samples are matched), and much fuller right-hand
shoulders. Most of the difference between the means of Gallup distributions for the
ladder and for SWL is due to differences in the number and distribution of middle and
top-half answers, rather than in the number and distribution of those rating their life
satisfaction below the mid-point of the scale.
We turn now to our estimation of global, regional and national equations for both ladder
and SWL measures of well-being. The basic observations are at the individual level, and
we are interested in estimating the extent to which individual life satisfaction depends on
circumstances and events at the individual, household, community and national levels.
We have developed three inter-related ways of unravelling the data. The most general is
to use two-level estimation to account for individual-level and national-level effects
simultaneously. The second is to use the individual-level data in equations that are
separate for each country, and then to look for international differences in the resulting
coefficients. The third is to use country average data to explain international differences
in well-being. We shall do all three, starting with the latest two-level results based on the
newly expanded Gallup sample.

2. Two-Level Global and Regional Equations Based on Individual Responses
The basic estimation form for the two-level analysis of the ordered life satisfaction
responses is:
(1) LSij = α + δln (yij) + μXij + γ Zj + εij
where LSij is some measure of life satisfaction, for respondent i in country j, yij is the
level of household income of the respondent, the Xij are other individual or household-

4

level variables, and the Zj are national-level variables, with the same value being used for
all individual observations in country j. We use the log form for both household and
national average income, to reflect standard economic assumptions and many empirical
results suggesting that less affluent agents derive greater utility from extra income. In
general, we employ national averages of variables for which we also have householdlevel observations, in which case the γ coefficients represent contextual effects, or, in
other terms, the extent of positive or negative externalities4. In all equations robust
standard errors are estimated assuming errors to be clustered by country, and a dummy
variable is included to permit differences in life satisfaction from one wave to the next..
When we calculate compensating differentials for non-financial determinants of life
satisfaction, we take into account the functional form of equation (1). Thus in our
theoretically and empirically preferred case where income is in log form and X is in
linear form, β= μ/ δ will be the log change in income that has for the average respondent
the same life satisfaction effect as a change in the non-financial life characteristic X.
Table 1 shows subjective well-being equations based on global samples ranging from
about 50,000 to over 140,000 respondents in 125 countries, with the smaller sample sizes
resulting from missing countries and observations for some variables5. All equations
include gender, age (in quadratic form), marital status, the logarithm of household
income, a measure of unmet food needs, a measure of social connectedness (having
someone to count on), a measure of the individual’s sense of freedom to choose, the
individual’s perception of the prevalence of corruption in business and government,
several measures of pro-social behaviour (donations of time, donations of money, and
providing help to a stranger), and two measures of religious attachment, one a measure of
the importance of religion in the respondent’s life and the other the amount of time
devoted to the practice of religion. The exact wording of each question is shown in the
appendix, and the basic results for the same equation fitted separately to each of seven
world regions are shown in Table 2.
The first equation in Table 1 shows the two-level results for the largest possible threewave sample of responses to the ladder question, a global sample of more than 140,000
respondents from 116 countries. The next three equations show the results of fitting the
same equation to a smaller sample of 52,600 respondents from 80 countries, all of whom
provided answers on the same 0-10 scale for the ladder and for satisfaction with life.
Equation 2 uses the ladder responses as the dependent variable, equation 3 uses SWL,
and equation 4 uses an equally weighted average of the ladder and SWL responses. The
first important finding is that the key structural coefficients are very similar in all four
equations. The second key result is that the equally weighted average of the ladder and
life satisfaction responses produces tighter coefficients, and explains a significantly
4

We do not include national level values for gender, the age variables, and marital status. Although
there are some differences among countries and regions in population age structure and marital status,
experiments adding the national averages to equation 1 do not reveal significant effects or materially alter
the sizes of other coefficients.
5
The lack of responses to the question of household income is responsible for most of the
reduction in sample size.

5

greater share of the total variance, than does either measure on its own. To explain more
than 44% of the individual-level variance of life evaluations on a global basis, using
globally uniform coefficients and making no allowance for country or region effects, is
quite remarkable. It leads us to suggest that this average might, in due course when full
global samples permit, be a preferred measure for life evaluations. For most of this
chapter, we shall take advantage of the close similarities of coefficients, and concentrate
our analysis on equation 1, which has a much larger sample size and corresponds better
with our subsequent analysis based on national equations.
Age effects are estimated by a quadratic form in age. With the exception of Africa, there
is a significant U-shape in age in all of the regional equations of Table 2, in all of the
regional averages of the age coefficients from the national equations, and in most of the
individual national equations. The first age variable is age in years and the second is the
square of age/100. Thus the age at which life satisfaction is lowest is younger than 50 if
the coefficient on the squared age variable exceeds that on age, and vice versa. As was
found by Blanchflower and Oswald (2008) using data from the WVS and other surveys,
life evaluations tend to have their lowest point within a few years on either side of age
fifty.
Marital status is divided into three categories: married or equivalent, single, and a
combination of divorced, separated and widowed, with single being treated as the base
case in estimation. The coefficient for married or equivalent is insignificant in the global
equation, but significantly positive in regions 2 and 3, comprising Western Europe, North
America and Australasia, in comparison with the never-married base case. The
coefficient on the combination of divorced, separated and widowed is significantly
negative in the largest global sample and in Western Europe, North America, Australasia
and Asia.
The log of household income is a very strong correlate of individual life satisfaction in all
equations. To ensure that as much as possible of the direct and indirect effects of higher
income are captured by the income variables, we have defined the food inadequacy
variable to be the residual from an equation explaining the raw variable by the log of
household income. As shown in Table 2, which divides the sample by regions, the
income coefficient is if anything higher in the richer countries (as previously noted by
Deaton 2008) and shows no obvious tendency to drop as individual income rises, beyond
the substantial non-linearity implied by the logarithmic form for income.
As already noted, the food inadequacy variable is defined net of its very significant
correlation with household income. This has the intended effect of raising the estimated
coefficient on household income above what it would have been if the food variable had
not been redefined to exclude the variance of income.6 Looking across countries, the
different variance of the income and food adequacy variables, can be interpreted as a

6

The Gallup variable (wp40) for not having enough money for adequate food was regressed on the
log of household income, and the residuals are used as the net food variable. If this transformation is not
done, the income coefficient in the first equation in Table 1 would be lower by 0.07.

6

measure of inequality of income distribution, and is strongly correlated7 with
international differences in the inequality of income distribution, as measured by the Gini
coefficient.
Our primary measure of social connections is provided by the answers to a question
asking whether respondents have relatives or friends they can count on to help them
whenever help is needed. In all parts of the world, most respondents in the Gallup sample
combining waves 1 to 3 report that they have family or friends they can count on, ranging
from 69% in Africa to 78% in Asia to over 90% in most OECD countries. In all regions
this social support is tightly linked to life satisfaction, with a global coefficient that
exceeds that on log income. As will be shown later, this implies income-equivalent life
satisfaction for social connections that are very high indeed. It would appear from the
regional differences in the data and estimated coefficients that respondents in Western
Europe, North America, Australia and New Zealand are richer in social as well as
economic terms than those living elsewhere, and attach even higher absolute and relative
values to such social support. On the basis of the largest global sample, obtained by
combining all three waves of the Gallup World Poll, the coefficient on having someone
to count on is 0.68 in Western Europe, and 0.69 for US+Canada+Australia+New
Zealand, compared to .30 in Asia and 0.40 in Africa (see Table 2).
Other variables indicative of personal or community-level social capital show the high
values attached to mutually supportive social connections. Respondents appear to value
not only the support they get from others, but also their own support for others. For
instance, those who in the last month had donated money or time to an organization, or
aided a stranger needing help were systematically more satisfied with their lives,
especially for donations (.15), followed by donating time (.074) and helping a stranger
(.072), as shown by the first equation in Table 1.
Trust questions were included in only a subsample of the wave 1 Gallup countries. As
suggested by earlier work (e.g. Helliwell and Putnam 2004) the well-being effects of
living in an environment where other people can be trusted8 are very substantial. For
example, as shown in Helliwell (2008) those Gallup respondents who think that their lost
wallets would be returned by a neighbour or the police evaluated their lives more highly
(by .15 and .22 points), as do those who express confidence in the police (.22).
Returning to the largest global samples represented by the first equation of Table 1, an
individual who thinks that corruption is widespread in business and government has life
satisfaction that is lower by 0.26 points, more than half the size of the coefficients on
income and having family or friends to rely on. Table 2 shows that these coefficients are
fairly similar in all regions. The prevalence of perceived corruption, and hence the
average life evaluation effect, does differ considerably among regions. The perceived
prevalence of corruption is highest in the transition countries (0.88) and lowest in the
7

For the 60 countries for which Gini coefficients are available, the correlation between the Gini
and the food inadequacy variable (WP40) is +0.70, and +.35 between the Gini and the food variable
adjusted to remove its relation to GDP per capita.
8
This is especially so for trust in the workplace, as discussed in Helliwell and Huang (2008).

7

US+Canada+Australia+NZ grouping (0.45) and Western Europe (0.60). Regional
averages for Asia, Latin America and Africa range from 0.80 to 0.83. There is a large
variation among countries in the level of perceived corruption, both within and across
regions, with Bulgaria perceived as most corrupt (0.98), and Finland the least (0.15).
How well are the large international differences in life evaluations explained by
international differences in life circumstances, whether related to income, social
networks, or corruption? We shall later use national aggregate equations to address that
question, but there are other ways. The middle equation panel of Table 1 adds regional
dummies to the standard two-level model, while the equations in the right-hand panel
include dummy variables for all countries, thus forcing out all of the country-level
variables. If the global model with uniform coefficients were seriously mistaken, then the
explained variance would increase substantially with the addition of regional or national
dummy variables, while the other coefficients might well be unstable. Even though the
equation with dummy variables for 100 countries has a larger total explained variance
than the one with only a few national variables, this increase is small, and the main
structural parameters are unaffected. This provides a first line of evidence that
international differences in life evaluations are due to differing life circumstances rather
than different structural relations between circumstances and life evaluations.
Table 5 (in the electronic appendix) provides a more precise way of testing for interregional differences in coefficients. The equation is estimated using region 1 (the FSU
and Eastern Europe) as the base case, and tests for individual-level coefficients in other
regions that are different from those in region 1. The equations are estimated for the
largest pooled sample for the ladder, as well as the matched samples for the ladder and
SWL. Looking only at the differences that are pervasive and significant, we find that the
importance of having someone to rely on is greater in region 2 (Europe), region 3
(US+Canada+Australia+NZ) and in region 4 (Latin America and the Caribbean), while
being lower in Asia, in each case relative to the base region. A sense of freedom matters
more in region 3 and less in Asia and Africa. The effects of national-level corruption are
great everywhere, with Table 5 showing no significant differences among regions. The
effects of a sense of personal freedom are also lower in Asia, Latin America and Africa
than in region 2 and Western Europe, while once again being significantly positive in all
regions, as shown by the regional equations in Table 2.
We turn now to consider contextual effects, as measured by the national averages of
variables also included at the individual level. One of the more striking results that we
found in our earlier studies using the first wave of the Gallup World Poll, with only the
ladder variable available as a measure of life satisfaction, was that average per capita
income had little effect. Earlier research using more local data has tended to find
significant relative income effects9, and this was matched by the earlier WVS results. In
Tables 1 and 2, household incomes are measured as log levels, converted into common
units by the use of purchasing power parities used in the preparation of the Penn World

9

See Luttmer (2005) and Barrington-Leigh and Helliwell (2008). See also Easterlin (1974).

8

Tables estimates of average GDP per capita10. Thus if there are any significant relative
income effects at the national level we would expect to find the contextual national GDP
per capita entering with a negative sign. The results in Table 1 suggest that any relative
income effects at the national level are being substantially offset by the effects of other
excluded variables that support life satisfaction in the richer countries11. In particular, the
national average should reflect all the tax-funded public good consumption and income
supports that are largely missing from measured variables.
The estimation of contextual effects at the national level is most reliably done using
ladder responses pooled from all three waves of the Gallup World Poll, since that gives
the largest number of individual and country observations. We have discussed above the
contextual effect of income, which is uneven in sign and generally insignificant. In
contrast, the contextual effects of the other variables generally take the same sign as the
individual-level effects, showing some significant evidence of positive contextual effects.
The contextual effects are large and significant in nations where corruption is low, where
more people have others to rely on, and where religious participation is higher. The last
result confirms the recent European findings of Clark and Lelkes (2009). The greater
importance of participation than of religious beliefs echoes the recent US results of Lim
and Putnam (2009). Thus the growing body of international evidence tends to support the
earlier findings of Helliwell and Putnam (2004) that the externalities of social context
variables are more likely to be positive than are those of income.
3. Country-by-Country Modelling of Life Satisfaction
The basic estimation form for analysis of individual life satisfaction within each country
is:
(2) LSij = αj + δjln (yij) + μjXij + εij
where LSij is individual life satisfaction measured on a scale of 0 to 10, yij is household
income, and the Xij are other individual-level variables. The estimates αj, δj, and μj are
specific to country j. The entire explanatory power of equation (2) comes from explaining
cross-sectional individual-level variance within a specific country, with differences
between countries showing up as differences in constant terms and the estimated
coefficients.
The raw national samples are in the first instance approximately 1000 for each survey
wave, but are rendered smaller by lack of data on key variables, especially household
10

More precisely, the individual household incomes in the Gallup data are divided by their country
means to get relative incomes within each country. These figures are then converted into common level
form by adding the resulting relative income to the average GDP per capita in 2005 measured at Purchasing
Power Parity (from the World Bank ICP). The contextual variable is the same World Bank series. Thus if
there are significant relative income effects at the national level the contextual variable should attract a
negative coefficient.
11
Alternatively, since the biggest reduction in the coefficient on national income happens when the
basic needs variables are added, the reduction in the relative income effect may be due to the large positive
cross-country correlations between national income and the attainment of basic needs. It is one more reason
for the issue to remain open.

9

income. Figure 3 shows histograms of the coefficients from all 125 country equations.
Table 6 (in the electronic appendix) displays the estimated coefficients and standard
errors for the 125 countries. The model in these estimations is identical12 to that in the
first equation of Table 1, except that all country-wide contextual variables drop out
because there is no within-country variance.
Figure 3 also includes the mean coefficients and 99% confidence range for the
corresponding parameters estimated in the two-level global equation. These coefficients
are very close to the means of the distributions of national coefficients.
The quadratic pattern of age effects is nearly universal, with almost all countries having
coefficients that are negative on age and positive on age squared. The pairs of
coefficients are significant for all regional groupings of countries, although not for many
individual countries. The gender effect for males is negative in 102 of the 125 countries,
although significantly so only for 35. The other demographic variables are also fairly
weakly defined in the national samples, reflecting the small sample sizes and the variety
of individual experiences.
The log of household income receives a positive coefficient in all but one of the 125
country regressions, and the coefficient is more than twice its standard error for 114
countries. To ensure that all of the effects of income flow through the coefficient on
household income, we have redefined the other income-dependent variable, lack of
enough money for food, to remove its correlation with income. The variable thus
measures the extent to which lack of money for food is greater than would be expected
for an average household with the same level of income. The lack of sufficient money for
food takes the expected negative coefficient in 123 of the 125 countries, and it is more
than double its standard error at least three-quarters of the country equations. The effects
of a sense of freedom, and the absence of perceived corruption are also pervasively
important, as shown by the coefficient patterns in Figure 3. For all variables the means of
the country coefficients are very close to the values estimated in Table 1, as would be
expected if the national samples were drawn from a global population with broadly
similar responses to these variables.
Finally, it is necessary to address more directly the experimental (e.g. Heine and
Norenzayen 2006) and other evidence (e.g. Kahneman 1999, Diener and Suh 2000,
Kahneman and Riis 2005) that cross-national comparisons of retrospective assessments
of subjective well-being are rendered difficult or possibly uninformative by cultural
differences in the ways in which questions are interpreted, scales are used, values are
determined and answers are framed (Heine et al 2002, Schmidt and Bullinger 2007, Oishi
2009). What is meant by culture in this context? Matsumoto (2000) defines culture as “a
dynamic system of rules – explicit and implicit – established by groups in order to ensure
their survival, including attitudes, values, beliefs, norms, and behaviours

12

One small exception is the foodnet variable, for which the definition changes slightly with the
change in level of estimation. For the global equations, foodnet is defined net of globally-estimated effects
of income on food adequacy, while for the national equations it is the national relation that is used to take
the variance of income out of the food variable to create foodnet.

10

…communicated across generations, relatively stable but with the potential to change
across time.”
This bears striking similarities to the OECD (2001) definition of social capital (Putnam
1993, 2000, Halpern 2005) as “networks together with shared norms, values and
understandings that facilitate co-operation within and among groups”. In international
research into the well-being consequences of differences in the quality of social capital
(Helliwell and Putnam 2004), it is presumed that key aspects of social norms (e.g. trust)
can be meaningfully measured and compared across cultures and over time. The use of
pooled international samples also assumes that the underlying structural relations are
reasonably uniform across nations and regions.
Our research and results suggest that some of the key inter-cultural differences in norms
and values emphasized in the literature are supported in the subjective well-being data of
the Gallup World Poll. For example, the well-being costs of living in a society with high
perceived levels of corruption in business and government appear to be slightly less in
countries where corruption is an established feature of the status quo (-.27 vs -.33, if we
divide the global sample into countries with above-average and below-average levels of
perceived corruption). Similarly, the well-being value attached to a sense of personal
freedom is slightly higher in societies classed as individualistic rather than collectivist.
But while these differences qualitatively confirm some key experimental cross-cultural
findings, what appears to us remarkable is that application of the same well-being
equation to 125 different national societies shows the same factors coming into play in
much the same way and to much the same degree. This is illustrated by Figure 4 (in the
electronic appendix), which shows actual and predicted values of life satisfaction
obtained by applying the same model, with coefficients restricted to be the same for all
countries13. One interesting exception is the significant positive boost to life satisfaction
in South and Central America14. Is this perhaps related to some as yet unmeasured
features of the Latin American family or broader social context? With this interesting
exception, the international differences in predicted values are entirely due to differences
in their underlying circumstances, even without making any provision for international
differences in equation structure and coefficients.
The international similarity of the estimated structure of life evaluations means that the
large international differences in average life evaluations are not due to different
approaches to the meaning of a good life, but to differences in the social, institutional,
and economic circumstances of life in different nations. This is exactly in line with the
chapter by Kahneman et al (2009) comparing the lives of French and American women.
They find, consistent with our results, that international differences in life satisfaction are
due to differences in the content of life rather than in the structure of the process of
evaluation.
4. How Much Does the Social Context Matter for Life Evaluations?
13

The equation is that shown in the first column of Table 1.
As shown by the significant positive coefficient on the dummy variable for region 4 in the
(SWL+ladder)/2 equation in the centre panel of Table 1

14

11

It is time to review and summarize our findings on the social determinants of well-being.
There are several ways of doing this: from two-level models pooling individual-level data
from all countries, from the averages of national-level coefficients, and from aggregate
equations making use of national average data. We can also choose among different ways
of evaluating the quality of life: satisfaction with life, the Cantril ladder, and our
preferred index averaging the two measures. For any sample of dependent variable and
model type, the importance of social context variables can be assessed either individually
or in groups, and measured either in terms of their direct life satisfaction effects or
relation to the effects of income.
Some of our main findings seem to apply broadly across alternative models and data, and
are hence worth spelling out in summary form.
First, we now find that the two alternative life evaluation measures we have assessed in
large samples produce very similar estimates of the relative importance of the economic
and non-economic correlates of well-being, especially in models based on individual
data. Indeed the remaining differences between the two measures15 can be seen as an
advantage, because a simple average of the two measures appears to increase the signalto-noise ratio significantly, resulting in models with tighter structural form and lower
standard errors of estimation.
Second, we find that the log of household income is a robust explanatory variable in
almost all countries and regions, with a global coefficient in the region of .4 to .5 in
equations where food adequacy is redefined to exclude the effect of income, thus forcing
income effects to flow though the income variable. This is about ten times its standard
error, making it possible to evaluate other factors reasonably precisely in incomeequivalent terms.
Third, since we now find that SWL and the ladder produce quite similar estimates, and
since we do not yet have large enough samples for SWL to employ our preferred measure
that averages SWL and the ladder, we can without too much likely bias use global,
national, and country average equations for the ladder to estimate the importance of the
social context.
In doing this evaluation, we shall use three methods: the first based on the global twolevel equation of Table 1, the second based on average coefficients from the nationallevel equations of Table 6, and the third based on an equation using only national average
data, as shown in Table 3.
All three methods show that there are several features of the social context that have large
and significant effects on well-being in all regions of the world. For example the
individual-level ‘friends to count on’ coefficient in the global two-level equation is as
large as that on the log of household income, implying that having someone to count on
15

Measured across all individuals asked both questions on the same survey, the correlation between
SWL and the ladder is 0.61.

12

is more than twice as important as a 50% higher income. But even that ignores the social
context effect- that people make a more positive evaluation of their lives if they live in a
society where others, and not just themselves, have people to rely on. This is shown by
the large and significant positive coefficient on the national average for the ‘count on
friends’ variable.
In order to assess the total effects of differences in the social context using two-level
modelling, we need to calculate the income-equivalent changes in well-being through
both channels. We do this by assuming a social context change that moves some fraction,
say one-tenth, of the respondents from a 0 to a 1, thus raising the value of a typical
individual’s social context variable by 0.1, which is also the amount by which the
national average increases. The standard deviations of the national averages of the social
context variables for the 140-odd Gallup World Poll countries range from .1 to .2, so that
a change of .1 is of moderate size in relation to the current range of differences across
countries. Our estimate of the direct plus contextual effects from method 2 thus involves
simply summing the two coefficient ratios from the left-hand column of Table 4.
Our second method for estimating compensating differentials is to base them entirely on
the national-level equations. This requires the use of the averages of coefficients from
equations applied separately to each national sample. The averages are shown in Figure
3, as vertical lines in the distributions of estimated coefficients16. The ratios of these
coefficients to those on the log of household income, and estimates of the standard errors
of those ratios, are shown in the middle column of Table 4.
Our third method relies on equations based entirely on national average data for the
countries for which there are values for average per capita national income, food
inadequacy, health-adjusted life expectancy, and eight six social context variables. One
advantage of using estimates based on national average data, is that they are less open to
the possibility that individual-level personality differences are responsible for individuals
reporting more frequent and higher-quality social interactions as well as higher life
satisfaction. A similar argument has been applied for income; people with more
optimistic and outgoing personalities may be more likely to find and report higher paying
jobs and higher levels of life satisfaction. It is not clear what the net effect would be on
the relative importance of income and social context variables. In any event, averaging
across all 1000 respondents in each nation-wave should reduce substantially or eliminate
that source of personality-driven bias. Another advantage of using the national level data
is that the average individual-level and contextual effects are automatically (if
indistinguishably) combined to provide estimates of total effects from social and
economic variables. The corresponding disadvantage, in contrast to our two-level
modelling, is that it is not possible to separate the individual-level and context effects of
the key variables. Another disadvantage of using the national average data is the limited
number of observations, coupled with a large number of correlated candidate variables.

16

The global averages of the national-level coefficients are weighted by the inverse square of the
estimated standard error of each of each coefficient. The exact data used are shown at the bottom of Table
6, in the electronic appendix.

13

The resulting coefficients are thus sensitive to changes in the number and nature of
countries and variables.
Table 3 shows the results of re-estimating the first equation of Table 1 using national
average data for the countries with available data. Since we wish our estimates of the
value of the income-equivalent value of the social context to err if anything on the
conservative side, the two variables that have high correlations with income: inadequate
money for food, and health-adjusted life expectancy, have been redefined to exclude their
correlation with income, thus giving GDP per capita the whole credit for circumstances
that might be responsible for both higher incomes and greater life expectancy. The social
context variables by themselves explain 73.4% of the cross-country variance of the
Gallup ladder, adjusted for degrees of freedom. This rises slightly to 73.5% when food
adequacy (net if income effects) is added, no further with the addition of net healthy life
expectancy and then to 84.9% when average per capita income is added. Starting from
the other side, per capita income explains 71.2% of the cross-country variance of the
ladder. This rises to 74.2% with the addition of food adequacy, no further with the
addition of healthy life expectancy, and finally once again to 84.9% with the addition of
the six social context variables. Thus even with the national level ladder data, the social
context matters as much as income in explaining international differences in well-being.
Finally, we can use the coefficients from the aggregate equation, just as we have used the
two-level global model, and the results from the country regressions, to calculate
compensating differentials, and these have been entered in the third column of Table 4.
Table 4 brings together estimates of compensating differentials of various social context
variables obtained from three different sources: the two-level modelling of Table 1, from
the weighted averages of coefficients estimated in national equations, and finally from
the Table 3 equation using national average data. As we have already noted, there are
good reasons why these estimates should differ. Methods 1 and 3 both take externalities
into account, and may for that reason be higher if externalities are more positive for the
social context variables than for income. In method 2, based on coefficient averages from
separate national equations, the national-level contextual effects are implicitly contained
in the constant terms of each national equation. However, in methods 1 and 2 there might
be an upward bias to the individual-level estimates of compensating differentials if
individual-level personality differences are more likely to generate positive covariance
between life evaluations and social reports than between life evaluations and income.
Method 3 avoids this risk by using only national level data for social context variables in
estimating the coefficients used to calculate the compensating differentials, but at the cost
of small samples and inability to distinguish individual-level and contextual effects.
In summary, if methods 1 and 3 give higher estimates of compensating differentials than
does method 2, then we would infer that contextual effects (externalities) are larger for
the social variables than for income. Method 1, which includes both individual-level and
contextual effects, should probably provide the largest estimate of their combined size,
but only if the externalities are positive, so that the individual-level and national-level
receive coefficients of the same size.

14

Table 4 shows the ratios of the social context coefficients to the coefficient on the
relevant log income variable, with the estimated standard error of that ratio shown below.
These differentials are estimates of the change in the (log of) household income that
would have a life satisfaction effect equivalent to a unit change in the corresponding
measure of social structure. For example, consider a change where 10% more of a
country’s population thought that they had someone to count on. The individual effect for
those having the improved social connections would be a log change of income of 1.08,
roughly equivalent to a trebling of family income. On top of this, and received by all
people, including those whose own social support had not improved, would be the
contextual effect, with a log equivalent value of .1*3.77=.377, or more than a one-third
increase of family income. The typical individual in this more-connected country would
have life satisfaction increase by .1*(3.77+1.08)=.485, equivalent to an increase of family
income of more than 60%.
These very large compensating differentials must be viewed in the context of actual
individual and international differences in per capita incomes and social circumstances.
In a typical country, 80% of the respondents have someone to rely on, and the standard
deviation of this measure across countries is just over one-sixth as large, while the
national average per capita income, measured in purchasing power parity as a fraction of
that in the United States, is .30, with a standard deviation across countries of .34,
reflecting the large number of very poor countries. Thus it is not too surprising to find
that even very large differences in life satisfaction across countries are dwarfed by the
corresponding differences in material income. One of the things that supports life
satisfaction in the poorer countries is that while they are also more socially deprived, on
average, according to almost all of the Gallup measures, than are those living in the richer
countries, their relative social deprivation is less than their relative economic
deprivation17.
The very large size of the estimated compensating differentials for social variables in all
regions suggests the importance of focussing on ways of supporting and improving the
social context in developing countries. In the richer countries, the case for increased
importance to the social context is even stronger, given the diminishing life satisfaction
effect of higher incomes implied by the empirically preferred log-linear form.
5. Conclusion
We find strong evidence for the importance of both income and social context variables
in explaining differences in well-being. For most specifications tested, the combined
effects of a few measures of the social and institutional context exceed that of income in
equations explaining international differences in life satisfaction. Calculation of
compensating differentials also reveals large income-equivalent values for improvements
in the social context, with much of this value flowing via positive national spillover
effects for key social variables.
17

In the macro equation of Table 3, the standardized beta on income is .66 for the log of GDP per
capita, compared to .43 for the non-income variables.

15

In a preliminary version of this chapter, based on data for a smaller number of countries,
we found evidence suggesting that average answers to the standard life satisfaction
question were higher than for the Cantril ladder, with this difference being larger for the
poorer countries. We hypothesized that this was because the ladder framing encouraged
respondents to think in more relative terms, and that these comparisons were global in
nature. However, as the sample of countries with both SWL and ladder data has grown,
we have found that both measures show similar correlations with the key structural
variables. The SWL answers remain higher on average than those for the ladder, but by a
smaller amount than we found using data from a smaller number of countries, and the
difference between the two measures is no longer related significantly to per capita
incomes.
Reflecting the facts that the ladder and the SWL questions are related in very similar
ways to the underlying structural determinants, that they are both evaluations of life as a
whole, that they are framed differently, and asked at different parts of the interview, we
hypothesized that an average of the two measures might have a higher signal-to-noise
ratio than either on its own18. Our tests to date appear to confirm this hypothesis, as the
average is significantly better predicted than either measure alone, and has a smaller
standard deviation and a smaller standard error of the estimate. The global cross-sectional
equation for the average of life satisfaction and the ladder explains 44% of the variance
for the 52,000 individuals for whom both assessments are currently available. This is
substantially the highest explained variance we have ever seen for a cross-sectional
explanation for subjective well-being. This is especially remarkable since the simple
model used constrains parameters to be equal in all countries. This suggests that both
measures are tapping into life in similarly evaluative ways, with their slightly different
framing, and their different positions in the body of the survey, giving some random
differences that become smaller when the two measures are averaged. It also suggests
that despite cross-cultural differences in the ways in which social and economic
institutions are designed, and in how people assess and are influenced by these
characteristics, a relatively small number of key structural variables appears to explain a
large fraction of differences in subjective life evaluations around the world.

References
Barrington-Leigh, C.P., and J.F. Helliwell (2008) “Empathy and Emulation: Subjective
Well-Being and the Geography of Comparison Groups.” NBER Working Paper
No. 14593.
Blanchflower, D.G. and A.J. Oswald (2008) “Is Well-Being U-Shaped Over the Life
Cycle?” Social Science and Medicine 66: 1733-49.
18

This tends to confirm the point, made at several places in this volume, that multiple measures of
well-bring should be collected where feasible, and used to form combined measures and/or guide the
selection among alternative measures,

16

Brickman, P. and D.T. Campbell (1971) “Hedonic Relativism and Planning the Good
Society.” In M.H. Appley, ed., Adaptation Level Theory: A Symposium. (New
York: Academic Press) 287-302.
Brickman, P., D. Coates and R. Janoff-Bullman (1978) “Lottery Winners and Accident
Victims: Is Happiness Relative?” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
36: 917-27.
Clark, A.E. and O. Lelkes (2009) “Let Us Pray: Religious Interactions in Life
Satisfaction.” (Working Paper: Paris School of Economics).
Deaton, Angus (2008) “Income, Health and Well-Being around the World: Evidence
from the Gallup World Poll.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 22(2): 53-72
Diener, E. and E.M. Suh, eds. (2000) Culture and Subjective Well-Being. (Cambridge
MA: MIT Press)
Diener, E., R.E. Lucas and C.N. Scollon (2006) “Beyond the Hedonic Treadmill:
Revising the Adaptation Theory of Well-Being.” American Psychologist 61(4):
305-14.
Diener, E., D. Kahneman, W. Tov and R. Arora (2009) “Income’s Differential Impact on
Judgments of Life versus Affective Well-Being” (this volume).
Easterlin, Richard (1974) “Does Economic Growth Improve the Human Lot? Some
Empirical Evidence” In P.A. David and M. Reder, eds., Nations and Households
in Economic Growth (New York: Academic Press), 89-125.
Frederickson, B.L. and D. Kahneman (2003) “Duration Neglect in Retrospective
Evaluations of Affective Episodes.” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 65: 45-55.
Fowler, J.H. and N.A. Christakis (2008) “The Dynamic Spread of Happiness in a Large
Social Network.” British Medical Journal (forthcoming)
Gallup Organization (2007) The State of Global Well-Being (New York: Gallup Press)
Halpern, David (2005) Social Capital (Cambridge: Polity Press)
Heine, S. and A. Norenzayan (2006) “Towards a Psychological Science for a Cultural
Species”. Perspectives on Psychological Science 1(3): 251-69
Heine S. et al. (2002). “What’s Wrong with Cross-Cultural Comparisons of Subjective
Likert Scales?: The Reference Group Effect” Journal of Personality and Social
Pyschology 82(6): 903–18

17

Helliwell, John F. and Robert D. Putnam (2004) “The social context of well-being” Phil
Trans R. Soc Lon. B 359: 1435-46. Reprinted in F.A. Huppert, B. Keverne and
N. Baylis, eds., The Science of Well-Being. (London: Oxford University Press,
2005, 435-59).
Helliwell, John F. and Haifang Huang (2008) “Well-Being and Trust in the Workplace.”.
NBER Working Paper No. 14589)
Helliwell, John F. (2008) “Life Satisfaction and Quality of Development.” NBER
Working Paper No. 14507.
Helliwell, John F., Haifang Huang and Anthony Harris (2009) “International Differences
in the Determinants of Life Satisfaction.” In Tridip Ray, E. Somanathan and
Bhaskar Dutta, eds. New and Enduring Themes in Development Economics
(World Scientific, Singapore).
Kahneman, D. (1999) “Objective Happiness.” In E. Diener, N. Schwarz and D.
Kahneman, eds., Well-Being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology (New
York: Russell Sage).
Kahneman, D. and Jason Riis (2005) “Living, and Thinking About it: Two Perspectives
on Life”. In F.A. Huppert, N. Baylis and B. Keverne, eds., The Science of WellBeing. (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Kahneman, D., P.P. Wakker, and R. Sarin (1997) “Back to Bentham? Exploration of
Experienced Utility.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112: 375-405.
Kahneman, D., D.A. Schkade, C. Fischler, A.B. Krueger and A. Krilla (2009) “The
Structure of Well-Being in Two Cities.” (this volume).
Lim, Chaeyoon and Robert D. Putnam (2009) “Praying Alone is not Fun: Religion,
Social Networks and Subjective Well-Being.” (working paper).
Lucas, Richard E. (2007) “Long-Term Disability is associated with Lasting Changes in
Subjective Well-Being: Evidence from Two Nationally Representative
Longitudinal Studies.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 92(4):
717-30.
Lucas, R.E., A.E. Clark, Y. Georgellis and E. Diener (2003) “Re-examining Adaptation
and the Set Point Model of Happiness: Reactions to Changes in Marital Status.”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 84(3): 527-39.
Luttmer, Erzo F.P. (2005) “Neighbours as Negatives: Relative Earnings and WellBeing.” Quarterly Journal of Economics (January): 963-1002.

18

Matsumoto, D. (2000) Culture and Psychology. (2nd ed.,Pacific Grove: Brooks Cole)
Oishi, S. (2009) “Culture and Well-Being: Conceptual and Methodological Issues.” ( this
volume).
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (2001) “The Well-Being of
Nations: The Role of Human and Social Capital. (Paris: OECD)
Putnam, Robert D. (1993) Making Democracy Work (Princeton: Princeton University
Press).
Putnam, Robert D. (2000) Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American
Community (New York: Simon and Schuster).
Sen, A. (1990) “Development as Capability Expansion.” In K. Griffin and J. Knight, eds.,
Human Development and the International Development Strategy for the
1990s. (London: Macmillan)
Sen, A. (1999) Development as Freedom. (New York: Knopf Press)
Schmidt, S., and M. Bullinger (2007) “Cross-cultural Quality of Life Assessment
Approaches and Experiences from the Health Care Field.” In Gough and
McGregor, eds. Well-Being in Developing Countries: from Theory to
Research. (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press) 219-41.
Stevenson, B., and J. Wolfers (2008) “Economic Growth and Subjective Well-Being:
Reassessing the Easterlin Paradox” NBER Working Paper No. 14283.
(Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research)
Wirtz, D., J. Kruger, C.N. Scollon, and E. Diener (2003) “What to Do on Spring Break?
The Role of Predicted, On-Line and Remembered Experience in Future Choice.”
Psychological Science 14(5): 520-4.

19

ladder (matched)

SWL (matdched)

1
2 (ladder+SWL)

ladder (all)

1
2 (ladder+SWL)

ladder (all)

1
2 (ladder+SWL)

log(household income)

ladder (all)

Table 1: Global equation with full set of social context variables.
Significance: 1%∗ 5% 10%∗

(1)
.42∗

(2)
.37∗

(3)
.44∗

(4)
.40∗

(5)
.43∗

(6)
.41∗

(7)
.44∗

(8)
.41∗

(.025)

(.034)

(.055)

(.042)

(.025)

(.042)

(.025)

(.046)

male

−.11∗ −.12∗ −.095∗ −.11∗ −.11∗ −.12∗ −.12∗ −.12∗

age

−.030∗ −.028∗ −.031∗ −.029∗ −.030∗ −.029∗ −.031∗ −.026∗

(.019)

(age/10)2
(as) married
separated, divorced, or widowed
not enough money: food(net)
friends to count on
freedom to choose
perception of corruption
donated time
donatedMoney
helped a stranger

(.025)

(.025)

(.022)

(.019)

(.022)

(.004)

(.005)

(.005)

(.004)

(.004)

(.004)

(.004)

(.004)

.022∗

.029∗

.025∗

.023∗

.024∗

.025∗

.022∗

(.004)

(.005)

(.006)

(.005)

(.004)

(.004)

(.004)

(.004)

.008

.076

.078

.077

.014

.073

.009

.045

(.036)
∗

(.058)

(.064)

(.054)

−.11

−.10

−.10

(.034)
∗

(.046)
∗

(.022)
∗

(.030)
∗

(.071)
∗

(.086)
∗

(.071)
∗

−.13

(.045)
∗

−.14

(.043)
∗

−.12

(.063)
∗

−.14

(.031)
∗

−.16

(.047)

−.71∗

−.63

−.68

−.73

−.71

−.63

−.70

−.62

(.025)
∗

(.043)
∗

(.036)
∗

(.032)
∗

(.025)
∗

(.032)
∗

(.024)
∗

(.032)
∗

(.027)
∗

(.038)
∗

(.045)
∗

(.034)
∗

(.027)
∗

(.032)
∗

(.027)
∗

(.031)
∗

(.023)
∗

(.033)
∗

(.052)
∗

(.039)
∗

(.022)
∗

(.037)
∗

(.022)
∗

(.035)
∗

.46
.31

−.26

.49
.36

.45
.47

.47
.42

−.22

−.25

−.24

(.025)
∗

(.041)
∗

(.047)
∗

(.038)
∗

(.023)
∗

(.031)
∗

(.040)
∗

(.020)
∗

(.034)
∗

(.046)
∗

.077
.16

.083

.15

.19

.070

.22

.32

.054

(.031)
∗

.46
.31

−.26

.47
.41

−.24

(.025)
∗

(.038)
∗

(.030)
∗

(.023)
∗

(.035)
∗

(.020)
∗

.18

.25

.062

.078
.16

.081

.32

−.26

.46
.41

−.22

(.037)
∗

(.030)
∗

(.023)
∗

(.029)
∗

(.035)

(.020)
∗

(.032)

.18
.25

.057

importance of religion

.010

.026

(.023)

(.038)

(.040)

(.035)

(.023)

attended church/etc

.047

.058

.040

.049∗

.046

(.019)

(.028)

(.035)

(.027)
∗

(.019)

(.027)

.13

.46

(.023)
∗

(.023)

.082
.17

.085

.18
.24

.052

(.024)

(.021)

(.024)

(.020)

(.023)

.078

.013

.083

.005

.076

(.034)

(.022)

(.032)

.046∗

.042

.035

(.018)

(.027)

.051

.19

.13

.16

.006

.11

(.064)

(.082)

(.13)

(.095)

nation: not enough money: food(net) −.17

−.21

−.25

−.23

(.060)
∗

−.69

(.080)
∗

−.83

(.36)
∗

(.46)
∗

(.64)

(.48)

(.37)

(.47)

nation: friends to count on

(.021)

.024∗

(.022)

nation: log(GDP per cap)

(.018)

1.60

1.12

1.19

1.16

1.05

.56

(.48)

(.66)

(.91)

(.73)

(.46)

(.71)

Continued on next page

ladder (matched)

SWL (matdched)

1
2 (ladder+SWL)

ladder (all)

1
2 (ladder+SWL)

(2)
.76∗

(3)
1.24

(4)
1.00

(5)
.79

(6)
1.14

(.30)

(.45)

(.59)

(.42)

(.34)

(.47)

1
2 (ladder+SWL)

nation: donated time

(1)
.55∗

ladder (all)

nation: perception of corruption

ladder (all)
nation: freedom to choose

(7)

(8)

.27

.18∗

−.078

(.071)
∗

(.070)
∗

(.063)

−1.53∗ −1.34∗ −.97∗ −1.15∗ −1.01 −.73
(.31)

(.39)

(.56)

(.37)

(.40)

(.36)

−.64

−.27

.92

.33

−.73

−.21

(.50)

(.64)

(.86)

(.67)

(.46)

(.54)

nation: donatedMoney

.12

−.25

−.85∗

−.55

.20

−.13

(.27)

(.36)

(.48)

(.38)

(.29)

(.37)

nation: helped a stranger

.032

−.10

.77

.33

−.18

.049

(.35)

(.45)

(.55)

(.38)

(.32)

(.38)

nation: importance of religion

−.57

−.65

−1.04

−.84

−.55

−.74∗

(.42)

(.48)

(.76)

(.54)

(.39)

(.43)

nation: attended church/etc

1.33∗

1.38∗

1.39

1.39∗

1.12∗

1.29∗

(.48)

(.49)

(.62)

(.52)

(.42)

(.39)

healthy life expectancy (net)

.020∗

.020

.051∗

.035∗

.013

.019∗

(.007)
∗

(.010)

(.012)

(.009)

(.009)
∗

(.010)

wave 2
wave 3
constant
dRegion1
dRegion2
dRegion3
dRegion4
dRegion5
dRegion6
region fixed effects
country fixed effects
obs.
R2 (adj)
Nclusters

.27

(.073)
∗

.24

−.013 −.79∗ −.40∗

.25

−.081

.20

(.058)

(.14)

(.18)

(.15)

(.055)

(.15)

(.063)

5.96∗

6.39∗

6.17∗

6.28∗

5.76∗

5.51∗

6.53∗

6.98∗

(.56)

(.85)

(1.28)

(1.01)

(.13)

(.15)

(.63)

(.82)

.051

.60

(.47)

(.39)

.38

.84

(.44)

(.39)

.54

.79

(.44)

(.39)
∗

.33

1.18

(.43)

(.42)

−.12

.48

(.45)

(.43)

.075

.37

(.41)

(.31)

X

X

X
X
140267 52657 52657 52657 140267 52657 146217 53174
.296
.338
.387
.441
.299
.452
.321
.481
116
80
80
80
116
80
124
81

male

ladder

ladder

ladder

ladder

ladder

ladder

log(household income)

ladder

Table 2: Sample separated by world region (ladder). Regions: 1: Former Soviet Union Countries and Eastern European
Countries; 2: European Countries; 3: United States,Canada, Australia, New Zealand; 4: Latin America and Caribbean; 5: Asia;
6: Africa; 7: Persian and Mid-east, including Isreal.Countries in
regions 3 and 6 were not asked the SWL question. OLS standard
errors are calculated using clustering at the country level.
Significance: 1%∗ 5% 10%∗

(1)
.56∗

(2)
.37∗

(3)
.42∗

(4)
.54∗

(5)
.53∗

(6)
.30∗

(7)
.65∗

(.045)

(.051)

(.023)

(.043)

(.039)

(.033)

(.14)

−.017 −.19∗ −.32∗ −.17∗ −.23∗ −.022 −.24∗
(.029)

age
(age/10)2
(as) married

not enough money: food(net)
friends to count on
freedom to choose
perception of corruption
donated time
donatedMoney
helped a stranger
importance of religion

log(GDP per cap.,PPP,2003/5)

(.036)

(.010)

(.009)

(.011)

(.005)

.036∗

.067∗

.040∗

(.010)

(.008)
∗

(.009)
∗

(.060)
∗

(.14)

.051

.21

−.007 −.29
(.094)
∗

(.081)
∗

.24

(.039)

(.024)

(.10)

(.094)
∗

(.051)
∗

(.056)
∗

.50

.62∗

(.042)
∗

(.068)
∗

(.17)

.42

.74

(.029)
∗
(.064)
∗

−.90∗ −.66

−.86

(.057)
∗

.42

(.006)

(.008)

(.006)

.025∗ −.006
(.008)

(.006)

−.099∗ −.088 −.071

−.28∗ −.12

−.76

(.078)

(.056)
∗

−.29

(.080)
∗

(.054)

(.017)

.048
(.019)
∗

.27

(.083)

−.073

.17

(.064)
∗

(.23)

−.64∗

−.61

−.48

(.15)
∗

(.044)
∗

(.052)
∗

(.034)
∗

.42

.54∗

(.12)

(.055)
∗

(.051)
∗

(.043)
∗

(.093)
∗

(.050)
∗

(.039)
∗

(.040)
∗

(.041)

.73

.60

.27

.23

.27

(.11)

.36

−.34

−.22

−.24

(.061)

(.060)
∗

(.083)
∗

(.045)
∗

(.047)

(.042)

.13

.007

.048

.15

(.063)
∗

(.035)
∗

.21

(.065)
∗

(.043)
∗

(.035)
∗

(.062)

.20

(.11)
∗

.17

.10

(.061)
∗

(.043)

(.047)

.041

−.028

(.025)
∗

(.045)
∗

(.20)

.12

(.032)
∗

.088

.13

(.033)

(.020)

(.042)

(.050)

(.17)

.057
.22

.16

−.17 −.24

.32

−.39

.19

−.005 −.004 −.013
(.058)

attended church/etc

(.055)

.037∗

(.082)

separated, divorced, or widowed

(.039)

−.049∗ −.041∗ −.062∗ −.051∗ −.025∗ .001 −.056∗

(.034)

(.048)

.027

.007

.047

(.034)

(.045)

−.23

−.18

(.085)
∗

1.15

(.50)

(.17)

(.18)

nation: not enough money: food(net) −1.52
(.94)

3.13∗
(1.87)

.15

.11

.11

.096

−.083
(.23)

(.038)

(.037)

.054

−.079

.12

.078

(.041)
∗

(.059)

(.050)

(.092)

.096

.072

.010

.011

(.031)

(.034)

(.043)

(.10)

.25

.13

(.17)

(.13)

−.007 1.02∗
(.083)

(.28)

−2.84∗ −1.14 −.043
(.85)

(.49)

(.58)

Continued on next page

ladder

ladder

ladder

ladder
(7)

(2.30)

(1.86)

(.55)

.072

1.13

.43

(2.28)

(1.46)

(.47)

(.44)

nation: perception of corruption

−.041 −1.10 −3.06∗

.55

1.10 −1.07∗ −2.80∗

(.60)

(.48)

(.91)

(.83)

nation: donated time

−.49

.76

nation: freedom to choose

nation: donatedMoney
nation: helped a stranger
nation: importance of religion
nation: attended church/etc
wave 2
wave 3
constant
region
obs.
R2 (adj)
Nclusters

ladder

(6)
1.23

ladder

(5)
−.92

ladder

(4)
3.56

nation: friends to count on

(1)
2.92

(2)
4.47

(3)

(1.19)

(3.40)

.72

.28

(1.01)

(.45)

(.63)

(.68)

−1.25 −1.41∗ −1.01

(1.19)

(.91)

(.97)

(.79)

−1.87

.26

.46

−.10

(1.24)

1.12

(.85)

(.72)

(.45)

(.55)

(1.06)

−.45

.99

−.43

1.61

.50

(.95)

(.80)

(1.12)

(.42)

(.58)

1.17

.33

.93∗

−1.71

.48

−.81 −2.40∗

(.55)

(1.17)

(.081)

.61

−.51

(.84)

(.59)

(1.02)

2.47∗

−.060

.63
(.71)

(.31)

(.82)

(1.12)

(.60)

(.92)

−.049

.23

−.18∗

.15

.37

.31

−.094

(.14)
∗

(.095)
∗

(.033)

(.14)

(.18)

(.12)

(.14)

.083

.21

.22

.24

(.17)

(.11)

.17

.33

(.097)

(.075)

(.034)

(.14)

3.00∗

3.01

8.55∗

3.92

(1.06)

(2.58)

(.39)

(1.54)

1
2
18024 15860
.199
.323
22
19

3
4688
.166
4

5.61∗ 5.25∗ 12.3∗
(1.15)

(1.30)

4
5
6
32125 26211 44855
.178
.190
.146
23
18
34

(.64)

7
4454
.309
4

Table 3: Macro-level estimates. Macro-level estimates

SWL

1
2 (ladder+SWL)

nation: log(GDP per cap)

(1)
.58∗

(2)
(3)
.62∗ .61∗

(4)
.54∗

(5)
.52∗

(6)
.52∗

(.057)

(.090)

(.058)

(.072)

(.053)

1
2 (ladder+SWL)

ladder

10%∗

SWL

5%

ladder

Significance: 1%∗

(.066)

nation: not enough money: food(net) −1.03∗ −.20 −.55 −1.74∗ −1.35∗ −1.32∗
(.39)

(.63)

(.42)

(.38)

(.44)

(.36)

.98

1.58

1.50

nation: friends to count on

1.57 3.05∗ 2.42∗

nation: freedom to choose

.94∗ 1.94∗ 1.47∗ 1.24∗

(.61)

(.33)

nation: perception of corruption
nation: donated time
nation: donatedMoney
nation: helped a stranger
nation: importance of religion

(.84)

(.62)

(.65)

(.45)

(.61)

(.39)

−1.14∗ −.51 −.72∗ −.70

(.66)

(.61)

1.75∗

1.46∗

(.52)

(.44)

−.60∗

−.67

(.33)

(.32)

(.28)

(.33)

(.33)

(.29)

.055

−.26 −.31

.21

−.25

−.38

(.51)

(.61)

(.53)

(.48)

(.53)

(.50)

.13

.28

.22

−.079

.50

.32

(.33)

(.46)

(.35)
∗

(.39)

(.50)

(.42)

.45

.74

.64

−.15

.43

.35

(.37)

(.48)

(.38)

(.35)

(.43)

(.38)

−.31

.024 −.32

−.42

−.14

−.33

(.38)
∗

(.50)

(.39)
∗

(.33)

(.37)
∗

(.44)

(.38)

healthy life expectancy (net)

.024∗ .070∗ .047∗ .017
(.008)

(.009)

(.008)

constant

4.88∗ 2.63 3.71∗ 5.28∗

4.42∗

4.80∗

(.007)

(.74)

region fixed effects
obs.
R2 (adj)

128
.849

(.53)

(.010)

(1.03)

99
.863

(.007)

.90

.86

(.32)

1.27

(.43)

1.29 1.38

1.13∗

nation: attended church/etc

(.45)

(.35)

.029∗

.022∗

(.81)

(.72)

(.77)

(.70)

99
.897

X
128
.869

X
99
.921

X
99
.922

perception of corruption
nation: perception of corruption
freedom to choose
nation: freedom to choose
friends to count on
nation: friends to count on
not enough money: food(net)
nation: not enough money: food(net)
donatedMoney
nation: donatedMoney
donatedTime
nation: donated time
helped a stranger
nation: helped a stranger
importance of religion
nation: importance of religion
attended church/etc
nation: attended church/etc
nation: healthy life expectancy (net)

-0.62*
[0.07]
-3.62*
[0.77]
0.73*
[0.07]
1.30
[0.71]
1.08*
[0.09]
3.77*
[1.17]
-1.50*
[0.08]
-0.19
[0.83]
0.38*
[0.05]
0.37
[0.63]
0.18*
[0.05]
-1.59
[1.17]
0.20*
[0.05]
0.04
[0.82]
0.02
[0.05]
-1.37
[0.98]
0.11*
[0.04]
3.14*
[1.12]
0.05*
[0.02]

From regressions on national averages

Method-3,

From within-nation regressions

Method-2,

From two-level regressions

Method-1,

Table 4: Compensating differentials
Significance: 1%* 5% 10%

-0.43*
[0.03]
-1.92*
[0.53]
0.45*
[0.03]
1.57
[0.66]
0.61*
[0.03]
2.64*
[0.99]
-1.04*
[0.03]
-1.74*
[0.62]
0.22*
[0.03]
0.21
[0.61]
0.13*
[0.03]
0.09
[0.9]
0.13*
[0.02]
0.76
[0.66]
0.01
[0.03]
-0.52
[0.58]
0.10*
[0.03]
2.13*
[0.68]
0.04*
[0.01]

Note:
1. Compensating differentials are defined as the ratio of the coefficient of the variable to the left of the table, over the
coefficient of the log of household income. In the case of method 2, the compensating differential is the weighted
average of the country-specific compensating differentials derived from within-country regressions. The weight is the
inverse of the square of standard errors.
2. The standard error for a compensating differential, which is defined as a ratio of coefficients, is calculated from the
variance-covariance matrix of estimated coefficients using the Delta method. In the case of method 2, the standard
error for the weighted average is calculated from the standard errors of country-specific compendsating differentials,
while assuming that each nation-sample represents a random sample from the same distribution.

Figure 1: Distribution of responses to alternative measures
Ladder, Gallup All Waves

0

Fraction
.05 .1 .15 .2

Fraction
0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25

SWL, Gallup Wave-2&3

0

2

4
6
8
Satisfied with life, GWP

10

0

Sample size: 115402; Mean: 5.95; # of Countries: 104

2

4
6
Ladder, GWP

8

10

Sample size: 342329; Mean: 5.43; # of Countries: 145

0

Fraction
.05 .1 .15 .2

SWL, WVS Wave-4

0

2

4
6
8
Satisfied with life, WVS4

10

Sample size: 117264; Mean: 6.53; # of Countries: 81

Figure 2: Figure 1 reproduced for countries with all three measures
Ladder, Gallup Wave-2&3

Fraction
0 .05 .1 .15 .2

Fraction
0 .05 .1 .15 .2

SWL, Gallup Wave-2&3

0

2

4
6
8
Satisfied with life, GWP

10

Sample size: 68805; Mean: 6.49; # of Countries: 59

Fraction
.05 .1 .15 .2
0

2

4
6
8
Satisfied with life, WVS4

Sample size: 91789; Mean: 6.52; # of Countries: 59

2

4
6
Ladder, GWP

8

Sample size: 169600; Mean: 5.87; # of Countries: 59

SWL, WVS Wave-4

0

0

10

10

Figure 3: Distribution of coefficient values from within-country regressions

Appendix: Wording of Key Questions
From Gallup World Poll
Life Today as Ladder
Please imagine a ladder with steps numbered from zero at the bottom to
ten at the top. Suppose we say that the top of the ladder represents the best
possible life for you and the bottom of the ladder represents the worst
possible. If the top step is 10 and the bottom step is 0, on which step of
the ladder do you feel you personally stand at the present time?
SWL:
All things considered, how satisfied are you with your life as a whole
these days? Use a 0 to 10 scale, where 0 is dissatisfied and 10 is satisfied.
CountOnFriends
If you were in trouble, do you have relatives or friends you can count on to
help you whenever you need them, or not?
CannotAffordFood
Have there been times in the past twelve months when you did not have
enough money to buy food that you or your family needed?
Corrupt: average of the following two responses
1. Is corruption widespread within businesses located in (county of
interview), or not? 2. Is corruption widespread throughout the government
in (county of interview), or not?
Freedom
In (county of interview), are you satisfied or dissatisfied with your
freedom to choose what you do with your life?
DonateMoney
Have you done any of the following in the past month? How about
Donated money to a charity?
DonateTime
Have you done any of the following in the past month? How about
Volunteered your time to an organization?
HelpStranger
Have you done any of the following in the past month? How about
Helped a stranger or someone you didnt know who needed help?
Religion Importance
Is religion an important part of your daily life?
Attended church/etc
Have you attended a place of worship or religious service within the last
seven days?
From World Value Survey
SWL:
All things considered, how satisfied are you with your life as a whole
these days? Please use this card to help with your answer. Dissatisfied (1)
2 3 4 … Satisfied (10)

