                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DO TARGET CEOS SELL OUT THEIR SHAREHOLDERS TO KEEP THEIR JOB
                              IN A MERGER?

                                        Leonce L. Bargeron
                                     Frederik P. Schlingemann
                                          René M. Stulz
                                          Chad J. Zutter

                                       Working Paper 14724
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14724


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2009




We thank seminar participants at the Rotterdam School of Management for valuable comments. We
also thank Jesse Ellis and Manoj Kulchania for excellent research assistance. * Corresponding author.
Tel.: +614-292-1970; fax: +614-292-2359. Email address: stulz@cob.osu.edu (R.M. Stulz) The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Leonce L. Bargeron, Frederik P. Schlingemann, René M. Stulz, and Chad J. Zutter. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Target CEOs Sell Out Their Shareholders to Keep Their Job in a Merger?
Leonce L. Bargeron, Frederik P. Schlingemann, René M. Stulz, and Chad J. Zutter
NBER Working Paper No. 14724
February 2009
JEL No. G30,G34

                                             ABSTRACT

CEOs have a potential conflict of interest when their company is acquired: they can bargain to be retained
by the acquirer and for private benefits rather than for a higher premium to be paid to the shareholders.
We investigate the determinants of target CEO retention by the acquirer and whether target CEO retention
affects the premium paid by the acquirer. The probability that a CEO is retained increases with a private
bidder, the performance of the target, and with the fraction of target shares held by insiders. Regardless
of the bidder type, we find no evidence that the premium paid is lower when the CEO is retained by
the acquirer. Strikingly, the target stock price increases more at the announcement of an acquisition
by a private firm when the CEO is retained than when she is not. This result holds whether the private
acquirer is a private equity firm or an operating company and for management buyouts.


Leonce L. Bargeron                                  René M. Stulz
Katz Graduate School of Business                    The Ohio State University
University of Pittsburgh                            Fisher College of Business
372 Mervis Hall                                     806A Fisher Hall
Pittsburgh, PA 15260                                2100 Neil Avenue
llbargeron@katz.pitt.edu                            Columbus, OH 43210-1144
                                                    and NBER
Frederik P. Schlingemann                            stulz_1@cob.osu.edu
Katz Graduate School of Business
University of Pittsburgh                            Chad J. Zutter
372 Mervis Hall                                     Katz Graduate School of Business
Pittsburgh, PA 15260                                University of Pittsburgh
schlinge@katz.pitt.edu                              372 Mervis Hall
                                                    Pittsburgh, PA 15260
                                                    czutter@pitt.edu
1. Introduction

      The top management of a firm faces a potential conflict of interest when that firm becomes an

acquisition target. Top managers can work hard to drive up the premium offered by the acquirer, but as

they do so, are more likely to have to find new jobs if the acquisition takes place. Alternatively, they can

bargain less vigorously for a higher premium in the hope of or even in exchange for keeping their jobs

and receiving other private benefits, such as the acceleration of the vesting of options and retirement

benefits. Courts and the press have recognized this conflict of interest. For instance, in a recent decision, a

judge concludes that a CEO “had powerful interests to agree to a price and terms suboptimal for public

investors so long as the resulting deal” gave him some benefits including “the chance to continue his

managerial positions for a reasonable time.”1 This conflict of interest is even more serious when top target

managers are allied with the acquirer as is common in acquisitions made by private equity firms.

Incumbent management’s heightened conflict of interest in such acquisitions has been the subject of much

attention in the press. For instance, an article in the Financial Times notes that “[t]here are always

conflicts of interest between shareholders and managers of public companies, but they escalate when

private equity firms hove into view. Take Justin King, chief executive of Sainsbury’s, the supermarket

chain. We are told that Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, CVC Capital Partners and Blackstone want him to stay

if they buy the business and will no doubt give him a stake. Whose side is Mr. King now on?”2 In this

paper, we investigate the determinants of target CEO retention by the acquirer and whether the gains

made by target shareholders from the acquisition depend on whether the CEO is retained by the acquirer.

      Though much attention has been paid to the view that the conflict of interest between target CEOs

and their shareholders is costly to shareholders (henceforth the “conflict of interest” hypothesis), an

acquirer might instead find the acquisition to be more valuable precisely because of the anticipated

retention of the target’s CEO and might therefore pay less for the acquisition if the CEO were to exit at or

shortly after the completion of the merger. For instance, part of the attraction of acquiring Bank One for

1
    In Re: Lear Corporation Shareholder Litigation, Opinion, Court of Chancery, Delaware, June 15, 2007.
2
    “Sleepwalking into a new insider scandal,” by John Gapper, The Financial Times, February 5, 2007.



                                                          2
JP Morgan Chase was the fact that the CEO of Bank One, Jamie Dimon, was viewed as a likely future

CEO of the acquirer.3 We call this hypothesis the “valuable CEO” hypothesis. Another view is that, as a

result of the conflict of interest, the acquirer has to pay more when the conflict of interest is most intense,

namely in private equity transactions where the CEO is part of the acquiring team, to avoid subsequent

litigation. Consequently, the target shareholders receive a larger fraction of the value created through the

transaction. We call this hypothesis the “shareholder bribe” hypothesis.

    The three hypotheses we investigate have sharply different predictions for CEO retention and for

target premiums. We would expect the interests of the CEO and target shareholders to be better aligned if

an acquisition takes place when insiders have a large stake in the target. If the acquirer is bribing the CEO

to facilitate the acquisition, such an effort can be expected to have less of an impact for the acquirer if the

target has high insider ownership because the insiders have strong incentives to take actions to maximize

the value of their stake. Yet, we find that the probability that the incumbent CEO is employed by the

acquirer increases with insider ownership which appears to be inconsistent with the conflict of interest

hypothesis. Not surprisingly, CEO retention is more likely for private equity acquisitions, yet is also more

likely for acquisitions by private operating companies. With the conflict of interest, we would expect the

CEOs to be most concerned about retention when their firm has performed poorly. If the firm has

performed well, they would be more attractive in the job market. In contrast, with the valuable CEO

hypothesis, we would expect the acquirer to be more eager to retain CEOs of firms that perform well. In

support of the valuable CEO hypothesis, we find that the CEO is more likely to be retained if the target

has better performance, as measured by operating income, or a higher Tobin’s q. There is, however,

evidence that the CEO is less likely to be retained when the acquisition appears to involve more of a

contest. More specifically, the CEO is less likely to be retained if there are competing bidders and if the

merger is brought about by a tender offer. This evidence suggests that there is a personal cost to the CEO

from resistance, but it is possible that the financial gain made by the CEO on her shares by obtaining a

3
 The New York Times article “Banking Giant: The Overview; $58 Billion Deal to Unite 2 Giants of U.S. Banking”
dated January 15, 2004 states, “[Dimon] is to take over as chief executive in two years from J. P. Morgan’s leader,
William B. Harrison, settling the persistent question of succession.”


                                                         3
higher premium offsets that cost. Nevertheless, this result could be supportive of the conflict of interest

hypothesis as it suggests that CEOs who want to remain employed after an acquisition may be better off

to avoid pushing up the premium through resistance tactics. Of course, it is also possible that acquisitions

without managerial synergies are acquisitions with more potential acquirers and hence a greater

likelihood of competition, in which case competition would not be costly for the incumbent CEO.

    Turning to the analysis of the returns to target shareholders, we find no evidence supportive of the

conflict of interest hypothesis. More specifically, there is no evidence that shareholders of targets

acquired by public companies receive a lower premium when the CEO is retained by the acquirer.

However, when the target is acquired by a private equity firm or a private operating company, there is

some evidence that the premium is higher if the CEO is retained. For acquisitions by private bidders, the

premium, measured as the announcement abnormal return, is significantly higher when the CEO is

retained. However, when the premium is measured over longer periods of time, there is no significant

difference between the premium when the CEO is retained and when she is not. We also investigate

whether the premium differs when other top management (including the chairperson of the board) is

retained, but the CEO is not. We find no evidence of lower premiums when management other than the

CEO is retained. Surprisingly, for the case of public firm acquisitions, we show that target shareholders

receive a larger premium when a top executive other than the CEO is retained. We also investigate

whether, among private equity deals, there is a premium difference between management buyouts and

other private equity transactions. We find no difference.

    The evidence on the valuable CEO hypothesis and the shareholder bribe hypothesis is mixed. The

valuable CEO hypothesis suggests that the premium is always higher when the CEO is retained, but we

only find evidence of a higher premium when the CEO is retained for acquisitions by private firms.

Further, the shareholder bribe hypothesis predicts that transactions where the CEO is part of the acquiring

team have a higher premium. In contrast, we find no evidence that management buyouts have higher

premiums compared to other acquisitions by private equity firms or by private operating firms where the




                                                     4
CEO is retained. It appears that CEO retention is valuable when a firm is acquired by a private firm, but

not when it is acquired by a public firm.

    Our paper contributes to the literature by expanding our understanding of the role of CEO private

benefits in acquisitions. Hartzell, Ofek, and Yermack (2004) use a sample of friendly acquisitions from

1995 to 1997 to show that an acquisition results in the CEO of the acquired firm receiving significant

payments. It is not surprising that the target CEO would receive a payment if the target is acquired

because CEOs who lose their job in an acquisition rarely show up again as CEOs of other public

companies (see, e.g., Agrawal and Walkling, 1994). However, Hartzell et al. show that target shareholders

receive a smaller premium when the CEO receives unusually high private benefits. Moeller (2005)

predicts that target shareholders receive more in an acquisition if the target CEO is less powerful because

a powerful CEO bargains more for private benefits and finds supportive evidence using a sample of

acquisitions from the 1990s. McConnell and Martin (1991) compare disciplinary takeovers, which they

define as takeovers where the CEO of the target changes soon after the acquisition, and non-disciplinary

takeovers using a sample of tender offers from 1958 to 1984. They find that there is no difference in the

cumulative abnormal return for the 41 days surrounding the announcement between the two types of

acquisitions. Wulf (2004) shows that shareholders of firms acquired in 53 merger-of-equals deals from

1991 through 1999, where the incumbent CEO remains with the corporation, receive lower returns

relative to other deals. Matsusaka (1993) does not examine target returns, but he argues that for some

acquisitions the target management is the main asset acquired. He calls such acquisitions “managerial­

synergy” acquisitions and shows that for a sample of mergers from the 1960s and early 1970s bidder

returns are higher when target management is retained. It follows from his analysis that, to the extent

target shareholders capture some of these synergy gains, target shareholders could gain more from the

acquisition when target management is retained by the bidder. The existing literature offers mixed results

on the relation between retention and target shareholder gains using very different samples. None of the

existing papers investigate directly the determinants of retention. Further, these papers only look at

acquisitions made by public firms.


                                                    5
    Recent evidence shows that private acquirers pay less for targets than public acquirers (see, e.g.,

Bargeron, Schlingemann, Stulz, and Zutter, 2008). However, DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Rice (1984)

study going private transactions in a different era and find that the average premium in all cash going

private transactions is not different from all cash tender offers by public firms. If acquisitions by private

equity firms where the CEO is retained are mostly the equivalent of going private transactions, their

results would imply that private equity firms would not pay less than public firms in acquisitions where

the CEO is retained. We find that private equity firms pay lower premiums than public firms whether the

CEO is retained or not. Consequently, the greater likelihood of CEO retention in acquisitions by private

equity firms cannot explain why private equity firms offer lower premiums than public firms. In contrast,

however, targets of private operating companies receive the same premium as targets of public companies

when the CEO is retained, but they receive a lower premium when the CEO is not retained. It follows

from this result that operating companies find acquisitions to be worth less when they do not find it

worthwhile to, or cannot, retain the CEO of the acquired company after the acquisition.

    The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we describe the sample construction. In Section 3, we

investigate the determinants of CEO retention. In Section 4, we compare premiums across acquisition

types when the CEO is retained and when the CEO is not retained. In Section 5, we examine whether the

results differ when a top manager who is not the CEO is retained instead of the CEO. We conclude in

Section 6.



2. Sample construction

    Our sample of acquisitions comes from the Securities Data Company’s (SDC) U.S. Merger and

Acquisition Database. We focus on a sample of cash-only offers to have an apples-to-apples comparison

between deals involving private bidders and those involving public bidders. We collect all completed

majority acquisitions for the period 1994-2006 between U.S. public targets and U.S. bidders in which the

acquirer owns 100% of the shares of the target after the deal and the form of payment is cash only. We

exclude all transactions with non-operating targets, without disclosed deal value, and labeled as spin-offs,


                                                     6
recaps, self-tenders, exchange offers, repurchases, minority stake purchases, acquisitions of remaining

interest, or privatizations. We check the Lexis-Nexis database for announcement press releases in order to

verify the status of private bidders, and we exclude all cases where the bidder is a group of individual

investors. We further require each target firm to be in the Center for Research in Securities Prices (CRSP)

and Compustat databases and to have a share code indicating a public firm (10, 11). We follow Schwert

(1996) and require that the acquisition from first bid to completion takes place in no more than one year.

These filters result in a sample with 1,263 deals where 352 deals involve a private bidder. Of the 352

deals involving a private bidder, a private equity firm is the bidder in 50.85% of acquisitions.

    Using the EDGAR database we find documents for 1,138 of the 1,263 deals announced between 1994

and 2006. We search these documents to determine whether any member of the target top management

team, including the Chairman of the Board (COB), is retained by the bidder to be employed by the

merged firm. The only individuals considered for retention are target officers or the COB listed in

merger-related documents filed with the SEC.4 We conclude that there is retention if at least one member

of the target’s management is retained.

    Retention is generally indicated by one of two types of statements. First, “it is generally expected that

a number of our executive officers will remain after the Merger is completed.” More specific statements

clearly identify the managers who will be retained. Second, “the executive officers of Il Fornaio that are

expected to remain officers of Il Fornaio following completion of the merger are Michael J. Hislop

(President and Chief Executive Officer), Michael J. Beatrice (Executive Vice President of Operations)

and Paul J. Kelley (Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer).” A deal is classified as

involving the retention of the CEO if the merger documents have a statement explicitly indicating that the

CEO is retained. It could be, therefore, that in some retention cases the CEO is retained even though we

find no information in the merger documents indicating that this is the case. In our analysis, we focus


4
  We primarily review merger-related proxy statements, tender offers, and tender offer agreements. These include,
but are not limited to, any iteration of S-4, PREM, DEFM, DEFA, DEFC, etc. for mergers and any iteration of 14-D
and 14-C for tender offers. We examine all documents around the time of the merger announcement up to and
including the effective date.


                                                       7
mostly on cases where the CEO is explicitly retained, but we also investigate the relation between the

acquisition premium and retention of a top executive other than the CEO.

    The deal is considered to have no retention if there is no mention of retention in the merger

documents. In addition, we do not classify deals as retention deals if the target’s managers are offered

new employment agreements by the target firm before the merger unless there is language indicating the

bidder’s intention to not only honor the agreement (which could simply mean that the bidder intends to

pay the severance attached to the new agreement), but also to retain the management after the merger. In

some cases, certain members of target management are indicated as being retained on a temporary basis

to assist during the transition period of the merger. Such cases and other temporary employment cases

(employment that is mentioned as temporary, transitional, or a term lasting one year or less) are not

included in the retention sample. Managers who are offered consulting agreements are also not considered

to be retained by the acquirer.

    In 505 of the 1,138 deals we find that at least one individual is retained based on the above criteria.

For the deals where there is retention, we determine whether the target CEO is retained. In 383 of the 505

deals with retention, the target CEO is retained. Our base sample consisting of 1,016 acquisitions

excludes the 122 deals in which an executive is retained but the CEO is not. The target CEO is retained in

225 public bidder deals and 158 private bidder deals (66.46% of these deals involve a private equity

firm). For 510 (123) public (private) bidder deals there is no retention. Of the 123 deals with a private

firm acquirer where there is no retention, 38.21% are acquisitions involving a private equity firm.



3. Determinants of retention

    The conflict of interest and valuable CEO hypotheses have different implications for the

characteristics of the target when the CEO is retained. In this section, we investigate how firm

characteristics differ depending on whether the CEO is retained and whether differences in firm

characteristics are supportive of the hypotheses we have developed concerning the retention of CEOs.




                                                     8
    Table 1 provides comparisons of firm characteristics by bidder type and CEO retention. For these

comparisons, we split the sample into acquisitions by public firms and by private firms. We further

provide data separately for acquisitions by private equity firms and acquisitions by private operating

firms. For each bidder type, we provide information separately for the acquisitions where the CEO is

retained and those where she is not. CEO retention occurs in 56.23% of acquisitions by private firms, but

only in 30.61% of acquisitions by public firms. Private equity bidders retain the target CEO in 69.08% of

the acquisitions. The CEO is retained in 41.09% of the acquisitions by private operating companies.

These differences in the frequency of CEO retention across the various bidder types suggest that it is not

meaningful to unconditionally compare firm and deal characteristics or target premiums for acquisitions

where the CEO is retained and those where she is not. Such comparisons would effectively amount to

comparing public firm acquisitions to private firm acquisitions. Throughout Table 1 we report medians,

except for binary variables where we report means. It is common in corporate finance to focus on medians

because they are less sensitive to outliers. For binary variables, the mean is a measure of frequency.

    Our first firm characteristic is the level of target insider ownership (TARGET_INSIDE_OWN)

obtained from the Compact D Disclosure database. Insider ownership in the case of targets of public firms

is the same whether the CEO is retained or not. In contrast, however, targets acquired by private firms

where the CEO is retained have significantly higher insider ownership. This result holds for both types of

private acquirers as well. Strikingly, targets of private acquirers where the CEO is retained have higher

insider ownership than targets of public firms when the CEO is retained. The opposite result holds for

acquisitions by private equity firms when the CEO is not retained.

    We use the log of the market value of equity as our measure of size (ln(MVE)). Private bidder targets

are smaller than public bidder targets except for targets of private equity firms when the CEO is retained.

For the sample of private acquirers, the target is significantly larger if the CEO is retained than if she is

not. In contrast, there is no significant difference in the size of targets of public bidders when the CEO is

retained and when she is not.




                                                     9
    We consider next four measures of performance: Tobin’s q (Q), industry-adjusted Tobin’s q (IAQ),

operating cash flow (OCF), and the past twelve month stock return (ARET_12). Tobin’s q is defined as

the ratio of the firm’s market value of assets (defined as the book value of assets minus the book value of

equity plus the market value of equity) to the book value of assets. Tobin’s q is highest for public firm

acquisitions. To the extent that Tobin’s q, or industry adjusted Tobin’s q, captures managerial talent or

managerial synergies, our valuable CEO hypothesis predicts a positive association between Tobin’s q and

CEO retention. Though Tobin’s q does not differ between the CEO retention sample and the no retention

sample for acquisitions by public companies or by private operating companies, it is significantly higher

for private equity acquisitions when the CEO is retained than otherwise. Similar results hold for industry-

adjusted q.

    Operating cash flow, defined as sales minus cost of goods sold, sales and general administrative

expenses, and change in net working capital, divided by book value of assets, is a measure of

performance. For public firm acquisitions, there is no difference in operating cash flow between the CEO

retention sample and the no retention sample. For private firm acquisitions, operating cash flow of firms

where the CEO is retained is higher than for public firm acquisitions and than for private firm acquisitions

where the CEO is not retained. The latter result is driven by the acquisitions by private operating firms.

    ARET_12 is measured as the market-adjusted buy-and-hold return for the 12 months prior to the

runup period or from day -316 to day -63 relative to the announcement date. There is generally no

difference in ARET_12 when comparing acquisitions by public and private firms. Further, none of the

median differences between the CEO retention sample and the no retention sample across different bidder

types are significant.

    Leverage could be considered as a measure of performance as well. However, leverage also affects

the ability of a firm to make payouts to equity to fend off an acquisition attempt and the ability of a bidder

to borrow against the assets of the target. Leverage (DEBT), defined as the debt-to-assets ratio, is

calculated as the book value of debt divided by the sum of the book value of debt and the market value of

equity. We find that leverage is higher for public firms when the CEO is not retained than otherwise.


                                                     10
However, for other acquisitions, leverage is the same whether the CEO is retained or not. Interestingly,

we find that leverage levels are significantly higher for acquisitions by private firms relative to

acquisitions by public firms for the sample of deals where the CEO retained.

    We consider two stock volatility measures. Firms with greater volatility are likely to be firms with

greater information asymmetries. CEO retention might be more valuable for such firms. The first measure

is the stock’s total volatility (STDEV) for days -379 to -127. The second measure is the volatility of the

stock’s market model residual (STDEVAR) over the period. There is no difference in these measures

across firms acquired by different bidder types and between retention and no retention samples for a given

bidder type.

    Our next two measures are liquidity measures. The first measure is a measure of the liquidity of the

assets of the target (TARLIQ) developed by Schlingemann, Stulz, and Walkling (2002). This measure is

the ratio at the four-digit SIC code level of corporate control transactions to the assets of the firms in

Compustat. A higher value of this measure means that the market for corporate control is more active. We

would expect more potential competition if the market for the corporate assets is more liquid. With a

more liquid market, we would expect conflicts of interest to be less important because there would be

more potential entrants in the bidding for the firm, so that a bidder that agrees to retain the CEO might

still see the premium driven to where it would have been without retention through competition. There is

no difference in TARLIQ across bidder types or within bidder types across the retention and no retention

samples. We also use the Amihud (2002) measure of common stock illiquidity (STOCKLIQ). Greater

stock liquidity would make it easier for arbitrageurs to take positions and for investors to take block

positions to influence a deal. We find no evidence of a difference in stock liquidity across types of

acquisitions.

    Finally, we consider deal characteristics. All variables are binary variables and we report their means.

We use the following characteristics: whether another offer is made (COMPETE) for the target prior to

the winning bid, whether the announcement of the offer of the winning bidder is followed by a bid by

another firm (INITBID), whether the offer is a tender offer (TENDER), whether the bidder has a toehold


                                                    11
(TOEHOLD), whether the deal has a target termination fee (TARTERM), and finally whether the deal

has bidder lockup provisions (BIDLOCK). COMPETE is significantly lower for acquisitions by operating

companies when the CEO is retained, but not for acquisitions by private equity firms. Private operating

firm acquisitions are less likely to have target termination fees when the CEO is retained. There is no

difference for any acquirer type in the frequency of toeholds whether the CEO is retained or not. For

public firm acquisitions and private equity firm acquisitions, tender offers are less frequent when the CEO

is retained. Surprisingly, CEO retention is not related to the probability of a subsequent bid. Finally,

bidder lockups are more likely if the CEO is retained for acquisitions by private operating companies but

not for acquisitions by other firms.

    The differences across acquirer types in the frequency of CEO retention could be explained by

differences in target characteristics or deal types rather than by differences in the organizational form of

the acquirer. In Table 2, we use logistic regressions to investigate whether CEO retention is explained by

the type of acquirer in addition to firm and deal characteristics. We find that CEO retention is more likely

if the acquirer is a private firm even when controlling for firm and deal characteristics. The target CEO is

more likely to be retained when insider ownership of the target is higher. CEO retention is positively

related to target performance as measured by Tobin’s q and operating income. CEO retention is less likely

if the market for corporate control for firms in the target’s industry is more active and if there is

competition for the target. Importantly, CEO retention seems accompanied by agreements that impose

penalties on the target for walking away from the merger. For a subset of firms, we have the age of the

CEO. We therefore re-estimate our logistic regressions from Table 2 for that subset of firms. We find that

the likelihood of CEO retention decreases with the age of the CEO. Adding the age of the CEO to the

regression does not affect our other conclusions.

    The results in Tables 1 and 2 reveal important differences between targets where the CEO is retained

by the acquirer and other targets. The CEO is more likely to be retained when the target has performed

well using operating income and Tobin’s q as measures of performance. Such a result is supportive of the

valuable CEO hypothesis. We also find that the CEO is more likely to be retained when insiders at the


                                                    12
target firm own a greater fraction of the firm’s shares. Such a result does not seem to support the conflict

of interest hypothesis. At the same time, we find that the CEO is less likely to be retained in acquisitions

that involve competition and where the bidder makes a tender offer. The CEO can affect the extent of

competition. The fact that the CEO is less likely to be retained when there is competition suggests that

there may be a personal cost to the target CEO from resisting aggressively and losing. The existence of

such a cost would make it more likely that the CEO would bargain for private benefits at the expense of a

higher premium. Consequently, our study of the determinants of retention, while supportive of the

valuable CEO hypothesis, does not make it possible to reject the conflict of interest hypothesis. However,

it could also be that competition is more likely when managerial synergies are low, so that the association

between CEO retention and lack of competition might simply reveal that the merger is more valuable for

a specific bidder because of managerial synergies and therefore would not indicate a cost of generating

competition for the target CEO. To assess the relevance of the various hypotheses, it is therefore

necessary to consider the relation between CEO retention and the premium paid.



4. Acquisition premiums and CEO retention

    This section examines the return to the target shareholders from the acquisition. We use the Center for

Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) database to collect daily return data for our sample of targets. We

estimate target shareholder gains over short event windows using standard event study methods (see, e.g.,

Brown and Warner, 1985). We compute cumulative abnormal returns (CAR) using market model

abnormal returns based on the CRSP value-weighted index. Market model parameters are estimated from

day -379 to day -127 relative to the first acquisition announcement day as in Schwert (1996). Such a

measure is commonly used. It is much less sensitive to benchmark specification (see, e.g., Brown and

Warner, 1985) than measures that cumulate returns over a long period of time, but it would be biased and

incomplete if there are systematic differences in how information about acquisition likelihood and terms

is revealed to the market before and after the bid announcement between different types of acquisitions.

To account for bid revisions, we calculate abnormal returns from the day before the announcement to the


                                                    13
close of the acquisition. We use size and book-to-market adjusted buy-and-hold returns (FFRET).5 To

further account for events that precede the announcement, we estimate size and book-to-market portfolio

adjusted buy-and-hold abnormal returns from 42 days before the winning bid to completion (WBC). As

Schwert (1996) notes, this approach to estimating the premium has the advantage of including all of the

days when the offer to the target shareholders might have changed as well as any pre-bid runup. When

using this measure of the premium, it cannot be argued that somehow we find differences in premiums

because takeover contests proceed differently for private bidders than they do for public bidders or for

cases where the CEO is retained than when she is not. However, this measure has two potentially serious

problems. First, the return can be affected by news not related to the acquisition since the returns before

the acquisition announcement can reflect news about the target’s business as a stand-alone firm. As a

result, the returns estimated over a long period are noisier estimates of the gain from the acquisition.

Second, the return measure is sensitive to misspecification of the benchmark return.6 This second problem

applies to the FFRET measure as well.

    We show first in Table 3 the mean and median CAR estimates. In both Panel A and Panel B, the CAR

estimates are generally lower for acquisitions by private firms than they are for acquisitions by public

firms. However, when there is no retention, both the mean and median CARs for acquisitions by private

equity firms and by private operating firms are lower than for acquisitions by public firms. In contrast,

where there is CEO retention, only CARs of acquisitions by private equity firms are lower than the CARs

of acquisitions by public firms. These results indicate therefore that the premium paid by private

operating companies is lower than the premium paid by public firms only when the acquisition does not

involve the retention of the CEO. For public firm acquisitions, there is no difference between the CEO

retention and the no retention samples. In contrast, the CARs are significantly lower for acquisitions by

private firms when the CEO is not retained. First, using the means, the CAR estimate when the CEO is

retained is higher by 6.32 percentage points than when the CEO is not retained. This difference is

5
  Size and book-to-market adjusted returns are calculated using the returns on the 25 Fama-French size and book-to­
market portfolios. Our results are similar if we use market-model cumulative abnormal return measures.
6
  See Kothari and Warner (2007).


                                                        14
significant at the 10% level. For medians, the difference is 3.68% and it is also significant at the 10%

level. When we consider separately private equity firm and private operating firm acquisitions, the

difference in CARs between acquisitions with CEO retention and those without are not statistically

significant. This seems to be due to the lower power of the tests on the subsamples because the estimates

of the mean differences in premiums are quite large, ranging from 5.42% for acquisitions by private

equity firms to 10.36% for acquisitions by private operating firms. In summary, we see no evidence that

shareholders receive less when the CEO is retained and some evidence that they receive more for private

firm acquisitions. Table 3 also shows buy-and-hold abnormal returns from the day before the

announcement to completion of the offer using the FFRET measure. The FFRET returns are significantly

lower for acquisitions by private firms than for acquisitions by public firms whether the CEO is retained

or not. However, there is no significant difference between the premium paid when the CEO is retained

and when she is not for any type of bidder. The results are similar for the WBC estimate of the premium.

It is interesting to note that for private firm acquisitions the mean difference between the CEO retention

and no retention samples is slightly negative while the median difference is larger than for the CAR

results but insignificant. Such differences suggest that the estimates of the WBC premium are much

noisier. Finally, we also provide data on the runup (RUNUP) in Table 3 which is the market-adjusted

buy-and-hold return from 63 days prior to the announcement to 6 days prior to the announcement. We

find that the RUNUP is smaller for acquisitions by public firms where the CEO is retained. There is no

difference in the RUNUP between the CEO retention and the no retention samples for the other types of

acquisitions.

    Table 3 does not offer evidence that shareholders are hurt by CEO retention, but instead offers some

evidence that they benefit. However, we saw in Section 3 that there are many target and deal

characteristic differences between the CEO retention and no retention samples. It could be, therefore, that

our evidence on abnormal returns masks differences in premiums once we take into account firm and deal

characteristics. To conduct this investigation, we estimate regressions where the dependent variable is a

measure of the premium. Our regressions control for variables that have been used in previous studies to


                                                    15
explain abnormal returns associated with acquisition announcements and premiums. These variables are

the target and deal characteristics we described in Section 3. In addition, we include an indicator variable

for acquisitions by private firms and an indicator variable for cases where the CEO is retained. These

regressions are models (1) to (3) of Table 4. Each regression uses a different measure of the premium.

The coefficient on the CEO retention indicator variable is insignificant for all three regressions. In all

cases, the coefficient represents a difference of less than one percentage point in the premium in absolute

value. The indicator variable for private firm acquisitions has a negative significant coefficient in all

regressions. Consequently, we find no evidence that CEO retention is associated with a lower premium.

Further, controlling for CEO retention does not affect the known result that acquisitions by private firms

have a lower premium.

    We next consider the possibility that the relation between the premium and CEO retention depends on

the type of acquirer. Private equity acquisitions often involve participation of the management of the

target. In contrast, acquisitions by public firms where the CEO of the target ends up being retained are

typically not acquisitions where the target CEO is part of the acquisition team. As pointed out in the

introduction, concerns about the conflict of interest hypothesis have been especially acute for acquisitions

by private equity firms where the CEO is part of the acquisition team.

    We re-estimate regressions (1) through (3) allowing the coefficient on the CEO retention indicator

variable to differ if the acquisition is by a private equity firm or by a private operating firm. We also

allow for the premium to vary depending on the type of acquirer. The coefficient on the CEO retention

indicator variable captures the difference in premium when the target CEO in an acquisition by a public

firm is retained. These regressions are models (4) to (6) of Table 4. The coefficient on the CEO retention

indicator variable is insignificant in each specification. The coefficient on the private equity acquirer

indicator variable is significantly negative in each specification. In model (4), the interaction between the

private equity bidder indicator variable and the CEO retention indicator variable is significantly positive.

It follows that the CAR premium is significantly higher for private equity acquisitions when the CEO is

retained. Unreported F-tests reveal that, for the CAR measure of the premium, the premium received by


                                                     16
shareholders in private equity transactions is higher when the CEO is retained, but remains significantly

lower than if the acquisition were made by a public firm. The conclusion regarding the difference

between private equity and public transactions holds irrespective of the premium measure employed. The

premium on acquisitions by private operating companies is significantly lower in models (4) and (5) but

not when we use the WBC premium in model (6). As for acquisitions by private operating firms, the

interaction with CEO retention is positive and significant in regression (4). It is interesting to note that the

estimate of the interaction is 12.01% whereas the estimate of the private operating firm indicator variable

is -10.21%. Consequently, the interaction more than offsets the acquirer type indicator variable. Not

surprisingly, therefore, additional unreported F-tests show that the premium for acquisitions by private

operating companies is statistically indistinguishable from the premium for acquisitions by public

companies when the CEO is retained. The premium paid by private operating companies is significantly

lower than in acquisitions by public firms when the CEO is not retained. In model (5), the interaction

between the private operating firm indicator variable and the CEO retention indicator variable is positive

as well.

    It follows from regressions (4) to (6) that CEO retention plays an important role in explaining the

premium difference between acquisitions by public firms and acquisitions by private firms. Acquisitions

by private equity firms always have a lower premium, but acquisitions by operating companies have a

lower premium only when the CEO is not retained. The evidence that CEO retention is valuable for

acquisitions by private firms but not by public firms is not supportive of the conflict of interest

hypothesis. The evidence is supportive of the valuable CEO hypothesis, but it raises a puzzle: Why is the

CEO more valuable for private firm acquisitions than for public firm acquisitions?

    In the introduction, we offered a third hypothesis, labeled the shareholder bribe hypothesis. With this

hypothesis, when concerns about the conflict of interest are high acquirers would pay more to reduce

litigation risks. Therefore, we would expect that the difference in premium between CEO retention and no

retention would be greatest for management buyouts (MBOs) where the executives of the acquired firm

are involved in the acquisition team. In our sample of acquisitions by private equity firms, we find 54


                                                      17
MBOs. The CAR measure for the private equity MBO acquisitions is 23.29% and it is 21.31% for the

non-MBO private equity acquisitions. The difference between these two estimates is not significant.

Though we do not report the results in a table, we estimate regressions of the premium on the same

variables as in Table 4 except that we now have an MBO indicator variable and a CEO retention indicator

variable. With this classification of acquisitions, we find that neither the MBO indicator variable nor the

CEO retention indicator variables are individually significant in any of the regressions. Further, the MBO

indicator variable and the CEO retention indicator variable are not jointly significant. It follows from

these results that there is no evidence that premiums are different for MBOs.

    A possible concern with the regressions we estimate is that we know that the CEO is more likely to be

retained when insider ownership is high. High insider ownership makes it less likely that the premium

will be low because the CEO is pursuing private benefits at the expense of the shareholders. Higher

insider ownership could also drive up the premium if the supply curve of shares to the bidder is upward

sloping (Stulz, 1988). Hence, it could well be that the premium is in some cases higher when the CEO is

retained simply because insider ownership is high, so that retention acts as a proxy for high insider

ownership. To investigate this possibility, we collect insider ownership for the firms in our sample. For

the subset of firms for which insider ownership is available, we re-estimate the regressions of Table 4 but,

following McConnell and Servaes (1990), we add the level and the square of insider ownership to allow

insider ownership to have a non-linear impact on the premium. Though we do not report these

regressions, we estimate regressions for the whole sample. In these regressions, the CEO retention

indicator variable, the insider ownership variable, and the square of the insider ownership variable are not

significant. However, the private firm acquisition indicator variable has a significant negative coefficient

in each regression.

    We next consider separate regressions for private and public acquirers. Regressions (1) through (3) of

Table 5 have the estimates for public firm acquisitions. Neither the CEO retention indicator variable nor

the insider ownership variables are significant. In regressions (4) through (6), we use the sample of

acquisitions by private firms. We find that the indicator variable for CEO retention is positive and


                                                    18
significant in equation (4). Neither the level nor the square of insider ownership is significant. It follows

from these regressions that adding insider ownership variables does not affect our conclusions concerning

CEO retention.



5. Non-CEO retention

    So far, the analysis has focused on cases where the CEO is retained by the acquirer. When building

the sample we identified 122 cases where a top-level executive other than the CEO is retained. We

examine these cases in this section. It is possible that these cases involve CEO retention as well, but the

documents do not explicitly mention the CEO. If we were to classify these 122 cases as CEO retention

cases, our earlier conclusions would not change. In this section, however, we assume that the non-CEO

retention cases are cases where the CEO is not retained. The fraction of cases where non-CEO executives

are retained but the CEO is not is highest for private operating companies (14.57% of all acquisitions) and

lowest for private equity acquisitions (8.98%). There are 85 acquisitions by public firms where non-CEO

executives are retained (10.37%). For these 85 cases, there is some evidence that the premium is higher

for acquisitions where a non-CEO executive is retained than for acquisitions where a CEO is retained

(though not for the FFRET measure). The mean CAR is 37.82% when a non-CEO executive is retained

compared to 30.27% when the CEO is retained, a differences that is significant at the 10% level, but the

difference of the medians is small and insignificant. The difference in premiums is larger when we look at

the long-term estimate of the premium, which is 56.13% for the mean when a non-CEO executive is

retained versus 41.10% when the CEO is retained; again, the difference of the medians is not significant,

but its magnitude is almost as large as the difference of the means. To conserve space these results are not

tabulated. In contrast to the results for acquisitions by public firms, there is no evidence that there is a

difference in premium when we compare acquisitions by private firms where the CEO is retained to those

where a non-CEO executive is retained.

    We next estimate regressions to assess more precisely whether the premium paid by the bidder differs

when a non-CEO executive is retained instead of the CEO. We estimate in Table 6 regressions for public


                                                     19
firm acquisitions and for private firm acquisitions. Regressions (1) through (3) show the results for the

public firm acquisitions. We use an indicator variable called RETENTION that equals one if any

executive is retained. We then have a second indicator variable called NON_CEO_RETENTION. This

indicator variable equals one if the CEO is not retained but some other executive is retained. We see that

the estimates of the coefficient on the RETENTION indicator variable are insignificant for all three

regressions. However, the indicator variable for the NON_CEO_RETENTION indicator variable is

significantly positive in models (1) and (3) and in model (2) the p-value is 0.11. Consequently, retention

of a non-CEO executive instead of a CEO leads to a higher premium for target shareholders. In

regressions not reproduced in a table, we use the sample of acquisitions without CEO retention but

include an indicator variable for non-CEO retention. In that regression, all coefficients on that indicator

variable have a positive coefficient. The coefficient is 0.1443 for the WBC measure and is statistically

significant at the 5% level.

    Regressions (4) through (6) show estimates of identical regressions but using the sample of private

firm acquisitions. We see that the coefficient on RETENTION is positive and marginally significant only

for the CAR measure of the premium, but not the others. The coefficient on NON_CEO_RETENTION is

insignificant irrespective of the premium measure, so that it does not make a difference for the return to

target shareholders whether the CEO is retained or the CEO is not retained but some other executive is

retained.



6. Conclusion

    In this paper, we have investigated the determinants of target CEO retention in an acquisition and the

implications of target CEO retention for the premium paid by the acquirer. There is much concern that in

an acquisition the CEO’s interests may not be well-aligned with those of shareholders and that the CEO

may choose to negotiate for private benefits, including possibly retention, at the expense of a higher

premium for the shareholders. Our evidence is not supportive of this conflict of interest hypothesis.




                                                    20
    We consider first the determinants of CEO retention. We find that CEOs of better performing firms

and of firms with greater insider ownership are more likely to be retained. However, CEOs of better

performing firms are precisely managers who would have better opportunities in the managerial labor

market, so that retention would be less valuable for them, and CEOs that the acquirer would be more

likely to want to retain because their performance is good, so that retention would be less likely to be at

the expense of target shareholders. Further, when insiders have high holdings of shares, their incentives

are better aligned with those of other shareholders, so that they will push hard for a higher premium. We

find that CEOs in tender offers and in competitive situations are less likely to be retained. These results

are consistent with the view that management that resists more, either directly or by generating

competitive offers, is less likely to be retained. One could therefore argue that this evidence provides

indirect support for the existence of a conflict of interest. However, it is also possible that there is more

competition when managerial synergies are lower, so that CEO retention would be less likely when there

is more competition for reasons that have nothing to do with the actions of the incumbent CEO.

    When we examine the premium paid by the acquirer, we find that there is no evidence that retention

is associated with a lower premium. In fact, the evidence we do find on a relation between the premium

and retention is the opposite. We find that the stock-price reaction to the acquisition announcement is

higher for private firm acquisitions when the CEO is staying. This result holds for management buyouts

as well as for acquisitions by private equity firms where the CEO is retained but where the CEO is not

directly part of the acquisition team. The same result does not hold for acquisitions by public companies.

    In the introduction, we presented two hypotheses that imply a greater premium when the CEO is

retained. The first hypothesis is that the premium is greater when management is part of the acquisition

team to decrease the risk of litigation. We find, however, that the premium is greater for acquisitions by

private operating companies, a result that cannot be explained by this shareholder bribe hypothesis. The

second hypothesis we called the valuable CEO hypothesis. With this hypothesis, the retention of the CEO

creates value for the acquisition and the price paid for the acquisition reflects this value. Another, perhaps

more precise way to describe this hypothesis is that there are managerial synergies as suggested by


                                                     21
Matsusaka (1993). However, we find no evidence that the CEO retention is valuable for acquisitions by

public firms. These results create a puzzle, which is why CEO retention would be more valuable when the

acquirer is a private firm than when the acquirer is a public firm.




                                                     22
                                                References

Agrawal, A., Walkling, R.A., 1994, Executive careers and compensation surrounding takeover bids,

   Journal of Finance 49, 985-1014.

Amihud, Y., 2002, Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time-series effects, Journal of

   Financial Markets 5, 31-56.

Bargeron, L., Schlingemann, F.P., Stulz, R.M., Zutter C., 2008, Why do private acquirers pay so little

   compared to public acquirers?, Journal of Financial Economics 89-3, 375-390.

Brown, S., Warner J., 1985, Using daily stock returns, the case of event studies, Journal of Financial

   Economics 14, 3-31.

DeAngelo, H., DeAngelo, L., and E. M. Rice, 1984, Going private: Minority freezeouts and stockholder

   wealth, Journal of Law and Economics 27, 367-401.

Hartzell, J., E. Ofek, and D. Yermack, 2004, What’s in it for me? CEOs whose firms are acquired,

   Review of Financial Studies 17, 37-61.

Kothari, S.P., and J. Warner, 2007, Econometrics of event studies, in S.P. Eckbo, Handbook of Corporate

   Finance, Vol. 1, North-Holland.

Matsusaka, J. G., 1993, Takeover motives during the conglomerate merger wave, The RAND Journal of

   Economics 24, 357-379.

McConnell, J.J., Martin, K.J., 1991, Corporate performance, corporate takeovers, and managerial

   turnover, Journal of Finance 46, 671-687.

McConnell, J.J., Servaes, H., 1990, Additional evidence on equity ownership and corporate value, Journal

   of Financial Economics 27, 595-612.

Moeller, T., 2005, Let’s make a deal! How shareholder control impacts merger payoffs, Journal of

   Financial Economics 76, 167-190.

Schlingemann, F.P., Stulz, R.M., Walkling, R.A., 2002, Divestitures and the liquidity of the market for

   corporate assets. Journal of Financial Economics 64, 117-144.

Schwert, G., 1996, Markup pricing in mergers and acquisitions, Journal of Financial Economics 41, 153­


                                                  23
   192.

Stulz, R., 1988, Managerial control of voting rights: Financing policies and the market for corporate

   control, Journal of Financial Economics 20, 25-54.

Wulf, J., 2004, Do CEOs in mergers trade power for premium? Evidence from “mergers of equals,”

   Journal of Law Economics & Organization 20, 60-101.




                                                 24
Table 1
Summary statistics on target and deal characteristics
The sample includes all SDC completed cash-only merger and acquisition deals between a U.S. bidder and a U.S. public target announced between 1994 and
2006 that result in 100% ownership by the bidder. Mean or median target and deal characteristics are reported for public bidder deals, private bidder deals,
private equity bidder deals, and private operating bidder deals by CEO retention and no retention. The target insider ownership (TARGET_INSIDE_OWN) is the
aggregate insider ownership listed in the Compact D Disclosure database. The market value of equity (MVE) is from CRSP calculated as the CPI-adjusted (2005
dollars) price of the stock times the number of shares outstanding 63 days prior to the announcement date. Tobin’s q (Q) is defined as the firm market value
assets divided by the book value of assets. Industry-adjusted Tobin’s q (IAQ) is defined as Tobin’s q minus the median two-digit SIC code industry value of this
variable. Operating cash flow (OCF) is defined as sales minus costs of goods sold, sales and general administrative expenses, and change in net working capital,
divided by book value of assets. ARET_12 is the market-adjusted buy-and-hold return from day -316 to day -63 relative to the announcement date. Debt-to-assets
(DEBT) is calculated as the book value of debt divided by the sum of the book value of debt and the market value of equity. STDEV and STDEVAR are defined,
respectively, as the raw returns from day -379 to day -127 relative to the announcement date and standard deviation of the market model residuals. TARLIQ is
the liquidity of the market for corporate control for the target firm’s industry and is defined as the value of all corporate control transactions for $1 million or
more reported by SDC for each year and two-digit SIC code divided by the total book value of assets of all Compustat firms in the same two-digit SIC code and
year. STOCKLIQ is the measure of stock illiquidity of Amihud (2002). COMPETE is an indicator variable equal to one if another deal for the same target is
announced in SDC during the 12 months prior to the announcement date. INITBID is an indicator variable equal to one if the announcement of the offer is
followed by an offer by another firm, while no bids took place during the 12 months before the announcement. TENDER, TOEHOLD, TARTERM, and
BIDLOCK are indicator variables from SDC equal to one if the deal respectively is a tender offer, involves a bidder that holds 0.5% or more of the target stock
prior to the announcement, includes target termination fees, and includes bidder lockup provisions. Mean [median] values for the non-public bidder deals that are
significantly different from the corresponding mean [median] value for the public bidder deals denoted with a, b, or c, are significant at the 1%, 5%, or 10%
level, respectively. Within the bidder groupings, differences in means [medians] between CEO retention and no retention denoted with α, β, or γ, are significant
at the 1%, 5%, or 10% level, respectively.




                                                                                25
                           Public bidder deals            Private bidder deals       Private equity bidder deals   Private operating bidder deals
                      CEO          No                CEO           No               CEO          No                CEO          No
                    retention retention Difference retention retention Difference retention retention Difference retention retention Difference
n                      225         510                158         123                105         47                 53           76

Mean values
TARGET_INSIDE_OWN    0.1083     0.1024    0.0059     0.1654c    0.0742    0.0912α     0.1511c    0.0536c   0.0975α      0.1702    0.0830    0.0872γ
ln(MVE)              4.8536    4.8677    -0.0141     4.3585c    4.2853a    0.0732      4.6770   4.4107b    0.2663      3.9952a    4.1187a   0.8765
Q                    1.2724     1.2989   -0.0265     1.2004b    1.0361a   0.1643α      1.2422    1.0706a   0.1716β     1.0695a    1.0206a   0.0489
IAQ                 -0.0483    -0.1111   -0.0628    -0.1939b   -0.2731a   -0.0792    -0.1935b   -0.3101b   -0.1166    -0.1944b   -0.2569b   -0.0625
OCF                  0.0896     0.0850    0.0046       0.12a    0.0803    0.0397α     0.1307a    0.0925    0.0382       0.1041    0.0684    0.0357
ARET_12             -0.1523    -0.1643   -0.0120     -0.1941   -0.0985     0.0956     -0.1754   -0.0772    0.0982      -0.2123   -0.0991    0.1132
DEBT                 0.0806     0.1114   -0.0308γ    0.1821a    0.1451     0.0370     0.1888a    0.1590    0.0298        0.16c    0.1425    0.0175
STDEV                0.0358     0.0336    0.0022      0.0335    0.0352    -0.0017      0.0325    0.0401    -0.0076      0.0351    0.0314    0.0037
STDEVAR              0.0355     0.0328    0.0027      0.0325    0.0348    -0.0023      0.0318    0.0364    -0.0046      0.0350    0.0314    0.0036
TARLIQ               0.0454     0.0491   -0.0037      0.0454    0.0470    -0.0016      0.0470    0.0470     0.0000      0.0267    0.0454    -0.0187
STOCKLIQ             0.0266     0.0177    0.0089      0.0434    0.0848a   -0.0414      0.0320   0.0661b    -0.0341     0.0822a    0.0865a   -0.0043

Median values
COMPETE             0.0267     0.0725    -0.0459α   0.0316     0.1138     -0.0822β   0.0476     0.0638      -0.0162   0.0000     0.1447c    -0.1447α
INITBID             0.0267     0.0137      0.0129   0.0190     0.0244     -0.0054    0.0286     0.0213      0.0073    0.0000     0.0263      -0.0263
TENDER              0.4089     0.5059    -0.0970β   0.2468a    0.3659a    -0.1190β   0.2095a    0.4468     -0.2373α   0.3208     0.3158a      0.0050
TOEHOLD             0.0622     0.0392      0.0230   0.0823     0.0325      0.0498γ   0.1143     0.0638      0.0505    0.0189c    0.0132c      0.0057
TARTERM             0.7156     0.7255     -0.0099   0.5886a    0.7073     -0.1187β   0.6000b    0.6596      -0.0596   0.5660b    0.7368     -0.1708β
BIDLOCK             0.0667     0.0588      0.0078   0.0506     0.0163a     0.0344    0.0190b    0.0213      -0.0022   0.1132     0.0132a     0.1000β




                                                                     26
Table 2
CEO retention logistic regression analysis
The sample includes all SDC completed cash-only merger and acquisition deals between a U.S. bidder and a U.S.
public target announced between 1994 and 2006 that result in 100% ownership by the bidder. The dependent
variable (CEO_RETENTION) is equal to one for deals where the target CEO is retained by the bidder and zero
otherwise. PEBIDDER (POBIDDER) is an indicator variable equal to one if the bidder is a private equity
(operating) firm. All remaining variables are defined in the header of Table 1. Regressions include year and industry
(two-digit SIC code main classifications) dummy variables. p-values are in brackets and are based on
heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors. Coefficients denoted with a, b, or c, are significant at the 1%, 5%, or
10% level, respectively.
                                          (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
                                   CEO_RETENTION CEO_RETENTION CEO_RETENTION CEO_RETENTION
PEBIDDER                                1.5959a       1.5474a      1.5970a        1.6135a
                                        [0.000]       [0.000]       [0.000]       [0.000]
POBIDDER                               0.4119c       0.4521b       0.4233c        0.4143c
                                        [0.065]       [0.039]       [0.059]       [0.064]
TARGET_INSIDE_OWN                       0.8882 a      0.9194a      0.9413a        0.9340a
                                        [0.009]       [0.008]       [0.006]       [0.006]
ln(MVE)                                 0.0052        0.0104        0.0359        0.0205
                                        [0.930]       [0.877]       [0.598]       [0.760]
Q                                      0.1657 b       0.1445       0.1703b
                                        [0.043]       [0.103]       [0.041]
IAQ                                                                              0.1898b
                                                                                  [0.015]
OCF                                     0.8170c       0.8503c      0.8055c       0.9097b
                                        [0.077]       [0.061]       [0.082]       [0.048]
ARET_12                                -0.0349       -0.0299       -0.0252       -0.0475
                                        [0.763]       [0.793]       [0.825]       [0.676]
RUNUP                                  -0.4206c      -0.4063c      -0.4373c      -0.4046c
                                        [0.068]       [0.079]       [0.060]       [0.079]
DEBT                                   -0.1872       -0.2683       -0.2304       -0.2538
                                        [0.651]       [0.514]       [0.582]       [0.536]
STDEV                                                 2.0311
                                                      [0.645]
STDEVAR                                                            -1.5754        2.1157
                                                                    [0.747]       [0.633]
TARLIQ                                 -5.2541a                    -5.3823a      -5.0937a
                                        [0.000]                     [0.000]       [0.000]
STOCKLIQ                                                           0.0800c
                                                                    [0.081]
COMPETE                                -1.0589a      -1.0791a      -1.0767a      -1.0885a
                                        [0.003]       [0.002]       [0.003]       [0.002]
INITBID                                 0.2415        0.3828        0.3088        0.2786
                                        [0.651]       [0.481]       [0.565]       [0.603]
TENDER                                 -0.3460c      -0.3544b      -0.3394c      -0.3562c
                                        [0.056]       [0.046]       [0.065]       [0.051]
TOEHOLD                                 0.4406        0.4627        0.4685        0.4546
                                        [0.196]       [0.170]       [0.174]       [0.182]
TARTERM                                -0.1567       -0.1853       -0.1494       -0.1646
                                        [0.392]       [0.306]       [0.418]       [0.371]
BIDLOCK                                               0.5954c      0.6298b        0.5944c
                                                      [0.053]       [0.040]       [0.056]
Constant                               -1.1024       -1.7999c      -1.3218       -1.0481
                                        [0.237]       [0.056]       [0.169]       [0.284]

Observations                               925                 928                  925                  925
Pseudo R-squared                          0.119               0.106                0.125                0.123



                                                         27
Table 3
Target return measures for different bidder types
The sample includes all SDC completed cash-only merger and acquisition deals between a U.S. bidder and a U.S.
public target announced between 1994 and 2006 that result in 100% ownership by the bidder. Panel A reports mean
and median [in brackets] target returns for deals with CEO retention. Panel B reports mean and median [in brackets]
target returns for deals with no CEO retention. Panel C reports differences in target returns for deals with CEO
retention and no retention. The variables CAR is the 3-day cumulative abnormal returns around the announcement
day, based on market model parameters. The variable FFRET is the Fama-French size and book-to-market portfolio-
adjusted buy-and-hold return from one day before the announcement date to the completion date of the transaction.
The variable WBC is the Fama-French size and book-to-market portfolio-adjusted buy-and-hold return from 42
trading days prior to the announcement of the winning bid to the completion date. RUNUP is the market-adjusted
buy-and-hold return from 63 days prior to the announcement to 6 days prior to the announcement. All reported p-
values are based on t-tests for differences in the mean and on Wilcoxon tests for differences in the median.
                                                           Difference    Private      Difference    Private      Difference
                    Public                    Private     from public    equity      from public   operating    from public
                    bidders                   bidders       p -value     bidders       p -value     bidders       p -value
Panel A: Return measures for deals with CEO retention

n                    225                          158                      105                        53
CAR                 0.3027                      0.2624       0.198       0.2369          0.025      0.3130        0.867
                   [0.2483]                    [0.1994]      0.021      [0.1958]         0.019     [0.2090]       0.271
FFRET               0.3082                      0.2595       0.201       0.2161          0.011      0.3456        0.598
                   [0.2497]                    [0.1832]      0.021      [0.1686]         0.005     [0.2321]       0.716
WBC                 0.4110                      0.3040       0.015       0.2299          0.000      0.4509        0.569
                   [0.3330]                    [0.2607]      0.004      [0.2146]         0.000     [0.3923]       0.570
RUNUP               0.0447                      0.0593       0.559        0.0311         0.636      0.1152        0.053
                   [0.0188]                    [0.0341]      0.683      [-0.0041]        0.394     [0.0815]       0.033
Panel B: Return measures for deals with no retention

n                      510                        123                       47                        76
CAR                   0.3118                    0.1992       0.000        0.1827         0.000      0.2094        0.004
                    [0.2525]                   [0.1626]      0.000       [0.1847]        0.002     [0.1608]       0.001
FFRET                 0.3244                    0.2173       0.000        0.1953         0.001      0.2309        0.023
                    [0.2742]                   [0.1874]      0.002       [0.1868]        0.012     [0.1905]       0.025
WBC                   0.4486                    0.3148       0.006        0.2211         0.002      0.3727        0.201
                    [0.3801]                   [0.1936]      0.000       [0.1625]        0.000     [0.2955]       0.102
RUNUP                 0.0950                    0.0754       0.547        0.0393         0.122      0.0977        0.949
                    [0.0528]                   [0.0111]      0.432      [-0.0077]        0.166     [0.0488]       0.983
Panel C: Differences in return measures for deals with CEO retention and no retention

                   Difference    p -value    Difference     p -value    Difference      p -value   Difference    p -value
CAR                 -0.0091       0.700        0.0632        0.047         0.0542        0.141       0.1036       0.112
                   [-0.0042]      0.752       [0.0368]       0.093       [0.0111]        0.274      [0.0482]      0.123
FFRET               -0.0161       0.579        0.0422        0.262        0.0207         0.645       0.1146       0.127
                   [-0.0245]      0.405      [-0.0042]       0.804      [-0.0182]        0.951      [0.0416]      0.331
WBC                 -0.0377       0.324       -0.0107        0.830         0.0088        0.900       0.0782       0.350
                   [-0.0471]      0.311       [0.0671]       0.807       [0.0521]        0.482      [0.0968]      0.255
RUNUP               -0.0503       0.021       -0.0160        0.635        -0.0082        0.845       0.0175       0.729
                   [-0.0340]      0.104       [0.0230]       0.866       [0.0030]        0.715      [0.0327]      0.358




                                                           28
Table 4
Target premium multiple regression analysis
The sample includes all SDC completed cash-only merger and acquisition deals between a U.S. bidder and a U.S.
public target announced between 1994 and 2006 that result in 100% ownership by the bidder. The dependent
variable in models (1) and (4) is CAR, in models (2) and (5) is FFRET, and in models (3) and (6) is WBC. The
dependent variables are defined in the header of Table 3. CEO_RETENTION is an indicator variable equal to one
for deals where the target CEO is retained by the bidder and zero otherwise. PEBIDDER (POBIDDER) is an
indicator variable equal to one if the bidder is a private equity (operating) firm. CEO_RETENTION_PEBIDDER
(CEO_RETENTION_POBIDDER) is an interaction term between CEO_RETENTION and PEBIDDER
(POBIDDER). All remaining variables are defined in the header of Table 1. Regressions include year and industry
(two-digit SIC code main classifications) dummy variables. p-values are in brackets and are based on
heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors. Coefficients denoted with a, b, or c, are significant at the 1%, 5%, or
10% level, respectively.
                                       (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)
                                      CAR3         FFRET           WBC          CAR3         FFRET          WBC
CEO_RETENTION                         0.008       -0.0025          -0.01       -0.0177       -0.0234       -0.015
                                     [0.680]       [0.911]        [0.741]      [0.452]       [0.408]       [0.680]
                                            a             a              a
PRIVATE                             -0.0755       -0.0682        -0.1181
                                     [0.000]       [0.004]        [0.001]
                                                                                        a             a             a
PEBIDDER                                                                      -0.1432       -0.1145       -0.2121
                                                                               [0.000]       [0.005]       [0.002]
                                                                                        a            b
POBIDDER                                                                      -0.1021       -0.0960        -0.0773
                                                                               [0.002]       [0.013]       [0.166]
                                                                                       c
CEO_RETENTION_PEBIDDER                                                         0.0843         0.0368        0.0354
                                                                               [0.053]       [0.476]       [0.639]
                                                                                       c             b
CEO_RETENTION_POBIDDER                                                         0.1201        0.1466         0.0946
                                                                               [0.055]       [0.043]       [0.270]
                                              c                           b             c                         b
ln(MVE)                             -0.0166         -0.014       -0.0363      -0.0165        -0.0132      -0.0336
                                     [0.078]       [0.175]        [0.011]      [0.076]       [0.194]       [0.018]
                                             a             a                            a             a
IAQ                                 -0.0261       -0.0243         -0.0162     -0.0265       -0.0245        -0.0161
                                     [0.002]       [0.008]        [0.205]      [0.002]       [0.008]       [0.199]
OCF                                  -0.0111       -0.0207        -0.1293     -0.0121        -0.0222       -0.1258
                                     [0.878]       [0.789]        [0.219]      [0.867]       [0.773]       [0.235]
                                             a             a             a              a             a            a
ARET_12                             -0.0623       -0.0652        -0.0740      -0.0596       -0.0624       -0.0743
                                     [0.000]       [0.000]        [0.003]      [0.000]       [0.000]       [0.003]
                                             a             a                            a             a
RUNUP                               -0.1931       -0.2078                     -0.1991       -0.2154
                                     [0.000]       [0.000]                     [0.000]       [0.000]
DEBT                                 0.0047         0.0153        0.0944       0.0022         0.0153       0.1052
                                     [0.929]       [0.802]        [0.255]      [0.967]       [0.802]       [0.209]
STDEVAR                               0.574         1.2246         0.345         0.595        1.2316       0.3432
                                     [0.508]       [0.180]        [0.755]      [0.489]       [0.174]       [0.755]
                                            b              b                            c            b
TARLIQ                              -0.1672       -0.2449         -0.2001     -0.1516       -0.2374       -0.1704
                                     [0.031]       [0.018]        [0.135]      [0.057]       [0.025]       [0.213]
                                             a             b                            a             c
COMPETE                             -0.0672       -0.0576         0.0008      -0.0645       -0.0529       -0.0006
                                     [0.002]       [0.035]        [0.987]      [0.003]       [0.053]       [0.990]
INITBID                              -0.0512        0.0772        0.0079      -0.0441         0.0855       0.0155
                                     [0.316]       [0.324]        [0.913]      [0.373]       [0.269]       [0.835]
                                            a             a              b             a             a           b
TENDER                               0.0875        0.0906         0.0818       0.0870        0.0881       0.0778
                                     [0.000]       [0.000]        [0.026]      [0.000]       [0.001]       [0.032]
                                                                         b                                         c
TOEHOLD                              -0.0182        -0.028       -0.1401        -0.013         -0.02      -0.1247
                                     [0.609]       [0.589]        [0.033]      [0.708]       [0.699]       [0.058]
TARTERM                               0.011         0.0166        0.0186       0.0122         0.0174       0.0157
                                     [0.606]       [0.531]        [0.603]      [0.573]       [0.516]       [0.662]
BIDLOCK                              0.0432         0.0476        -0.0221      0.0373         0.0398      -0.0288
                                     [0.306]       [0.381]        [0.742]      [0.382]       [0.469]       [0.669]
                                            a             a              a             a             a            a
Constant                             0.3607        0.3877         0.9985       0.3591        0.3904        0.9990
                                     [0.000]       [0.006]        [0.000]      [0.000]       [0.006]       [0.000]

Observations                          1,011         1,011         1,011         1,011         1,011         1,011
Adjusted R-squared                    0.154         0.169         0.128         0.158         0.173         0.134




                                                            29
Table 5
Target premium multiple regression analysis controlling for target insider ownership
The sample includes all SDC completed cash-only merger and acquisition deals between a U.S. bidder and a U.S.
public target announced between 1994 and 2006 that result in 100% ownership by the bidder. Models (1) – (3) are
for public bidder deals only and Models (4) – (6) are for private deals only. The dependent variable in models (1)
and (4) is CAR, in models (2) and (5) is FFRET, and in models (3) and (6) is WBC. The dependent variables are
defined in the header of Table 3. CEO_RETENTION is an indicator variable equal to one for deals where the target
CEO is retained by the bidder and zero otherwise. TARGET_INSIDE_OWN_SQU is the aggregate insider
ownership squared. All remaining variables are defined in the header of Table 1. Regressions include year and
industry (two-digit SIC code main classifications) dummy variables. p-values are in brackets and are based on
heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors. Coefficients denoted with a, b, or c, are significant at the 1%, 5%, or
10% level, respectively.
                                               Public bidder deals                         Private bidder deals
                                        (1)             (2)              (3)        (4)              (5)            (6)
                                      CAR3           FFRET             WBC        CAR3            FFRET           WBC
CEO_RETENTION                        -0.0135           -0.02          -0.0179    0.0640c           0.0536        0.0074
                                     [0.594]         [0.514]          [0.656]    [0.062]          [0.182]        [0.899]
TARGET_INSIDE_OWN                    -0.1526         -0.0146           0.1954      0.404           0.2489        0.4497
                                     [0.294]         [0.931]          [0.412]    [0.119]          [0.419]        [0.249]
TARGET_INSIDE_OWN_SQU                0.2641           0.1627          -0.0906    -0.4308          -0.2795       -0.7468
                                     [0.163]         [0.491]          [0.752]    [0.182]          [0.460]        [0.133]
ln(MVE)                              -0.0192         -0.0124         -0.0362b   -0.0383b         -0.0488b       -0.0544c
                                     [0.111]         [0.329]          [0.037]    [0.040]          [0.023]        [0.079]
IAQ                                 -0.0255b        -0.0245b          -0.0157    -0.0434          -0.0393       -0.0387
                                     [0.011]         [0.020]          [0.279]    [0.116]          [0.231]        [0.232]
OCF                                   -0.055         -0.0703         -0.2095c    0.3269c          0.3354c        0.3275
                                     [0.478]         [0.411]          [0.092]    [0.086]          [0.095]        [0.143]
ARET_12                             -0.0633a        -0.0696b         -0.0964b   -0.0538a         -0.0600b       -0.0598c
                                     [0.006]         [0.010]          [0.026]    [0.005]          [0.015]        [0.060]
RUNUP                               -0.1901a        -0.2138a                    -0.2060a         -0.1860b
                                     [0.000]         [0.000]                     [0.008]          [0.041]
DEBT                                 -0.0415         -0.0534           0.0312      0.101           0.1416        0.2325c
                                     [0.573]         [0.519]          [0.782]    [0.250]          [0.160]        [0.097]
STDEVAR                              0.2012            0.676            -0.78    0.1313              0.8           0.88
                                     [0.872]         [0.603]          [0.617]    [0.907]          [0.557]        [0.665]
TARLIQ                              -0.3334b        -0.4692a           -0.303    0.0942            0.0816        0.0582
                                     [0.011]         [0.006]          [0.202]    [0.518]          [0.565]        [0.748]
COMPETE                             -0.0533c         -0.0328          -0.0062    -0.0242          -0.0335        0.1134
                                     [0.053]         [0.343]          [0.918]    [0.643]          [0.588]        [0.325]
INITBID                              -0.0397          0.0788          -0.0284    -0.0205           0.1027        0.0875
                                     [0.592]         [0.469]          [0.717]    [0.796]          [0.473]        [0.634]
TENDER                               0.0802a         0.0867a           0.0659    0.1245a          0.1161b        0.1258c
                                     [0.002]         [0.005]          [0.155]    [0.010]          [0.039]        [0.087]
TOEHOLD                              -0.0252         -0.0547         -0.2140b    0.0134             0.024       -0.0236
                                     [0.490]         [0.366]          [0.012]    [0.871]          [0.803]        [0.844]
TARTERM                                0.03           0.0346           0.0405     -0.046         -0.0501        -0.0871
                                     [0.290]         [0.315]          [0.428]    [0.235]          [0.288]        [0.162]
BIDLOCK                              0.0119           0.0133          -0.0738    0.0468            0.0444         0.164
                                     [0.798]         [0.820]          [0.350]    [0.483]          [0.628]        [0.301]
Constant                             0.4505a         0.3817a          0.8223a    0.2536           0.7593a        1.0718a
                                     [0.001]         [0.007]          [0.000]    [0.216]          [0.002]        [0.001]

Observations                           664            664              664        261              261           261
Adjusted R-squared                    0.133          0.157            0.103      0.195            0.206         0.121




                                                             30
Table 6
Target premium multiple regression analysis controlling for non-CEO retention
The sample includes all SDC completed cash-only merger and acquisition deals between a U.S. bidder and a U.S.
public target announced between 1994 and 2006 that result in 100% ownership by the bidder. Models (1) – (3) are
for public bidder deals only and Models (4) – (6) are for private deals only. The dependent variable in models (1)
and (4) is CAR, in models (2) and (5) is FFRET, and in models (3) and (6) is WBC. The dependent variables are
defined in the header of Table 3. RETENTION is an indicator variable equal to one for deals where any member of
the target management, including the COB, is retained by the bidder and zero otherwise. NON_CEO_RETENTION
is an indicator variable equal to one for deals where a member of the target management other than the CEO is
retained by the bidder and zero otherwise. All remaining variables are defined in the header of Table 1. Regressions
include year and industry (two-digit SIC code main classifications) dummy variables. p-values are in brackets and
are based on heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors. Coefficients denoted with a, b, or c, are significant at the
1%, 5%, or 10% level, respectively.
                                                Public bidder deals                         Private bidder deals
                                         (1)             (2)              (3)        (4)              (5)            (6)
                                       CAR3           FFRET             WBC        CAR3            FFRET            WBC
RETENTION                             -0.0193        -0.0249           -0.0124    0.0564            0.0317        -0.0214
                                      [0.422]         [0.394]          [0.739]    [0.104]          [0.426]        [0.698]
NON_CEO_RETENTION                     0.1001c          0.1149          0.1505b    0.0349            0.0421         0.0243
                                      [0.078]         [0.118]          [0.037]    [0.609]          [0.600]        [0.765]
ln(MVE)                               -0.0128         -0.0066         -0.0371b   -0.0445b         -0.0476b       -0.0493c
                                      [0.242]         [0.587]          [0.017]    [0.013]          [0.019]        [0.072]
IAQ                                  -0.0218b        -0.0233b          -0.0152    -0.0523          -0.0552        -0.0494
                                      [0.011]         [0.017]          [0.265]    [0.113]          [0.151]        [0.121]
OCF                                   -0.0299         -0.0275         -0.2341c    0.4186b          0.4374b        0.4506b
                                      [0.709]         [0.774]          [0.051]    [0.023]          [0.033]        [0.022]
ARET_12                              -0.0716a        -0.0819a         -0.1121a   -0.0587a         -0.0619b       -0.0621b
                                      [0.002]         [0.003]          [0.005]    [0.004]          [0.010]        [0.040]
RUNUP                                -0.2134a        -0.2447a                    -0.1746b         -0.1470c
                                      [0.000]         [0.000]                     [0.016]          [0.086]
DEBT                                  0.0183           0.0229          0.0683     0.0582            0.0951        0.2231c
                                      [0.817]         [0.813]          [0.506]    [0.488]          [0.329]        [0.085]
STDEVAR                               0.9883           1.8707         -0.0757      -0.497           0.0458         0.3878
                                      [0.419]         [0.167]          [0.957]    [0.670]          [0.974]        [0.841]
TARLIQ                               -0.2933b        -0.3482b         -0.2859     0.0392          -0.0525         -0.1346
                                      [0.011]         [0.024]          [0.138]    [0.788]          [0.733]        [0.453]
COMPETE                              -0.0628b        -0.0599c         -0.0246     -0.0563          -0.0875         0.0578
                                      [0.023]         [0.087]          [0.662]    [0.263]          [0.141]        [0.555]
INITBID                               -0.0443           0.087          0.0162     -0.0263           0.1159         0.1294
                                      [0.488]         [0.369]          [0.840]    [0.651]          [0.316]        [0.358]
TENDER                                0.1015a         0.1093a         0.0883b     0.1185b          0.1195b        0.1300c
                                      [0.000]         [0.001]          [0.048]    [0.013]          [0.038]        [0.063]
TOEHOLD                               -0.0341         -0.0677         -0.1884a    0.0058            0.0319        -0.0309
                                      [0.307]         [0.218]          [0.006]    [0.940]          [0.723]        [0.777]
TARTERM                               0.0193           0.0197          0.0459      -0.015         -0.0003         -0.0178
                                      [0.470]         [0.553]          [0.299]    [0.706]          [0.996]        [0.752]
BIDLOCK                               0.0335            0.036         -0.0423     0.0548            0.0598         0.1721
                                      [0.474]         [0.555]          [0.575]    [0.391]          [0.520]        [0.256]
Constant                              0.3387a          0.2234         1.0603a     0.3724c          0.6670a        0.8109b
                                      [0.005]         [0.105]          [0.000]    [0.071]          [0.007]        [0.022]

Observations                           817             817              817        316              316           316
Adjusted R-squared                    0.150           0.158            0.128      0.162            0.163         0.128




                                                              31
