                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    INTERNATIONAL PORTFOLIO ALLOCATION UNDER MODEL UNCERTAINTY

                                          Pierpaolo Benigno
                                           Salvatore Nisticò

                                        Working Paper 14734
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14734


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2009




We are grateful to conference and seminar participants at the 2009 AEA Meeting in San Francisco,
the NBER IFM Meeting, the “Anglo-Italian-French Workshop” in Pavia, the “International Risk-Sharing
and Portfolio Diversification” conference at EUI, the 24 Annual Congress of the EEA in Barcelona,
the 50 Annual Meeting of the SIE in Rome, Università di Padova, the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, University of Amsterdam, Cambridge University, Università Commerciale “L.Bocconi”, Universitat
Pompeu Fabra, LUISS as well as David Backus, Francisco Barillas, Roel Beetsma, Michael Devereux,
Stephane Guibaud, Anna Pavlova, Giorgio Primiceri, Tom Sargent, Laura Veldkamp, Gianluca Violante.
Salvatore Nisticò gratefully acknowledges kind hospitality of the Economics Department at NYU.
Financial support from an ERC Starting Independent Grant is gratefully acknowledged. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Pierpaolo Benigno and Salvatore Nisticò. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
International Portfolio Allocation under Model Uncertainty
Pierpaolo Benigno and Salvatore Nisticò
NBER Working Paper No. 14734
February 2009, Revised December 2009
JEL No. F3,G11,G15

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper proposes an explanation of the international home bias in equity based on ambiguity aversion.
Doubts imply an additional hedging motif driven by the interaction between real exchange rate risk
and ambiguity aversion. What matters is the long-run as opposed to the short-run risk. Domestic equity
is a good hedge with respect to long-run real exchange rate risk even when bonds are traded. The higher
is the degree of ambiguity aversion, the stronger is the home bias. We identify the degree of ambiguity
aversion with detection error probabilities and show that our framework is able to explain a large share
of the observed US home bias, as well as other stylized facts on US cross-border asset holdings.

Without doubts, a standard open-economy macroeconomic model would be unsuccessful along all
these dimensions.


Pierpaolo Benigno
Dipartimento di Scienze Economiche e Aziendali
Luiss Guido Carli
Viale Romania 32
00197 Rome - Italy
and NBER
pbenigno@luiss.it

Salvatore Nisticò
Universita' di Roma Tor Vergata
Dipartimento di Diritto e Procedura Civile
and LUISS Guido Carli
Dipartimento di Scienze Economiche e Aziendali
Viale Romania 32
00197 Rome - Italy
snistico@luiss.it
1       Introduction
The lack of international diversification in equity portfolios is one of the most persistent observa-
tions in international finance. Investors hold a large share of their wealth in domestic securities,
more than what would be dictated by the share of these securities in the world market. This is
known as the “the home-bias puzzle” (French and Poterba, 1991, Tesar and Werner, 1995).
    We address this puzzle by introducing doubts in a standard open-economy model along the
lines of Hansen and Sargent (2005, 2007).1 Agents are endowed with a reference probability
distribution which they do not trust. They express their doubts by surrounding the reference
probability distribution with a set of nearby distributions. They fear this possible model mis-
specification and end up following the worst distribution in the set of surrounding distributions.
This environment can account for an undiversified portfolio and home-bias in assets holdings.
Our explanation relies on the interaction between natural asymmetries, characterizing open
economies, and model uncertainty. Both features are necessary for our result. In particular,
we stress the importance of fluctuations in the real exchange rate as the key asymmetry driving
our results.2
    Agents enter financial markets with different appetites for state-contingent wealth, and asset
trading provides a way to reduce such differences. In a standard model, the appetite for wealth
is driven by the marginal utility of consumption and indeed asset trading helps to reduce the
idiosyncratic movements in the marginal utilities across countries. With model uncertainty,
differences in the appetite for wealth can also be driven by differences in the beliefs. Ambiguity-
averse agents are worried about bad news regarding their consumption profiles. Cross-country
variations in beliefs translate into bad news about the cross-country differences in consumption
growth. The real exchange rate is a source of fluctuations for relative consumption growth and
an additional source of risk with respect to those driving the differences in the marginal utility
of consumption.3 Agents use portfolio holdings to hedge this risk and can bias their choices
towards domestic asset. We provide empirical support for this result.
    Hedging real exchange rate has been a popular argument for explaining asset home bias since
the work of Adler and Dumas (1983). However, in their model, this channel follows from the
desire of reducing the idiosyncrasies in the marginal utility of consumption across countries, while
in our model it is driven by the wedge in the distorted beliefs. This is more than a subtlety. In
their framework, to be able to account for some home bias, the risk-aversion coefficient should
increase, at the cost of raising in a counterfactual way the mean of the risk free rate, the so-called
risk-free rate puzzle (Weil, 1989). In our model, instead, the relevant parameter is the degree of
ambiguity aversion – a measure of the size of the set of nearby probability distributions– which
can increase without falling in the risk-free rate puzzle. The result of home bias depends on
degrees of ambiguity aversion which are consistent with reasonable values of the detection error
probability that agents face when confronting the reference and the subjective measures.
    A more recent literature has de-emphasized hedging real exchange rate as a relevant channel
to explain asset home bias (see van Wincoop and Warnock, 2006, 2008), because in the data the
    1
     An incomplete list of papers that have tried to address the home-bias puzzle are: Benigno and Kucuk-Tuger
(2008), Bottazzi et al. (1998), Coeurdacier (2005), Coeurdacier and Gourinchas (2009), Coeurdacier et al. (2007),
Cole and Obstfeld (1991), Engel and Matsumoto (2006), Epstein and Miao (2003), Heathcote and Perri (2004),
Kollmann (2006), Obstfeld and Rogoff (2001), Pavlova and Rigobon (2007), Uppal (1993).
   2
     Deviations from purchasing power parity have been the subject of an extensive literature in open-economy
macroeconomics, see Rogoff (1996).
   3
     Even if the cross-country marginal utility of consumption might be also driven by real exchange rate fluctu-
ations, this risk is not collinear to the one driving the cross-country differences in the beliefs. See Section 2 for
details.


                                                         1
covariance between the real exchange rate and the excess return on foreign-versus-domestic equity
is negligible, conditional on the excess return on bonds. Our model emphasizes the importance
of long-run versus short-run real exchange rate risk. An important contribution, indeed, is to
show that the long-run risk is empirically relevant, even conditional on other excess returns, and
equities are a good hedge for this risk. This is key for our model to succeed in explaining the
home-bias puzzle.4
    On the contrary, we find that non-diversifiable labor-income risk is not sufficient to explain
asset home bias, confirming previous results of Baxter and Jermann (1997) and in contrast to
recent findings of Coeurdacier and Gourinchas (2009). As a consequence, standard open-economy
macro models under rational expectations do not succeed in explaining the home-bias puzzle.
    Finally, we show that ambiguity aversion is also able to reconcile the model with other
stylized empirical facts on US cross-border holdings that the rational-expectations benchmark
has difficulties in replicating. In particular, the US is a net creditor in equity instruments and a
net debtor in bond instruments, its position in foreign-currency bonds is about balanced, whereas
that in home-currency bonds is largely negative (Tille, 2005 and 2008).
    The structure of this paper is the following. The next section gives the main intuition of
the results and discusses more extensively the contribution of the paper with respect to related
literature. Section 3 discusses the structure of model uncertainty. In Section 4 we present the
model. We contrast the equilibrium portfolio allocation implied by the standard framework
with rational expectations, in Section 5, with those implied by model uncertainty, in Section 6.
Section 7 presents the empirical relevance of the model.


2       Intuition and related literature
In this section, we provide the intuition of the main results of the paper and discuss the compar-
ison with related literature. A fundamental principle of finance, based on the arbitrage theory,
is that households want to hold assets that pay well when needed. A measure of the appetite
for wealth is given by the stochastic discount factor: the higher the stochastic discount factor in
a particular state of nature, the higher the appetite for wealth of the households in that state.
Therefore, when households have different stochastic discount factors, they might exploit trade
in assets in order to hedge such differences. Indeed, when perfect risk-sharing is achieved, the
wedge between the stochastic discount factors across agents is completely eliminated. In partic-
ular, for agents trading in international assets, perfect risk-sharing requires equalization of the
stochastic discount factors evaluated in units of the same consumption index:
                                                                 qt
                                               mt+1 = m∗t+1           ,
                                                               qt+1

where mt+1 is the stochastic discount factor for evaluating wealth in states of nature at time
t + 1 for the household of a generic country H, m∗t+1 the respective factor for the household
    4
    Our approach differs from most of the existing literature which finds portfolio shares as a function of primitive
parameters, like the risk-aversion coefficient, the share of traded goods, or the trade cost. This is clearly a
desirable feature of general equilibrium models, but it has the drawback of hiding the hedging relationships based
on observable variables that are at the root of the portfolio decisions. Van Wincoop and Warnock (2006, 2008)
show that the covariances between the asset returns and the sources of risk implied by these models are often
counterfactual: once data restrictions on asset prices are considered, these models fail to solve the portfolio
home-bias puzzle. On the other hand, the few contributions focusing on the hedging relationships that underlie
portfolio choices (such as Coeurdacier and Gourinchas, 2009 and van Wincoop and Warnock, 2006, 2008) typically
use static models, which, by construction, neglect any possible source of long-run risk.



                                                         2
in country F and qt is the real exchange rate. In a consumption-based model, the stochastic
discount factors depend on the respective marginal utilities of consumption. In particular, in a
quite general model and in a log-linear approximation, deviations from full risk-sharing can arise
from three sources of risks:
                                                             f ull
            ln mt+1 + ∆ ln qt+1 − ln m∗t+1 ' me (λ̄ − λ̄             )exrt+1 + mq εq,t+1 + ml εl,t+1 .        (1)

In the equation above, exrt+1 represents the vector of excess returns – the first source of risk;
εq,t+1 is a measure of the real exchange rate risk and εl,t+1 of cross-country non-diversifiable
                                                                                    f ull
labor-income risk, expressed in units of the same consumption index; λ̄ − λ̄              captures the
deviations of the optimal steady-state portfolio from the one that achieves full diversification;
finally, me , mq and ml depend on structural model parameters.5 When there is no real exchange
rate nor labor-income risk (εq,t+1 = εl,t+1 = 0 for all t), the optimal portfolio clearly implies full
                        f ull
diversification: λ̄ = λ̄ . More generally, the real exchange rate risk is relevant only as long as
the risk-aversion coefficient is different from the unitary value (otherwise mq = 0). Departures
from full diversification are optimal when excess returns display some covariance with the other
two sources of risk.6 Whichever channel is relevant and able to explain asset home bias is
therefore a question of empirical evaluation.
    Real exchange rate risk and non-diversifiable labor-income risk have been widely explored
in the literature. However, neither of them is completely satisfactory. On the one hand, the
covariance between real exchange rate risk and the excess return on equities has been found to
be very small, conditional on the excess return on bonds. Accordingly, for this channel to be
empirically relevant, the degree of risk aversion should rise, to increase mq , but at the cost of
increasing also the mean of the risk-free rate implied by the model – the so-called risk-free rate
puzzle. On the other hand, the covariance between the labor-income risk and the excess return
on equities can be weak or strong. In particular, we show that results might depend on the
measure of labor-income risk used. Our model-based definition is not able to explain important
departures from full diversification.
    However, our explanation of the home-bias puzzle comes from a different source through
model uncertainty and ambiguity aversion. Under model uncertainty agents in the two countries
can act according to different subjective probabilities. The first important consequence implied
by this environment is that perfect risk-sharing requires now the equalization of the stochastic
discount factors evaluated under the same probability measure:
                                                      ∗                qt
                                         gt+1 mt+1 = gt+1 m∗t+1
                                                                      qt+1

where gt+1 and gt+1∗   are the changes of measure from the subjective distributions (which are
country-specific) to the reference one (which is instead common across countries). Accordingly,
agents face an additional hedging motif driven by the possible difference in the subjective prob-
ability measures.
    Indeed, differences in the appetite for wealth now arise not only from possible differences in
the marginal utilities of consumption across countries – first hedging motif, coming from (1) –
but also from differences in the probabilities agents assign to states of nature. More specifically,
   5
     In our model, we consider trade in two equities and two bonds (one for each country) and therefore three
excess returns. The vector λf ull has three dimensions and implies zero bond holdings and an equal split of equity
between countries. See Section 5 for details.
   6
     When markets are incomplete, agents try to minimize the projection of the deviations from zero, described
by equation (1), on the space spanned by the asset payoffs.


                                                        3
when agents are ambiguity averse, such subjective probabilities reflect the fear of model mis-
specification, and are related to revisions in the path of consumption growth. Consequently, the
additional hedging motif is related to revisions in the relative cross-country consumption pro-
file. Indeed, ambiguity-averse agents will assign a high subjective probability to those states of
nature in which their consumption growth is lower than in the other country, and will therefore
want to invest more in assets that pay well precisely in those states of nature. In a log-linear
approximation, this additional hedging motif can be written as a linear function of the same
three sources of risk identified before
                              ∗                           f ull
                ln gt+1 − ln gt+1 ' (γ − 1)[ge (λ̄ − λ̄           )exrt+1 + gq εq,t+1 + gl εl,t+1 ],       (2)
where γ ≥ 1 denotes the degree of ambiguity aversion, which we assume to be equal across
countries (γ = γ ∗ ), and ge , gq and gl are parameters. The optimal portfolio now seeks to
“minimize” the sum of equations (1) and (2). In particular, with no real exchange rate nor labor-
income risk, the optimal portfolio still implies full diversification, even with model uncertainty,
and for any degree of ambiguity aversion γ. Moreover, if there is labor-income risk but no real
exchange rate risk, the degree of ambiguity aversion still does not affect the optimal portfolio
allocation. Indeed, we show that gl = ml and ge = me , and therefore that the two sources of
risk behind the two hedging motifs are collinear, implying the same portfolio. On the contrary,
gq is always different from mq ; hence, as long as there are fluctuations in the real exchange rate,
the degree of ambiguity aversion does affect the optimal portfolio allocation. This is particularly
evident in the case of log-utility (which is assumed throughout the paper) in which mq = 0
while gq = −1. Now γ can increase to make the real exchange rate risk empirically more
relevant without raising the mean of the risk-free rate.7 Indeed, by calibrating γ using detection
error probabilities, we show that reasonable values of ambiguity aversion are able to explain a
substantial degree of home bias in US equity holdings.
    There is a related literature on ambiguity and portfolio choices. The most related papers are
Epstein and Miao (2003) and Uppal and Wang (2003). Epstein and Miao (2003) incorporate
Knightian uncertainty in a multi-agent model by allowing for multiple priors. They explain
home bias in asset holdings by assuming heterogeneity among agents concerning the degree of
ambiguity about returns. They do not consider natural asymmetries coming from open-economy
modeling and therefore εq,t+1 = εl,t+1 = 0 in their model. Instead, in our model, the implied
under-diversification is not the result of an asymmetric attitude towards ambiguity across agents,
since we assume γ = γ ∗ , but the consequence of natural open-economy asymmetries, which we
show that are indeed relevant in the data. Uppal and Wang (2003), instead, analyzes a single-
agent partial equilibrium model with trading in multiple assets, in which the agent has different
degrees of ambiguity aversion across the return processes of the various assets. As in Epstein
and Miao (2003), they too build key asymmetries in the degrees of ambiguity aversion, though
with respect to different assets rather than across different agents. Uppal and Wang (2003)
build on the framework proposed by Hansen and Sargent (2005, 2007), as we do, but to obtain
tractability they adopt a non-innocuous modification of the original problem, as done also in
Manhout (2004, 2006). This makes our model and theirs not comparable.8 Our approach,
instead, adheres completely to the methodology of Hansen and Sargent (2005, 2007). In this
respect, a further methodological contribution of this paper is to derive a simple solution of
non-linear robust-control problems through approximation methods.
   7
    See in particular Barillas et al. (2006) on this point.
   8
    Indeed, they transform a constant lagrange multiplier into a time-varying function of the value function to
get a closed-form solution. Pathak (2002) describes the transformation employed by Maenhout (2004, 2006) and
Uppal and Wang (2003) as poorly motivated and explains in details the unappealing consequences.


                                                      4
3        Model Uncertainty
We characterize model uncertainty as an environment in which agents are endowed with some
probability distribution, but they are not sure that it is in fact the true data-generating one, and
might instead act using a nearby distorted “subjective” probability distribution.
    Consider a generic state of nature st at time t and define st as the history st ≡ [st , st−1 , ..., s0 ].
Let agents be endowed with π(st ) as the “approximating” or “reference” probability measure on
histories st . Decision-makers may seek a different probability measure, a “subjective” one, de-
noted by π e(st ) which is absolutely continuous with respect to the “approximating” measure.
Absolute continuity is obtained by using the Radon-Nykodym derivative.9 First, the two proba-
bility measures agree on which events have zero probability. Second, there exists a non-negative
martingale G(st ) with the property
                                              X
                                   E(Gt ) ≡      G(st )π(st ) = 1                                       (3)
                                                      st

such that, for a generic random variable X(st ),
                             X                X
                    e t) ≡
                   E(X         e(st )X(st ) =
                               π                 G(st )π(st )X(st ) ≡ E(Gt Xt )                               (4)
                                     st                    st

in which E(·) and E(·)
                    e denote the expectation operators under the “approximating” and “subjec-
tive” probability measures, respectively. Specifically, G(st ) is a probability measure, equivalent
             e(st )/π(st ), that allows a change of measure from the “approximating” to the “sub-
to the ratio π
jective” measure.
    Moreover, since Gt is a martingale, we can define its increment g(st+1 |st ) as

                                                                G(st+1 )
                                              g(st+1 |st ) ≡             ,
                                                                 G(st )

with the property Et gt+1 = 1. It follows that g(st+1 |st ) is equivalent to the likelihood ratio
e(st+1 |st )/π(st+1 |st ), and acts as a change of measure in conditional probabilities. High values
π
of g(st+1 |st ) imply that the decision-makers assign a higher subjective probability to state st+1
conditional on history st .
    For each random variable Xt+1 , therefore, the martingale increment gt+1 defines a mapping
between the conditional expectations under the two measures:

                                           E
                                           et (Xt+1 ) = Et (gt+1 Xt+1 ),                                      (5)

in which Et (·) and E
                    et (·) denote the conditional-expectation operators.
    As in Hansen and Sargent (2005), we use conditional relative entropy as a measure of the
divergence between the “approximating” and “subjective” probabilities,

                                                 Et (gt+1 ln gt+1 ),

which approximately measures the variance of the distortions in the beliefs. When there are
in fact no distortions this measure is zero: in this case, indeed, g(st+1 |st ) = 1 for each st+1 .
In particular, since we are going to work with a dynamic model, in what follows, it is more
    9
        This way of constructing subjective probability measures is borrowed from Hansen and Sargent (2005, 2007).



                                                            5
appropriate to exploit the discounted version of conditional relative entropy discussed in Hansen
and Sargent (2005)                     (∞                              )
                                        X
                                             t−t0
                            η t0 ≡ Et0     β      Gt Et (gt+1 ln gt+1 ) ,                     (6)
                                       t=t0
where 0 < β < 1. A high value of entropy can be interpreted as a very large divergence between
the “subjective” and the “approximating” beliefs. On the contrary a low value of entropy implies
beliefs that are not too distorted or dissimilar from the reference model.


4    Model
We consider a model with two countries, denoted domestic (H) and foreign (F ), each populated
by a representative agent. Representative agents supply a fixed amount of labor. In each coun-
try, there is a continuum of firms producing a continuum of goods in a market characterized
by monopolistic competition. All goods are traded. Households enjoy consumption of both do-
mestic and foreign goods and can trade in a set of financial assets. Specifically, there are four
assets traded in the international markets: two risk-free nominal bonds, denominated in each
currency, and two equity assets, representing claims on the dividends of domestic and foreign
firms, respectively. In their consumption and portfolio decisions, households mistrust the ref-
erence probability distribution and therefore compute expectations according to the subjective
one.
    The representative agent in the domestic economy maximizes utility given by
                                         (∞                 )
                                           X
                                     Eet
                                        0      β t−t0 ln ct                                   (7)
                                              t=t0

where β, with 0 < β < 1, is the intertemporal discount factor and E      et (·) is the time−t0 ex-
                                                                           0
pectation operator taken with respect to the distorted probability measure. As discussed in the
previous section, this distorted measure is absolutely continuous with respect to the “reference”
measure and satisfies property (5). The expected utility can be written also in terms of the
“reference” distribution as
                              (∞            )        (∞                 )
                               X                       X
                                   t−t                      t−t
                         Eet
                            0     β 0 ln ct = Et0          β 0 Gt ln ct
                              t=t0                       t=t0

where we have normalized Gt0 = 1. The representative agent in the other country has simi-
lar preferences but a possibly different subjective probability measure and therefore a different
expectation operator E et∗ (·).
                          0
    The utility flow is logarithmic in the consumption index c. The latter is a CES aggregator
of domestic (cH ) and imported (cF ) goods:
                                 h 1       ϑ−1          1
                                                                  i ϑ
                                                               ϑ−1 ϑ−1
                              c ≡ n ϑ (cH ) ϑ + (1 − n) ϑ (cF ) ϑ      ,

in which n, with 0 < n < 1, is the weight given to the consumption of domestic goods and
ϑ, with ϑ > 0, is the intratemporal elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign
goods. The consumption sub-indexes cH and cF are Dixit-Stiglitz aggregators of the continuum
of differentiated goods produced in country H and F , respectively:
                      Z 1     σ t −1
                                       σ σ−1
                                            t            Z 1       σ t −1
                                                                            σ σ−1
                                                                                 t
                                          t                                    t
                 cH ≡      c(h) σt dh              cF ≡       c(f ) σt df          ,
                        0                                       0


                                                     6
where σ t is the time-varying elasticity of substitution across the continuum of measure one of
goods produced in each country, with σ t > 1, for all t. The appropriate consumption-based price
indices expressed in units of the domestic currency are defined as
                                        h                             i 1
                                                                       1−ϑ
                                     P ≡ n(PH )1−ϑ + (1 − n) (PF )1−ϑ      ,                                               (8)

with                                                     1                                                     1
                         Z     1                     1−σ
                                                           t
                                                                                Z    1                     1−σ
                                                                                                                   t
                                           1−σ t                                              1−σ t
                 PH ≡               p(h)           dh                    PF ≡             p(f )       df               .
                            0                                                     0
A similar structure of preferences holds for the foreign agent marked with the appropriate aster-
isks. In particular the weight n∗ in the foreign consumption index might not be equal to n. In
the case in which n > n∗ , home-bias in consumption arises. More generally when n 6= n∗ , there
are deviations from purchasing-power parity and fluctuations in the real exchange rate, even if
the law-of-one price holds for each traded good. In our model, this is a possible source of risk
to be hedged through portfolio choices. In particular, we will show that this channel, together
with model uncertainty, can explain home bias in asset holdings.10
     In each country, there is a continuum of firms of measure one producing the goods in a
monopolistic-competitive market. A domestic firm of type h has a constant-return-to-scale pro-
duction technology yt (h) = Ztφ lt1−φ where Zt is a natural resource available in the country and
lt denotes labor which is employed at the wage rate Wt ; φ is a parameter with 0 < φ ≤ 1. When
φ = 1, the model collapses to an endowment economy.
     Prices are set without frictions and the law-of-one price holds. Equilibrium implies that
prices are equalized across all firms within a country and set as a time-varying markup µt ≡
σ t /[(σ t − 1)(1 − φ)] > 1 over nominal marginal costs
                                                                      Wt lt
                                                         PH,t = µt          ,
                                                                      yH,t

implying that the wage payments are inversely related to the mark-up:
                                                                  PH,t yH,t
                                                        Wt lt =             .
                                                                    µt
Firms make profits and distribute them in the form of dividends. The aggregate dividends in
the domestic economy are given by
                                                                         (µt − 1)
                                    DH,t = PH,t yH,t − Wt lt =                    PH,t yH,t ,
                                                                            µt
which displays a positive correlation between dividends and the mark-up. The existence of non-
diversifiable labor income is another source of risk to be hedged through portfolio choices.11
We indeed introduce mark-up shocks to allow for a possible negative correlation between labor
income and equity returns.12 However, we will show in our empirical analysis that in general
non-diversifiable labor income risk is not strong enough to explain home bias in asset holdings.
  10
     Notice that we could have alternatively modeled variations in the real exchange rate through deviations from
the law-of-one price without affecting our conclusions.
  11
     When φ = 1 we are in a pure endowment economy, in which all income is diversifiable. In this case µt goes
to infinity.
  12
     Mark-up shocks can fall in the category of redistributive shocks, discussed by Coeurdacier et al. (2007) and
Coeurdacier and Gourinchas (2009).


                                                                  7
    The market of foreign goods works in a similar way with the appropriate modifications.
    There are two equity markets – one for each country – with shares that are traded interna-
                                                                              ∗ for the domestic
tionally. The market prices for equity shares in local currency are VH,t and VF,t
and foreign country, respectively. Households can also trade in two risk-free nominal bonds,
denominated in units of the two currencies. The flow-budget constraint of the domestic agent is
                                        ∗                       ∗    ∗
  BH,t + St BF,t + xH,t VH,t + xF,t St VF,t ≤ RH,t BH,t−1 + St RF,t BF,t−1
                                                                            ∗      ∗
                                      + xH,t−1 (VH,t + DH,t ) + xF,t−1 St (VF,t + DF,t ) + Wt lt − Pt ct (9)

in which BH,t and BF,t are the amounts of one-period nominal bonds, in units of the two cur-
                                     ∗ are the risk-free returns from period t − 1 to period t,
rencies, held at time t; RH,t and RF,t
in the respective currencies; xH,t and xF,t are the shares of the domestic and foreign equity,
respectively, held by the domestic agent. Finally St is the nominal exchange rate, defined as the
price of foreign currency in terms of domestic currency. The flow-budget constraint (9) can be
written in a more compact form and in real terms – in units of the domestic consumption index
– as
                                     at = rp,t at−1 + ξ t − ct ,                             (10)
where we have defined
                                                                            ∗
                                      BH,t + St BF,t + xH,t VH,t + xF,t St VF,t
                               at ≡
                                                            Pt
and
                                               ∗      qt                                     qt
                  rp,t = αH,t−1 rH,t + αF,t−1 rF,t          + αeH,t−1 rH,t
                                                                       e
                                                                           + αeF,t−1 rF,t
                                                                                      e∗
                                                                                                   .
                                                     qt−1                                   qt−1
In the definition above, αH,t , αF,t , αeH,t , αeF,t represent the shares of wealth that the domestic
agent invests in the domestic bond, foreign bond, domestic equity and foreign equity, respectively,
satisfying the following restriction:

                                        αH,t + αF,t + αeH,t + αeF,t = 1.                                   (11)

Moreover rH,t , rF,t∗ , re        e∗                                  13 The variable ξ denotes non-
                         H,t and rF,t are the respective real returns.                 t
diversifiable real labor income, defined as ξ t ≡ Wt lt /Pt , and qt is the real exchange rate defined
as qt ≡ St Pt∗ /Pt .
    The domestic agent’s optimization problem is to choose consumption and the portfolio allo-
cations to maximize (7) under the flow-budget constraint (10) and appropriate no-Ponzi game
conditions.

4.1    Optimality conditions
The optimality condition with respect to consumption implies an orthogonality condition, in
expectation, between the real stochastic discount factor and the real portfolio return

                                             E
                                             et (mt+1 rp,t+1 ) = 1,                                        (12)

in which mt+1 is the real stochastic discount factor defined as
                                                                 ct
                                                mt+1 ≡ β              .                                    (13)
                                                            ct+1
  13
    Lower-case variables denote the real counterpart of the respective upper-case variable. See the appendix for
details on the derivations and definitions.


                                                       8
A similar condition applies to the foreign economy:
                                                 et∗ (m∗t+1 rp,t+1
                                                 E           ∗
                                                                   ) = 1,                                               (14)
where the foreign stochastic discount factor is defined as
                                                                     c∗t
                                                        m∗t+1 ≡ β           .                                           (15)
                                                                    c∗t+1
The optimality conditions with respect to the portfolio allocation imply a set of four restrictions
for each agent, one for each asset, given by:
                                                                             
                                                          ∗   ∗           qt
              Et (mt+1 rH,t+1 ) = 1,
               e                                       Et mt+1 rH,t+1
                                                        e                        = 1,          (16)
                                                                         qt+1
                                   
                          ∗    qt+1                           et∗ m∗t+1 rF,t+1
                                                                         ∗
                                                                               
              Et mt+1 rF,t+1
               e                      = 1,                    E                  = 1,          (17)
                                qt
                                                                             
                         e
                              
                                                        et∗ m∗t+1 rH,t+1
                                                                   e      qt
              Eet mt+1 rH,t+1   = 1,                   E                         = 1,          (18)
                                                                         qt+1
                                   
                          e∗   qt+1                           e ∗ m∗ re∗
                                                                               
              Et mt+1 rF,t+1
               e                      = 1,                    E t    t+1 F,t+1 = 1.            (19)
                                qt
   Equilibrium in the goods market requires the production of each good to be equal to world
consumption
                       yH,t = cH,t + c∗H,t           ∗
                                                    yF,t = cF,t + c∗F,t .
The labor markets are in equilibrium at the exogenously supplied quantities of labor
                                             lt = ¯lt                      lt∗ = ¯lt∗ .
Bonds are in zero-net supply worldwide
                                                  ∗             ∗
                                          BH,t + BH,t = BF,t + BF,t = 0.
Equity shares sum to one
                                          xH,t + x∗H,t = xF,t + x∗F,t = 1.
     Given the path of the stochastic disturbances {¯lt , ¯lt∗ , Zt , Zt∗ , µt , µ∗t }, an equilibrium is an
allocation of quantities {ct , cH,t , cF,t , c∗t , c∗H,t , c∗F,t , αH,t , αH,t , αeH,t , αeF,t , α∗H,t , α∗H,t , α∗e     ∗e
                                                                                                                  H,t , αF,t ,
      ∗                          ∗      e      e∗                                    ∗   ∗
at , at } and prices {rH,t , rF,t , rH,t , rF,t , qt , PH,t /PF,t , Wt /Pt , Wt /Pt } such that each agent’s
consumption, portfolio shares and wealth are optimal given prices, and goods, labor, and asset
markets are in equilibrium.
     Although we have written a general equilibrium model, in the next section we show that
we do not really need to solve the entire model to understand the determinants of the portfolio
allocation. Instead, we can isolate a block of the general-equilibrium conditions to determine
the portfolio shares {αH,t , αH,t , αeH,t , αeF,t , α∗H,t , α∗H,t , α∗e          ∗e
                                                                          H,t , αF,t } by taking as given the path
                    ∗        e     e∗
of returns {rH,t , rF,t , rH,t , rF,t }, the real exchange rate qt and the processes of non-diversifiable
labor incomes {ξ t , ξ ∗t }. The optimal portfolio allocation, therefore, depends on the co-movements
between these sources of risk. Moreover, since all these variables are observable, we can use data
restrictions to evaluate the co-movements and the empirical relevance of the model.14
   14
      Empirical restrictions of this kind should apply to any general equilibrium model of international portfolio
allocation. Indeed, recent papers in the literature characterize portfolio allocations in terms of primitive param-
eters or shocks, yet without considering such empirical restrictions. Along this dimension, they would be less
successful. See van Wincoop and Warnock (2006, 2008) and Coeurdacier and Gourinchas (2009) for a related
argument and for models that are instead evaluated under data restrictions.


                                                              9
5        The benchmark case of no model uncertainty
When there is no model uncertainty, investors fully trust the “reference” probability distribution
to be the true one, so that “approximating” and “subjective” measures coincide. For a generic
random variable Xt+1 , it follows that Eet Xt+1 = Ee ∗ Xt+1 = Et Xt+1 .
                                                     t
   Accordingly, we can characterize the equilibrium portfolio allocation combining equations (16)–
(19) to obtain the following set of orthogonality conditions:
                                                                
                                        ∗     qt      e
                        Et mt+1 − mt+1              rH,t+1 − rH,t+1     =0                    (20)
                                            qt+1
                                                                   
                                           qt            qt+1
                     E t mt+1 − m∗t+1              e∗
                                                  rF,t+1         e
                                                              − rH,t+1    =0                  (21)
                                          qt+1            qt
                                                                   
                                      ∗    qt      ∗     qt+1
                     E t mt+1 − mt+1              rF,t+1      − rH,t+1    = 0.                (22)
                                          qt+1            qt

The above conditions require the cross-country difference in the real stochastic discount factors –
evaluated in terms of domestic consumption – to be orthogonal to three relevant excess returns:
the domestic equity premium, the excess return on foreign versus domestic equity, and the
excess return on foreign versus domestic bonds. Indeed, conditions (20), (21) and (22) and
restriction (11) are sufficient to characterize the equilibrium portfolio allocation.
    Given the assumption of incomplete markets, we cannot solve for the optimal portfolio al-
location in non-linear closed form.15 However, we can still derive many insights by using the
approximation methods developed by Devereux and Sutherland (2006) and Tille and van Win-
coop (2006). As a first step, we solve for the paths of consumption and wealth, given returns
and the steady-state portfolio shares, using a first-order approximation of the Euler equations
and the budget constraints. In particular, letting variables with hats denote log-deviations from
the steady state and variables with upper-bars the steady-state level, this yields to

                                                                         (1 − β) 0        sξ
            m̂t+1 + ∆q̂t+1 − m̂∗t+1 = −(∆ĉR
                                           t+1 − ∆q̂t+1 ) = −                   λ exrt+1 − εl,t+1 ,                (23)
                                                                           βsc            sc
where sξ is the steady-state ratio between non-traded income and financial wealth, which is com-
mon across countries and given by sξ ≡ ξ̄/ā, and sc is the steady-state ratio between consumption
                                                                                     ∗
and financial wealth and such that sc = (1 − β)/β + sξ . Moreover, λ ≡ ᾱ − ᾱ captures the
cross-country difference in optimal portfolios and is given by16

                                           2(ᾱeH + ᾱeF ) − 2
                                                              

                                    λ̄ =       2ᾱeF − 1      ,                             (24)
                                                  2ᾱF

and the vector of excess returns exr is defined as
                                                  e − r̂
                                                 r̂H,t
                                                                 
                                                         H,t
                                              e∗ + ∆q̂ − r̂ e
                                 exrt ≡  r̂F,t        t     H,y
                                                                 .
                                              ∗
                                            r̂F,t + ∆q̂t − r̂H,t
    15
     Van Wincoop and Warnock (2006, 2008) work with a closed-form solution, but in a partial-equilibrium
two-period model. Coeurdacier and Gourinchas (2009), Coeurdacier et al. (2007), Heathcote and Perri (2004),
Kollman (2006) obtain closed-form solutions by assuming that markets are locally complete.
  16
     It can be shown that in a symmetric steady state in which Ā = S̄ Ā∗ , ᾱe∗       e       ∗
                                                                               i = 1− ᾱi and ᾱi = −ᾱi , for i = H, F .




                                                           10
                                                                                               f ull
     The definition of λ̄ implies that full diversification is achieved when λ̄ = λ̄    = 0. Equa-
tion (23) is the equivalent of equation (1) and describes the first hedging motif underlying port-
folio choices, related to differences in the marginal utilities of consumption. It shows that under
log utility the cross-country differences in the stochastic discount factors arise from two sources:
fluctuations in the excess returns and cross-country variations in labor income. In particular,
εl,t+1 represents the news at time t + 1 in the growth path of the cross-country non-diversifiable
labor incomes (in units of the domestic consumption index)
                            ∞
                            X                  R                             R
                 εl,t+1 =         β k [Et+1 (∆ξ̂ t+1+k − ∆q̂t+1+k ) − Et (∆ξ̂ t+1+k − ∆q̂t+1+k )],     (25)
                            j=0

which captures the source of labor-income risk relevant to our model.
    As a second step, we use equation (23) and a second-order approximation of the orthogonal-
ity conditions (20)–(22) to determine the steady-state portfolio shares as a function of prices,
returns and non-diversifiable labor income.17 The optimal steady-state portfolio shares satisfy
the following equation
                                        β
                              λ̄ = −sξ      Σ−1 Et (exrt+1 · εl,t+1 ),                     (26)
                                       1−β t
where Σt is the time−t conditional variance-covariance matrix of the vector of excess returns
exrt+1 .
    When sξ = 0, all income risk is tradeable. As argued in Section 2, the optimal portfolio
implies full diversification: λ̄ = 0 and accordingly ᾱei = ᾱ∗e                    ∗
                                                               i = 1/2 and ᾱi = ᾱi = 0, for
i = H, F . When there is non-diversifiable income, instead, the model implies a departure from
full diversification that depends on the covariances between labor-income risk and the excess
returns.
    The set of conditions in (26) can be written in a simpler form as
                                                              e                    ib , exr ie )
                                                                    − r̂H,t+1 |exrt+1
                                        sξ β covt (εl,t+1 , r̂H,t+1                         t+1
                   ᾱeH + ᾱeF = 1 −                    e                      ib , exr ie )
                                                                                                       (27)
                                        2 1−β   vart (r̂H,t+1    − r̂H,t+1 |exrt+1      t+1

                                                  e∗                 e          ib       de
                          1 sξ β covt (εl,t+1 , r̂F,t+1 + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1 |exrt+1 , exrt+1 )
                 ᾱeF =     −               e∗                    e         ib , exr de )
                                                                                                       (28)
                          2   2 1−β vart (r̂F,t+1    + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1 |exrt+1      t+1
                                                  ∗                            de , exr ie )
                                                        + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1 |exrt+1
                            sξ β covt (εl,t+1 , r̂F,t+1                                t+1
                  ᾱF = −                   ∗                               de      ie
                                                                                             ,         (29)
                            2 1−β   vart (r̂F,t+1 + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1 |exrt+1 , exrt+1 )
in which variances and covariances are conditional on the other excess returns and previous-
period information. We denote with exrde , exrie and exrib the excess returns on domestic
equity, international equity, and international bonds, respectively:
                                           de      e
                                        exrt+1 ≡ r̂H,t+1 − r̂H,t+1 ,
                                           ie      e∗                 e
                                        exrt+1 ≡ r̂F,t+1 + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1 ,
                                           ib      ∗
                                        exrt+1 ≡ r̂F,t+1 + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1 .

    Using (27) to (29) together with (11), we are able to determine the split of wealth across the
different assets. In particular, equation (27) determines the share of financial wealth invested in
 17
      Details of the derivation are shown in the appendix.


                                                          11
the equity market relative to the bond market: when sξ 6= 0 and εl,t+1 co-varies positively with
the excess return of domestic equity over domestic bonds, domestic agents will take an overall
long position in the bond markets (ᾱH + ᾱF > 0). In this case, indeed, in the face of a bad shock
to labor income, domestic bonds pay relatively better than equities: bonds are a better hedge
with respect to labor-income risk.
    Equation (28), instead, determines the diversification between domestic and foreign equi-
ties. In particular, to obtain home bias in equity, the excess return on international equity
should co-vary positively with the surprises in the cross-country differential in the growth of
non-diversifiable labor income. In this case, the return on domestic equity will increase, relative
to that on foreign equity, when indeed domestic agents receive a bad shock regarding their labor
income. This makes domestic equity a better hedge against labor-income risk relative to foreign
equity and points toward explaining the home bias in equity holdings.
    Finally, equation (29) describes the position taken in the foreign bond market and as a
consequence in the domestic bond market, given the overall position implied by (27). When the
covariance between εl,t+1 and the excess return of the foreign bond with respect to the domestic
bond is positive, then foreign bonds do not pay well when needed. In this case the domestic
agent would like to take a short position in the foreign bond market (ᾱF < 0).18
    Although simpler versions of (27) and (29) have been treated in the literature, to our knowl-
edge, this is the first complete analysis in a dynamic general equilibrium model with incomplete
markets. Results of the previous literature are nested in the above framework. When there is
only trading in equities, the relevant condition for determining the portfolio allocation collapses
to                                                       e∗                 e
                             1 sξ β covt (εl,t+1 , r̂F,t+1 + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1 )
                       ᾱeF = −                      e∗                  e       .             (30)
                             2    2 1−β      vart (r̂F,t+1  + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1 )
    Covariances are no longer conditional on the other excess returns, but only on the information
set at time–t. There is home bias in equity holdings when home equity is a good hedge with
                                                                      ie ) > 0.
respect to non-diversifiable income risk, i.e. when covt (εl,t+1 , exrt+1
    A popular argument for international diversification being worse is the neoclassical model of
Baxter and Jermann (1997) in which labor income and dividends are correlated. In this case, the
above covariance would be negative, implying even larger holdings of foreign assets. Heathcote
and Perri (2004), instead, show a case in which the correlation can become positive in a model
with capital accumulation and home bias in consumption preferences. Furthermore, Coeurdacier
and Gourinchas (2009) discuss several theoretical cases that can rationalize a positive covariance
and then imply home-bias in equity.19 In the case of our general-equilibrium model, Section
3 shows that the covariance can be positive or negative depending on the relative strength of
the mark-up shocks. Conditional on a positive mark-up shock, profits and dividends increase,
whereas labor income decreases. This might imply a negative correlation between labor income
and the return on domestic equity. Therefore, the domestic agent would hold more of its own
assets to hedge against labor-income risk.


6        Portfolio Choices under Model Uncertainty
Under rational expectations, agents form expectations trusting the “reference” probability mea-
sure. On the contrary, with model uncertainty, they surround the “reference” probability distri-
    18
     Note that this does not necessarily imply a long position in the domestic bond market. Indeed, the overall
position depends on equation (27), as previously discussed.
  19
     See also Coeurdacier et al. (2007) and Engel and Matsumoto (2006).


                                                      12
bution with a set of nearby distributions and act according to a distorted probability measure.
In particular, the “subjective” conditional expectations, as shown in (5), are linked to the “refer-
ence” conditional expectations through the martingale increments g and g ∗ , for country H and
F respectively. Accordingly, we can write conditions (20)–(22) as
                                                                     
                                       ∗     ∗     qt     e
                    Et gt+1 mt+1 − gt+1 mt+1             rH,t+1 − rH,t+1     =0
                                                 qt+1
                                                                        
                                     ∗          qt            qt+1
                  E t gt+1 mt+1 − gt+1   m∗t+1          e∗
                                                       rF,t+1         e
                                                                   − rH,t+1    =0
                                               qt+1            qt
                                                                        
                                     ∗    ∗     qt      ∗     qt+1
                  E t gt+1 mt+1 − gt+1 mt+1            rF,t+1      − rH,t+1    = 0.
                                               qt+1            qt
This set of equations implies the three restrictions needed to determine the portfolio allocation.
In a second-order approximation, and in compact form, they read as

                           Et (∆ĉR                 R
                                                                 
                                   t+1 − ∆q̂t+1 − ĝt+1 ) · exrt+1 = 0,                       (31)

where a superscript R denotes the difference between the domestic and the foreign variable.
The restriction above shows that the optimal portfolio allocation is going to be affected by the
         R , which measures the cross-country difference between the subjective distortions and
factor ĝt+1
the approximating probability distribution. We now enrich our set of assumptions to endogenize
the way in which these distortions arise.
    We consider the sophisticated agents of the robust-control theory of Hansen and Sargent
(2005, 2007). These agents fear model misspecification, and seek decision rules that are robust
to it. Following Hansen and Sargent (2005, 2007), we can regard such robust-decision-making
process as a two-player game between the representative household and an “evil” agent. The
household surrounds the reference model with a set of alternative distributions, in which he/she
believes the true one lies. The “evil” agent will, then, choose the most unfavorable distribution
in this set, and the household will act accordingly. To choose the worst-case distribution, the
“evil” agent seeks to minimize the utility of the decision-maker under an entropy constraint of
the form similar to (6). The latter defines the size of the set of alternative models, and imposes
a bound on the allowed divergence between the distorted and the approximating measures. In a
more formal way, {gt } is chosen to minimize
                                         (∞                  )
                                          X
                                     Et0      β t−t0 Gt ln ct ,
                                               t=t0

under the entropy constraint
                                      ∞
                                  (                                   )
                                      X
                            Et0           β t−t0 Gt βEt (gt+1 ln gt+1 )   ≤ K,
                                  t=t0

and the restrictions given by the martingale assumption on Gt :

                                              Gt+1 = gt+1 Gt                                   (32)

                                                Et gt+1 = 1.                                   (33)
The parameter K in the entropy constraint imposes an upper-bound on the divergence between
the distorted and the approximating beliefs. The higher K, the more afraid of misspecification
the agent is, because a higher K allows the “evil” agent to choose larger distortions.

                                                      13
    Hansen and Sargent (2005) propose an alternative formulation of this problem in which the
entropy constraint is added to the utility of the agent to form a modified objective function
                    (∞                  )       (∞                                 )
                      X                            X
                           t−t0                         t−t0
               Et0       β      Gt ln ct + θEt0       β      Gt βEt (gt+1 ln gt+1 ) ,        (34)
                          t=t0                             t=t0

where θ > 0 is a penalty parameter on discounted entropy.
    The problem of the “evil” agent becomes that of choosing the path {gt } to minimize (34)
under the constraints (32) and (33). Higher values of θ imply less fear of model misspecification,
because the “evil” agent is penalized more by raising entropy when minimizing the utility of the
decision-maker. When θ goes to infinity, the optimal choice of the “evil” agent is to set gt+1 = 1
at all times, meaning that the optimal distortion is zero: the rational expectations equilibrium
is nested as a special case.
    The problem of the decision-maker is instead that of choosing sequences for consumption
and portfolio shares to maximize (34) taking into account the minimizing action of the evil
agent. As discussed in the literature, among others by Barillas et al (2006), it can be shown that
the solution of the inner minimization problem implies a transformation of the original utility
function (34) into a non-expected recursive utility function of the form20
                                                           1
                                                               β
                                 vt = c1−β
                                        t    [E (v
                                               t t+1 ) 1−γ 1−γ
                                                          ]       ,                           (35)

where the parameter γ is the following monotonic transformation of θ:
                                                              1
                                               γ =1+               .                                            (36)
                                                          (1 − β)θ
   The equilibrium real stochastic discount factor implied by (35) – evaluated under the reference
probability measure – is                                          !
                                                         1−γ
                                             ct        vt+1
                             gt+1 mt+1 = β                          ,
                                            ct+1 [Et (vt+1 )1−γ ]
and the optimal distortion is therefore
                                                             1−γ
                                                                         !
                                                           vt+1
                                          gt+1 =                             .
                                                      [Et (vt+1 )1−γ ]

    Notice that in (35) we can scale continuation values by consumption to get
                                           "            # β
                                       vt      vt+1 ct+1 1−γ 1−γ
                                          = Et                   ,
                                       ct      ct+1 ct

showing that gt+1 can be related to the current and future consumption path. Indeed, in a
first-order approximation – which suffices to evaluate (31) – we can write:
                                              ∞
                                              X
                          ĝt+1 = −(γ − 1)          β k [Et+1 ∆ĉt+1+k − Et ∆ĉt+1+k ] ,
                                              k=0
  20
     Barillas et al (2006) discuss the relation between fear of model misspecification and the class of risk-adjusted
preferences described in Kreps and Porteus (1978) and Epstein and Zin (1989). See also Strzalecki (2009) for an
analysis on how models of ambiguity aversion imply different preferences for the timing resolution of uncertainty.
  Notice also that the framework with model uncertainty is observationally equivalent to a model with preference
shocks (see Pavlova and Rigobon, 2007). Importantly, however, in our context they are endogenous.


                                                         14
in which ĝt+1 increases when the agent fears bad news with respect to the consumption-growth
profile. Hence, the worst-case scenario takes the form of downward revisions in current and
future consumption growth.21
    Recall that g(st+1 |st ) is equivalent to the ratio between the “subjective” and “approximating”
               e(st+1 |st )/π(st+1 |st ). Higher values of g(st+1 |st ) implies that the agent is assigning
probabilities, π
a higher probability to those states of nature where there are bad news on the consumption-
growth profile. When g(st+1 |st ) increases, the appetite for receiving additional wealth increases
as well. In this case, the agent would like to hold assets that pay well when there are indeed bad
news on the consumption-growth profile.
    The above derivations apply also to the foreign agent. In the symmetric case in which
γ = γ ∗ , we can show that the optimal relative distortion depends negatively on the surprises in
the consumption-growth differential across countries:
                       ∞
                       X
    R
                             β k Et+1 ∆ĉR             R
                                                            
  ĝt+1   = −(γ − 1)                     t+1+k − Et ∆ĉt+1+k
                       k=0
                                                                                             
                                                             (1 − β) 0        sξ
                                                  = −(γ − 1)        λ exrt+1 + εl,t+1 + εq,t+1 , (37)
                                                               βsc            sc
where the second equality substitutes for the relative consumption growth using a first-order
approximation of the Euler equations and the budget constraints. Moreover, εq,t+1 is defined as
the time-t surprises in the real exchange rate growth:
                                           ∞
                                           X
                                εq,t+1 ≡         β k [Et+1 ∆q̂t+1+k − Et ∆q̂t+1+k ] .                     (38)
                                           k=0

    With model uncertainty and fears of model misspecification, the cross-country difference in
the appetite for wealth is given by the sum of (23) – capturing the first hedging motif described
by the wedge between the marginal utilities of consumption – and (37) – capturing the additional
hedging motif given by the wedge between the subjective distortions. Accordingly, equation (37)
corresponds to equation (2).
    The second hedging motif, captured by the variable ĝt+1R and given by the revisions in the

expectation regarding the future path of relative consumption growth, is driven by three sources
of risk: the fluctuations in the excess returns, the labor-income risk and the fluctuations in
the real exchange rate. As argued in Section 2, the coefficients related to excess returns and
labor-income risk are the same for the two hedging motifs: me = ge = −(1 − β)/βsc and
ml = gl = −sξ /sc . As a consequence, absent real exchange rate risk, the optimal portfolio
allocation driven by ambiguity aversion is the same as the one driven by the benchmark model
with no uncertainty. The degree of ambiguity aversion γ is irrelevant in this case.
    On the contrary, the coefficient on real exchange rate risk is different across the two compo-
nents: mq = 0 while gq = −1. As a consequence, under log-utility, ambiguity aversion implies an
additional term driving the optimal steady-state portfolio shares, compared to equation (26):22
                       β                                (γ − 1) β
           λ̄ = −sξ       Σ−1
                           t Et (exrt+1 · εl,t+1 ) − sc           Σ−1 Et (exrt+1 · εq,t+1 ),              (39)
                      1−β                                  γ   1−β t
which depends on the covariances between the excess returns and the surprises in the real ex-
change rate, and on the degree of ambiguity aversion. The higher γ is, the more averse to model
  21
     Hansen et al. (2008) show how to derive gt+1 as a closed-form solution including risk-premia terms, which,
however, are not important in our approximation for computing the steady-state portfolio shares.
  22
     Refer to the Appendix for details.


                                                          15
uncertainty the investors are, the more important this additional component is. When investors
are not concerned about model uncertainty (i.e. as θ → ∞) then γ is equal to 1: beliefs are not
distorted and (39) coincides with (26).
    In particular, equation (39) implies the following condition:
                                          e∗                   e          ib
                     covt (εl,t+1 , r̂F,t+1 + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1 |exrt+1 , exrt+1 )  de
           1 1 β
  ᾱeF =    −     sξ            e∗                    e         ib , exr de )
           2 21−β       vart (r̂F,t+1    + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1 |exrt+1      t+1
                                                              e∗                   e          ib
                                          covt (εq,t+1 , r̂F,t+1 + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1 |exrt+1 , exrt+1 ) de
                          1 (γ − 1) β
                      −                sc            e∗                    e         ib , exr de )
                                                                                                       . (40)
                          2 γ      1−β       vart (r̂F,t+1    + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1 |exrt+1      t+1

On top of equation (28), agents would like to hold more domestic equities if their return is
high when the real exchange rate is expected to appreciate. This requires that εq,t+1 co-varies
                                                                          e∗
positively with the excess returns on foreign-versus-domestic equity, r̂F,t+1               e
                                                                               + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1 ,
conditional on the other excess returns. As the fear of model misspecification increases, then,
this additional hedging motif matters more for determining home bias in international portfolio
choice.
    There is an important distinction to underline at this point. As anticipated in Section 2, the
additional component in equation (39), capturing the hedge against real exchange rate risk, would
also be present in a standard model with non-distorted beliefs and non-unitary risk aversion, as
in Adler and Dumas (1983). In that case, indeed, it would be
                             1−β                                   sξ
                  me = −ρ                            ml = −ρ                        mq = ρ − 1,
                              βsc                                  sc
with ρ measuring the degree of risk aversion, and ĝt+1  R   = 0 at all times. Hence, the second
component in equation (39), with ρ substituting for γ, would also apply, but for a completely
different reason. What would matter is the impact of the real exchange rate in driving apart the
real marginal utilities of consumption across the two countries. Agents would like to trade assets
to hedge these differences, but not under log utility.23 In our model, instead, fluctuations in the
real exchange rate affect the optimal portfolio allocation because of the distortions in the beliefs
(hedging motif (2)), which is relevant even under log-utility.
    Moreover, in the standard case, ρ would represent the risk-aversion coefficient and, at the
same time, the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. By raising risk aversion, to
make the second component larger, the intertemporal elasticity of substitution would be lowered
and the implied risk-free rate would increase in a counterfactual way. In our model, instead, the
intertemporal elasticity of substitution is tied to one (a value close to recent empirical estimates,
as discussed in Vissing-Jœrgensen and Attanasio, 2003) whereas the parameter γ – now capturing
the degree of ambiguity aversion – can be larger than one, thus increasing the importance of
the second component without affecting the mean of the risk-free rate, as shown in Barillas et
al (2006).
    Furthermore, equation (38) shows that what matters is not only the risk of an immediate
variation in the real exchange rate, but also the risk of future ones. As β gets close to one,
only the long-run risk remains relevant. In this case, indeed, εq,t+1 becomes proportional to the
revisions in the conditional expectations of the long-run real exchange rate:
                                           εq,t+1 ∼
                                                  = Et+1 q̂∞ − Et q̂∞ .
  23
    Under log-utility, indeed, substitution and income effects cancel each other out and relative-inflation risk does
not imply differences in the marginal utility of consumption across countries once evaluated in the same units of
consumption goods.


                                                         16
This is a further novel implication of our model. Indeed, the existing literature that analyzes
the hedging motifs underlying portfolio choices in international macro models, by building on
static frameworks, necessarily focuses only on short-run real exchange rate risk. In the next
Section we will show that the difference between short- and long-run real exchange rate risk can
be empirically relevant when evaluating the implications for international portfolio allocation.


7     Empirical Evidence
One of the appealing features of the theoretical model presented in the previous section is that
it derives clear implications about the second moments of variables that are directly observ-
able. These implications can therefore be tested empirically without further assumptions on the
empirical counterparts of our theoretical variables.

7.1    Data
To evaluate the implications of equations (26) and (39), we collect and use quarterly data for the
G7 Countries, over the sample 1980q1-2007q4. We consider the US as the Home country and
the aggregation of the remaining G7 countries as the Foreign country.24
    We define the CPI index for the foreign country, expressed in USD, as
                                              X
                                     St Pt∗ =    ω i,t Si,t Pi,t ,
                                                      i

in which Pi,t is the CPI in local currency for country i, Si,t is the bilateral nominal exchange
rate between the local currency in country i and the dollar (US dollars for one unit of local
currency), and ω i,t is the actual time-t GDP-weight of country i relative to the aggregation of
the G6 countries:25
                                                 GDPi,t
                                        ω i,t = P         .
                                                 i GDPi,t
Accordingly, the real exchange rate between the US and the G6 countries is simply computed as:

                                       St Pt∗
                                                    P                   
                                                         i ω i,t Si,t Pi,t
                           q̂t = log            = log                        ,
                                        Pt                    Pt

where Pt is the CPI index for the US.
   Analogously, we compute nominal labor income in US dollars for the Foreign country as:
                                               X
                                 St Wt∗ ¯lt∗ =   ω i,t Si,t Wi,t ¯li,t ,
                                                     i
  24
     In particular, we use data on aggregate nominal compensation of employees, from the OECD Quarterly
National Accounts (**OCOS02B, where ** is the two-letter country code), the Consumer Price Indexes from
the IFS database (**I64..F), nominal returns on short-term treasury bills from the IFS database (**I60C..),
nominal National Price and Gross Return indexes on the domestic stock market, from MSCI Barra (MS****L), in
local currency, and bilateral nominal exchange rate vis-à-vis the USD, constructed using the domestic stock-price
indexes in USD, from the MSCI Barra (MS****$). Moving from the monthly National Price and Gross Return
                                                                                                   e
indexes from MSCI database, we construct series for the quarterly nominal returns on equity (Ri,t     ) following
Campbell (1999).
  25
     To check for robustness, we repeated the analysis using average GDP-weights as an alternative aggregation
methodology, as in Coeurdacier and Gourinchas (2009), and using both aggregate and per-capita levels for the
quantity variables. None of our results is significantly affected.



                                                          17
                                 Table 1: Some Data Statistics (Annual rates)

                                                                                         R
                                µ(·)                σ(·)              ρ(·)    ρ(·, ∆ξ̂       − ∆q̂)   ρ(·, ∆q̂)
              R
        ∆ξ̂     − ∆q̂           0.773              13.051             0.024        1.000              −0.438
               ∆q̂              0.165              11.348             0.175       −0.438               1.000
      r̂Fe∗ + ∆q̂ − r̂ e        0.699              13.535             0.108       −0.530               0.436
                      H
         ∗ + ∆q̂ − r̂
       r̂F                      0.984              10.718             0.030       −0.919               0.722
                      H
             e
           r̂H − r̂H            6.350              15.850            −0.004       −0.027              −0.139
      Note: means and standard deviations are in percentage points




in which we measure Wi,t ¯li,t using data on aggregate nominal compensation of employees in
country i. Accordingly, relative labor income in units of US dollars is the log difference between
the aggregate nominal compensation in the US and in the other G7 countries:
                      Wt ¯lt
                                        ¯
                                        Wt lt Pt Pt∗
                                                                     
                                                                   ξt           R
               log        ∗ ¯∗
                                 = log          ∗  ∗ ¯∗
                                                          = log        ∗   = ξ̂ t − qˆt .
                     St Wt lt           Pt St Pt Wt lt            qt ξ t
    Given nominal quarterly returns on the stock market, defined by Ri,t          e for each country i and

Rte for the US, and nominal quarterly returns on bonds, defined by Ri,t for each country i and
Rt for the US, we can obtain the real returns as ri,t ≡ Ri,t Pi,t−1 /Pi,t and ri,t    e ≡ Re P
                                                                                           i,t i,t−1 /Pi,t for
each country i and for the US. Using those, we construct the three excess returns of interest as:
                                                              e
                                                                r
                                exrt ≡ r̂H,t − r̂H,t = log t
                                    de     e
                                                                rt
                                                                        e qi,t
                                                          P                       !
                           ie   e∗             e              i ω i,t ri,t qi,t−1
                       exrt ≡ r̂F,t + ∆q̂t − r̂H,t = log
                                                                     rte
                                                         P                  qi,t !
                          ib   ∗                             i ω i,t ri,t qi,t−1
                      exrt ≡ r̂F,t + ∆q̂t − r̂H,t = log                             .
                                                                    rt
    Table 1 reports some summary statistics for the variables of interest. We report the average
level µ(·) and the standard deviation σ(·), both annualized and in percentage points, the serial
correlation coefficient ρ(·) and the correlation with the growth rate in relative labor income
       R
ρ(·, ∆ξ̂ − ∆q̂) and in the real exchange rate ρ(·, ∆q̂). These simple correlations already suggest
that domestic equity seems a poor hedge against labor income risk, relative to foreign stocks,
while both domestic equity and domestic bonds seem somewhat useful in providing the right
co-movement to hedge against real exchange rate fluctuations. In the next sections we will refine
and articulate these results.
     In order to evaluate the optimal portfolio allocation implied by our model, we need to calibrate
the steady-state consumption-to-financial wealth ratio, sc . To this end, we use the average
financial wealth-to-disposable income ratio for the US computed by Bertaut (2002), and the
average consumption-to-disposable income ratio for the US, computed using data on personal
consumption of non-durable goods and personal disposable income. The former, on a quarterly
frequency, amounts to about 20, while the latter to around .3: by using these numbers we get
a calibrated consumption-to-wealth ratio sc = .3/20 = .015. We calibrate the quarterly time
discount factor following Tallarini (2000) and Barillas et al (2006): β = .995. Using the value
of sc obtained above, we derive the model-consistent steady-state value of the labor income-to-
financial wealth ratio, by using sξ = sc − (1 − β)/β = .01.

                                                               18
7.2    The statistical model
                              h            ∗
                                                                                           i0
We define the data vector yt ≡ ∆ξ̂ t , ∆ξ̂ t , ∆q̂t , exrtde , exrtie , exrtib , r̂H,t , xt and estimate the
following VAR(1) model
                                    yt = µ + Ayt−1 + et ,                                               (41)
in which et is distributed as a multivariate normal with zero mean and variance-covariance matrix
Ω.26 In the data vector y we also include a series of additional controls, collected into the vector
x, which might be useful in describing the dynamic path of the variables of interest. In practice,
x includes the growth rate of relative GDP, the slope of the US yield curve, the international
excess return on ten-year government bonds and the growth rate in the US trade balance.27
Using the above, we can evaluate the theoretical implications of our framework, and relate the
results to existing literature.28

7.3    Asset structure
In our empirical analysis, we study three alternative cases concerning the asset structure. The
first case assumes that the only asset available for international trade is equity (henceforth Asset
Menu I ) as in Baxter and Jermann (1997). In the second case we allow for trade in both
equity and bonds, but restrict the latter to an overall balanced position (Asset Menu II ), as
in van Wincoop and Warnock (2006, 2008) and Coeurdacier and Gourinchas (2009); in this
case, therefore, a long position on domestic bonds necessarily implies a short position of equal
magnitude on foreign ones. Finally, we introduce a third asset structure, which is the general
case in which bonds and equity are both available, and leveraged positions between risky and
riskless assets are also allowed for (Asset Menu III ); as a consequence, in this case the relative
positions in home and foreign bonds are not directly related.

7.4    The role of labor-income risk
In this section we evaluate whether labor-income risk can explain the home-bias puzzle in equity
holdings. In particular, this is the first component in equation (39) and depends on the positive
covariance between the present discounted value of domestic-versus-foreign labor income and the
excess return of foreign-versus-domestic equity. This hedging motif, which arises even under no
model uncertainty, has been emphasized by several studies without reaching a clear consensus.
Baxter and Jermann (1997) show that when equity is the only asset that can be traded interna-
tionally, the presence of non-diversifiable income risk actually implies a foreign-equity bias. On
the other hand, Bottazzi et al. (1996) and more recently Julliard (2003) and Coeurdacier and
Gourinchas (2009) bring evidence supporting the view that hedging against labor-income risk
  26
     The length of the VAR is chosen optimally using the Schwarz’s Bayesian Criterion for each estimation, and
turns out to be always 1.
  27
     Gourinchas and Rey (2007) show that the net-export growth rate is a useful predictor for portfolio returns at
long horizons, while the other variables are among the forecasting variables commonly used for predicting asset
returns and labor income. See also Campbell (1996).
  28
     For what concerns the statistical model, as a robustness check, we estimated three alternative specifications.
The first specification is the minimal requirement to describe the model economy and include only data on labor
income and the excess return on foreign equity. The second and third specifications augment the first one by
introducing data on the residual excess returns. Moreover, for each of the specifications above, we also varied the
informational content of the data-vector by adding the real exchange rate, in changes, and the auxiliary regressors
included in vector x. In the text we report results for the extensive specification only, since results are robust to
the other alternatives. The full set of results is available upon request.



                                                         19
                                   Table 2: The empirical role of Labor-Income Risk
                                                  Asset Menu I                     Asset Menu II                    Asset Menu III


                     Conditional covariance-to-variance ratios of LIR with selected excess returns
         e∗
       r̂F,t+1                e
                 + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1 c                −0.524                             0.016                             0.040
         ∗
       r̂F,t+1   + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1 c                  —                               −1.116                            −1.129
               e
             r̂F,t+1 − r̂H,t+1 c                       —                                 —                                0.062

                                 Optimal Portfolio Allocation under Rational Expectations
                    ᾱeF                              1.020                             0.484                             0.460
                    ᾱeH                             −0.020                             0.516                             0.479
                    ᾱF                                —                                1.108                             1.121
                ᾱeH + ᾱeF                           1.000                             1.000                             0.939
                ᾱH + ᾱF                              —                                0.000                             0.061
                ᾱeF + ᾱF                            1.020                             1.592                             1.580
 Note: LIR denotes Labor-Income Risk; Asset Menu I: equities only; Asset Menu II: equities and balanced bonds; Asset Menu III:
 general model with equities and bonds. ᾱe
                                          F denotes the share of wealth invested in foreign equity; ᾱe
                                                                                                      H denotes the share of wealth invested
 in domestic equity; ᾱF denotes the share of wealth invested in foreign bonds; ᾱe      e
                                                                                   H + ᾱF measures   the overall share of wealth invested in
                                                                                               e
 equity assets; ᾱH + ᾱF measures the overall share of wealth invested in debt instruments; ᾱF + ᾱF measures the overall share of wealth
 invested in foreign assets.




can explain some degree of home-bias in equity holdings. Heathcote and Perri (2004) and Coeur-
dacier and Gourinchas (2009), moreover, discuss some theoretical examples that can produce the
required co-movements to explain home-bias.
    We analyze this interaction in the context of our dynamic model. Using the output of
the VAR, we construct the surprises in the path of relative labor income across countries, and
compute the time-t conditional moments that we need. For comparisons with existing literature,
however, we also compute the unconditional covariance-to-variance ratios, obtained through
straightforward OLS projection of the surprises in relative labor income on the excess returns of
the assets available for trade.29 In the simple case of Asset Menu I (only equities) we obtain:
                                                      e∗                 e
                                 εl,t+1 = −0.479 · (r̂F,t+1 + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1 ) + ul,t+1 ,
                                              (0.081)


where the standard error is reported in parenthesis. The unconditional covariance-to-variance
ratio therefore is negative, statistically significant and economically rather large. The implication
is that hedging labor-income risk does not produce home-bias in equity, but rather implies a
foreign-equity bias. This result on the one hand supports Baxter and Jermann (1997), and on
the other hand weakens the argument of Heathcote and Perri (2007).
    In Table 2 we report the time-t conditional covariance-to-variance ratios related to labor-
income risk, and the portfolio allocation implied by our theoretical model under the assumption
that there is no real exchange rate risk. These results, moreover, are consistent with the bench-
mark case of no model uncertainty. In particular, the second column of Table 2 shows that
the finding of Baxter and Jermann (1997), i.e. that the portfolio diversification puzzle is even
worse than expected, is confirmed even when we move to the evaluation of the time-t conditional
moments, consistently with equation (30).
    This result has recently been challenged by Coeurdacier and Gourinchas (2009), who point
out that, once also riskless bonds are traded, variances and covariances should be computed
  29
    The unconditional covariance-to-variance ratios would be appropriate in our case if the process yt were in
fact a multivariate white noise. Our data, however, do not support this representation.


                                                                     20
                                Table 3: Unconditional covariance-variance ratios

              Loadings of:                Coeurdacier–Gourinchas (2009)*                          Benigno–Nisticò (2009)**
           e∗
         r̂F,t+1   + ∆q̂t+1 −     e
                                r̂H,t+1                 0.260                                              −0.027
                                                        (0.070)                                             (0.067)

           ∗
         r̂F,t+1 + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1                    −1.170                                              −0.982
                                                        (0.110)                                             (0.084)

                                                                           w              w
         Note: standard errors in parentheses. * Dependent variable is   r̂t+1   −   Et r̂t+1 .   ** Dependent variable is εl,t+1 .




conditional on the other asset returns. Their claim is that, with the appropriate conditioning,
the previous result would be overturned, and their empirical findings indeed support this claim.
    We repeat their analysis of Coeurdacier and Gourinchas (2009) within our dynamic frame-
work, where the asset structure assumed therein corresponds to our Asset Menu II. Specifically,
Table 3 reports the result of an OLS projection of labor-income risk on the two relevant ex-
cess returns, and contrasts our findings with theirs.30 In the second column we report the
findings of Coeurdacier and Gourinchas (2009) which show that, conditioning on the excess re-
turn on foreign-versus-domestic bonds, there is a positive covariance between the excess return on
foreign-versus-domestic equity and non-diversifiable labor-income risk, whereas the unconditional
covariance is instead negative. They conclude that the results of Baxter and Jermann (1997) are
driven by their particular asset structure, and do not hold when bonds are included. In the third
column, we report our estimation’s results, which show instead a negative (though insignificant)
conditional covariance-to-variance ratio.
    The difference between the two results can be explained by the different approach to mea-
suring labor-income risk. Coeurdacier and Gourinchas (2009) use the unexpected component of
the (home relative to foreign) return-to-labor, which they construct as
                        ∞
    w          w
                        X                              R
  r̂t+1 − Et r̂t+1 =            ρk (Et+1 − Et )(∆ξ̂ t+1+k − ∆q̂t+1+k )
                         k=0
                                                     ∞
                                                     X
                                                 −         ρk (Et+1 − Et )(r̂H,t+1+k
                                                                             e                      e∗
                                                                                     − ∆q̂t+1+k − r̂F,t+1+k ), (42)
                                                     k=1

where ρ ≡ 1 − sc is a constant of linearization that depends on the average consumption-to-
wealth ratio. It is worth noticing that this measure is not directly implied by their model,
which is static, but rather it is borrowed from Campbell (1996). Two important assumptions
underlie this formulation, which are critical to distinguish their approach from ours. First, it
is assumed that there exists a market for domestically tradeable claims on the stream of future
labor-income flows, which implies that the return on labor is computed in analogy to the return
on the financial assets, using the log-linear approximation of Campbell and Shiller (1988).31
Second, the expected relative return on domestic non-financial wealth is equated to the expected
excess return on domestic-versus-foreign equities. This is a strong assumption, as also discussed
by Campbell (1996), and explains why the first term on the second line of equation (42) arises.
    With this definition, it follows that the return-to-labor is likely to be positively related, by
construction, with the excess return on foreign-versus-domestic equity.
  30
     Note that we have defined the excess returns as foreign-versus-domestic returns, the opposite of Coeurdacier
and Gourinchas (2009). Accordingly, for comparison, in Table 3 we report their results multiplied by -1.
  31
     Furthermore, it seems odd to assume that there are tradeable claims on human capital which are traded
domestically and not internationally.


                                                                  21
     We do not make either of the assumptions above. Instead, in our framework, the relevant
measure of non-diversifiable labor risk is directly implied by the theoretical model, and corre-
sponds to the revision in the present-discounted value of cross-country labor income εl,t+1 , as
shown by equation (25).32 It is worth noticing that our measure of labor-income risk is instead
similar to those used by Shiller (1995) and Baxter and Jermann (1997), which coincide with the
first summation on the right-hand-side of (42).33 Using this definition, we find that domestic
equity is not a good hedge, reinforcing Baxter and Jermann’s (1997) result even if we condition
on bond returns.
     To derive the equilibrium portfolio allocations implied by our theoretical model, we compute
the relevant covariance-to-variance ratios conditioning them also on the information set available
at time−t, and report the results in the second column of Table 2. The covariance between labor-
income risk and the excess return on equities becomes of the right sign, but it is quantitatively
negligible, and it does not imply a substantial degree of home-bias. On this respect, therefore, our
results again contrast with Coeurdacier and Gourinchas (2009). However, we share the finding
that agents should go long in foreign bonds and short in domestic ones, with the counterfactual
implication that almost 160% of domestic wealth is allocated to foreign assets.
     The third column of Table 2 displays the results for Asset Menu III, and shows that allowing
for leveraged positions between equity and riskless assets does not change the results. Indeed,
the covariance of labor-income risk with the domestic equity premium is positive, implying an
overall long position in the international bond market (ᾱeH + ᾱeF < 1). This further exacerbates
the inability of labor-income risk alone to support home-bias in equity: even though less than
half of the steady-state wealth is allocated to foreign equities, the share allocated to domestic
ones is also smaller than 50%.

7.5    The role of real exchange rate risk
In the above section we showed that there is no support for the view that domestic equity is
a good hedge against non-diversifiable labor-income risk to explain the home-bias in US equity
holdings. We now move to analyze the portfolio implications of model uncertainty where the
fear of model misspecification translates into long-run real exchange rate risk.
    The role of hedging real exchange rate fluctuations as an explanation for the home-bias puzzle
has been recently questioned by van Wincoop and Warnock (2006, 2008) and Coeurdacier and
Gourinchas (2009). Their main argument is based on the evidence that the covariance between
real exchange rate changes and the excess return on foreign-versus-domestic equity becomes
negligible once this covariance is taken conditional on other returns, like the excess return on
riskless bonds. This observation comes from the results of a simple OLS regression between
one-period ahead changes in the real exchange rate and the vector of excess returns
                                     ∆q̂t+1 = κq + ψ 0q exrt+1 + uq,t+1 ,                                     (43)
reported in Table 4. While the loading of the excess returns on foreign equity is significant and
positive if equity is the only tradeable asset, once the vector of excess returns is augmented to
include also the excess return on foreign-versus-domestic bonds, the covariance-to-variance ratio
between the real exchange rate and the excess return on equity becomes negligible.
  32
      Note that in a first-order approximation (which is all is needed to evaluate the orthogonality conditions and
derive the portfolio allocation) expected excess returns are always zero, so the last terms in (42) would drop even
if we did make the two assumptions discussed above.
   33
      Indeed, the only difference between (25) and the measure in Shiller (1995) and Baxter and Jermann (1997)
is the discount parameter: while they use ρ ≡ 1 − sc , we use the time discount factor β. Numerically, however,
they are also very close to each other.


                                                        22
                 Table 4: Loadings of excess returns on real exchange rate depreciations

                     Loadings of:                  Asset Menu I              Asset Menu II                Asset Menu III
                 e∗
               r̂F,t+1   + ∆q̂t+1 −     e
                                      r̂H,t+1               0.365                 0.021                      −0.026
                                                           (0.072)               (0.068)                     (0.071)
                 ∗
               r̂F,t+1 + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1                    –                    0.747                       0.781
                                                             –                   (0.086)                     (0.086)
                      e
                    r̂H,t+1 − r̂H,t+1                        –                        –                      −0.098
                                                             –                        –                      (0.048)
               Note: standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is ∆q̂t+1 .




    In a rational-expectation model such small covariances (provided they are of the right sign)
would require an unreasonably large degree of risk aversion to justify the hedging role of domestic
equities, which would then open room for other puzzles, like the aforementioned risk-free rate
puzzle.
    Instead, our dynamic model with distorted beliefs gives a new role to real exchange rate risk:
what matters is not only the current real-exchange-rate risk but also the revisions in the entire
future expected path of the real exchange rate. What is relevant, therefore, is not so much the
role of equity to hedge against short-run real exchange rate risk, but rather its hedging properties
against long-run fluctuations.
    To study whether shifting from a short-run to a long-run perspective affects the hedging
properties of equity with respect to real exchange rate risk, we start writing equation (38) in
terms of levels instead of growth rates:
                ∞
                X                                                                 ∞
                                                                                  X
   εq,t+1 ≡           β k [Et+1 ∆q̂t+1+k − Et ∆q̂t+1+k ] = (1 − β)                        β k [Et+1 q̂t+1+k − Et q̂t+1+k ] .    (44)
                k=0                                                               k=0

    By looking at different terms in the summation above, we can investigate the co-movement
between asset returns and surprises in the real exchange rate path, at different time horizons.
In particular, we can evaluate whether the hedging properties of equity and bonds change when

               Asset Menu I                                      Asset Menu II                                 Asset Menu III
0.54                                            0.16                                           0.12



0.52
                                                0.14                                            0.1


 0.5
                                                0.12                                           0.08


0.48
                                                 0.1                                           0.06

0.46

                                                0.08                                           0.04
0.44


                                                0.06                                           0.02
0.42


                                                0.04                                              0
 0.4



0.38                                            0.02                                         −0.02
       0            10            20                   0             10            20                 0            10            20
           Time−horizon: quarters                           Time−horizon: quarters                        Time−horizon: quarters




                                                                        ie
Figure 1: The covariance-to-variance ratio between ∆Et+1 q̂t+1+k and exrt+1 , for increasing k (horizontal
axis). Asset Menu I : equities only. Asset Menu II : equities and balanced bonds. Asset Menu III : general
model with equities and bonds.


                                                                     23
                     Asset Menu II                                               Asset Menu III
0.82                                                         0.85



0.81                                                         0.84



 0.8                                                         0.83



0.79                                                         0.82



0.78                                                         0.81



0.77                                                          0.8



0.76                                                         0.79



0.75                                                         0.78



0.74                                                         0.77
       0        5        10         15            20                0        5        10         15            20
                Time−horizon: quarters                                       Time−horizon: quarters




                                                                        ib
Figure 2: The covariance-to-variance ratio between ∆Et+1 q̂t+1+k and exrt+1 , for increasing k (horizontal
axis). Asset Menu II: equities and balanced bonds. Asset Menu III: general model with equities and bonds.


the risk to be hedged is farther away in the future, as opposed to very soon.
    To this end, given our estimated model (41), we compute the time−t + 1 news about the
real exchange rate k periods ahead, given by ∆Et+1 q̂t+1+k , in which ∆Et+1 (·) ≡ Et+1 (·) − Et (·)
denotes the time-t + 1 revisions in conditional expectations, and in particular the news about the
long-run component ∆Et+1 q̂∞ . Moreover, for each time-horizon we also evaluate the covariance-
to-variance ratios with respect to all excess returns of interest, conditional on time-t information
and on the residual asset space, given by Σ−1  t Et (∆Et+1 q̂t+1+k · exrt+1 ). Hence, Figure 1 plots
the covariance-to-variance ratios of the news in the real exchange rate path with the excess return
on foreign-versus-domestic equity, against the time-horizon k, for the three asset structures that
we consider. Figure 2 does the same for the excess return on foreign-versus-domestic bonds, for
the two asset menus which include bonds (II and III).
    The first point in each plot, i.e. when k = 0, corresponds to the covariance-to-variance
ratio of a static model, in which only the short-run risk matters. Moving from the left to the
right panel of Figure 1, the first point drops from about .4 to virtually zero, implying that the
hedging power of equity against real exchange rate risk fades away, when we condition on other
excess returns and in particular on bonds. This is the core of the results in van Wincoop and
Warnock (2006) and Coeurdacier and Gourinchas (2009).
    However, at longer horizons the hedging properties of equity sharply improve, even when we
condition on other excess returns. Figure 2, instead, shows that the hedging properties of bonds
are only marginally affected. We view this evidence as suggesting that domestic equity can have
a relatively more important role in hedging the real exchange rate risk at longer horizons in order
to explain the international home-bias puzzle.34

7.6        The role of model uncertainty
We now merge the results and discussions of the previous sections and present the empirical
implications of our framework through equation (39).
   Table 5 reports the covariance-to-variance ratios of the two sources of risk implied by our
model (labor-income and real exchange rate) with the relevant excess returns, for the three asset
  34
    A recent literature documents the quantitatively substantial implications of long-run risk for asset valuation,
in the context of non-expected utility frameworks. See, among others, Hansen et al. (2008), who also provide an
interpretation related to model uncertainty.


                                                        24
menus that we consider. In particular, the empirical co-movements with respect to the interna-
tional excess return on equity reveals that domestic equity – relative to foreign – is qualitatively
useful to hedge both risks, as long as riskless bonds are available for trade;35 however, they also
imply that the role of domestic equity as a hedge against real exchange rate risk is at least twice
as important as its role to hedge against labor-income risk (almost ten times more important
under Asset Menu II ). Co-movements with exrib imply that domestic bonds – relative to foreign
– represent always a useful hedge against real exchange rate risk (positive ratio), but a bad hedge
against labor-income risk (negative ratio). In the general case of Asset Menu III, moreover, the
top-panel of Table 5 implies that debt instruments are a relatively better hedge against labor-
income risk (positive ratio), while equity assets are relatively better to hedge real exchange rate
risk (negative ratio).

                           Table 5: The empirical role of Real Exchange Rate Risk
                                            Asset Menu I                   Asset Menu II                 Asset Menu III


                 Conditional covariance-to-variance ratios of LIR with selected excess returns
      e∗
    r̂F,t+1                e
              + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1               −0.524                         0.016                           0.040
      ∗
    r̂F,t+1 + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1                   —                            −1.116                         −1.129
            e
          r̂F,t+1 − r̂H,t+1                      —                              —                             0.062


                Conditional covariance-to-variance ratios of RERR with selected excess returns
      e∗
    r̂F,t+1                e
              + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1                0.518                          0.145                          0.098
      ∗
    r̂F,t+1   + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1                 —                             0.771                          0.796
            e
          r̂F,t+1 − r̂H,t+1                      —                              —                            −0.117

 Note: LIR denotes Labor-Income Risk; RERR denotes Real Exchange Rate Risk; Asset Menu I: equities only; Asset Menu II: equities
 and balanced bonds; Asset Menu III: general model with equities and bonds.



    Figure 3 shows the implications of these empirical co-movements for the optimal portfolio
allocation, for increasing degrees of ambiguity aversion and for the three asset menus considered.
In particular, the first point of each line captures the case of no-model uncertainty (γ = 1) in
which the optimal portfolio allocation is driven only by labor-income risk – the first component of
the right-hand-side of (39). As the degree of ambiguity aversion γ increases, instead, the second
component of (39), related to real exchange rate risk, becomes progressively more important.
    The top-left panel of Figure 3 displays the share of wealth allocated to domestic equity (ᾱeH ).
As the degree of ambiguity aversion rises, ᾱeH sharply increases, regardless of the specific asset
structure (up to 70% for Asset Menus I and II and up to 80% for Asset Menu III ). In particular,
in the general case of Asset Menu III, when γ = 10 the share of wealth allocated to domestic
equity reaches about 77%, explaining therefore a large proportion of the home-bias found in the
data, and in contrast with the 48% of the case with no model uncertainty. The top-right panel
shows the overall share of wealth that the domestic agent invests in the equity market. Asset
Menu III is the only case in which leveraged positions between different kinds of securities are
allowed for. Indeed, as the degree of ambiguity aversion increases, the domestic agent takes a
short position in the overall bond portfolio to invest more in equities: the component driven
by hedging real exchange rate risk in (39) dominates, and implies that domestic equities pay
relatively better than domestic bonds precisely when an unexpected appreciation of the real
exchange rate occurs. In particular, for γ = 10, the overall share of wealth allocated to equity
  35
     Indeed, in the case of Asset Menu I, domestic equity are a better hedge against real exchange rate risk
(positive ratio) and a worse hedge against labor-income risk (negative ratio), relative to foreign equity.



                                                              25
                    Allocation in domestic equity                                         Overall allocation in equity
         0.8                                                               1.15

                                                                            1.1
         0.6

                                                                           1.05




                                                               "eH + "eF
 "eH




         0.4
                                                                             1

         0.2                            Asset Menu I
                                                                           0.95
                                        Asset Menu II
                                        Asset Menu III
           0                                                                0.9
               0       5         10         15           20                       0        5          10          15         20
                                  !                                                                    !

                     Allocation in foreign bonds                                      Overall allocation in foreign assets
         1.2                                                                1.6

           1                                                                1.4
                                                                            1.2
         0.8
                                                                             1
         0.6




                                                                   "eF+"F
 "F




                                                                            0.8
         0.4
                                                                            0.6
         0.2
                                                                            0.4
           0                                                                0.2
        −0.2                                                                 0
               0       5         10         15           20                       0        5          10          15         20
                                  !                                                                    !



Figure 3: Optimal portfolio allocation: the effect of increasing degrees of concern about model misspec-
ification. Asset Menu I: equities only. Asset Menu II: equities and balanced bonds. Asset Menu III:
general model with equities and bonds.


(ᾱeH + ᾱeF ) increases to about 110%. This leveraged position in favor of equity assets also explains
why the optimal degree of home-bias in the case of Asset Menu III is larger than in the other two
cases. The bottom-left panel of Figure 3 shows the share invested in foreign bonds. When γ = 1,
foreign bonds are a good hedge against labor-income risk (relative to domestic bonds), and the
agent invests virtually all of his/her wealth in foreign bonds: this implication is counterfactual.
Instead, foreign bonds are not a good hedge with respect to long-run real exchange rate risk and
indeed agents would like to take a short position in this respect. As γ increases, therefore, the
bad-hedge component with respect to real exchange rate risk becomes more important, and the
share of wealth allocated to foreign bonds decrease to about 5% when γ = 10.
     The bottom-right panel of Figure 3 shows the overall share invested in foreign assets. When
γ = 1, there is a large foreign bias in asset holdings (mainly bonds) which is financed by short-
ening the domestic bond: foreign bonds are, indeed, a good hedge with respect to labor-income
risk, as previously discussed. Both foreign bonds and equity are, however, a bad hedge with
respect to long-run real exchange rate risk; accordingly, when γ rises, the overall wealth invested
in foreign assets decreases substantially (38% when γ = 10, in the case of Asset Menu III ).
     Moreover, in the general case of Asset Menu III, we can evaluate the ability of the model to
replicate other stylized facts that are receiving increasing attention by the empirical literature.
Tille (2005, 2008), for example, reports a detailed breakdown of the composition of US foreign
assets and liabilities, and documents four basic features: 1) the US is a large net creditor in
equity instruments and 2) a net debtor in bond instruments; 3) the net position on foreign-
currency bonds is about balanced, while 4) the position in bonds denominated in US dollars
is largely negative. In our framework, the net-foreign asset position in equities is given by
N F E = ᾱeF + ᾱeH − 1 and the one in bonds by N F B = ᾱF + ᾱH , in which ᾱF and ᾱH capture
country H’s position on bonds denominated in foreign and domestic currency, respectively.36
  36
       Indeed, the steady-state net-foreign asset position (as a share of steady-state domestic wealth) is given by



                                                              26
    As shown by the first points in Figure 3, labor-income risk alone is not useful along this
dimension: the first component, indeed, implies an overall long position in the international
bond market, making the US a net debtor in equity assets (ᾱeH + ᾱeF < 1), and a largely long
position on foreign-currency bonds (ᾱF ' 1.1). On the contrary, real exchange rate risk and
fear of model misspecification are able to reconcile the model with all the stylized facts on US
cross-border holdings documented by Tille (2005, 2008). Indeed, rising degrees of ambiguity
aversion imply a creditor position in equity assets (ᾱeH + ᾱeF > 1) and a debtor position in debt
instruments (ᾱH + ᾱF < 0) – top-right panel. Moreover, the position in foreign-currency bonds
shrinks progressively towards a balanced position (ᾱF ' 0), while the one in home-currency
bonds remains negative (ᾱH < 0).

7.7    Calibrating γ using detection error probabilities
This section describes how to appropriately calibrate γ as a parameter capturing the concern
about model misspecification. We follow Anderson et al. (2003) and Hansen and Sargent (2007)
in using detection error probabilities. Let us call model A the approximating model and model
B(γ) the worst-case model associated with a particular γ. Agents start with the belief that
the models are equally likely. That is, they assign 50% prior probability to each model. After
having seen T observations, they can perform a likelihood ratio test for distinguishing the two
models. Under the hypothesis that model A is correct, we denote with pA (γ) the probability that
a likelihood ratio test would instead falsely say that model B(γ) generated the data. Conversely,
we denote with pB (γ) the probability that a likelihood ratio test would falsely say that model A
generated the data, when in fact model B(γ) is correct. The detection error probability, then, is
the weighted average of pA (γ) and pB (γ) with the weights given by the prior probabilities:
                                             1                
                                     p(γ) =     pA (γ) + pB (γ) .
                                             2
The detection error probability is a decreasing function of γ, since a larger γ (and therefore a
smaller θ) implies a lower penalization upon relaxing the entropy constraint in equation (34).
Indeed, the higher γ the wider is the entropy ball inside which the consumer allows the evil
agent to choose the worst-case distortion, and therefore the more afraid of misspecification the
consumer is. Accordingly, higher values of γ imply a larger divergence between the worst-case
model and the approximating one, and is therefore less probable that the likelihood-ratio test
will favor the wrong model. When γ = 1, on the contrary, the two models are equivalent and
p(γ) is therefore equal to 1/2.
    It is important to notice that the mapping between γ and p(γ), is model-specific and varies in
different contexts. This is why the plausibility of a given value of γ, as a measure of the concern
about model misspecification, should be appropriately determined in terms of the detection error
probability that it implies, which can instead be regarded as a context-invariant measure.
    In our context the approximating model is given by the VAR in (41):
                                            yt = µ + Ayt−1 + et
where et is distributed as a multivariate normal with zero mean and variance-covariance matrix
Ω. In the Appendix we show that the worst-case models, associated with specific values of γ
and γ ∗ , imply a distortion in the mean of the VAR, and take the form
                                        yt = µ + w(γ) + Ayt−1 + et                                            (45)
                             ∗                                                                    ∗
N F A ≡ ᾱeF + ᾱF − ᾱe∗                                             e     e∗
                       H − ᾱH , and the two components are N F E ≡ ᾱF − ᾱH and N F B ≡ ᾱF − ᾱH . The equations
in the text use the properties of the symmetric steady state in which ā = q̄ā : ᾱH = 1 − ᾱH and ᾱ∗H = −ᾱH .
                                                                               ∗    e∗        e




                                                        27
                                                DEP versus ! and !*                                                           DEP versus discounted relative entropy
                              50                                                                                     50
                                                                 H Country                                                                              H Country
                                                                 F Country                                                                              F Country
                              45                                                                                     45


                              40                                                                                     40


                              35                                                                                     35
Detection Error Probability




                                                                                       Detection Error Probability
                              30                                                                                     30


                              25                                                                                     25


                              20                                                                                     20


                              15                                                                                     15


                              10                                                                                     10


                               5                                                                                     5


                               0                                                                                     0
                                   0        5           10        15         20                                           0             10            20               30
                                                       !, !*                                                                                  ", "*



Figure 4: Detection Error Probabilities (DEP) versus fear of model misspecification (γ and γ ∗ , left
panel) and versus discounted conditional relative entropy (η and η ∗ , right panel).


for consumers in country H and

                                                                 yt = µ + w∗ (γ ∗ ) + Ayt−1 + et                                                                    (46)

for those in country F , where w(γ) and w∗ (γ ∗ ) are the optimal distortions in the mean.
    We simulated 100,000 samples, each of size 112 observations (corresponding to the sample
1980q1-2007q4 that we use in the VAR estimation), and computed the detection error probabil-
ities associated with the approximating and the worst-case models, by varying the parameters γ
and γ ∗ . The results are displayed in Figure 4.
    The left panel of Figure 4 shows the detection error probabilities, p(γ) and p(γ ∗ ), plotted
against γ and γ ∗ . We follow Anderson et al. (2003), Maenhout (2006) and Barillas et al. (2006),
and consider alternative models whose detection error probabilities are around 10 per cent as
“difficult to detect”. Figure 3 has shown that values of γ or γ ∗ between 5 and 10 are sufficient
to get the most of the model fit in terms of home-bias in equity and other empirical evidence on
cross-border holdings. Figure 4 then shows that values of γ and γ ∗ between 7 and 10 are still
associated with detection error probabilities around 0.10.
    The degree of ambiguity aversion needed to explain the empirical facts is therefore consis-
tent with conservative values of the detection error probabilities, thus validating the empirical
relevance of the model’s implications. Given that the left panel shows that for similar detection
error probability γ and γ ∗ are very close, we can also conclude that the assumption γ = γ ∗ is
generally innocuous.37
    The right panel of Figure 4 plots the detection error probabilities against the discounted
conditional relative entropy defined in (6), which in our case is time-invariant and equals

                                                                              β
                                                                 η(γ) = .5       w(γ)0 Ω−1 w(γ)
                                                                             1−β
             37
                              At the threshold value of 10%, the values for γ and γ ∗ are, respectively, 9 and 7.5.


                                                                                  28
for agents in country H and
                                                           β
                                        η ∗ (γ ∗ ) = .5       w∗ (γ ∗ )0 Ω−1 w∗ (γ ∗ )
                                                          1−β
for those in country F . This panel reveals that for each value of detection error probability,
the discounted entropies are the same for the two agents, in further support of the view that a
bound on detection error probabilities, rather than a given value for γ, appropriately defines a
context-invariant measure of concern about model uncertainty.


8         Conclusions
The observation that international investors hold a disproportionate share of their wealth in
domestic rather than foreign assets is one of the most persistent fact in international finance.
This is named the international home-bias puzzle, that the literature has been dealing with for
a couple of decades.
    This paper develops a dynamic general equilibrium model of portfolio and consumption
choices, with incomplete markets and distorted beliefs. Households might use a “subjective”
probability distribution that is generally different from the “approximating” one and make robust
optimal choices against model uncertainty. This framework assigns a new role to real exchange
rate risk for portfolio allocation even in a model with log utility. Importantly, moreover, what
matters is not only the short-run risk but also and foremost the long-run risk of real exchange
rate fluctuations.
    Within this framework we characterize optimal portfolio allocations in terms of covariances
between measurable sources of risk to be hedged (non-diversifiable labor-income risk and real
exchange rate risk) and a vector of cross-country excess returns, and evaluate their empirical
relevance using financial and macro data on the G7 countries.
    Our results suggest that, contrary to what claimed in recent related contributions, hedging
non-diversifiable labor-income risk is not sufficient to account for the lack of international port-
folio diversification. Indeed, in a setting in which equity is the only available asset, correlations
in financial data support a large foreign-equity bias, as in Baxter and Jermann (1997). Adding
further assets does not help in identifying a clear role for this risk in explaining the home-bias
puzzle, once the former is measured in a model-consistent way. On the other hand, a “plau-
sible” concern about model misspecification is able to generate a substantial equilibrium home
bias in equity holdings, and allows to match other empirical facts regarding the US cross-border
holdings. We evaluate the “plausibility” of the concern for model uncertainty by resorting to
detection error probabilities, which measure how easily the competing models can be told apart
using a finite amount of data.
    The methodological contribution of the paper goes beyond the analysis of the home-bias puz-
zle. The class of preferences that we suggest, in fact, produces a perturbation of the equilibrium
stochastic discount factor which decouples the attitudes towards intertemporal substitution with
those towards risk and ambiguity, and can prove useful in addressing other failures of standard
preference specifications along the asset-price dimension.38 Indeed, it has been shown, in closed-
economy settings, that disentangling the elasticity of intertemporal substitution from the degree
of risk aversion helps in accounting for the equity premium puzzle. Once we open the economy
to international trade in assets, there are additional puzzling features of financial data, among
which the international equity- and bond-premia puzzles and the Backus-Smith anomaly are
    38
         See for a discussion Backus et al. (2004).


                                                                29
notable examples.39 All these stylized facts imply restrictions on the stochastic discount factor
that standard preferences cannot meet at the same time, and that might be all reconnected to
some common misspecification.40 The modification of the stochastic discount factor that our
preference specification implies is a promising tool to correct this misspecification and build
macro models whose predictions are closer to the empirical implications of financial data.




  39
     Barillas et al. (2006) discusses the implications of model uncertainty for the equity premium puzzle; Piazzesi
and Schneider (2006) studies the slope of the yield curve with Epstein-Zin preferences. Ilut (2008) studies how
ambiguity aversion can help explain the uncovered-interest-rate puzzle.
  40
     All excess-return puzzles, for example, imply “high” lower bounds on the volatility of the equilibrium stochastic
discount factor, as discussed for the equity premium by Hansen and Jagannathan (1991).


                                                         30
References
 [1] Adler, Michael and Bernard Dumas (1983), “International Portfolio Choice and Corporation
     Finance: A Survey,” Journal of Finance, 38(3), pp. 925–984.

 [2] Anderson, Evan, Lars P. Hansen and Thomas J. Sargent (2003), “A Quartet of Semigroups
     for Model Specification, Robustness, Prices of Risk, and Model Detection”, Journal of the
     European Economic Association, 1(1), pp. 68–123.

 [3] Backus, David and Gregory Smith (1993), “Consumption and Real Exchange Rates in Dy-
     namic Economies with Non-Traded Goods,” Journal of International Economics, 35(3-4),
     pp. 297–316.

 [4] Backus, David, Bryan Routledge and Stanley Zin (2004), “Exotic Preferences for Macroeco-
     nomics,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2004.

 [5] Baxter, Marianne and Urban Jermann (1997), “The International Diversification Puzzle is
     Worse Than You Think,” American Economic Review, 87(2), pp. 170–180.

 [6] Barillas, Francisco, Hansen, Lars and Thomas Sargent (2006), “Doubts or Variability?”
     forthcoming in the Journal of Economic Theory.

 [7] Benigno, Gianluca and H. Kucuk-Tuger (2008), “Financial Globalization, Home Equity Bias
     and International Risk Sharing,” unpublished manuscript, London School of Economics.

 [8] Bertaut, Carol (2002), “Equity Prices, Household Wealth, and Consumption Growth in
     Foreign Industrial Countries,” International Finance Discussion Papers 724. Washington:
     Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

 [9] Bertaut, Carol C. and William L. Griever (2004), “Recent Developments in Cross-Border
     Investment in Securities,” Federal Reserve Bulletin (Winter), pp. 19–31.

[10] Bottazzi, Laura, Paolo Pesenti and Eric van Wincoop (1996), “Wages, Profits and the In-
     ternational Portfolio Puzzle,” European Economics Review 40(2), pp. 219–254.

[11] Campbell, John Y., (1996), “Understanding Risk and Return," Journal of Political Economy,
     104 (2), pp. 298–345.

[12] Campbell, John Y., (1999), “Asset prices, consumption, and the business cycle,” in John
     Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds.: Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1, North-Holland,
     Amsterdam.

[13] Campbell, John Y., and Shiller, Robert J. (1988) “Stock Prices, Earnings, and Expected
     Dividends.” Journal of Finance, 43, pp. 661–76.

[14] Coeurdacier, Nicolas (2005), “Do Trade Costs in Goods Market Lead to Home Bias in
     Equities?” unpublished manuscript, London Business School.

[15] Coeurdacier, Nicolas and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (2009), “When Bonds Matter: Home
     Bias in Goods and Assets,” unpublished manuscript, University of California at Berkeley.

[16] Coeurdacier, Nicolas, Philippe Martin and Robert Kollmann (2007), “International Portfolio
     Choices with Supply, Demand and Redistributive Shocks,” NBER Working Paper No. 13424.


                                              31
[17] Cole, Harold and Maurice Obstfeld (1991), “Commodity Trade and International Risk Shar-
     ing: How Much Do Financial Markets Matter?” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 28,
     pp. 3–24.

[18] Cooper, Ian and Evi Kaplanis (1994), “Home Bias in Equity Portfolios, Inflation Hedging,
     and International Capital Market Equilibrium,” The Review of Financial Studies, 7(1), pp.
     45–60.

[19] Cosmin, Ilut (2008), “Ambiguity Aversion: Implications for the Uncovered Interest Rate
     Parity Puzzle,” unpublished manuscript, Northwestern University.

[20] Devereux, Michael B. and Alan Sutherland (2006), “Solving for Country Portfolios in Open
     Economy Macro Models,” unpublished manuscript.

[21] Engel, Charles and Akito Matsumoto (2006), “Portfolio Choice in a Monetary Open-
     Economy DSGE Model,” NBER working paper No. 12214.

[22] Epstein, Larry and Jianjun Miao (2003), “A Two-Person Dynamic Equilibrium under Am-
     biguity,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 27, pp. 1253–1288.

[23] Epstein, Larry and Stanley Zin (1989), “Substitution, Risk Aversion and the Temporal
     Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,” Econometrica 57,
     pp. 937–969.

[24] French, Kenneth and Poterba, James (1991), “Investor Diversification and International
     Equity Markets.” American Economic Review 81 (2), pp. 222–226

[25] Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Helene Rey (2007), “International Financial Adjustment,”
     Journal of Political Economy, 115(4).

[26] Hansen, Lars and Ravi Jagannathan (1991), “Implications of Security Market Data for
     Models of Dynamic Economies,” The Journal of Political Economy, 99(2), pp. 225–262.

[27] Hansen, Lars and Thomas Sargent (2005), “Robust Estimation and Control under Commit-
     ment,” Journal of Economic Theory 124, pp. 258–301.

[28] Hansen, Lars and Thomas Sargent (2007), Robustness, Princeton University Press.

[29] Hansen, Lars, John Heaton and Nan Li (2008), “Consumption Strikes Back? Measuring
     Long-Run Risk,” Journal of Political Economy, 116(2), pp. 260–302.

[30] Heathcote, Jonathan and Fabrizio Perri (2004), “The International Diversification Puzzle is
     Not as Bad as You Think,” unpublished manuscript.

[31] Julliard, Christian (2003), “The International Diversification Puzzle is Not Worse Than you
     Think,” unpublished manuscript, Princeton University.

[32] Kollmann, Robert (2006), “International Portfolio Equilibrium and the Current Account,”
     unpublished manuscript, University of Paris XII.

[33] Kreps, D. M. and E. L. Porteus (1978), “Temporal Resolution of Uncertainty and Dynamic
     Choice,” Econometrica 46, pp. 185–200.



                                              32
[34] Maenhout, Pascal J. (2004), “Robust Portfolio Rules and Asset Pricing,” The Review of
     Financial Studies, Vol. 17, pp. 951–983.

[35] Maenhout, Pascal J. (2006), “Robust Portfolio Rules and Detection-Error Probabilities for
     a Mean-Reverting Risk Premium,” Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 128, pp. 136–163.

[36] Obstfeld, Maurice (2006), “International Risk Sharing And the Costs of Trade, ” The Ohlin
     Lectures, unpublished manuscript.

[37] Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff (2001), “The Six Major Puzzles in International
     Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 15,
     pp. 339–390.

[38] Pathak, Parag (2002), “Notes on Robust Portfolio Choice,” unpublished manuscript.

[39] Pavlova, Anna and Roberto Rigobon (2007), “Asset Prices and Exchange Rates,” Review of
     Financial Studies 20(4), pp. 1139–1181.

[40] Piazzesi, Monika and Martin Schneider (2006), “Equilibrium Yield Curve,” NBER Macroe-
     conomic Annual 2006.

[41] Rogoff, Kenneth (1996), “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle,” Journal of Economic Lit-
     erature, Vol. 34, No. 2, pp. 647-668.

[42] Shiller, Robert (1995), “Aggregate Income Risks and Hedging Mechanisms,” Quarterly Re-
     view of Economics and Finance, vol 35, 2, pp. 119-152

[43] Strzalecki, Tomasz (2009), “Temporal Resolution of Uncertainty and Recursive Models of
     Ambiguity Aversion,” unpublished manuscript, Harvard University

[44] Tallarini (2000), “Risk-Sensitive Real Business Cycle,” Journal of Monetary Economics 45,
     pp. 507–532.

[45] Tesar, Linda and Werner, Ingrid (1995), “Home Bias and High Turnover,” Journal of Inter-
     national Money and Finance 14 (4), pp. 467–492.

[46] Tille, Cedric (2005) “Financial Integration and the Wealth Effect of Exchange Rate Fluctu-
     ations”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report no. 226.

[47] Tille, Cedric (2008) “Financial Integration and the Wealth Effect of Exchange Rate Fluctu-
     ations”, Journal of International Economics, 75, pp. 283–294.

[48] Tille, Cedric and Eric van Wincoop (2006), “International Capital Flows,” unpublished
     manuscript, University of Virginia.

[49] Uppal, R. (1993), “A General Equilibrium Model of International Portfolio Choice,” Journal
     of Finance 48(2), pp. 529–553.

[50] Uppal, R. and T.Wang (2003), “Model Misspecification and Under-diversification”, Journal
     of Finance 58, pp. 2465–2486.

[51] Van Wincoop, Eric and Francis Warnock (2006), “Is Home Bias in Assets Related to Home
     Bias in Goods?” NBER Working Paper No 12728.


                                              33
[52] Van Wincoop, Eric and Francis Warnock (2008), “Can Trade Costs in Goods Explain Home
     Bias in Assets?” unpublished manuscript, University of Virginia.

[53] Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn and Laura Veldkamp (2007), “Information Immobility and the
     Home Bias Puzzle,” unpublished manuscript, New York University.

[54] Vissing-Jœrgensen, Annette and Orazio P. Attanasio (2003), “Stock-Market Participation,
     Intertemporal Substitution and Risk-Aversion,” American Economic Review. Vol. 93(2), pp.
     383–391.

[55] Weil, Philippe (1989), “The Equity Premium Puzzle and the Riskfree Rate Puzzle,” Journal
     of Monetary Economics 24, pp. 401–421.

[56] Weil, Philippe (1990), “Non-expected Utility in Macroeconomics,” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 105(1), pp. 29–42.




                                             34
Appendix

A       Some Useful Definitions
.
      To get equation (10), we have defined
                                                                              ∗
                                   At ≡ BH,t + St BF,t + xH,t VH,t + xF,t St VF,t ,

and
                                                   ∗         St                            e∗ St
                      Rp,t ≡ αH,t−1 RH,t + αF,t−1 RF,t           + αeH,t−1 RH,t
                                                                            e
                                                                                + αeF,t−1 RF,t      ,
                                                            St−1                               St−1
with
                                                    e       VH,t + DH,t
                                                   RH,t ≡               ,
                                                              VH,t−1
                                                             ∗       ∗
                                                    e∗      VF,t + DF,t
                                                   RF,t ≡        ∗
                                                                        ,
                                                              VF,t−1
and
                                                      BH,t ≡ αH,t At ,
                                                     St BF,t ≡ αF,t At ,
                                                    xH,t VH,t ≡ αeH,t At ,
                                                            ∗
                                                   xF,t St VF,t = αeF,t At ,
and analogously for the foreign country:
                                                      ∗
                                                     BH,t ≡ α∗H,t A∗t St ,
                                                       ∗
                                                      BF,t ≡ α∗F,t A∗t ,
                                                  x∗H,t VH,t ≡ αe∗   ∗
                                                                H,t At St ,

                                                    x∗F,t VF,t
                                                           ∗
                                                               = αe∗   ∗
                                                                  F,t At .



B       Derivation of equation (26)
In what follows, a variable with an “upper-bar” denotes the symmetric steady state and a “hat” denotes the log-
deviation with respect to such steady state. A first-order approximation of the Euler conditions (12) and (14)
implies
                                              Et ∆ĉt+1 = Et r̂p,t+1 ,                                   (B.1)
                                                   Et ∆ĉ∗t+1 = Et r̂p,t+1
                                                                     ∗
                                                                           .                             (B.2)
In particular, the portfolio returns can be approximated to first order as

                                               r̂p,t+1 = r̂H,t+1 + ᾱ0 exrt+1 ,
                                            ∗
                                          r̂p,t+1 = r̂H,t+1 + ᾱ∗0 exrt+1 − ∆q̂t+1 ,
where we have defined
                                                                                ᾱ∗F
                                      2            3                         2          3
                                           ᾱF
                                ᾱ ≡ 4 ᾱeH + ᾱeF 5               ᾱ∗ ≡ 4 ᾱ∗e
                                                                             H + ᾱF
                                                                                     ∗e 5
                                                                                          ,              (B.3)
                                           ᾱeF                                ᾱ∗e
                                                                                  F

and the vector of excess returns as
                                                        ∗
                                                      2                     3
                                                      r̂F,t  + ∆q̂t − r̂H,t
                                                             e
                                             exrt ≡ 4      r̂H,t − r̂H,t    5.
                                                        e∗               e
                                                      r̂F,t + ∆q̂t − r̂H,t
    In a first-order approximation, the no-arbitrage conditions imply that excess returns have zero conditional
means, Et exrt+1 = 0. It follows, using equations (B.1) and (B.2), that the cross-country differential in the
expected consumption growth depends on the expected depreciation in the real exchange rate

                                                   Et ∆ĉR
                                                         t+1 = Et ∆q̂t+1 ,                               (B.4)

where an upper-script R denotes the difference between the domestic and foreign variables.


                                                             35
     A first-order approximation of the flow budget constraint (10) together with the budget constraint of the
foreign agent implies
                                                  0                     R
                                 βâR     R                                       R
                                    t = ât−1 + λ̄ exrt + ∆q̂t + βsξ ξ̂ t − βsc ĉt ,                    (B.5)
where sξ is the steady-state ratio between non-traded income and financial wealth, given by sξ ≡ ξ̄/ā, which is
equal in the two countries; sc is the steady-state ratio between consumption and financial wealth and such that
sc = (1 − β)/β + sξ . Moreover, the vector λ̄ is defined as
                                                 2                     3
                                                          2ᾱF
                                            λ̄ ≡ 4 2(ᾱeH + ᾱeF ) − 2 5 .                                (B.6)
                                                        2ᾱeF − 1

     The set of difference equations (B.4) and (B.5) can be solved forward to obtain relative consumption and
relative wealth (ĉR   R                                R
                   t , t ) as a function of the states (t−1 , q̂t−1 ) and the processes of excess returns, relative non-
                                                                   R
diversifiable income and the real exchange rate {exrt , ξ̂ t , q̂t }. In particular, we obtain
                                                                                         ∞
                                (1 − β) R                 (1 − β) 0        (1 − β)sξ    X               R
               (ĉR
                  t − q̂t ) =          (ât−1 − q̂t−1 ) +        λ̄ exrt +           Et      β T −t (ξ̂ T − q̂T ),         (B.7)
                                  βsc                       βsc                sc       T =t
                                                                                            ∞
                                                   0               R                        X               R
              (âR              R
                 t − q̂t ) = (ât−1 − q̂t−1 ) + λ̄ exrt + sξ (ξ̂ t − q̂t ) − (1 − β)sξ Et          β T −t (ξ̂ T − q̂T ).   (B.8)
                                                                                            T =t

    We determine the portfolio shares by using a second-order approximation of the moment conditions (20)–(22).
In particular we just need three restrictions to determine the vector λ̄:
                                       h                                      i
                                   Et (∆ĉR                  e
                                            t+1 − ∆q̂t+1 )(r̂H,t+1 − r̂H,t+1 ) = 0,

                                      h                                               i
                                    Et (∆ĉR                e∗                 e
                                           t+1 − ∆q̂t+1 )(r̂F,t+1 + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1 ) = 0.
                                      h                                               i
                                                            ∗
                                    Et (∆ĉR
                                           t+1 − ∆q̂t+1 )(r̂F,t+1 + ∆q̂t+1 − r̂H,t+1 ) = 0,

We can now use equations (B.7)–(B.8) in the conditions above and solve for the steady-state vector of portfolio
shares and obtain equation (26).


C      Derivation of equation (39)
Under model uncertainty, it is still true that (B.4) and (B.5) still hold and can be used to write (37) as

                           R                  (1 − β) 0                                 sξ
                         ĝt+1 = −(γ − 1)            λ̄ exrt+1 − (γ − 1)εq,t+1 − (γ − 1) εl,t+1 ,
                                                βsc                                     sc
where we have defined the time-t surprises in the real exchange rate growth as
                                                   ∞
                                                   X
                                        εq,t+1 ≡         β j [Et+1 ∆q̂t+1+j − Et ∆q̂t+1+j ] .                              (C.9)
                                                   j=0

    Therefore, the left-hand side of the orthogonality condition (31) can be written as
                                                          (1 − β) 0                           sξ
                      (∆ĉR                R
                          t+1 − ∆q̂t+1 − ĝt+1 ) = γ             λ̄ exrt+1 + (γ − 1)εq,t+1 + γ εl,t+1 ,
                                                            βsc                               sc
from which it follows that (31) implies equation (39).


D      Derivation of equations (45)–(46)
In the approximating model
                                                       yt = µ + Ayt−1 + et ,
the vector of shocks et is distributed as a multivariate normal with zero mean and variance-covariance matrix Ω.
Accordingly, the probability density of et , denoted by f (et ), is proportional to
                                                    „               «
                                                        1
                                                exp − e0t Ω−1 et .
                                                        2

                                                                  36
The approximating and the worst-case models are linked through the martingale increments g and g ∗ for the
agents of country H and F , respectively. We showed in Section 5 that in a first-order approximation g and g ∗ are
related to the revisions in the expected future path of the respective consumption growth:
                                                 ∞
                                                 X    „                        «
                                  ĝt = −(γ − 1)   β k Et ∆ĉt+k − Et−1 ∆ĉt+k
                                                    k=0
                                                     X∞       „                         «
                                 ĝt∗ = −(γ ∗ − 1)         β k Et ∆ĉ∗t+k − Et−1 ∆ĉ∗t+k ,
                                                     k=0

                                                ∗
in which we are allowing for different γ and γ .
     Using equations (B.1)–(B.2) and a first-order approximation of the flow-budget constraint (10), we can solve
for the growth rate of domestic consumption, as a function of steady-state portfolio shares, asset returns and
labor income. It follows that we can write g and g ∗ as linear combinations of the VAR innovations:

                                              ĝt = −(γ − 1)z(γ)0 et
                                              ĝt∗ = −(γ ∗ − 1)z∗ (γ ∗ )0 et ,

in which vectors z and z∗ depend on γ and γ ∗ through the steady-state portfolio shares. Indeed, simple algebra
shows that
                                          1−β                             sξ
                                   z(γ) ≡        ιexr ᾱ(γ) + H0 ιr + H0 (ιξ − ιr )
                                           βsc                            sc
for country H, and
                                     1−β                                     sξ
                        z∗ (γ ∗ ) ≡       ιexr ᾱ∗ (γ ∗ ) + H0 (ιr − ιq ) + H0 (ιξ + ιq − ιr ),
                                      βsc                                    sc
for country F , in which ᾱ and ᾱ∗ are defined in (B.3), and H ≡ (I − βA)−1 .
     It follows that the probability distribution of the distorted model for the agent in country H, denoted by
f˜(et ), is given by                                  „            «   „                «
                                                        1
                          f˜(et ) ≡ f (et ) · gt ∝ exp − e0t Ω−1 et exp −(γ − 1)z(γ)0 et .
                                                        2
Completing the square finally allows us to write f˜(et ) as
                                             „           ”0             ”«
                                               1“            “
                                f˜(et ) ∝ exp − et − w(γ) Ω−1 et − w(γ)    ,
                                               2

in which w(γ) ≡ −(γ − 1)Ωz(γ) is the mean distortion implied by the preference for robustness. Similarly, the
distorted probability distribution function for the agent in country F , f˜∗ (et ), is given by
                                                      „                ”0                   ”«
                                                        1“                  “
                       f˜∗ (et ) ≡ f (et ) · gt∗ ∝ exp − et − w∗ (γ ∗ ) Ω−1 et − w∗ (γ ∗ )      ,
                                                        2

in which w∗ (γ ∗ ) ≡ −(γ ∗ − 1)Ωz∗ (γ ∗ ).
    Equations (45)–(46) directly follow.




                                                              37
