                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      CHARACTERISTICS OF OBSERVED LIMIT ORDER DEMAND AND SUPPLY
                   SCHEDULES FOR INDIVIDUAL STOCKS

                                           Jung-Wook Kim
                                              Jason Lee
                                            Randall Morck

                                        Working Paper 14733
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14733


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2009




We thank Hyeon Kee Bae, Utpal Bhattacharya, Wonseok Choi, David Feldman, Lawrence Glosten,
Jarrad Harford, Mark Huson, Aditya Kaul, Alok Kumar, Ki Bong Lee, Kyung-Mook Lim, Raymond
Liu, Ernst Maug, Vikas Mehrotra, Jeffrey Pontiff, Barry Scholnick, Hanfeng Shen, Andrei Shleifer,
Jeremy Stein, Peter Swan, Bohui Zhang, students in Andrei Shleifer’s behavioral finance seminar
course at Harvard University, and seminar participants at the University of Alberta, the University
of Amsterdam, Arizona State University, the City University of Hong Kong, Erasmus University of
Rotterdam, Seoul National University, and the University of New South Wales for helpful comments.
 We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the University of Alberta SAS fellowship and
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Jung-Wook Kim, Jason Lee, and Randall Morck. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Characteristics of Observed Limit Order Demand and Supply Schedules for Individual Stocks
Jung-Wook Kim, Jason Lee, and Randall Morck
NBER Working Paper No. 14733
February 2009
JEL No. G01,G10,G14

                                              ABSTRACT

Using complete order books from the Korea Stock Exchange for a four-year period including the 1997
Asian financial crisis, we observe (not estimate) limit order demand and supply curves for individual
stocks. Both curves have demonstrably finite elasticities. These fall markedly, by about 40%, with
the crisis and remain depressed long after other economic and financial variables revert to pre-crisis
norms. Superimposed upon this common long-term modulation, individual stocks’ supply and demand
elasticities correlate negatively at high frequencies. That is, when a stock exhibits an unusually elastic
demand curve, it tends simultaneously to exhibit an unusually inelastic supply curve, and vice versa.
These findings have potential implications for modeling how information flows into and through stock
markets, how limit order providers react or interact to information flows, how new information is capitalized
into stock prices, and how financial crises alter these processes. We advance speculative hypotheses,
and invite further theoretical and empirical work to explain these findings and their implications.


Jung-Wook Kim                                         Randall Morck
Assistant Professor of Finance                        Faculty of Business
School of Business                                    University of Alberta
University of Alberta                                 Edmonton, CANADA T6G 2R6
Edmonton, Alberta                                     and NBER
Canada T6G 2R6                                        randall.morck@ualberta.ca
jungwook.kim@ualberta.ca

Jason Lee
Associate Professor of Accounting
University of Alberta
Edmonton AB Canada T6G 2R6
jason.lee@ualberta.ca
1.       Introduction

Complete limit order books, with each entry flagged as a buy or sell, for all Korean listed

stocks from December 1996 to December 2000 let us observe the whole demand and supply

curves of limit orders for each individual listed stock at any instant in time. We do this twice

each day – once at the beginning of trading and again at 2:30 PM, half an hour before the

market’s close.1 Since the market opens with a call auction, but then switches to continuous

trading, this lets us explore demand and supply under the two microstructure alternatives.

Since our sample period includes 1997 and 1998, we can also compare demand and supply

curves before, during, and after the Asian financial crisis.

         Because we observe entire demand and supply curves for limit orders, we measure the

elasticity of each curve separately and directly, rather than jointly and by inference from

prices and quantities traded. This sidesteps entirely the standard identification problems

associated with elasticity estimation using observed quantities traded and market prices (or

prices near the market prices). This also lets us compare the two elasticities and investigate

the relationship between them. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to

investigate these issues.

         Our main results are as follows.

          First, individual stocks’ limit order supply and demand elasticities are significantly

less than infinity, in that their reciprocals differ significantly from zero. This is consistent

with theories of information capitalization that derive stock prices from the intersections of

finitely elastic demand and supply curves for each stock (e.g., Harrison and Kreps, 1978;

Grossman and Stiglitz,1980). A caveat is in order, for our limit order books do not, of

course, reveal the total demand and supply that would arise at each hypothetical price. These

totals would be limit orders already in the books plus new limit orders and market orders that

1
 The KSE was open Saturday mornings until December 5, 1998, so on Saturdays during that period the second elasticity is
estimated at 11:30 AM instead of 2:30 PM. Dropping these observations does not qualitatively change any of our results.



                                                          1
would have been submitted were the price to have moved to that hypothetical level. We only

observe the first of the three components, so our elasticities of limit order supply and demand

may well underestimate the elasticities of the total supply and demand curves for individual

stocks. In Korean data, this problem is mitigated because market orders are little used and

because limit orders are costless unless executed, so a shareholder willing to sell at a price

above the current market price, for example, has nothing to lose except private information

by submitting out of the market sell limit orders.

       Second, both demand and supply elasticities exhibit a common long run modulation,

which change dramatically during the Asian financial crisis. Before the crisis, both average

around 36. That is, a one percent price change commands a 36 percent change in quantity

demanded or supplied. Both values drop to roughly 22 after the crisis. Unlike many other

economic and financial indicators, which fluctuate dramatically around the crisis before

reverting to their pre-crisis levels, individual stocks’ limit order elasticities remain at these

new average levels – apparently permanently. This implies a permanently elevated

heterogeneity of investors’ valuations after the crisis. The direction of this shift is intriguing,

for post-crisis reforms are thought to have enhanced transparency and the advent of online

trading is thought to have reduced transactions costs (Kim and Kim, 2008; Kwak, 2007).

These findings raise the possibility of elevated information asymmetry and/or risk aversion,

constraining information flow through a stock market years after a major financial crisis, with

reduced limit order depth around market prices perhaps leaving stock prices more vulnerable

to liquidity-driven fluctuations.

       Third, superimposed on this common long run modulation, the two elasticities exhibit

a negative correlation at high frequencies. That is, stocks that develop unusually elastic

demand curves tend simultaneously to develop unusually inelastic supply curves and vice




                                                2
versa. This high frequency correlation is more strongly negative in 2:30 PM elasticities than

in opening auction elasticities.

        This finding raises the possibility of a feedback. For example, demand elasticity might

fall as buy-side limit order book depth evaporates in response to aggressive sell-side orders

that flatten a stock’s supply curve. This sort of feedback reinforces the importance of

selecting relatively information-free changes in quantities demanded or sought when

estimating individual stocks’ demand or supply elasticities (Shleifer, 1986; Wurgler and

Zhuravskaya, 2002). Such feedback is also consistent with the conclusions of French and

Roll (1986), Roll (1988), and others regarding information propagation in financial markets:

most new information is uncovered by private investors and revealed sequentially through

their trading.

        Because limit orders greatly preponder market orders in Korea (See Section 3.2

below), and because Korean limit order books retain considerable depth well away from

market prices, we can measure elasticities across broad price ranges, consistent with

economically significant fundamental valuation heterogeneity across limit order providers.

This complements previous work using strategic limit order placement near the market price

to gauge local elasticities (Kalay et al., 2004).

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses other relevant

research. Section 3 discusses the data and elasticity measurement procedure. Section 4

describes our findings, and Section 5 concludes.



2.      Relation to Previous Studies

The wheelhorses of asset pricing (Markowitz, 1952; Tobin, 1958; Sharpe, 1964; Lintner,

1965) postulate that individual stocks have infinitely many perfect substitutes in other stocks

or portfolios, and so have horizontal demand and supply curves. A parallel literature assumes



                                                    3
individual stocks have finitely elastic demand and supply schedules reflecting heterogeneous

valuations across investors (e.g., Grossman and Stiglitz, 1980).

       The virtues of the wheelhorses are elegance and simplicity; those of Grossman and

Stiglitz (1980) and their descendents are compatibility with increasingly persuasive – though

still disputable – empirical evidence of economically significant valuation heterogeneity. This

debate turns on abnormal returns associated with private information (French and Roll, 1986;

Roll, 1988); secondary offerings (Scholes, 1972; Allen and Postlewaite, 1984; Mikkelson and

Partch, 1985; Loderer et al., 1991); repurchases (Bagwell,1992); and index revisions

(Shleifer, 1986; Harris and Gruel, 1986; Jain, 1987; Dhillon and Johnson, 1991; Beneish and

Whaley, 1996; Lynch and Mendenhall, 1997; Liu, 2000; Kaul et al., 2000; Greenwood, 2005).

Also consistent with valuation heterogeneity are finitely elastic demand and supply schedules

observed in auctions (Bagwell, 1992; Kandel et al., 1999; Liaw et al., 2000); patterns in near-

market limit orders (Kalay et al., 2004; Sandås, 2001), inexplicably large normal trading

volumes (Varian, 1985, 1989); persistent pricing anomalies (Shleifer, 2000; Shiller, 2002),

and historical accounts of investor behavior during alleged stock market manias and panics

(Kindleberger, 1978). Shleifer and Vishny (1997) go furthest, arguing that a realistic

assessment of arbitrage costs precludes the assumption of homogenous information.

       Elaborations of the basic Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) framework posit investors

with different information sets (Blough, 1988; Glosten, 1994), different ways of processing

information (Hindy, 1989), different abilities to process information (De Long et al., 1990,

Barber and Odean, 2000; Grinblatt and Han, 2005), different priors (Kandel and Pearson,

1995), differences of opinion more generally (Varian 1985, 1989; Harris and Raviv, 1993;

Kandel and Pearson 1995; Fama and French 2007), and different time preferences (Foucault

et al., 2005). Glosten’s (1994, p. 1129) observation that “the possibility of information-




                                               4
motivated trades … implies that the schedule of offers is generally upward sloping” pertains

to most such approaches.

       These approaches are clearly interrelated. For example, heterogeneous impatience

might reflect heterogeneous beliefs about the future, heterogeneous abilities to predict the

future, or heterogeneous levels of irrational optimism or pessimism. Nonetheless,

heterogeneous impatience attracts special interest in the microstructure literature as

potentially consistent with information set homogeneity if investors have heterogeneous and

exogenously determined levels of impatience. For example, investors confronted with sudden

medical or legal bills might knowingly sell shares at depressed prices to obtain cash

immediately. Parlour (1998) achieves this by assuming (p. 804) that investors price common

future cash flow estimates with discount rates drawn from an exogenously given distribution.

       Patient investors can thus gain by placing limit orders above and below a stock’s

fundamental value, providing immediate execution to impatient investors (Handa and

Schwartz, 1996). Such models explain locally elastic demand and supply curves for limit

orders near the market price (Sandås, 2001; Kalay et al., 2004), since competition between

providers of immediate execution precludes limit orders far away from the market price. Our

finding of substantial limit order depth far away from market prices, while not inconsistent

with heterogeneous patience, is arguably more consistent with other drivers of heterogeneous

valuations, such as heterogeneous information.

       Hollifield et al. (2004, 2006) model impatience and information heterogeneity in

concert, and conclude that the two are inseparably confounded and must be considered jointly.

This is because “traders with high private values submit buy orders with high execution

probabilities. Traders with low private values submit sell orders with high execution

probabilities. Traders with intermediate private values either submit no orders, or submit buy

or sell orders with low execution probabilities” (Hollifield et al., 2006, p. 2760). Intuitively,



                                               5
investors with private information provide liquidity at better prices than other potential

providers, making actual liquidity provision a by-product of heterogeneous valuations. This

prediction is confirmed experimentally (Bloomfield et al., 2005).

       Since we directly observe both demand and supply elasticities, we can also test for

relationships between them. Valuation heterogeneity driven by patience heterogeneity is

consistent with a static limit order book. But if investors have different information or

different information processing capabilities, they should monitor each other’s trades to infer

each other’s private valuations (Grossman and Stiglitz, 1980; Shleifer and Vishny, 1997).

This implies a dynamic feedback in limit order books, with uninformed limit order providers

reacting to likely informed trading by withdrawing limit orders to reduce expected adverse

selection costs (Harris, 1998; Parlour, 1998; Sandås, 2001; Goettler et al., 2009).

       Our finding of a negative correlation between supply and demand elasticities at high

frequencies validates the importance of investigating these dynamics, and suggests directions

for future theoretical work in this area. A formal model is beyond the scope of this paper, but

the logic can be laid out readily. Assume the information propagation framework proposed

by French and Roll (1986) and Roll (1988) is correct: a specific subset of investors are the

first to learn of new information, and others only learn of it by watching for unusual trading

patterns that signal new private information. As trades execute at changing prices, limit order

providers observe the valuations of other investors, and use this information to update their

own fundamental value estimates, as well as the uncertainty they attach to those estimates;

and hence also their limit orders. This point seems especially important given Roll (1988),

who shows that stock price fluctuations usually do not correspond to public information

events. From this, he infers that stock price changes are typically caused by investors seeking

to gain from private information they acquire. This suggests that traders on one side of the

limit order book may often be at an information advantage to those on the other side. For



                                               6
example, if a subset of investors learns a stock is underpriced, they should enter large buy

orders at or just above the market price, flattening the demand curve. Seeing these executed,

uninformed sell-side investors would presumably withdraw limit order depth near the market

price, steepening the supply curve. Such a feedback might be represented with an impact

function, extending Kyle (1985) or Sandås (2001); or by generalizing the “crowding out”

effect in Parlour (1998) or Goettler et al. (2009).

        Consistent with the intuition underlying these conjectures, Kavajecz (1999) finds

specialists and limit order traders in the U.S. reducing depths around information events,

thereby reducing their exposure to adverse selection (Hollifield et al., 2004, 2006). Also

consistent with this intuition, Goldstein and Kavajecz (2004) report limit order traders

remaining inactive or even withdrawing when the plummeting Dow Jones Industrial Average

triggered circuit breakers that halted all trading on October 27, 1997.



3.      Measuring Elasticities

This section describes how we measure elasticities of limit order demand and supply of

individual stocks. It first describes the trading system of the Korea Stock Exchange (KSE)

and the raw trade and quote data it generates, then how we construct demand and supply

schedules for each stock twice a day, and finally how we summarize the shapes of those

curves as elasticities.



3.1.    Market Microstructure

The KSE is an order driven market, in that it has no designated market makers or specialists.

Any investor is free to make a market in any stock, however this entails certain costs. All

investors, including brokers, pay a 0.3% stamp tax on executed sales. Online trading started

in 1997 with fees of 0.5%, matching standard brokerage fees at the time. But online fees fell



                                                7
sharply after June 1998 as competition began in earnest. Tick sizes range from 0.1% to 0.5%

depending on a stock’s price range. For example, a ₩5,000 stock is priced in ₩5 increments,

while a ₩ 50,000 stock is priced in ₩ 50 ticks. Bid-ask spreads are thus not entirely

endogenous.

        The investor base also changes with time. Before May 1998, foreign ownership was

capped, limiting foreigners’ ability to buy aggressively if the firm already had large foreign

blockholdings. After May 1998, all such restrictions disappeared.

        Trading begins at 9:00 AM with a call market – an auction in which accumulated bids

and offers, taken as simultaneous, are matched to generate one opening price for each stock.

In our data, 19.10 percent of buy orders and 21.14 percent of sell orders are submitted to

opening sessions.

        Subsequent prices, until 10 minutes before the closing time at 3:00 PM, are set in

continuous trading.2 In the last 10 minutes, another auction market session determines prices.

Orders not fully filled in the opening auction pass into continuous trading unless cancelled or

revised. An automatic trading system records all outstanding limit orders and automatically

crosses new market and limit orders with these, or with opposite market orders. 3 The

computerized order-routing system prioritizes by price and then time.



3.2.    Trade and Quote Records Data

Our Korean Stock Exchange Trade and Quote (KSETAQ) data are computer records from

this system. They include all KSE transactions and limit orders – filled and unfilled. Each

record gives a ticker symbol, a date and precise time; a flag for buy versus sell orders; and,

for limit orders, the price. We include only transactions involving common shares, so that


2
  Before May 22, 2000, the KSE held separate morning (9:00 AM to 12:00 AM) and afternoon (1:00 PM to 3:00 PM)
sessions, each commencing with a call market.
3
  For additional detail, see, e.g., Choe et al. (1999).



                                                     8
each firm is represented by only one listed security.

         We can further separate data used in the opening auctions from continuous trading

data. Margin and short sale orders are also specially flagged. Our sample contains complete

data from December 1st 1996 to December 31st 2000, and Table 1 summarizes its

composition.



                                               [Table 1 about here]



         In constructing demand and supply schedules, we focus on limit orders because

market orders, by definition, do not specify prices.4 Also, market orders are a very small

fraction of total orders on the KSE. Table 1 shows limit orders comprising 94.78 percents of

buy orders and 92.99 percent of sell orders. The rarity of market orders likely reflects their

novelty. Market orders were introduced by the KSE on November 25th 1996, only a few days

before our sample period begins, and remained little used.5 We hope to explore this event

and its implications in future work.

         We then take two snapshots per day of each stock’s complete limit order book. The

first is at the opening auction, and the second is at 2:30 PM – thirty minutes before trading

ends. Unexecuted limit orders expire at the end of the day, so one day’s limit orders do not

typically reappear the next day.



3.3.     Demand and Supply Schedules

To gauge elasticities, we first plot out the limit order demand and supply schedules of each

individual stock – first in the opening auction and then at 2:30 PM amid continuous trading.

4
  Bloomfield et al. (2005) and Kaniel and Liu (2006) argue that informed investors should prefer limit orders to market
orders. Thus, limit orders are likely more useful for gauging information heterogeneity among investors.
5
  One financial analyst we asked about this proposed a starkly behavioral motive, resonant of the “default option” bias
explained in Thaler and Sunstein (2008): the standard electronic form for entering orders has a blank for price, so most
investors enter one.



                                                           9
This is done precisely as in economics principles textbooks, and is best illustrated with an

example.



                                              [Figure 1 about here]



         Figure 1 graphs the demand and supply schedules on November 11th 2000 of

Samsung Electronics, a large and heavily traded KSE listing.6 These graphs are constructed

by horizontally summing all limit orders that would execute at each theoretical price. The

sum of all buy orders that would execute at a given price p is the demand for Samsung

Electronics at that price. As the price is decreased, tick by tick, successively more buy limit

orders join the executable list so the demand curve reaches further to the right at lower prices.

The sum of all sell orders that would execute at price p is analogously the supply of

Samsung Electronics shares offered at that price. Again, as the price rises in one tick

increment, additional sell orders join that sum and the supply curve extends increasingly far

to the right at successively higher prices.



                                              [Figure 2 about here]



         The demand and supply schedules at both the opening auction and 2:30 PM resemble

those in standard economics textbooks, with the obvious proviso that the area to the left of

the market price is unobservable in continuous trading.                            Figure 2 shows Samsung

Electronics’ demand and supply schedules at 15-minute intervals throughout the day

including the opening and closing auctions. The 2:30 PM snapshots are typical. Graphs on

other dates and for other stocks look similar to those shown in the figures.

6
 We randomly choose 3 other stocks from large, medium and small capitalization groups. These graphs all resemble Figure
1.



                                                         10
         Using this technique, we construct supply and demand curves for each listed stock

twice each day, precisely as in Figure 1. We begin by constructing analogs of Figure 1 for

each stock j. For each bid price p, we sum the bid orders that would execute to obtain

demand7



         d j ( p ) = ∑b =1 nbj δ ( pbj ≥ p )
                        B
[1]




with b an index of bid limit orders, nbj the number of shares sought in order b, and δ ( p bj ≥ p )

an indicator set to one if order b executes at price p and to zero otherwise.                      The supply of

stock j at p is analogously defined over ask limit orders, indexed by a, as follows.



         s j ( p ) = ∑a =1 najδ ( paj ≤ p )
                       A
[2]




         For each stock, at any point in time, we thus map price p into a total quantity of stock

j demanded, dj(p), and a total quantity supplied, sj(p). This technique reveals demand and

supply schedules for each stock at each day’s opening auction and again at 2:30 PM. Note

that these demand and supply schedules are observed, not estimated. Simultaneous equations

identification problems do not arise.



3.4.     Alternative Approaches to Measuring Elasticities

Kalay et al. (2004) measure demand and supply elasticities for stocks traded on the Tel Aviv

Stock Exchange from limit orders adjacent to market prices. They report unambiguously




7
 When an order is submitted but subsequently cancelled, we exclude it in constructing the demand and supply schedules.
Similarly, for any revised order, we use the revised price and/or quantity.



                                                         11
finite elasticities, but caution that their estimates depend critically on their assumptions about

the shareholder base.

       Specifically, they measure elasticities as percentage changes in quantities divided by

percentage changes in prices and take the former to be the quantity offered or sought divided

by the ‘total quantity of shares’. If this denominator is shares outstanding, all shares are

assumed to be for sale and their elasticities are very small: 0.083 and 0.009 for mean local

demand and supply elasticities, respectively. If they scale instead by opening volume, only

shareholders active at that time are assumed to be willing to trade and their elasticities are

large: 415.4 and 63.6 for demand and supply elasticities, respectively. Scaling by total shares

in the order book at open, or by mean daily volume, yields only slightly less extreme point

estimates. All of these scaling methods are defensible, as are others – such as the public float,

or a smoothed trading volume.

       This issue affects the estimation of any demand and supply elasticities in any markets

– for example, the potential total quantity of oil might be current inventories, “proven”

reserves, “possible” reserves, or all geological deposits. While accepting the validity of this

issue, we follow the conventional econometrics textbook approach (e.g., Greene, 1993) and

estimate elasticities as log differences in quantities offered, or sought, divided by log

differences in prices. This lets the data choose a denominator at the cost of imposing a

constant elasticity assumption across the whole length of each side of the limit order book.

This assumption is clearly restrictive, but parsimoniously characterizes valuation

heterogeneity across the broad price ranges we observe in the data.

       Since measuring this heterogeneity is our primary interest, the log on log specification

is defensible. However, alternative assumptions may well be preferable in other contexts.

Subsequent sections therefore examine the robustness of our results to modifying this

assumption and estimating elasticities using subsets of limit order books.



                                               12
3.5.    Elasticity Measurement Procedure

To measure the elasticity of demand in limit orders for firm j’s stock at time t, we regress the

logarithm of total demand at that time at price pk, ln dj,t(pk), on the logarithm of pk,



[3]     ln d j ,t ( p k ) = a j ,t − η Dj ,t ln p k + u j ,t ,k




The elasticity of demand at time t, η Dj,t , the percentage decrease in the quantity of stock j

sought given a one percent price rise, is thus minus one times the coefficient of ln pk in [3].

        The elasticity of supply at time t, η Sj,t , is the percentage increase in the quantity of

stock offered given a one percent price rise, and so is measured by the coefficient on ln pk in

[4].



[4]     ln s j ,t ( pk ) = b j ,t + η Sj ,t ln pk + v j ,t ,k



        Both demand and supply elasticities are each measured only when we have over five

price-quantity pairs. In the final sample, the mean (median) number of pairs used is 17 (13)

for opening auction demand elasticities and 17 (12) for opening auction supply elasticities,

and 17 (14) and 21 (16) for 2:30 PM demand and supply elasticities, respectively. The mean

(median) regression R2 of [3] at the opening auction and at 2:30 PM are 74% (76%) and 64%

(65%) respectively; and, those of [4] are 80% (82%) and 72% (74%) respectively, suggesting

that the log on log specification parsimoniously summarizes the data.

        Finally, although [3] and [4] use regression coefficients as elasticity measurements,

no simultaneity bias arises. This is because we are not jointly estimating demand and supply




                                                                  13
curves from the same data. Rather, we are plotting out observed demand and supply curves

precisely and then using [3] and [4] to measure the slope of each side of the limit order book.



3.6.   Limit Order Book Range

As noted in Section 2, the elasticities of demand and supply schedules could reflect various

sorts of investor heterogeneity – including information heterogeneity, patience heterogeneity,

or some combination of the two. If investors are heterogeneously patient, finitely elastic

demand and supply schedules could persist despite investors having homogenous information.

This is because impatient investors compensate patient investors for immediate order

execution by acquiescing to slightly disadvantageous prices.

       As noted above, the KSE lacks designated market makers. Instead, new orders are

matched against outstanding orders. But private traders can act as de facto market makers by

standing ready to buy or sell at prices slightly below or above the market price. Handa and

Schwartz (1996) and Foucault et al. (2005) model such private market makers’ profits from

trading at advantageous prices offsetting trading costs, non-execution costs, and

disadvantageous fundamentals news; and suggest that limit orders around market prices may

be associated with virtual market making rather than with genuine heterogeneous valuation.

       Hollifield et al. (2004, 2006) argue that investors whose private information implies

valuations different from the market price are also those who provide liquidity as de facto

market makers. If investors have more homogenous information, and are more certain of their

valuations, this model implies that such de facto market makers would maximize their

quasirents by placing limit orders close to the market price, where execution is likely. In

contrast, if investors have more heterogeneous information or attach less certainty to their

valuations, de facto market makers would place limit orders farther away from the current

market price to avoid adverse selection.



                                              14
       We therefore examine the distribution of prices in limit order books. We believe

Ockham’s razor favors these limit order books reflecting genuinely heterogeneous

fundamental value estimates for several reasons:

       First, the price ranges at which we observe substantial limit order depth are quite

broad, and so seem a priori inimical to de facto market making as a sole, or even primary

explanation. Panels A and B of Table 2 show substantial limit order depths beyond 3% away

from the observed market price – open prices in morning auctions or bid-ask midpoints at

2:30 PM for each schedule. This is equivalent to a 6% spread in a specialist market. These

limit orders represent about 71% and 74.1% of total limit buy and sell orders for the opening

auction and 69.4% and 75.2% for 2:30 PM, respectively. Only 10.5% (9.1%) of total

quantities demanded (supplied) fall within a one percent range around the market price at the

opening auction and only 10.2% (6.6%) at 2:30 PM. Such a substantial width in the limit

order distribution seems consistent with heterogeneous investor beliefs, or at least, liquidity

provision by investors with heterogeneous valuations as in Hollifield et al. (2004, 2006).



                                     [Table 2 about here]



       Second, Korea levies a 0.3% Tobin tax on all stock sales, even by brokers’ trading on

their own accounts. Public shareholders serving as liquidity providers confront even higher

transactions costs, for in 2000, brokerage fees ranged from 0.35% to 0.5%, though online

trading costs fell sharply after June 1998, and now range between 0.025% and 0.1%. Such

costs could render limit orders solely to provide liquidity more costly.

       Third, Table 1 shows market orders comprising only 5.22% of shares sought and

7.01% of shares offered. If limit orders existed primarily to provide liquidity around market

prices, they ought not to preponder market orders greatly, for the latter ought to include much



                                               15
of the demand for quick execution. Aggregated limit order magnitudes, roughly sixteen to

twenty-fold greater than market orders at 2:30 PM and seven to thirteen-fold greater in the

opening auction, seem superfluous.

       This evidence is admittedly circumstantial, for our findings could conceivably just

reflect substantial impatience heterogeneity, rather than information-based heterogeneity. We

therefore pursue this issue further below. First, Section 3.7 re-estimates elasticities excluding

price-quantity pairs proximate to market prices, where liquidity provision absent valuation

heterogeneity is most plausible. Second, Sections 4.3, 4.4, and 4.5 demonstrate a high

frequency negative correlation between elasticities of demand and supply. Based on these

findings, Section 4.6 argues that information heterogeneity among investors is a plausible

explanation of our findings.



3.7.   Whole and Cored Elasticities

Equations [3] and [4] assume constant elasticity across all prices. This assumption injects

noise if the true elasticity varies across prices, but becomes even more problematic if

Hollifield et al. (2004, 2006) do not apply; and limit orders near the market price reflect

competitive market making by liquidity providers with no genuinely divergent valuations.

We can mitigate, and evaluate, these concerns by estimating elasticities after removing

observations near the market price, where competitive market makings unassociated with

valuation heterogeneity is most likely.

       We define near-market limit orders as those priced in the interval (pm(1 – k), pm(1 +

k)), centered around the market price, pm, with k set to one, two, and then three percent of the

market price. By dropping price-quantity pairs with prices in these successively larger near-

market intervals, we obtain cored supply and demand schedules, so-named because of the

holes around their market prices. At all non-near-market prices, these demand and supply



                                               16
schedules are identical to those described above. That is, given a supply schedule of price-

quantity pairs {(p, s(p)}, we denote the corresponding cored supply schedules, Cs(k), for k =

one, two, or three percent, as



[5]         C s ( k ) ≡ {( p, s( p )) | p ∈ (0, pm (1 - k)] ∪ [ pm (1 + k),+∞ )} .



Cored demand schedule are similarly defined.

           We then run [3] and [4] on these cored demand and supply schedules to obtain cored

elasticities of demand or supply.



4.         Empirical Results

This section first reports summary statistics of demand and supply elasticities; and then

presents firm-level daily panel regressions. We divide our sample period into three sub-

periods; a pre-crisis period of December 1996 through October 1997, an in-crisis period of

November 1997 to October 1998, and a post-crisis period of November 1998 to December

2000. This division of the sample period into three sub-periods follows the definition in Kim

and Wei (2002).8



                                               [Figure 3 about here]



4.1.       Magnitudes

Panels A and B of Figure 3 plot the time series of daily mean elasticities against time; Panel

C of Figure 3 plots the KSE index for the same period. Table 3 reports the summary statistics

of underlying firm-level daily elasticities of demand and supply curves. Table 3 shows the


8
    In November, 1997, the Bank of Korea stopped defending Korean Won and Korean government requested IMF bail-out.



                                                          17
median demand elasticities to be about 20 both in opening auctions and at 2:30 PM; while the

median supply elasticities are 24 in opening auctions and 23 at 2:30 PM. A one percent

increase in price thus induces roughly a 20 percent drop in demand and a 23 percent rise in

supply.9



                                                      [Table 3 about here]



             All of the elasticity estimates in Panels A and B of Table 3 are significantly below

infinity; in the sense that their reciprocals significantly differ from zero. Whether we use

whole demand and supply schedules or cored demand and supply schedules to estimate ηD

and ηS, standard t-tests and rank tests show the means and medians of both 1/ηD and 1/ηS to

differ significantly from zero (p < 0.0001).

             Our elasticity measurements generally exceed the 10.50 figure imputed by Kaul et al.

(2000), the 7.89 estimate obtained by Wurgler and Zhuravskaya (2002), the mean (median)

elasticity of 0.68 (1.05) reported by Bagwell (1992) from Dutch auction share repurchases,

and the mean (median) estimates of 2.91 (2.47) by Kandel et al. (1999) from IPO data. Our

estimates lie between the lower and upper bounds determined by Kalay et al. (2004).

             These differences might reflect different methodologies, unique information events

used in some of the studies, or different institutional arrangements in different countries or

time periods. For example, KSE investors observe quantities demanded and supplied at the

five best prices during our sample period, whereas investors in other stock markets have less

information, so higher average KSE elasticities are not entirely surprising.

             We also check the differences between elasticities observed in opening auctions and

those observed at 2:30 PM. If uncertainty regarding private information were appreciably


9
    Cored elasticities generate similar patterns. Section 4.2 discusses this issue in detail.



                                                                  18
resolved by trading, as proposed by Glosten and Milgrom (1985), elasticities should rise

through the day. Through our sample period, 2:30 PM mean elasticities generally exceed

mean opening auction elasticities – consistent with the findings of Kalay et al. (2004).

However, our analogous median measurements show no discernable intraday pattern.



4.2.   Harmony at Low Frequencies

One advantage of a long time series that includes a crisis is that it allows a comparison of the

magnitudes of elasticities before and after the crisis using one measurement methodology.

Thus, even if absolute magnitudes are not directly comparable across studies that use

different estimation methods, we can make valid comparisons over time for KSE stocks. The

average elasticities of both demand and supply fluctuate far more during the last months of

1997 and the first months of 1998 than either before or after. This period of instability

corresponding to the onset of the 1997 Asian financial crisis, evident in the KSE index in

Panel A of Figure 3, is unsurprising.

       More intriguingly, elasticities of both demand and supply are markedly lower after

this interlude of instability, implying more heterogeneous valuations across investors in the

post-crisis period. Table 3 shows a 39% drop, from 30.0 to 18.3, in the median opening

auction demand elasticity; and a 41% drop, from 36.9 to 21.9 in the median opening auction

supply elasticity. Similarly dramatic reductions are evident in 2:30 PM measurements; and in

the means as well. These differences are all statistically significant (p < 0.0001). Note that

even after the KSE market index reverts to the pre-crisis level, elasticities of both curves

remain depressed through the remainder of our sample period. This suggests that the crisis

permanently altered both demand and supply curves, to reflect permanently elevated

heterogeneity across investors in firm valuations.

       Substantial fluctuation at higher frequencies is clearly superimposed on this step



                                              19
function. However, elasticities fluctuate around stable averages in both the pre- and post-

crisis periods, and no trend in the magnitude of these higher frequency fluctuations is

immediately evident for each sub-period. These regularities suggest an underlying factor,

common to demand and supply elasticities, which follows a step function; but otherwise

changes little before or after the crisis. Possible candidates would be several institutional

reforms that have permanent impact. However, we can exclude them because many of post-

crisis reforms arguably rendered the country’s equity market more transparent and thus

lowered arbitrage costs. Greater transparency should decrease information heterogeneity,

leaving both curves more elastic, all else equal. The advent of low-cost online trading after

June 1998, at first blush at least, should have reduced arbitrage costs and flattened demand

and supply curves as well.

        In our sample, supply is generally more elastic than demand. The difference in means

is highly significant (p < 0.0001) throughout all three sub-periods. Thus higher supply

elasticities are not artifacts of fire sales during the crisis period. Kalay et al. (2004) find

supply less locally elastic (around market prices) than demand for stocks traded in Tel Aviv

Stock Exchange (TASE), and posit short sale constraints as an explanation. Short sales are

uncommon on the KSE, comprising only about 0.5% of pre-crisis sell orders and an

essentially negligible fraction in the post-crisis sub-period. Thus, our relatively high supply

elasticities are not readily explained by more intense short sale activities in KSE than in

TASE.



                                    [Figure 4 about here]



        To see if our results are driven by orders near market prices, we repeat the exercise

using cored elasticities. Figure 4 shows the permanent decrease in mean elasticities is robust



                                              20
to dropping limit orders priced within one, two, and three percent of the market price. Similar

patterns are evident if we use median elasticities instead. Thus, the significant drop in

elasticities we observe is not driven by orders near market prices.

         Within each sub-period, mean elasticities are larger if the elasticities are estimated

using orders farther away from the market price, though this difference attenuates in the post-

crisis period.10 Higher elasticities for limit orders farther away from the market price in the

pre-crisis period are consistent with investors’ valuations being more homogeneous before

the crisis than after it.

         The finite elasticities evident in Panels A and B of Figure 4 throughout our sample

period, even after excluding orders near market prices, are consistent with the persistence of

economically important information heterogeneity, and thus reinforce the clues in Table 2.

Since the KSE lets any trader help make the market in any stock, competitive pressure on de

facto market makers lacking any private information would induce large limit orders near the

market price where execution probability is large. Although extreme demand for liquidity

might occasionally invite such orders farther from the market price, a persistent high density

in the tails of the limit order distribution presents at least a strong circumstantial case for

information heterogeneity. That is, investors would enter such orders only if they genuinely

expected the price to move to a new range. For example, investors holding a stock they

believe undervalued might enter high sell orders in anticipation of an upward correction.

Investors expecting an overvalued stock to fall might enter low buy limit orders for analogous

reasons.



                                                     [Figure 5 about here]
10
   The slightly higher elasticities generated by dropping limit orders within three percent of the market price may reflect a
reduced sample, since we require more than five price-quantity pairs to estimate elasticities. Stocks with scant limit order
depth away from the market price thus fall out of the sample, and these may be either thinly traded or subject to little
valuation heterogeneity. However, the same pattern is evident using recalculated mean and median elasticities based on the
whole demand or supply schedules and on the various cored schedules defined in [5], but using only those firm-day
observations for which three percent cored schedules are measurable.



                                                            21
4.3.   Counterpoint at Higher Frequencies?

Figure 5 plots individual stocks’ daily mean demand elasticities against daily mean supply

elasticities using first opening auction and then 2:30 PM snapshots, and using first elasticities

measured across the whole limit order book and then our various cored elasticities. A clear

negative relationship is evident in the 2:30 PM elasticities. A similar negative relationship

becomes apparent in the opening auction elasticities after dropping limit orders within one

percent of the market price, and persists with the other cored elasticities as well.



                                        [Figure 6 about here]



       To verify these visual patterns, we estimate the simple correlation of daily mean

demand elasticities with daily mean supply elasticities each month. Figure 6 plots these

against time, showing that they jibe roughly with the patterns apparent in Figure 5. The

correlation is strongly negative for elasticities based on the 2:30 PM snapshots, regardless of

whether we use whole elasticities or cored elasticities. A similarly robust negative correlation

of a similar magnitude is evident using cored elasticities, but less apparent in using whole

elasticities at the opening auctions.

       The crystallization of a clear negative correlation, after dropping limit orders within

one percent of the market price at the opening auction, may be explained by Figure 1. This

shows the demand and supply curves at the opening auction intersecting to the right of the

price axis. The opening auction includes above-market buy orders and below-market sell

orders because investors cannot observe the market price until the auction is completed. In

contrast, investors observe the market price at 2:30 PM, precluding above-market buy limit

orders and below-market sell limit orders. The orders entered at such disadvantageous prices



                                                 22
in the opening auction actually execute at the market price, and so are, in effect, transformed

into market orders. Consequently, deleting them by using the cored elasticities is clearly

warranted.



4.4.    Panel Regressions

To investigate this contemporaneous negative high frequency correlation further, we turn to

panel regressions using daily firm-level elasticities. We demean these data using cross-

section means to remove any temporal fixed effects, and also include firm fixed effects to

control for any firm characteristics that might affect elasticities. Thus, we run



[6]     η~jS,t = α j + β η~jD,t + ε j ,t ,



where stock j’s market-adjusted elasticities of supply and demand at time t are η~jS,t ≡ η Sj ,t − ηt S

and η~jD,t ≡ η Dj ,t − ηt D , respectively, with ηt S and ηt D the mean elasticities of supply and

demand, respectively, across all stocks at time t; and the α j are firm fixed effects. We also

cluster standard errors by firm to adjust for any autocorrelation in the elasticities.



                                             [Table 4 about here]



        Table 4 presents estimates of β from [6] using whole elasticities and the cored

elasticities described in [5] for our entire sample period and for the pre-crisis, in-crisis, and

post-crisis subperiods. Highly significant negative coefficients arise in every case for the 2:30

PM elasticities, and in every case for the opening auction elasticities of cored demand and

supply schedules. The sole exception is opening auction elasticities of whole demand and




                                                     23
supply schedule. We conclude that the firm-level panel regressions in Table 4 confirm the

patterns apparent in Figures 5 and 6.



4.5.       Robustness Checks

A variety of robustness checks generate qualitatively similar results, by which we mean

similar patterns of signs and statistical significance to those in Table 4.

           We cluster standard errors by firm. Clustering by time generates qualitatively similar

results.

           We measure fewer stocks’ elasticities when we use cored elasticities, for which we

exclude the section of the demand or supply schedule near the market price. This is because

we require more than five price-quantity points to take a measurement. The smallest sample

arises for elasticities defined using C(0.03) which encompasses only demand or supply

schedule points more than three percent above or below the market price.               Rerunning

regressions using this smaller set of stocks but using elasticities based on the whole schedules

and the other cored schedules, occluding limit orders within only one and two percent of the

market, also yields qualitatively similar results. That is, except for opening auction elasticities

based on whole schedules, all the coefficients are highly significantly negative.

           We rerun the regressions in Panels A and B of Table 4 weighting each pair of

elasticities by the firm’s market capitalization at the previous day’s close. This is to see if our

results differ across larger or smaller firms, which might inhabit different information

environments for many reasons. Again, qualitatively similar results to those in Table 4 ensue.



4.6.       Clinching the Case for Information Heterogeneity

A negative contemporaneous correlation between the elasticities of a stock’s supply and

demand schedules is difficult to explain if finite elasticities reflect only liquidity provision,



                                                 24
and not information heterogeneity.       Absent heterogeneous private valuations, buy-side

liquidity provision should not evaporate if sell-side liquidity provision deepens, and vice

versa.

         However, this high frequency negative correlation between supply and demand

elasticities is entirely consistent with some traders acquiring private information, as in French

and Roll (1986) and Roll (1988), and with other investors inferring that information by

observing trading patterns, as in Glosten and Milgrom (1985). We speculate that aggressive limit

order placement by privately informed traders would increase the elasticity on their side of

the limit order book; and that investors on the other side, observing this and fearing they are

at an informational disadvantage, would withdraw limit order depth, lowering the elasticity

on their side of the limit order book. For example, an eruption of large buy orders would

flatten the demand curve, but signal sell side limit order providers that private information is

afoot. Fearing adverse selection, sell side limit order providers would reduce their exposure

by withdrawing limit order depth, rendering the supply curve more inelastic.

         This sort of feedback raises interesting possibilities for extending models of

information heterogeneity and liquidity provision, such as Hollifield et al. (2004, 2006), to

include the reactions of uninformed traders and the process by which private information

propagates through the market and becomes public.



5.       Conclusions

The asset pricing literature descended from Harrison and Kreps (1978) and Grossman and

Stiglitz (1980) posits finitely elastic demand and supply curves for individual stocks with

elasticities determined by investors’ risk aversion, information heterogeneity, and uncertainty

regarding fundamental valuations. Blough (1988), Hindy (1989), De Long et al. (1990),

Kandel and Peason (1995), Harris and Raviv (1993), Varian (1985, 1989), Shleifer and



                                               25
Vishny (1997), and others all elaborate theories along these lines, which in one way or

another, all preserve the assumption of finite elasticities.

        We observe (not estimate) elasticities of the demand and supply curves of individual

stocks’ limit orders on the Korea Stock Exchange and find that these are unambiguously

finite. Our results, subject to the caveat that limit order books do not measure all latent

supply and demand away from the market price, are thus consistent with the approach to asset

pricing set forth in this literature.

        The Asian financial crisis, which occurred midway through our sample period, upset

conventional frameworks for understanding the Korean economy, and induced dramatic

changes in the business strategies of many Korean firms. Such factors may have increased the

heterogeneity of investors’ beliefs about fundamental values. The crisis also reduced the

wealth of many investors, and arguably also heightened their perceptions of the risks inherent

in equity – factors most readily interpreted as elevated risk aversion among investors.

Information heterogeneity and investor risk aversion are both plausible determinants of the

elasticities of demand and supply curves for individual stocks in models permitting

heterogeneous investor perceptions of fundamental values.

        Elasticities of both supply and demand are about 40% lower in the post-crisis period

than in the pre-crisis period, and do not revert within our entire sample period– although

other financial and economic indicators do return to their pre-crisis levels. This pattern

seems consistent with elevated valuation heterogeneity and uncertainty, with elevated risk

aversion, or with both. This pattern is also consistent with investors possessing private

information being less likely to enter large orders based on that information, and with

liquidity providers fearing trading against better informed investors and therefore being more

cautious about providing limit order depth. If so, a financial crisis may render a stock market

less able to assimilate private information.



                                                26
        The elasticities of demand and supply in a stock’s limit order book typically exhibit a

contemporaneous negative correlation in high frequency (daily) data. We speculate as to how

informed investors entering one side of the market with large orders would flatten one of the

two curves, and how uninformed investors on the other side, reacting to this, would withdraw

limit order depth, steepening the other curve.

        The patterns we detect in the observed (not estimated) limit order elasticities of

demand and supply of individual common stocks call for further theoretical work to ascertain

the interactions between changing information heterogeneity, valuation uncertainty, and risk

aversion. We especially encourage new models of the strategic interactions of risk-averse

buyers and sellers of financial assets in markets with heterogeneous information; and of how

rational traders infer new private information and react upon detecting it. Of course, we also

welcome further empirical work to qualify our findings, geographically or temporally, or to

advance alternative explanations of the robust empirical regularities described above.



References
Allen, Franklin, and Andrew Postlewaite, 1984, Rational expectations and the measurement of a
        stock's elasticity of demand, Journal of Finance 39, 1119-26.
Bagwell, Laurie S., 1992, Dutch auction repurchases: An analysis of shareholder heterogeneity,
        Journal of Finance 47, 71-105.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2000, Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common stock
        investment performance of individual investors, Journal of Finance 55, 773-806.
Beneish, Messod, and Robert Whaley, 1996, An anatomy of the “S&P Game”: The effects of
        changing the rules, Journal of Finance 51, 1909-1930.
Bloomfield, Robert J., Maureen O’Hara, and Gideon Saar, 2005, The “make or take” decision in an
        electronic market: Evidence on the evolution of liquidity, Journal of Financial Economics 75,
        165-200.
Blough, S., 1988, Differences of opinion and the information value of prices, working paper, The
        Johns Hopkins University.
Choe, Hyuk, Bong-Chan Kho, and René Stulz, 1999, Do foreign investors destabilize stock markets?
        The Korean experience in 1997, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 227-254.
De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J. Waldman, 1990, Noise
        trader risk in financial markets, Journal of Political Economy 98, 703-738.
Dhillon, Upinder, and Herb Johnson, 1991, Changes in the Standard and Poor’s 500 list, Journal of
        Business 64, 75-85.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 2007, Disagreement, tastes, and asset pricing, Journal of
        Financial Economics 83, 667-689.




                                                 27
Foucault, Thierry, Ohad Kadan, and Eugene Kandel, 2005, Limit order book as a market for liquidity,
         Review of Financial Studies 18, 1171-1217.
French, Kenneth, and Richard Roll, 1986, Stock return variances: The arrival of information and the
         reaction of traders, Journal of Financial Economics 17, 5-26.
Goettler, Ronald, Christine Parlour, and Uday Rajan, 2009, Equilibrium in a dynamic limit order
         market, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Glosten, Lawrence, 1994, Is the electronic open limit order book inevitable?, Journal of Finance 49,
         1127-1161.
Glosten, Lawrence, and Paul Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask, and transaction prices in a specialist market
         with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Financial Economics 13, 71-100.
Goldstein, Michael A., and Kenneth A. Kavajecz, 2004, Trading strategies during circuit breakers and
         extreme market movements, Journal of Financial Markets 7, 301-333.
Greene, William H., 1993, Econometric Analysis, Macmillan Publishing Company.
Greenwood, Robin, 2005, Short- and long-term demand curves for stocks: Theory and evidence on
         the dynamics of arbitrage, Journal of Financial Economics 75, 607-649.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Bing Han, 2005, Prospect theory, mental accounting, and momentum, Journal of
         Financial Economics 78, 311-339.
Grossman, Sanford, and Joseph Stiglitz, 1980, On the impossibility of informationally efficient
         markets, American Economic Review 70, 393-411.
Handa, Puneet, and Robert A. Schwartz, 1996, Limit order trading, Journal of Finance 51, 1835-
         1861.
Harris, Lawrence, 1998, Optimal dynamic order submission strategies in some stylized trading
         problems, Financial Markets, Institutions & Instruments 7, 1-76.
Harris, Lawrance, and Eitan Gurel, 1986, Price and volume effects associated with changes in the
         S&P 500: New evidence for the existence of price pressures, Journal of Finance 41, 815-829.
Harris, Milton, and Artur Raviv, 1993, Differences of opinion make a horse race, Review of Financial
         Studies 6, 473-506.
Harrison, J. Michael, and David M. Kreps, 1978, Speculative investor behavior in a stock market with
         heterogeneous expectations, Quarterly Journal of Economics 93, 323-336.
Hindy, A., 1989, An equilibrium model of futures markets dynamics, working paper, MIT.
Hollifield, Burton, Robert A. Miller, and Patrik Sandås, 2004, Empirical analysis of limit order
         markets, Review of Economic Studies 71, 1027-1063.
Hollifield, Burton, Robert A. Miller, Patrik Sandås, and Joshua Slive, 2006, Estimating the gains from
         trade in limit-order markets, Journal of Finance 61, 2753-2804.
Jain, Prem, 1987, The effect of stock price of inclusion in or exclusion from the S&P 500, Financial
         Analysts Journal 43, 58-65.
Kalay, Avner, Orly Sade, and Avi Wohl, 2004, Measuring stock illiquidity: An investigation of the
         demand and supply schedules at the TASE, Journal of Financial Economics 74, 461-486.
Kaniel, Ron, and Hong Liu, 2006, So what orders do informed traders use?, Journal of Business 79,
         1867-1913.
Kandel, Eugene, and Neil D. Pearson, 1995, Differential interpretation of public signals and trade in
         speculative markets, Journal of Political Economy 103, 831-872.
Kandel, Shmuel, Oded Sarig, and Avi Wohl, 1999, The demand for stocks: An analysis of IPO
         auctions, Review of Financial Studies 12, 227-247.
Kaul, Aditya, Vikas Mehrotra, and Randall Morck, 2000, Demand curves for stocks do slope down:
         New evidence from an index weights adjustment, Journal of Finance 55, 893-912.
Kavajecz, Kenneth A., 1999, A specialist’s quoted depth and the limit order book, Journal of Finance
         54, 747-771.
Kim, E. Han, and Woochan Kim, 2008, Changes in Korean Corporate Governance: A Response to
         Crisis, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 20, 47-58.
Kim, Woochan, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2002, Foreign portfolio investors before and during a crisis,
         Journal of International Economics 56, 77-96.
Kindleberger, 1978, Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises, Basic Books.
Kwak, Hae-Sun, 2007, Three Hundred Frequently Asked Questions on Stock Investment: Theory and
         Practical Strategy (in Korean), Dong A Il Bo Sa.


                                                 28
Kyle, Albert, 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 1315-1335.
Liaw, Gwohorng, Yu-Jane Liu, and K.C. John Wei, 2000, On the demand elasticity of initial public
         offerings: An analysis of discriminatory auctions, working paper, Hong Kong University of
         Science and Technology.
Lintner, John, 1965, The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in stock
         portfolios and capital budgets, Review of Economics and Statistics 47, 13–37.
Liu, Shinhua, 2000, Changes in the Nikkei 500: New evidence for downward sloping demand curves
         for stocks, International Review of Finance 1, 245-267.
Loderer, Claudio, John Cooney, and Leonard van Drunen, 1991, The price elasticity of demand for
         common stock, Journal of Finance 46, 621-52.
Lynch, Anthony, and Richard Mendenhall, 1997, New evidence on stock price effects associated with
         changes in the S&P 500 Index, Journal of Business 70, 351-383.
Markowitz, Harry, 1952, Portfolio selection, Journal of Finance 7, 77-91.
Mikkelson, Wayne H., and M. Megan Partch, 1985, Stock price effects and costs of secondary
         distributions, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 165-194.
Parlour, Christine, 1998, Price dynamics in limit order markets, Review of Financial Studies 11,
         789.
Roll, Richard, 1988, R2, Journal of Finance 43, 541-566.
Sandås, Patrik, 2001, Adverse selection and competitive market making: Empirical evidence from a
         limit order market, Review of Financial Studies 14, 705-734.
Scholes, Myron, 1972, The market for securities: Substitution versus price pressure and the effects of
         information on share price, Journal of Business 45, 179-211.
Sharpe, William, 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of risk.
         Journal of Finance 19, 425-442.
Shiller, Robert J., 2002, From efficient market theory to behavioral finance, Journal of Economic
         Perspectives17, 83-104.
Shleifer, Andrei, 1986, Do demand curves for stock slope down? Journal of Finance 41, 579-590.
Shleifer, Andrei, 2000, Inefficient markets: An introduction to behavioral finance, Oxford University
         Press Inc., New York.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, The limits of arbitrage, Journal of Finance 52, 35-55.
Thaler, Richard H., and Cass R. Sunstein, 2008, Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth,
         and Happiness, Yale University Press.
Tobin, James, 1958, Liquidity preference as behavior towards risk, Review of Economic Studies 25.
Varian, Hal, 1985, Divergence of opinion in complete markets: A note, Journal of Finance 40, 309-
         17.
Varian, Hal, 1989, Differences of opinion in financial markets, in Courtenay C. Stone (ed.), Financial
         Risk: Theory, Evidence and Implications, Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual Economic
         Policy Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Kluwer, Boston, 3-37.
Wurgler, Jeffrey, and Katia Zhuravskaya, 2002, Does arbitrage flatten demand curves for stocks?,
         Journal of Business 75, 583-608.




                                                 29
Figure 1. Observed Demand and Supply Schedules for Samsung Electronics
on November 11, 2000
The opening auction orders graphs (black) reflect all buy and sell orders submitted for the opening
auction that sets the open price. The 2:30 PM limit orders graphs (gray) reflect all outstanding limit
orders as of 2:30 PM.




                                                 30
Figure 2. Demand and Supply Schedules in Real Time for Samsung Electronics on November 11, 2000
Demand and supply schedules for Samsung stock from the opening auction orders through the end of trading constructed from snapshots of complete limit
order books taken every 15 minutes.
Panel A: Supply of Samsung at 15 minute intervals                             Panel B: Demand for Samsung at 15 minute intervals




                                                                         31
Figure 3. Mean Demand and Supply Elasticities of Individual Stocks over Time
Each stock’s elasticity of demand is the negative of the coefficient of log price in a regression
explaining log quantity demanded at that price in the stock’s limit order book; while its elasticity of
supply is the coefficient in an analogous regression explaining log quantity supplied. Elasticities are
estimated whenever the stock’s relevant limit order schedule contains over five price-quantity pairs.
Elasticities are measured twice each day from Dec. 1996 to Dec. 2000: first in the opening auction
and again at 2:30 PM. Until December 5, 1998, the KSE was opened Saturday mornings, and the
second elasticity is estimated at 11:30 AM on Saturdays. Daily elasticities are averaged across all
stocks and this mean is graphed against time. The East Asian Financial Crisis period is the widened
time axis segment from Nov. 1997 to Oct. 1998. The pre-crisis, and post- crisis periods are Dec.
1996 to Oct. 1997, and Nov. 1998 to Dec. 2000, respectively.

Panel A: Opening Auction Elasticities




Panel B: 2:30 PM Elasticities




Panel C: KSE Index




                                                  32
Figure 4. Mean Elasticities for the Whole Sample and Subsamples Dropping
Limit Orders Priced within One, Two, or Three Percent of the Market Price.
Each stock’s elasticity of demand is the negative of the coefficient of log price in a regression
explaining log quantity demanded at that price in the stock’s limit order book; while its elasticity of
supply is the coefficient in an analogous regression explaining log quantity supplied. Elasticities are
estimated whenever the stock’s relevant limit order schedule contains over five price-quantity pairs,
for the whole sample and subsamples where observations within [-k%, k%] range around market
prices are removed for k=1,2, or 3. Elasticities are measured twice each day from Dec. 1996 to Dec.
2000: first in the opening auction and again at 2:30 PM. Until December 5, 1998, the KSE was
opened Saturday mornings, and the second elasticity is estimated at 11:30 AM on Saturdays. Daily
elasticities are averaged across all stocks and then across days in specified periods: the entire
sample, pre-crisis (December 1996 – October 1997), in-crisis (November 1997 – October 1998), and
post-crisis (November 1998 – December 2000) periods.

Panel A: Demand Elasticities at Opening Auction and at 2:30 PM




Panel B: Supply Elasticities at Opening Auction and at 2:30 PM




                                                  33
Figure 5. Relationship Between Daily Average Demand and Supply Elasticities
Daily average supply elasticity is plotted against daily average demand elasticity, with observations
color coded for pre-crisis (December 1996 – October 1997), in-crisis (November 1997 – October
1998), and post-crisis (November 1998 – December 2000) periods. Each stock’s elasticity of demand
is the negative of the coefficient of log price in a regression explaining log quantity demanded at that
price in the stock’s limit order book; while its elasticity of supply is the coefficient in an analogous
regression explaining log quantity supplied. Elasticities are estimated whenever the stock’s relevant
limit order schedule contains over five price-quantity pairs; for the whole sample and subsamples
dropping observations within one, two, or three percent of market prices. Elasticities are measured
twice each day from Dec. 1996 to Dec. 2000: first in the opening auction and again at 2:30 PM. Until
December 5, 1998, the KSE was opened Saturday mornings, and the second elasticity is estimated at
11:30 AM on Saturdays.

Panel A: Elasticities at Opening Auction




                                                  34
Panel B: Elasticities at 2:30 PM




                                   35
Figure 6. Correlations of Individual Stocks’ Daily Mean Demand and Supply
Elasticities, by Month
Each stock’s elasticity of demand is the negative of the coefficient of log price in a regression
explaining log quantity demanded at that price in the stock’s limit order book; while its elasticity of
supply is the coefficient in an analogous regression explaining log quantity supplied. Elasticities are
measured from Dec. 1996 through Dec. 2000 at the open and at 2:30PM whenever the stock’s
relevant limit order schedule contains over five price-quantity pairs. Plots include correlations using
the elasticities based on all limit orders, as well as those based on subsamples dropping limit orders
within one, two, and three percent of the market prices. Until December 5, 1998, the KSE operated
Saturday mornings, so the second elasticity on those days is estimated at 11:30AM. Correlations are
of daily supply and demand elasticities, using all days in each month.

Panel A: Correlations of Daily Mean Demand and Supply Elasticities Measured at Opening
Auctions




Panel B: Correlations of Daily Mean Demand and Supply Elasticities Measured at 2:30 PM




                                                  36
                      Table 1. Distribution of Orders and Trades
Orders can be limit or market orders, and can be submitted in an opening auction or in continuous
trading throughout the day. Data are for common stocks trading on the Korea Stock Exchange (KSE)
during December 1996 to December 2000. Each daily trading session is partitioned into an opening
auction and the continuous trading during the rest of the day. Values in parentheses are average
order sizes.

                                                                            Rest of Day
     Order Type              Entire Day             Opening Auction
                                                                         Continuous Market
                            13,938,249                 3,620,127              10,318,122
             Market
                              (1,177.4)               (1,096.11)              (1,205.92)
                            253,301,774               47,428,384             205,873,390
              Limit
   Buys                       (1,298.6)                (1,251.1)              (1,309.54)
                            267,240,023               51,048,511             216,191,512
              Total
                             (1,292.28)               (1,240.11)               (1,304.6)


                            19,880,406                 6,966,032              12,914,374
             Market
                              (716.69)                  (628.91)               (764.04)
                            263,831,555               53,011,848             210,819,707
              Limit
   Sells                     (1,729.71)               (1,254.08)              (1,849.31)
                            283,711,961               59,977,880             223,734,081
              Total
                             (1,658.72)               (1,181.47)              (1,786.66)




                                               37
Table 2. Limit Order Book Ranges
On each trading day, the limit order book prices for the opening auction are normalized by the
opening price while the limit order book prices at 2:30 PM are normalized by the bid-ask mid-point.
Then, quantities (in millions of shares) demanded and supplied in each price range are accumulated
over the sample period of December 1996 to December 2000.

Panel A: Opening Auction
                                             Demand                        Supply
 Limit Order Price as Percent of
                                              Percent of Total              Percent of Total
         Opening Price              Quantity                      Quantity
                                                 Quantity                       Quantity
          Price < 85%                 4,987       14.00%             64          0.20%
        85% ≤ Price < 90%             5,945        16.7             121            0.4
        90% ≤ Price < 95%             8,206         23              315             1
        95% ≤ Price < 97%             5,077        14.2             350            1.2
        97% ≤ Price < 98%             2,790         7.8             314             1
        98% ≤ Price < 99%             2,793         7.8             515            1.7
       99% ≤ Price < 100%            2,712          7.6             757            2.5
       100% ≤ Price < 101%            1,052         2.9            2,011           6.6
       101% ≤ Price < 102%             631          1.8            2,069           6.8
       102% ≤ Price < 103%             384          1.1            2,238           7.4
       103% ≤ Price < 105%             415          1.2            4,715          15.5
       105% ≤ Price < 110%             413          1.2            9,454          31.1
       110% ≤ Price < 115%             160          0.4            5,564          18.3
          115% ≤ Price                  95          0.3            1,938           6.4
              Total                  35,659      100.00%           30,423       100.00%

Panel B: 2:30 PM
                                             Demand                        Supply
 Limit Order Price as Percent of
                                              Percent of Total              Percent of Total
     the Bid-Ask Mid-Point          Quantity                      Quantity
                                                 Quantity                       Quantity
          Price < 85%                 6,044       13.80%
        85% ≤ Price < 90%             7,984        18.2
        90% ≤ Price < 95%            10,053        22.9
        95% ≤ Price < 97%             6,359        14.5
        97% ≤ Price < 98%             4,102         9.3
        98% ≤ Price < 99%             4,907        11.2
       99% ≤ Price < 100%            4,476         10.2
       100% ≤ Price < 101%                                         3,321           6.60%
       101% ≤ Price < 102%                                         4,521              9
       102% ≤ Price < 103%                                         4,610             9.2
       103% ≤ Price < 105%                                         8,651            17.2
       105% ≤ Price < 110%                                         15,438           30.8
       110% ≤ Price < 115%                                         8,563            17.1
          115% ≤ Price                                             5,088            10.1
              Total                  43,925       100.00%          50,193         100.00%




                                                38
Table 3. Elasticities of KSE Stocks Before, During, and After the 1997 Crisis
Each stock’s elasticity of demand is the negative of the coefficient of log price in a regression
explaining log quantity demanded at that price in its limit order book; while its elasticity of supply is the
coefficient in an analogous regression explaining log quantity supplied. Elasticities are measured
twice each day from Dec. 1996 to Dec. 2000: first in the opening auction and again at 2:30 PM.
Elasticities are estimated if over five price-quantity pairs exist for each firm, each day. All means and
medians are significantly below infinity; that is, t-tests and rank tests, respectively, reject the null
hypotheses of their reciprocals being zero at probability levels better than one percent. Until
December 5, 1998, the KSE was opened Saturday mornings, and the second elasticity is estimated at
11:30 AM on Saturdays. Daily elasticities are averaged across all stocks and then observed across
all days in the specified time periods: the entire sample, pre-crisis (December 1996 – October 1997),
in-crisis (November 1997 – October 1998), and post-crisis (November 1998 – December 2000)
periods.

Panel A: Elasticity of Demand

Trading Session              Sub-Period             Observations        Mean        Median     Std. Dev.
Opening auction         Entire sample period          605,407           22.690      20.320      12.772
                          Pre-crisis period           120,588           32.078      30.015      16.765
                           In-crisis period           139,188           23.102      21.484      12.777
                         Post-crisis period           345,631           19.249       18.26       8.903

     2:30 PM            Entire sample period              591,996       24.791      19.597       20.259
                          Pre-crisis period               122,214       35.189      29.652       24.322
                           In-crisis period               128,252       27.908       22.5        22.027
                         Post-crisis period               341,530       19.899      16.674       15.851

Panel B: Elasticity of Supply
Trading Session              Sub-Period             Observations         Mean       Median     Std. Dev.
 Opening auction        Entire sample period              608,952       27.048      24.409       14.341
                          Pre-crisis period               125,565       38.594      36.88        18.215
                           In-crisis period               136,922       27.535      25.626       14.862
                         Post-crisis period               346,465       22.671      21.895        9.293

     2:30 PM            Entire sample period              632,702       28.822      23.368       22.257
                          Pre-crisis period               147,261       38.096      32.885       24.297
                           In-crisis period               139,688       30.372      25.039       23.174
                         Post-crisis period               345,753       24.246      20.402       19.482




                                                     39
Table 4. Panel Regressions of Supply on Demand Elasticities
Firm-level daily panel regressions are of η~ jS,t = α j + β η~ jD,t + ε j ,t , with η~ j,St and η~ j,Dt stock j’s market-
adjusted limit order supply and demand elasticities on day t and αj firm fixed effects. We obtain
market-adjusted elasticities of firm j by subtracting the day t’s cross-sectional mean supply or demand
elasticity across all firms from firm j’s supply or demand elasticities. Each stock’s elasticity of demand
is the negative of the coefficient of log price in a regression explaining log quantity demanded; while
its elasticity of supply is the coefficient in an analogous regression explaining log quantity supplied.
Elasticities are estimated whenever a schedule has more than 5 price-quantity pairs. Whole
elasticities are estimated using whole demand or supply limit order schedules, cored elasticities use
all parts of the schedules except intervals within one, two, or three percent around market prices.
Panel A uses elasticities at the opening auction and Panel B uses elasticity snapshots or limit order
books at 2:30 PM, 30 minutes before the close. Until December 5, 1998, the KSE was opened
Saturdays until noon, so the second elasticity is measured at 11:30 those days. The sample is
partitioned into pre-crisis (Dec. 1996 – Oct. 1997), in-crisis (Nov. 1997 – Oct. 1998), and post-crisis
(Nov. 1998 – Dec. 2000) periods. Probability levels (p-values) are based on t-statistics adjusted for
firm clustering.

Panel A: Panel Regression of Supply on Demand Elasticity at Opening Auction, with Day and
Firm Fixed Effects and Firm-Clustered Standard Errors

Price Quantity                                                        Pre-Crisis         In-Crisis       Post-Crisis
                                                Entire Sample
     Pairs                                                             Period             Period           Period
     Whole              Estimate of β                  0.006             -0.006            -0.016           0.007
                          p-value                     0.016              0.166             0.000            0.008
                        Adjusted R 2                  0.027              0.046             0.044            0.049
                        Observations                 530,405             89,321           110,910          330,174
  Cored at 1%           Estimate of β                 -0.107             -0.129            -0.146           -0.083
                          p-value                     0.000               0.000            0.000            0.000
                        Adjusted R 2                  0.019               0.042            0.027            0.020
                        Observations                 423,593             45,162            78,700          299,731
  Cored at 2%           Estimate of β                 -0.113             -0.166            -0.150           -0.098
                          p-value                     0.000               0.000            0.000            0.000
                        Adjusted R 2                  0.022               0.050            0.030            0.021
                        Observations                 372,210             24,547            64,633          283,030
  Cored at 3%           Estimate of β                 -0.106             -0.182            -0.131           -0.119
                          p-value                     0.000               0.000            0.000            0.000
                        Adjusted R 2                  0.021               0.039            0.022            0.022
                        Observations                 321,442             10,324            50,022          261,096




                                                          40
Panel B: Panel Regression of Supply on Demand Elasticity at 2:30 PM, with Day and Firm Fixed
Effects and Firm-Clustered Standard Errors

Price Quantity                                       Pre-Crisis     In-Crisis   Post-Crisis
                                     Entire Sample
     Pairs                                            Period         Period       Period
    Whole         Estimate of β          -0.178         -0.187       -0.206        -0.167
                    p-value               0.000         0.000        0.000         0.000
                  Adjusted R 2            0.030         0.045        0.044         0.029
                  Observations          544,224        102,645      111,088       330,491
 Cored at 1%      Estimate of β          -0.156         -0.176       -0.194        -0.143
                    p-value               0.000          0.000       0.000         0.000
                  Adjusted R 2            0.024          0.045       0.037         0.023
                  Observations          491,918        70,914        99,680       321,324
 Cored at 2%      Estimate of β          -0.161         -0.217       -0.187        -0.157
                    p-value               0.000          0.000       0.000         0.000
                  Adjusted R 2            0.024          0.049       0.035         0.023
                  Observations          420,849        36,908        80,716       303,225
 Cored at 3%      Estimate of β          -0.164         -0.252       -0.176        -0.181
                    p-value               0.000          0.000       0.000         0.000
                  Adjusted R 2            0.026          0.053       0.033         0.027
                  Observations          351,460        14,539        59,708       277,213




                                            41
