                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    RULES VERSUS DISCRETION



                        Robert J. Barro



                     Working Paper No. 1473




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                         September i98




Prepared for a presentation at the Conference on Alternative
Monetary Regimes, Dartmouth, August 1984. I am grateful to the
National Science Foundation for Support of underlying research.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                         NBER Working Paper #1473
                                                         September 1984



                            Rules versus Discretion

                                     ABSTRACT



     Under a discretionary regime the monetary authority makes no commitments

about future money and prices. Then, if surprise inflation conveys economic

benef its and if people form expectations
                                            rationally, it turns out that the
equilibrium involves high and variable monetary growth and inflation. Moreover,

since the high rate of inflation is anticipated there are no benefits from

inflation surprises. The implementation of an enforced rule can lower the mean

rate of inflation while delivering the same average amount of inflation

surprises, namely zero. Using these results as a background, the paper dis

cusses alternative monetary rules, including quantity versus price rules and a

prescription for stablilizing nominal GNP. This discussion touches on the

distinction between positive and normative economics, which leads to a pessi—

mistic appraisal of the role for economists' policy advice.




                                                         Robert   J. Brro
                                                         Department of Economics
                                                         University of Rochester
                                                         Rochester, NY      14627
General Features of Rules and Discretion

     The traditional debate over rules versus discretion focused on the capa-

bility and objectives of the policymaker. Advocates of rules referred to

imperfect knowledge about the economy and to policymakers' propensities to

further inappropriate ends, possibly motivated by special interests.' But, if

the policymaker were intelligent and well—meaning, then there was no obivous

defense for a rule that tied his hands in advance. Discretion seemed to be

synonoinous with flexibility, which one had no reason to deny to a smart, bene-

volent policymaker.

     This perspective on rules versus discretion was changed by Kydland and

Prescott (1977), who looked at rules as a form of commitment. A commitment

amounts to a binding contract, which specifies in advance the actions that

someone will take, possibly contingent on a variety of exogenous circumstances.

In contrast, under discretion, a person promises only to take those future

actions that will best further his objectives later on. (Such promises are easy

to enforce!) Thus, discretion is the special case of a rule or contract in which

none of today's provisions restrict a persons's future actions. In the area of

private business dealings, we tend to think about optimal forms of contracts, and

would regard pure discretion as unusual. Similarily, in the context of public

policy, the perspective becomes the optimal form of rules or prior restrictions---

even the smart, benevolent policyniaker is likely to desire and use an ability

to make binding promises.

     Kydland and Prescott discuss various areas of public policy in which commit-

ments are important. One example is patents, which encourage inventions, but

which also restrict the supply of goods ex post. Under pure discretion, a

policyinaker who has no past commitments and who cares about "social welfare"

would   ("once   and for all") invalidate all old patents, but continue to issue new
                                                                                      2

ones. However, the perception of this form of policy by potential inventors has

adverse effects on new   inventions,   which soon become old inventions. Hence, the

optimal policy contains a mechanism to preclude or at least inhibit the abolition

of old patents. Then the details of the policy involve the standard tradeoff

between the incentive to invent and the ex post restriction of supply.

     The manner of committing future actions varies with the area of public

policy. In some cases, such as the duration and scope of patents, the rules are

set out in formal law. Then the costs of changing laws (possibly coming under

the constitutional restrictions against ex post facto laws) enforces the govern-

ment's commitments. However, in the case of the Gold Standard Act, the existence

of a law proved in 1933 to be inadequate protection for those who held gold or

made contracts denominated in gold.2

     More often a government's commitments rely on the force of reputation,

whereby people's expectations of future policy are tied in some fashion to past

behavior. For instance, if a government defaults on its debts, then potential

bondholders are deterred by the perception that future defaults are more likely.

Presumably, this consideration is the main deterrent to default by numerous

"sovereign" debtor countries today.      (Sovereign must mean   lacking   in formal

collateral.)   But, as a general matter, the precise connection between past

actions and expectations of future behavior is difficult to formalize in a model.



Monetary Policy under Discretion

     A major contribution of Kydland and Prescott was the recognition that

monetary policy involves the same issues about commitments as do such areas as

patents, default on government debt, and imposition of levies on previously

accumulated capital (via changes in property taxes or in other taxes that fall on
                                                                                    3

capital). In the case of patents it is obvious that a policymaker must worry

about the link between current actions—-such as eliminating past patents or

changing the form of patent law—--and people's perceptions about the value of

presently issued patents (which motivate inventions). Similarly, the monetary

authority must consider the interplay between today's choices—-whether to

engineer a monetary expansion or to change the "law" governing monetary policy——

and people's beliefs about future money and prices.

     Consider the example about the Phillips curve, as discussed in Kydland and

Prescott (1977) and in Barro and Gordon (1983a, b). These models involve the

following main ingredients. First, monetary policy works by affecting the

general price level. Second, unexpected increases in the price level (but not

expected changes in prices) expand real economic activity. Thus, there is an

"expectational Phillips Curve." Third, the "representative person," and hence

the benevolent policymaker, value these expansions of activity at least over some

range (which means that existing distortions make the "natural" level of output

too small). Fourth, inflation is itself a bad——people value it only as a device

to create unexpected inflation and thereby higher levels of economic activity.



     This model is structually similar to the example about patents. At any

point in time the policymaker is motivated to generate unexpected inflation in

order to stimulate the economy. (The analogue is the expansion of supply via the

abolition of past patents.) But people understand these incentives in advance

and therefore form high expectations of inflation. Hence, the policymaker must

choose a high rate of inflation just to stay even——that is, in order for unex-

pected inflation to be zero. Finally, this high inflation imposes costs on the

economy. (The parallel is the decrease in inventions because of the expectation
                                                                                    4

economy. (The parallel is the decrease in inventions because of the expectation

that current patents will not be honored later.)

     Barro and Gordon (l983a, b) analyze the equilibria for monetary policy and

inflation for the Phillips—curve model. In the case of pure discretion, the

policymaker has no mechanisms for committing the future behavior of money and

prices, Rather, the policymaker has a free hand to maximize social welfare at

each point in time, while treating past events as givens. In this situation

there is an incentive in each period to create surprise inflation in order to

generate an economic boom. But individuals understand this motivation and

formulate their expectations accordingly. Thus, actual inflation cannot end up

being systematically higher or lower than expected inflation.

     Overall, two conditions must be satisfied in equilibrithn. First, people's

expectations of inflation are correct on average (that is, expectations are

rational). Second, although the policyniaker retains the power in each period to

fool people via inflation surprises, he is not motivated to exercise this

power. In order for this second condition to hold, the policymaker's drive to

create unexpected inflation must, in equilibrium, be balanced by the cost of

inflation itself. In other words, inflation must be high enough so that the

marginal cost of inflation equals the marginal benefit from inflation surprises.

Only then will the chosen rates of inflation and monetary growth be consistent

with the policymaker's desire to maximize social welfare at each point in time.

The important point is that this equilibrium involves inflation that is high, but

not surprisingly high. Therefore, the economy bears the costs of high inflation,

but does not receive therewards that would arise from unexpected inflation.

     The solution just described depends on the presence of benefits from

surpr:ise inflation, but does not rest on the existence of the (expectational)
                                                                                   5

Phillips curve, pr Se.    In particular, surprise inflation amounts to a capital

levy on assets, such as money and government bonds, that are denominated in

nominal terms. Hence, at a point in time, unexpected inflation works like a

lump—sum tax as a device to generate government revenue. Given that other taxes

are distorting, the policyinaker (and the representative person in the economoy)

would value the use of this lump—sum tax. Accordingly, the model parallels the

previous one with the Phillips curve, even though the source of benefit from

unexpected inflation is different. There is an analogous discretionary equilib-

rium with high inflation, but with no tendency for unexpected inflation to be

positive or negative.4

     In the example of the Phillips curve, the incentive to create surprise

inflation hinges on the desire to expand economic activity. But this incentive

depends in turn on some distortions that make the natural rate of output too

low. The disincentive effects from income taxes and transfer programs are

possible sources of these distortions.5 Similarly, in t.he example where the

government values surprise inflation as a lump—sum tax, there must be an under-

lying environment in which alternative taxes are distorting. Thus, in both

cases, the existence of initial distortions underlies the prediction of high

inflation. Calvo (1978) discusses the general role of existing distortions in

these types of models. Notably, the bad outcomes under discretion depend on the

presence of these distortions.

    Barro and Gordon (1983b) view the discretionary equilibrium as a positive

theory of monetary policy and inflation under present—day monetary arrangements.

Aside from predicting "high" average inflation and monetary growth, the model

indicates the reactions to changes in the benefits from unexpected inflation or

in the costs of actual inflation. For example, a rise in the natural rate of
                                                                                           6

unemployment can raise the benefits from lowering unemployment through surprise

inf:lation, It follows that a secular rise in the natural unemployment rate will

lead to a secular rise in the mean rates of monetary growth and inflation.

Similar1y, the policymaker would particularly value reductions of unemployment

during recessions. The implication is that monetary growth will be counter—

cyclical, although such a policy can end up with no effect on the amplitude of

business cycles.

       A higher stock of nominally—denominated public debt raises the benefits from

capital levies via surprise inflation. Thus, the model implies that more public

debt will lead to higher values of monetary growth, inflation and nominal

interest rates (although not to higher unexpected inflation). In other words,

the prediction is that deficits will be partly monetized. A similar analysis

suggests that indexation of the public debt for inflation——which removes some of

the   benefits from surprise inflation——will lead to        lower rates of inflation and

monetary      growth. Finally, a higher level of government spending tends to raise
the benefits from lumpsum      taxation (because      the deadweight losses from other
taxes   would be higher). This change leads again to higher rates of inflation and

monetary growth. That is, the endogenous response of monetary growth implies

that    government expenditures    are inflationary.

        The   model assumes that   actual inflation is costly, but does not explain the

source    of these costs. (Two      frequently mentioned possiblities are the adminis-

trative    expenses for changing prices and     the transaction costs associated with

economizing      on cash holdings.) In any    case,   the positive analysis of monetary
policy    does imply that a downward shift in the costs of inflation will lead to

more inflation. Thus, if people think that inflation is not a serious problem,

then the economy will end up with a lot of inflation
                                                                                    7

     The analysis implies also that each flicker in the benefits from inflation

surprises or in the costs of inflation will be reflected in variations in infla—

tion. Hence, in contrast to an environment in which the government stabilizes

prices, there will be substantial random fluctuations of inflation and monetary

growth. Further, the variances of prices and money will be larger the greater

the random fluctuations in the variables that influence the benefits from

inflation shocks. For example, if there are frequent supply shocks (which alter

the natural rate of output), then inflation and monetary growth will be volatile.



Monetary Rules

     The results under discretion contrast with those under rules——that is, under

regimes where the policymaker can and does make commitments about future monetary

growth and inflation. Under discretion, the equilibrium involved high inflation,

but no tendency toward surprisingly high inflation. Hence, the economy suffered

the costs from high inflation, but secured none of the benefits from inflation

surprises, Clearly, the policymaker can improve on this outcome by committing

himself exante to low inflation. If this commitment is credible——that is, if it

is adequately enforced——then people also anticipate low inflation. Therefore,

the equilibrium wou1d exhibit low and stable inflation,6 with the same average

amount of surprise inflation (zero) as before. These results support a form of

"constant—growth—rate rule," although applied to prices rather than to the

quantity of money,

     There is a tension in this type of rules equilibrium because the policymaker

may retain the capacity to produce large social gains at any point in time by

"cheating"—that is, by generating surprisingly high iflation. Then there may be

a temporary economic boom or at least a substantial amount of government revenue
                                                                                           8

obtained via a distortion—free tax. But, if such cheating were feasible and

desirabie then people would understand the situation beforehand. In this case

the low—inflation equilibrium would not be tenable. (Sometimes people say that

this equilibrium is "time inconsistent", although it is actually not an equilib-

rium at all.) Rather, there would be a high—inflation, discretionary equilib—

rium, as described earlier. That is why the enforcement power behind the

low—inflation rule is crucial. There must be a mechanism for binding the

policyniaker's hands in advance, so that (surprisingly) high inflation cannot be

chosen later, even if such an outcome looks good to everyone                Note that

the rationale for t.his "binding of hands" applies even though (or actually

espec:i.aliy if ) the policymaker is well—meaning. This type of commitment is

necessary    in   order for low inflation to be credible and hence for the economy to

achieve the equilibrium with low inflation.

        Although the low-infiation, rules equilibrium is superior to the high-infia-

tion, discretionary equilibrium, the rules equilibrium is still not "first

best,"     The benefits   from inflation surprises——for example, from lower unemploy--

ment    or from the   generation of distortion—free government revenue——reflect some

external effects that. have not. been eliminated. In fact, it is the desire to

approach the first—best solution via inflation surprises              that threatens

the viability of the low-inflation equilibrium. The pursuit of the first best

tends to push the economy away from the second best of a rule with low inflation,

and    toward the third   best of discretionary policy with high inflation. Again,

 this perspective highlights the importance of the enforcement power that makes        a

 rule   sustainable.

        More generally, the optimal rule may set prices contingent on exogenous

 events, rather than being non—contingent. For example, wartime can be
                                                                                    9

accompanied by high inflation, which constitutes surprisingly high inflation from

the standpoint of earlier times at which the war was not anticipated.   In an

equilibrium, the counterpart must be surprisingly low inflation during peacetime.

This type of contingent rule may be desirable because it generates lots of

easy renenue via the capital levy from unexpected inflation during emergencies.

In particular, it is possible to hold down distortions from the income tax at the

most important times, such as wars.7 Although the necessary accompaniment is a

loss of revenue during the non—emergencies, the net effect of this contingent

policy is likely to be beneficial.8 Under the gold standard, governments did in

fact tend to go off gold during wars. This procedure enables a government to

pursue the type of contingent policy for inflation that I sketched above. In

this sense the movement off gold during wars was not necessarily a violation of

the "rules." However the subsequent return to gold at the previous parity was

probably an important part of the enforcement process.

     One difficulty with contigent rules is that they may be difficult to

verify.   In particular, it is easy to confuse contingencies with the type of

cheating that I described earlier.9 Further, the policymaker would be inclined

to explain away high inflation as the consequence of some emergency, rather than

as a failure to conform with the rules. Hence, these considerations favor a rule

that is relatively simple, such as a constant—growth--rate rule for prices or

money, In any case the contingencies should be limited to well—defined events,

such as major wars. Although this limitation may miss some gains from contingent

action, the greater ease of enforcement makes it less likely that the situation

will degenerate into a high—inflation, discretionary equilibrium.
                                                                                                    10

ThePoykr's Reputation
       Barro and Gordon (1983a) examine some possibilities for substituting the

policinaker's reputation for formal rules. In this setting people's expectations

of future inflation depend on past performance. Hence, unlike the case               of    pure

discretion, the policymaker's choice of today's inflation rate assigns some

weight to the effect on future inflationary expectations. Such considerations

motivate the policymaker to hold down          the   rates of inflation and   monetary    growth.

       The example considered in Barro and Gordon (l983a) involves a reputational

equilibrium in which the outcome for inflation is a weighted average of that

under   discretion      and that under a constant—growth—rate rule. Notably, the higher

the poi:icyinaker's      discount   rate, the greater the weight attached to the discre-

tionary result, From a positive standpoint, the findings are qualitatively

in line with those under discretion. The main difference is that the reactions

of inflation to various shocks—-such as shifts in the natural rate of unemploy-

ment or in the size of government——are now smaller in magnitude, Hence, the

variances (as well as the means) of irf]ation and           monetary   growth are smaller

than    those   under discretion.

       One difficulty is the potential for multiple equilibria. There is a

bootstrap character to the reputational equilibria, whereby if people base future

beliefs on the policymaker's actions in some fashion, then the policymaker may be

motivated       (in   a range of cases) to validate these beliefs. Hence, various

equilibria conform with rational expectations as well as with period—by—period

optimization by the policymaker. Although one of the reputational equilibria

tends    to generate     the best results overall, it is unclear how      the   economy

(perhaps    guided     by the policymaker) would settle on this solution.
                                                                                    11

     A unique reputational equilibrium may obtain in cases where past performance

conveys information about the policymaker's own preferences (as in the model of

Backus and Driff iii (1984), who build on the work of Kreps and Wilson (1982)).

However, this analysis relies on differences in personal characteristics of

potential policymakers, which probably leaves little scope for systematic

theoretical analysis.

     On the one hand, it seems that the equilibria supported by reputation are

uncertain approximations to the outcomes delivered by formal rules when supported

by appropriate enforcement mechanisms. But, on the other hand, it appears that

reputation, rather than a formal rule, prevails in many areas of public policy.

Possibly the costs of establishing and enforcing formal rules are often too great

to ignore.




    ionetary Rules
     In this section 1 assume that the choice is amoung types of monetary rules,

rather than between rules or no rules (that is, rules versus discretion). The

choices are often divided between quantity rules and price rules. In the former

category the policymaker aims for a target path of a monetary aggregate, such as

the monetary base, or Ml, or a still broader concept of money. Friedman's (1960,

Chapter 4) proposal for a constant—growth—rate rule for M2 falls into this

class. From October 1979 until late 1982, the Fed claimed to be following a

policy of this general type, which was framed in terms of monetary targets. But

it is hard to see from the data that the growth of monetary aggregates became

notably more stable, say from quarter to quarter. (On the other hand, interest

rates did show unprecedented volatility, which many people think related to the

Fed's new policy.)
                                                                                    12

     Under a price rule the monetary authority uses its direct instruments—-which

might be open—market operations, the discount rate, a pegged exchange rate, or a

set price of gold——In order to achieve a desired path for some target price. The

target might be a general index of prices, the prices of specified commodities,

an interest rate, or the exchange rate itself. Examples of price rules are the

gold standard, other commodity standards, a regime with a fixed exchange rate,

and Irving Fisher's (1920) "stable—money" proposal for varying the price of gold

in order to stabilize the overall cost of living. A policy of pegging a nominal

interest rate is also a price rule, but an incomplete one, Namely, this type of

rule requires some additional specifications in order to pin down the levels of

prices and other nominal variables (see, for example, Sargent and Wallace, 1975,

and MeCallum, 1984). Therfore, an interest—rate rule is not really a substitute

for a rule that specifies the quantity of some monetary aggregate or the level of

some price.

     Generally, people are concerned with a variety of current and future prices,

rather than   with   the quantities of monetary aggregates,        For example,
people care about the mean and variance of inflation and nominal interest rates,

but not particularly about how much Ml is outstanding. Hence, the case for a

quantity rule must rely on ease of implementation and verification.'0 Even this

argument is compromised by the monetary authority's tendency to shift from one

target aggregate to another as it finds convenient on other grounds (see }Ietzel,

1984).   Such a regime involves feedback from unspecified ultimate targets

to money, rather than actually being a quantity (of money) rule.

     Similarly, the reason for focusing on a narrow band of prices, such as gold

or an exchange rate, is that such regimes are relatively easy to operate and

monitor. Otherwise, it would be preferable to stabilize a broad index of prices,
                                                                                     13

possibly using the price of gold (as in Fisher) or some other price instrument in

order to attain the desired behavior of prices in general.

     At the risk of' engaging in normative economics (see below), I would advocate

a modified Fisherian regime in which open—market operations (rather than the

price of gold) were used in order to achieve a target path of a general price

index, such as the deflator for the GNP.'1 This type of regime involves a form

of feedback, whereby a price level above target triggers lower growth of the

monetary base, and vice versa for a price level below target. The objective

might involve a moving path of prices, which allows for nonzero inflation.

However, the ease of monitoring the system (and prevention of "once—and—for—all"

discretionary adjustments to the level of prices) argues for specifying the

target as a constant price level. This setup would also produce the most

convenient monetary unit——namely one that maintains a nearly constant purchasing

power.'2 However, the government's seigniorage is severely limited in this

context. Finally, it would be possible to permit deviations from the target

price level during major wars. This kind of provision parallels the tendency

under previous monetary regimes for governments to depart from gold in wartime.

     A credible rule of this type works to stabilize prices even if there are

lags in observations of price indices or in the effects of (exogenous changes in)

money on the price level. In particular, if prices rise above target, then

people know that future monetary actions will bring prices back down to target.

This expectation of deflation raises the current real demand for money, which

lowers today's price level. In other words, there is a form of stabilizing

speculation that improves the functioning of the system. (The Swiss may have

been relatively successful in controlling inflation for these reasons and not

because of a constant—growth--rate rule for money——see Grossman, 1984).
                                                                                                     14

        Overall, the proposed rule would generate a near zero mean inflation rate

and    a   small forecast variance of future price levels. In such a regime the

prices of individual commodities would be accurate guides for the allocation of

resources. Hence, as in Hayek (1945), monetary policy provides for a stable

economic background that enhances the flow of information and thereby promotes

efficiency,

        Recently some people have suggested that monetary policy aim at stabilizing

nominal GNP,       rather   than the general price level (see, for example, Hall, 1980,

and    Taylor,     1984). Since nominal GNP       is   the product of real GNP and      the   GNP

deflator,     this rule prescribes inverse feedback of money to two things: first,

excesses of real GNP          over   target, andsecond, excesses of the deflator over

target. By contrast, the price—stabilization rule dictates feedback only to the

second item——given the price level, fluctuations in real GNP do not induce any

reactions     of   monetary instruments,

        In order to evaluate proposals for stabilizing nominal GNP, it is necessary

to    ask why feedback      from real GNP   to   money is desirable. In particular, this

reaction must mean        that the monetary      authority does less good a job of stabi-

lizing     the overall    price level. That is, there are occasions when the policy-

maker accepts greater departures of the             price level from target in order to

effect the desired response of money to                fluctuations in output. But then there

must   he some gain      from these monetary reactions to output that justifies the

accompanying       increase   in fluctuations of the general price level.

        In many    theories   associated with the "new       classical    macroeconomics," such as

Sargent     and Wallace     (1975), the regular reaction of money to real activity does

not    smooth out    the business cycle.13 Since people know             that   recessions inspire

monetary     accelerations,     there are no systematic surprises, Then, if only the
                                                                                     15

surprise movements in money matter for real variables, there would be no implica—

tions for the business cycle. It follows that it would be preferable to limit

monetary policy to the objective of stabilizing the general price level. Any

broadening of this objective threatens people's accurate perceptions of prices

(which has adverse real effects), but provides no offsetting benefits.

     On the other hand, Keynesian theories with sticky prices suggest that

regular feedback from output to money can (usefully) smooth out fluctuations in

real economic activity. Hence, although it means an increase in the volatility

of prices, it is nevertheless worthwhile for money to react systematically to

variations in real GM?.

     In effect, the proposal to stabilize nominal GM? is an attempt to unite

the principal warring factions of macroeconomists. The new classicists are

supposed to be happy because monetary policy is governed by a rule, and that rule

does entail stabilization of some nominal magnitude. Then the feedback response

of money to real GM? is to be regarded as a minor nuisance, most of which the

private sector can hopefully filter out.

     Keynesians are supposed t.o be happy with the scheme because it allows for an

active response of money to recessions and booms. Presumably most Keynesians

would also accept the feedback from prices to money, although they many not opt

for the equal weighting attached to fluctuations in real GM? vesus fluctuations

in the general price level. Apparently, the main thing that Keynesians have to

give up is their "commitment" to discretionary monetary policy, which seems

little to ask.

     The choice between the two objectives——stabilizing the general price level

versus stabliizing nominal GNP——corresponds to the weights one attaches to the

validity of the two competing viewpoints about macroeconomics. (Surely one of
                                                                                              16

validity of the two competing viewpoints about macroeconomics. (Surely one of

these views must be correct!) Notably, if one attaches little weight to

Keynesian     theories    with sticky prices, then the policymaker's preferred objective

would he stabilization of the general price level.




       I   have been vague in this paper about whether I am engaging in positive or

normative econoomics (which doubtless reflects my uncertainties, rather than a

desire to conceal truth). ln Barro and Gordon (1983a)            we intended to carry out a
positive analysis        of monetary policy, given that the existing institutions

dictated an environment of discretion. That is.,        the   policymaker could not opt

for   a rule,   under which there would be meaningful commitments about future money

and   prices.    Then, given these institutional constraints1 we analyzed the day—to--

day operating characteristics of the monetary authority. In particular, it did

not seem that the advice of economists would be especially relevant at this

level.

       Gordon and I also contrasted the results under discretion with those

generated under rules——that is, under an alternative institution where the

policyinaker could and did make some cominitnients about future money and prices.

In    order   for this comparison between discretion and      rules   to be interesting, it

must   be that   both setups are feasible under some circumstances, That is, there

must   at   some level be a choice of whether (at a cost) to erect institutions that

do or do not      permit   commitments about future money and     prices.   But this choice

should     be as much    subject to positive analysis as   are   those about day-to—day

operations under      a    given institutional mode. Further, if an economist labels the

actual institutional selection as inferior to the non—chosen option, then what
                                                                                    17

does that labeling mean? Possibly the economist has unearthed new knowledge, but

other possibiities are more likely. Although Buchanan and Tu]lock (1962) and

Buchanan (1962) argue the opposite, it is unclear why the advice of economists is

more pertinent at the level of institutional choice than it is at the level of

day-to—day ope rat ions.

     I suppose the answer is that economists' advice does have some role, but one

that is measured in the same way as the contribution of other factors of produc-

tion. Namely, economists' market wages——rather than claims to save the economy

billions of dollars through policy advice——tell us something about the group's

productivity. Although the wages of economists are fairly high, they still

represent a negligible proportion of the GNP.'4
                                                                                                        18

                                                  Footnotes




       'See, for example, Friedman (1960, Chapter 4).



       2For a discussion of the abrogation of gold clauses in public and                    private
contracts, see Yeager (1966, p. 305). Additional discussions are in Nussbaum

(1950,    pp. 283-91)      and   McCulloch     (1980).




       3The     analysis   can   be   extended to incorporate the standard inflation tax           or
other    real   effects from anticipated inflation. Then the best rate of inflation

need   not be zero.


       4See     Barro    (1983) for an elaboration of this model.



       5These taxes and          transfers   may themselves be warranted as necessary counter-

parts of (valuable) government expenditures. Hence, there is no implication that

the   government        is failing to optimize on the fiscal side.



       6More generally, one can           choose      the average inflation rate that is optimal

from the standpoint of the usual inflation tax,




       7The government's ability             to run   deficits   lessens   this incentive, but does
not eliminate it. Contingent on a bad draw, such as a                      war, it tends   to be
desirable to trigger the distortion—free capital levy.
                                                                                    19

     8Such an outcome obtains in the model of Lucas and Stokey (1983).     They
consider a form of contingent public debt, which ends up paying off well during

peacetime and badly in wartime. If government bonds are nominally denominated

and non—contingent (for reasons that escape me), the contingent behavior of

inflation achieves the same end.




     9Fischer (1980) argues that governments may find it advantageous to preserve

some possibilities for cheating, rather than committing themselves fully not to

cheat (even if such commitments were feasible). One interpretation of Fischer is

that contingent rules are preferred to noncontingent ones, as in the previous

example where governments inflate during wars or other national emergencies. A

second possible interpretation is that randomization of policy may sometimes be

useful. Randomized policies were non—optimal in the models of monetary policy

that I have considered (Barro and Gordon, 1983a), but Weiss (1976) offers an

example in which a randomized income tax would be desirable. However, Skinner

(1984) argues empirically that randomization of the income tax is, in fact,

harmful on net.



    101   do not mean to argue that a constant—growth-rate rule for money, if

implemented say 30 years ago, would have been inferior to actual monetary

policy. A quantity rule is likely to be better than discretion. Also, the

difference between a quantity rule, say for Ml, and a rule for stabilizing the

general level of prices derives from movements in the real demand for Ml. But

shifts in this demand—-especially the changes in velocity that are induced by

shifting nominal interest rates—would probably have been mild if the monetary

authority had adhered for a long time to a constant—growth--rate rule.   However,
                                                                                    20

Qcont i nued

when starting from a state of high and volatile nominal interest rates, there are

serious problems in the implementation of a quantity rule. Namely, there is the

possibility of severe deflation during the transition to lower inflation, since

real cash balances must rise dramatically. The advantage of a price rule is that

it allows for large infusions of nominal money during the transition. Further,

since this monetary expansion arises only in response to the actual behavior of

prices, there is no threat to the credibility of the system.



    11Simons (1936), who was concerned mostly with the superiority of rules over

authorities, also favored a price rule rather than a quantity rule.



   12See Hall (1982) for a related discussion.



   '3This conclusion also obtains in purely real theories of business cycles. In

other models monetary activism can affect the character of the business cycle,

but not in a desirable maimer. In these cases it follows inediately that

feedback from output to money should be avoided.



   '4Perhap economists are like the water of the water—diamond paradox. If

there were only a few economists, then their overall wage income might be

enormous. But economists are in such abundant supply (being cheap to produce)

that their wage rate is driven down to a meagre level.
                                                                                     21
                                    References




Backus, D. and J. Driffill, "Inflation and Reputation," unpublished, Queens
     University, February 1984.

Barro, B. J.,, "Inflationary Finance under Discretion and Rules," Canadian Journal
     of Economics, February 1983.

_____        and D. Gordon, "Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model of
     Monetary Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, July 1983a.

________     and_________, "A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural
     Rate Model," Journal of Political Economy, August 1983b.

Buchanan, J.M., "Predictability: the Criterion of Monetary Constitutions," in
     L. B. Yeager, ed., In Search of a Monetary Constitution, Harvard University
     Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1962.

__________    and G. Tullock, The Calculus of Consent, University of Michigan
     Press, Ann Arbor, 1962.

Calvo, G., "On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in a Monetary Economy,"
     Econometrica, November 1978.

Fischer, S., "Dyanmic Inconsistency, Cooperation and the Benevolent Dissembling
     Government," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 1980.

Fisher,   I., Stabilij the Doflar, Macmillan, New York, 1920.

Friedman, M., A Program for Monetary Stability, Fordham University Press,
     New York, 1960.

Grossman, H., "Counterfactuals, Forecasts, and Choice—Theoretic Modelling of
     Policy," National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper no. 1381, June
     1984.

Hall, B. E., "Monetary Policy for Disinflation, Remarks perpared for the Federal
     Reserve Board," October 1980.

             "Explorations in the Gold Standard and Related Policies for Stabi-
     lizing the Dollar," in R. Hall, ed., Inflation: Causes and Effects,
     University of Chicago Press, Chicago, for the National Bureau of Economic
     Research, 1982.

Ilayek, F. A., "The Use of Knowledge in Society," American Economic Review,
     September 1945.

Hetzel, B., "The Formulation of Monetary Policy," unpublished, Federal Reserve
     Bank of Richmond, 1984.
                                                                                        22

Kreps, D. and R. Wilson, "Reputation and Imperfect Information," Journa
    EcononicTy, 1982.
Kydiand, F. W. and E. C. Prescott, "Rules Rather than Discretion: the Inconsis—
     tency of Optimal Plans," Journal of Political Economy, June 1977.

Lucas, H. E. and N. Stokey, "Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in an Economy
     without Capital," Journal of Monetary Economics, July 1983.

McCallum, B. T., "Some Issues Concerning Interest Rate Pegging, Price Level
     Determinacy and the Real Bills Doctrine," National Bureau of Economic
     Research , working paper no. 1294, March 1984.

McCuiloch, J. H., "The Ban on Indexed Bonds, 1933—77," American Economic Review,
     December 1980.

Nussbaum, A., M       in the Law,   National and_International, The Foundation Press,
     Brooklyn, N.Y., 1950.
Sargent. T. J. and N. Wallace, "Rational Expectations, the Optimal Monetary
     Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy
     April 1975.

Skinner, J., "Uncertain Tax Policy and Economic Efficiency," unpublished,
     University of Virginia, March 1984.

Simons, H ,    "Rules versus Authorities in Monetary Policy," Journal    of Political
     Econy, February      1936.

Taylor, J,, "What would Nominal GNP Targetting do to the Business Cycle?" pre—
     sented at the Carnegie—Rochester Conference, Rochester, N.Y., April 1984.

Weiss, L., "The Desirability of Cheating Incentives and Randomness in the Optimal
     Income Tax," Journal of Political Ecopprny, December 1976.

Yeager, I     B   International Monetary Relations,   Harper   & Row, N Y , 1966
