NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A NEW METRIC FOR BANKING INTEGRATION IN EUROPE
Reint Gropp
Anil Kashyap
Working Paper 14735
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14735

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2009

Corresponding author’s email address: reint.gropp@ebs.edu This paper is to appear in an NBER
volume entitled “Europe and the euro”, edited by Alberto Alesina and Francesco Giavazzi. The paper
was presented at the NBER summer institute pre-conference and the 2nd ZEW conference on banking
integration and stability. Comments from participants, especially Massimiliano Affinito and Loretta
Mester (discussants), Alberto Alesina, Olivier Blanchard, Ricardo Caballero and Francesco Giavazzi
are gratefully acknowledged. Research assistance by Markus Balzer, Biliana Kassabova, Matthias
Köhler and Marco Lo Duca is gratefully acknowledged. Gropp thanks the DFG (German Science
Foundation) for research support and the Goethe University Frankfurt for its generous hospitality.
Kashyap thanks the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago for financial support.
The views in this paper are our own and not necessarily shared by any of the institutions with which
we are affiliated with. All mistakes are ours alone. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Reint Gropp and Anil Kashyap. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

A New Metric for Banking Integration in Europe
Reint Gropp and Anil Kashyap
NBER Working Paper No. 14735
February 2009
JEL No. G18,G21,L1
ABSTRACT
Most observers have concluded that while money markets and government bond markets are rapidly
integrating following the introduction of the common currency in the euro area, there is little evidence
that a similar integration process is taking place for retail banking. Data on cross-border retail bank
flows, cross-border bank mergers and the law of one price reveal no evidence of integration in retail
banking. This paper shows that the previous tests of bank integration are weak in that they are not
based on an equilibrium concept and are neither necessary nor sufficient statistics for bank integration.
The paper proposes a new test of integration based on convergence in banks’ profitability. The new
test emphasises the role of an active market for corporate control and of competition in banking integration.
European listed banks profitability appears to converge to a common level. There is weak evidence
that competition eliminates high profits for these banks, and underperforming banks tend to show improved
profitability. Unlisted European banks differ markedly. Their profits show no tendency to revert to
a common target rate of profitability. Overall, the banking market in Europe appears far from being
integrated. In contrast, in the U.S. both listed and unlisted commercial banks profits converge to the
same target, and high profit banks see their profits driven down quickly.

Reint Gropp
Department of Finance, Accounting and Real Estate
European Business School
Rheinstrasse 1
65375 Oestrich-Winkel
Germany
Reint.Gropp@ebs.edu
Anil Kashyap
Booth School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
anil.kashyap@chicagobooth.edu

1. Introduction
In this paper we propose a new approach for assessing banking integration in Europe. The
measurement of integration is of considerable policy relevance. For example, the European
Central Bank mission statement reads: “We in the Eurosystem have as our primary objective
the maintenance of price stability for the common good. Acting also as a leading financial
authority, we aim to safeguard financial stability and promote European financial
integration” (italics added). The ECB (2007) defines financial integration by saying “The
market for a given set of financial instruments or services to be fully integrated when all
potential market participants in such a market (i) are subject to a single set of rules when they
decide to deal with those financial instruments or services, (ii) have equal access to this set of
financial instruments or services, and (iii) are treated equally when they operate in the
market.”
This definition has direct implications for how banking integration should be
measured. For instance, the equal access condition presumes that it is profitable for all
services to be offered in all markets. This is akin to requiring that if there is demand for a
service it must be met everywhere within an economic area at the lowest cost at which it can
be provided anywhere within that area. This seems a useful benchmark for bond or wholesale
banking markets, but much less relevant for locally provided retail banking services. Unless
bank cost structures are identical across local communities some services might not be offered
in some locations. This is not informative about financial integration.
The equal treatment provision is also unusual because it includes no efficiency
benchmark. As an extreme example, consider the case of a monopolist supplying financial
services far above marginal cost. This would satisfy the ECB definition, but clearly would
not be efficient and we doubt would be viewed as acceptable by policymakers.
The common problem highlighted by both these observations is that market conditions
depend on both supply and demand. The ECB definition pays insufficient attention to the
supply side of the market. Existing empirical work (as represented by Cabral et al., 2002;
Baele et al., 2004; Adam et al., 2002, ECB 2008) also suffers to certain extent from the same
criticism.
Previous research assessing integration has been of three varieties. One looks at the
extent of cross-border direct retail operations of banks (Gual, 2004, Perez et al., 2005). These
data are tracked by the Bank for International Settlements and suggest that while wholesale or
money market flows across borders within the euro area are large, retail flows are generally
2

less than 1 percent of total lending. This is taken as evidence against retail banking
integration, although most authors would concede that cross-border retail flows do not
constitute a necessary condition for retail banking integration to take place. One could easily
imagine a financial system in which we would observe a complete absence of cross-border
retail flows, but which would be perfectly integrated. For example, the threat of such flows
could be enough to ensure perfect integration.
A second indicator is cross-border bank mergers (see most recently Köhler (2007) and
Köhler (2009), for evidence on this and a review of this literature). The absence of such
deals, say in comparison to the number of domestic bank mergers, has also been taken as
evidence against retail bank integration. Of course, similar arguments apply in this case as for
cross-border retail flows and cross-border mergers are likely to be neither necessary, nor
sufficient for financial integration to take place.
The third method for detecting integration comes from Adam et al.’s (2002) study of
retail interest rates. They look at 5 year corporate loans and mortgage loans and find lending
rates barely converge after 1999. In a partial adjustment model the speed of convergence is
only 2% per year for corporate rates and 7% for mortgage rates. Based on this slow rate of
convergence, they conclude that retail banking markets are far from integrated and do not
seem to be on a path towards integration.
The ECB’s annual Financial Integration Report (2008) reports extensive descriptive
information, such as the cross-country standard deviation of interest rates on various bank
products to argue that retail bank markets are not integrated. Affinito and Farabullini (2009)
show that interest rate dispersion is reduced after controlling for variables reflecting the
characteristics of domestic borrowers, such as risk exposure, disposable income, firm size,
etc. They also demonstrate that price dispersion is larger across the euro area than across
regions in Italy. They conclude that “euro area prices appear different because national
banking products appear different or because they are differentiated by national factors”. We
argue that this same reasoning implies that interest rate dispersion is a poor guide to judging
integration. Indeed, we will present examples that show that interest rate dispersion may be
completely unrelated to banking integration.
The starting point for our analysis is a reconsideration of the relevance of the law of one
price in this context. We argue that the law of one price in retail banking, the way it has been
applied in the previous literature, constitutes neither a sufficient nor necessary condition for
retail banking integration. The reason is the high degree of heterogeneity in demand for retail
bank products that may arise from differences in tax systems, preferences, risk characteristics
3

or other demand side related factors (section 2). Once we admit that there are legitimate
reasons why demand might differ across markets, then even with a single supply curve prices
would differ. Yet, these price differences would not represent a failure of integration.
In section 3, we propose a new test of retail bank integration in the spirit of Stigler (1963)
which we argue constitutes a sufficient condition for banking integration. Our notion of
integration presumes new entry and takeovers will lead to a convergence in profitability. This
way of looking at integration shifts the focus to looking at barriers to entry and takeovers and
to comparisons of profit rates rather than prices of banking products. The remainder of the
paper explores whether integration in this sense holds.
In section 4, we describe the data we use to carry the test of our condition. This sample
consists of 36,000 observations on banks in France, Germany, Italy, Spain, the U.S and the
U.K between 1994 and 2006. The sample includes listed and unlisted banks and also includes
many savings and cooperative banks. We show that average profitability varies widely
among bank types (listed, unlisted) in Europe, but not in the U.S. Further, even within listed
and unlisted banks, profitability varies widely across countries in Europe.
In section 5, we estimate a partial adjustment model to assess convergence. The logic of
our test suggests investigating whether profit rates converge and whether the tendency
towards convergence depends on the strength of the market for corporate control. Hence
publicly traded banks should be under different pressure than unlisted banks.
We find this to be the case. Listed banks in Europe and U.S. each show a tendency to
revert to the average profit rates in their respective areas. The non-listed commercial banks in
the U.S. that are unusually profitable tend to have these profits competed away – but
underperforming non-traded banks do not seem to improve. The profit rates of the unlisted
commercial banks in Europe show no tendency to converge to any type of European average;
there is some evidence profit rates for unlisted banks converge to a country-specific average.
We read these patterns as suggesting U.S. banking market is reasonably well integrated, but
that the banking market in Europe appears to be far from being integrated. We close this
section with some thoughts on the relationship between the introduction of the common
currency in the euro area and banking integration.
Section 6 offers some final thoughts on how the results might inform future policy
discussions regarding financial integration.

4

2. The law of one price revisited
Intuitively, assessing integration using the law of one price seems appealing. Indeed, for
many financial instruments such as government bonds, or high grade corporate securities,
checking for the convergence of prices is standard practice. In the case of bank products,
however, heterogeneity that invariably is present will undermine this type of comparison.
Banks offer highly differentiated products to their customers, which may frequently be
tailored towards their specific life circumstances, preferences, risk characteristics and needs.
Unless one accurately controls for these differences, which may very likely systematically
differ across countries, the law of one price will not send a clear message regarding the state
of integration.
[Chart 1 about here]
We illustrate this point in two ways. Chart 1 shows our understanding of the standard
view of financial integration that underlies law-of-one-price tests using generic supply and
demand schedules. This characterization presumes that there is a single demand (curve which
is common across markets and customers) and different supply curves. The standard view
presumes that if we observe more than one price for a similar product (as in the chart with P1,
P2 and P3), then this is evidence for market segregation and a lack of integration. In the
language of the ECB definition of integration the equal treatment of customers across markets
would not be satisfied since identical customers are facing different prices.
The logic behind the ECB definition would be that the common set of regulatory rules
would lead supplier S1 to capture the market, because she is the low cost provider of the
financial service. So she should supply Q3 and the prevailing market price should be P3.
Under these circumstances the law of one price will give an accurate picture of the degree of
financial integration.
[Chart 2 about here]
Now consider Chart 2. Again, we would observe multiple prices (P1, P2, P3). But in
Chart 2, there is only one supply curve and the observed violation of the law of one price is
due to unobserved heterogeneity in demand. The demand variation may be a function of
differences in preferences, risk characteristics or other demand characteristics in different

5

markets (countries). In this case, all of the conditions required under the ECB definition of
integration might hold.
Thus, as a purely logical matter, tests for the law of one price implicitly assume that
demand for bank’s products is homogeneous across markets and products.2 If there were
sufficient harmonization across countries of all the factors that might lead to violations of the
pre-conditions for capital structural irrelevance, then perhaps this assumption might be
reasonable. 3 But we know statutory corporate tax rates differ considerably, and effective
rates show even larger differences; for instance, Mintz (2006) reports that effective average
corporate tax rates in France, Germany, Italy, and Spain are 32.1%, 38.1%, 30.2% and 23.2%.
So based purely on differences in the tax advantages of interest deductibility, the preference
for debt versus equity financing should differ in these countries. Consequently, there is no
reason to expect demand for bank loans to be equalized and hence prices on bank loans to
converge.
On top of the tax issues, the large literature on differences on the effectiveness in
corporate governance across countries, imply potentially differential benefits of debt
financing to control agency costs. These considerations would generate further variation in
the demand for debt, and likely the monitoring provided by banks.
Once demand differences are acknowledged, deciding how to describe the state of
market integration becomes much more difficult. The well known literature on price
discrimination following from Varian (1985) suggests that prices would likely differ in the
presence of cross-market differences in demand. This may or may not entail any efficiency or
welfare costs.
One way to see the subtleties involved is to suppose that the ultimate source demand
differences can be traced to variation in the costs that different customers face in searching for
credit. This seems like a plausible benchmark in the context of many retail bank products. In
this case, the large body of research dating back to Salop and Stiglitz (1982) becomes
relevant. These models of spatial competition describe conditions under which price
dispersion for identical goods can arise in equilibrium. In this case, even within countries
prices would not converge. Note that in this class of models, financial service firms would

2

For an argument along similar lines, see Perez et al. (2005).
One can summarize the necessary conditions for the Modigliani and Miller capital structure irrelevance as
requiring that i) investors and firms can trade the same set of securities at competitive market prices equal to the
present value of their future cash flows; ii) there are no taxes, transactions costs, or issuance costs associated
with security trading; iii) a firm’s financing decisions do not change the cash flows generated by its investments,
nor do they reveal new information about them. See Berk and DeMarzo (2007) Chapter 14 for further details.
3

6

enter the market and drive profit rates down to the level of the entry cost. In this case there
would be no inefficiencies in the market, despite the price dispersion.
For all these reasons, it seems to us the conditions needed to construct an informative
test for integration based on the law of one price are very unlikely to prevail. Hence, we look
for a different type of test.

3. Return on assets as a measure of bank integration
Stigler (1963) kicked off a large literature in industrial organization based on the observation
that in equilibrium (with well functioning markets) the expected returns of comparable assets
in an economy should be similar. Stigler’s empirical work (and all of the subsequent work
which we have found, such as Fama and French (2000)), has been conducted using nonfinancial businesses. We explore whether the returns on assets of banks across different
markets/countries converge and suggest that convergence of profitability is a preferable
measure of financial integration to the law of one price.
Convergence would only be expected if the structure of the retail banking industry is
such that (i) product markets are contestable and (ii) the market for corporate control operates
efficiently across markets.4 While neither of these conditions has received much attention in
the discussion over retail banking integration, they seem to be essential pre-conditions for an
integrated equilibrium. More specifically, if these two conditions hold, the implications for
the return on assets of banks in different countries are straightforward. If a bank earns rents in
a market, the threat of a new entrant should drive down these rents towards the equilibrium
value. If a bank underperforms in a market, a more efficient competitor should take this bank
over, driving returns on assets up towards the equilibrium value.
We should emphasise that contestability and a functioning market for corporate
control are necessary and sufficient conditions for financial integration to take place. For
example, consider the hypothetical monopoly supplier that we argued earlier might satisfy the
ECB definition of integration. If this monopolist were faced with a threat of takeover
(possibly from outside the euro area) and the market was contestable, then the banking
services would be provided efficiently at marginal cost. Profits would converge and we
would identify the market as integrated. Conversely, if there was not any takeover pressure,

4

We presume throughout the analysis that all banks can meaningfully compared. Banks specialize so as to fill
very different niches, then the Stigler reasoning breaks down since effectively the banks would not be
competing. Hence, we do not control for risk or make any other adjustments to reflect differences in operating
practices or strategies.

7

or if the market could not be captured by a competitor, then prices might differ across
locations and/or be priced above marginal cost. In this, case profits need not converge and we
would judge the markets not to be integrated.
Likewise, the models predicated on the Salop and Stiglitz depiction of spatial
competition also posit entry as an equilibrating mechanism. In that framework, banks choose
where to locate by spreading out so that the profits are competed down to just cover entry
costs. Given homogeneity of regulations across the euro area this would also lead to
convergence in profits.
Empirically, we look for convergence in the return on assets (ROA) of banks
estimating variants of the classic partial adjustment equation.5 Under rational expectations we
can use realised ex-post values as a proxy for expected returns (e.g. Cochrane, 2001) and start
with a specification of the form

ΔROAit = η + λ ( ROAt* − ROAit −1 ) + ui + vit

(1)

In what follows we consider several models of the long run equilibrium profitability, ROA*.
The actual estimating equation is the differenced form of (1)6:

ΔROAit = α + λΔROAt* − β ΔROAit −1 + wit

(2)

In principle, the coefficient on the lagged dependent variable, β, should equal 1-λ. But as
emphasized by Caballero and Engel (2004), the ordinary least squares (OLS) estimate of β is
biased towards zero if changes in profitability are lumpy. The intuition for this econometric
problem is easiest to see under the extreme case when changes in ROA are always discrete
and ROA* is a random walk. In this case, the OLS estimate of β can be deduced by
considering 4 possible terms based on whether the ROA adjusted either at t-1 or t. In three of
these cases, there was no adjustment in either or both periods so that the covariance between
the change ROA at time t and t-1 will necessarily be zero. The only time when a correlation
is possible is when there is adjustment in consecutive periods. Because the t-1 adjustment
would optimally put ROA at its equilibrium value, there would be no way to predict whether

5

An alternative to using banks’ profitability would be to check for convergence in banks’ profit or cost
efficiency. For a survey of this literature see Hughes and Mester (forthcoming). We present results for one
alternative measure of bank profitability (ROE) below.
6
This specification is derived by taking lags of both sides of the equation and taking the difference. The
constant term would be zero but as explained in the next footnote, for certain specifications we consider samples
where the mean adjustment is non-zero by construction. So we include the constant in all specifications to
permit comparisons across specifications.

8

the subsequent shocks would involve upward or downward adjustment. So on average these
two changes will be uncorrelated as well.7
Our theory implies that the adjustment mechanism is likely to involve discrete entry
and exit decisions, so we would expect the change in profitability to exhibit considerable
kurtosis. We show below that this is indeed the case, so we will infer the adjustment speed
from the change in the estimated target for profitability and make no attempt to impose a
restriction linking the coefficients on ΔROA* and the lagged dependent variable.
This reasoning suggests the following (strong) definition of convergence.
Strong definition of integration: The world banking market is integrated if there is a common
ROA* to which all banks converge.
There are many reasons (including regulatory) that banks in the U.S. and Europe might find it
difficult to use the same business model in each location. If that is true then pressure from
banks on the different continents driving convergence may be weak.
Hence, we also consider weaker definitions of integration. Our second definition
requires that all banks in the European Union (E.U.) converge to the same equilibrium value
of ROA. Hence:
Weak definition of integration: The E.U. banking market is integrated if there is a common
ROA* to which all E.U. banks converge.
To clarify the interpretation of the results for integration in the E.U., we also study the
behaviour of U.S. banks. We do this because the U.S. banking market is generally considered
to be integrated and (relatively) efficient (although we do test this presumption).
Accordingly, we compare both the equilibrium value ROA and the estimated speed of
convergence for both U.S. and European banks. We view the U.S. results as providing both a
check of our procedure and a quantitative benchmark for the European estimates.
One useful feature of our framework is that it naturally suggests culprits that might be
responsible if integration is absent. In particular, besides just estimating (2) for all banks, it is
informative to check whether the underperforming banks raise their profitability or whether

7

There may be a second problem with estimating equation (2) with OLS, the lagged dependent variable on the
right hand side may be correlated with the error term (Nickell, 1981). We discuss some instrumental variables
estimates that potentially attend to this concern below.

9

highly profitable banks see declines in profits.8 If underperforming banks raise their
profitability, we would interpret this as evidence in favour of a functioning market for
corporate control forcing them to improve their performance.9 If highly profitable banks see
their profits decline quickly, this would be evidence for contestability in banking markets, in
which the threat of entry or actual entry quickly eliminates rents.
These possibilities suggest that it would be useful to conduct the tests controlling for
differences in contestability or the effectiveness of corporate governance. This leads us to
estimate ROA convergence separately for different types of banks. Both contestability and
the market for corporate control should be fully operational for listed banks, while the threat
of a take over may be considerably weaker for an unlisted bank. Hence, for unlisted banks we
would expect much slower ROA convergence from below. We would expect adjustment due
to contestability to be similar for unlisted and listed banks; if we find differences here, this
would be strong evidence of lack of integration.
Finally, the tests will be conducted deflating profits by the book value of assets (rather
than the market value.) There are several reasons for this choice. The structure of the
European banking sector is one of them. As we show below, the number of listed banks for
which we could conceivably calculate market values is low in Europe. By limiting our
analysis to these banks we would miss an important share of the European retail banking
sector, especially in Germany, where both savings and cooperative banks are important.
Indeed, the differences between listed and unlisted banks are themselves informative so that
ignoring the non-traded banks would reduce the power of our tests. Moreover, as a practical
matter, proper measurement of the market values of banks’ assets would require market
values of the loan portfolios of banks, which are unavailable. Lastly, the efficiency of stock
market valuations would force rates of return measured at market prices to converge,
irrespective of the degree of integration. The point of our procedure is to see operating
performance (i.e. the cash flows produced by the banks for a given book value of assets)
convergences, not whether the stock market functions properly. Hence, our measure is only
informative about integration when the analysis is done using book values.

8

We allow the constant in equation (2) for precisely this reason. When estimated on a sample of banks whose
ROA is either above or below ROA* it would make no sense to omit the constant. So to permit comparisons in
the full sample estimates we also allow an intercept.
9
Given that we are estimating continuous albeit lumpy adjustment, we think of the main mechanism as the threat
of takeover more than a potential takeover itself.

10

4. Data
We confine the study to banks in France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and the UK, and include U.S.
banks as a benchmark. We start with all consolidated and unconsolidated balance sheet data
for banks in these countries that are available in the Bankscope database. We first eliminate
all banks that are part of the consolidated balance sheet of another bank. We track banks from
1994 to 2006. We also eliminate banks with zero or negative total assets, missing post tax
profits, total customer loans, total deposits, interest earnings and operating expenses. We
drop banks that had fewer than 4 observations and observations in the bottom or top 2% of the
change in ROA.
The resulting distribution of bank/year observations is given in Table 1. About two
thirds of the observations are from E.U. countries, with Germany accounting for 46 percent of
the sample and the U.S. accounting for just under 1/3.
[Tables 1 and 2 about here]
Data on the type of banks are reported in Table 2. Roughly 40 percent of the sample
consists of commercial banks or bank holding companies; below we group these banks along
with the handful of medium and long-term credit banks and real estate banks into the
“commercial bank” category. Sixty percent of the commercial banks are U.S. institutions.
The banks not counted as commercial are savings or cooperative banks. The location
of the savings and cooperative banks across countries is also very uneven. Almost all
cooperative banks are either located in Germany (8,813 bank/year observations) and Italy
(1,980) bank/year observations) and are extremely small. Savings banks are predominantly
located in Germany (5,981 bank/year observations) and the U.S. (2,414 bank/year
observations).
In Table 3, we present sample statistics for the level and change of ROA. We compute
return on assets as the ratio of post-tax profits divided by total assets. The mean return on
assets is 0.62%, which is somewhat lower compared to the average value of ROA of 0.8%
obtained in a very large cross-national sample in Demirguc-Kunt and Huizinga (1998). The
distribution is skewed to the right with a median of 0.45%. As one would expect, the mean
and the median of the first difference of ROA are zero or very close to zero. Importantly, the
kurtosis of the change in ROA is 8.12, which suggests that the lumpiness concerns discussed
by Caballero and Engel (2004) are quite relevant.

11

[Table 3 about here]
When estimating equation (2) we must construct an estimate of ROA*. The essence
of the Caballero and Engel bias argument is that firm-specific proxies for the target level of
profitability will still be plagued by the effects of infrequent adjustment. 10 Fortunately,
aggregate variables can be used to construct a target measure and in our application, the mean
rate of profitability is a natural candidate target. So we will consider various mean rates of
profit as the equilibrium target.
Chart 3 shows the mean rate of returns for all banks in the sample. It is quite clear that
there are substantial differences in profit rates across the counties in our sample. U.S. profit
rates are consistently higher than elsewhere and German rates are consistently lower, and until
the last couple of years of the sample the gap between the two does not narrow. Given the
different governance mechanisms and profit objectives across banks and the different
percentages of banks types across countries we do not view these differences as particularly
informative.
Chart 4 breaks out the banks into categories that we find more meaningful. The upper
panel shows the ROAs for the publicly traded banks; there are 699 banks, with three quarters
U.S. based. These banks presumably have a strong profit motive and are potentially taken
over if they are poor performers, so that both the necessary pre-conditions for our test hold for
these institutions. The profit rate distribution, especially in the early part of the sample, is
quite dispersed. As in Chart 3, the U.S. banks show persistently higher profits than the others.
Given the high percentage of U.S. banks in the sample this makes the mean rate for all the
listed banks higher in every year than the average for each of the European countries. As a
second point of reference, the dashed line in the chart shows the average for the European
countries only. By the last few years of the sample the average profit rates narrowed. For
example, in 1996 the range of average profit rates across countries was 91 basis points, and by
2006 the range had shrunk to 54 basis points.
The second panel shows commercial banks that are not publicly traded. These banks
are supposed to maximize profits but if they are not doing so it may be costly to acquire
10
Fama and French (2000) build a firm specific target and use the dividend payout rate, a dummy for dividend
paying firms and the ratio of the market value of equity to the book value of equity. Even if we were to ignore
the lumpiness issues, these variables would not work well in our context. For example, we have many non-listed
firms so we cannot use the market to book ratio. We did not have complete data on dividend payments available
either. Virtually all large listed banks pay dividends and for the unlisted ones the data are not available. It is not
clear for the cooperative banks whether dividend payments should be thought of in the usual sense (because the
banks can pass profits back to their members in other ways such as through lower fees). Further, we are
interested in whether banks converge to a common target, rather than a firm specific target.

12

control to correct any underperformance. Again the U.S. banks are noticeably and
consistently more profitable than their European counterparts. As a reference, we include the
average profit rate for the listed European banks. While the mean for the listed banks is in the
middle of the distribution from 2000 onwards, the distribution of profit rates if anything is
widening slightly over the last 6 years; while in 1999 the difference in average profit rates of
the unlisted European banks was 26 basis points, by the end of the sample the spread was 43
basis points.
The last panel shows the profit rates for savings and cooperative banks. A priori these
banks satisfy neither of our necessary conditions for profit convergence – there are so few of
these banks in the UK that we omit their average from the picture. Recall that most of the
banks in the sample are in Germany and the U.S. and through 2003 the movements in the
profit rates in these countries appear to be completely disconnected, before converging
somewhat in the last years of the sample. The ROA in the other three countries also narrowed
substantially at the end of the sample, but the averages over the prior years were very
different.

5. Convergence Estimates
5.1. Baseline
We turn now to more formal econometric tests to assess convergence based on
estimating equation (2) for the three groups of banks in Chart 4. Because the pre-conditions
involving contestability and corporate control most naturally hold for the listed banks, we
begin by estimating the equation for them. The first column in Table 4 shows that listed
banks profit rates move toward the average for all banks in the sample, closing half the gap
between their own level of profits and the target each year.11 Fama and French in their
investigation of non-financial firms estimated the speed of convergence (to a firm specific
mean) to be roughly 0.4. The lagged dependent variable has a significant negative coefficient,
which based on the reasoning on Caballero and Engel is not surprising.12 Consequently in

11

The standard errors are clustered at the bank level throughout our analysis. If instead we cluster by date the
standard errors for U.S. samples fall and those for the E.U. samples tend to rise somewhat.
12
The intuition is as follows. If the adjustment involves discrete actions and the ROA* has a trend, then the
periods of inaction will cause that the typical change in the actual ROA to be less than the trend. Consequently,
the longer the period in between the adjustments, the larger will be the observed action to catch up. Without
making specific assumptions on the stochastic process for the trend we cannot calculate the magnitude of this
bias.

13

what follows we ignore the coefficient estimate on the lagged dependent variable and
concentrate instead on the implied estimate for λ from the ROA* proxy.
[Table 4 about here]
Based on Chart 4, we know that the average profit rate for the full sample is driven by
developments in the U.S. Moreover, Chart 4 also tells us that the average in rate in each of
the European countries lies below the sample average in each year. So based on these
considerations there are good reasons to doubt the robustness of this initial specification. In
the second specification in Table 4, we drop the U.S. banks and re-estimate the equation.
This regression confirms the hunch that the European banks are not tracking the overall
sample average profit rate. The estimated value for λ is negative and insignificant from zero.
Hence the apparent convergence from the first specification is entirely due to the U.S. banks
and there is no evidence that European banks are mirroring their U.S. counterparts.
Therefore, the strongest version of integration fails.
The next two specifications in Table 4 explore weaker tests of convergence, asking
whether the U.S. banks’ profits move with the average in the U.S. and the European rates
move with the European average. Both of these tendencies are present. The U.S. banks
convergence is, if anything, implausibly high, with λ estimated to be 0.85. Taken literally this
implies that virtually all profit differences are eliminated within one year. We suspect that
some of this comes from the fact that our sample includes a period substantial consolidation
of the U.S. banking market, when the largest listed banks took over many of the middle-sized
banks that had been prominent prior to the possibility nationwide branching -- see Jones and
Critchfield (2005) for survey of overall consolidation trends in the U.S.
For the European publicly traded banks, we find significant convergence towards the
mean rate for Europe. The estimated value of λ is 0.33 is plausible and significantly lower
than the U.S. estimate.13 Thus, European listed banks do appear to be operating in an
integrated market.
Non-listed banks have prominent market shares in both the U.S. and Europe. In this
sample, the percentage of European bank assets residing in listed banks is 53%, while the
analogous percentage in the U.S. is 47% in 2006. Therefore, the finding of convergence for
listed banks in the E.U. and U.S. is not a sufficient statistic for the overall state of market

13

Not surprisingly, the U.S. listed banks are not converging to the average profit rate of the European banks nor
are the European banks moving towards the average profit rate for the U.S. banks.

14

integration. So we next ask whether the non-traded banks are also moving to towards the
average profit rates for the listed banks.
For the U.S. the answer is yes. The non-listed commercial banks show a significant
propensity to move towards the average rate of profit for their listed competitors. The
estimate for λ is .431, which is significantly below the rate for listed banks. A lower speed of
convergence for unlisted banks is not surprising. We expect that in markets where high
profits are being earned competition among unlisted banks and from listed banks would
compete down any rents. But, in cases where an unlisted bank is under-performing, taking it
over may be much more costly than the taking over a poor performing listed bank. This
second consideration would lead to a lower average speed of convergence. We explore this
conjecture below.14
The European results for unlisted banks are strikingly different from the U.S. The
estimate of λ for unlisted commercial banks is -0.014 and insignificantly different from zero.
The corresponding coefficient for savings and cooperative banks is -0.06 and significant at the
5% level. Hence, there is no indication that the profit rates of unlisted banks in Europe are
tied to profit patterns for listed banks. Hence, even our weak definition of integration fails for
unlisted and non-commercial banks in the E.U.
5.2 Further tests
We next explore whether the mechanisms suggested by our theory appear operative.
In particular, we ask whether banks whose profits are above ROA* fall (due to competition)
and whether banks with below target profits improve (due to a threat of a takeover). We view
these predictions as asymmetric because competition should always be a force to dissipate
rents, but taking over or restructuring an underperforming bank is costly. So if corporate
governance changes are associated with a high fixed cost, they may be difficult to implement.
This is true even for listed banks, as many of the gains of a takeover frequently accrue to the
shareholders of the existing firm (e.g. Shleifer and Vishny, 1988). Furthermore, cooperative
banks may not even have a profit maximization motive so if they were recording low profits
they might have little incentive and no outside pressure to improve. Accordingly in these
14

For completeness, the table also includes information on savings and cooperative banks. Remarkably the
profits of savings banks in the U.S. also tend to converge to the rates of listed banks. The coefficient for λ is
1.15. We find this result surprising and puzzling for at least two reasons. One is that there is abundant evidence
that savings banks have a fundamentally different business model than commercial banks, especially large
commercial banks (Critchfield et al (2004)). The conventional view is that in the U.S. community banks hardly
compete with large commercial banks. Moreover, it is often very difficult to take over community banks. Hence
it is not clear what mechanism would force convergence for these banks.

15

tests we study only commercial banks (listed and unlisted) where there is no ambiguity about
the management objectives.15
We refine the basic predictions about the effects of contestability and corporate
governance in two ways. First, we expect all commercial banks (listed or not) to be subject to
competitive pressure. Thus, we expect abnormal profits to be competed away for all
commercial banks. Second, we expect an asymmetry in the effect of corporate governance,
with listed banks being easier to restructure than unlisted banks.

[Table 5 about here]
The first two specifications in Table 5 show the estimates of λ for listed U.S. banks
that are below and above ROA*. In both cases, λ is significantly positive, although the
estimate for the underperforming banks is implausibly large. The estimates suggest that
competitive forces and corporate governance are both operating for these banks.
The next two columns show the analogous estimates for the E.U. listed banks. Both
the estimates are close to 0.3, and thus effectively the same as the estimate from Table 4
where the speed of adjustment was restricted to be the same in both directions. The standard
errors are now much larger, so we cannot be confident that the estimates are different from
zero. Hence, the evidence for contestability and the market for corporate control operating
with respect to the E.U. mean is relatively weak. One potential explanation is that this is a
sample size problem: We have data for only about 100 listed banks (and 600 observations) in
the E.U. as opposed to more than 400 banks (and more than 2000 observations) in the U.S.
This accurately reflects the limited number of listed banks in the E.U. so there is nothing that
we can do about this shortage of data.16
The next pair of estimates shows the results for unlisted U.S. commercial banks. The
underperforming banks do not seem to raise their profits. Hence, the pressure on poorly
performing unlisted banks to improve performance through the market for corporate control is
weaker for unlisted than for listed commercial banks. In contrast, high profit unlisted banks
15

We are ignoring agency problems and corporate governance issues here.
It is important to distinguish between the number of listed banks and their market share. In the U.S. there are
hundreds of listed banks. In some European countries, most notably Spain and the UK, there are a relatively
small number of listed banks operating, but their market share exceeds the market share of listed banks in the
U.S. This points to another potential reason for the weaker estimated convergence among European banks: if
these mega-banks are so large that no domestic institutions can acquire them, then the only potential buyers
might be outside the country. If so, the fixed costs involve in turning these banks around will be higher for the
relevant suitors and the pressure to reform may be weaker.
16

16

do tend to see their rents competed down (and the estimate is significant at the 1% level).
This pattern is consistent with the view that competitive forces are operative for these banks
even if there are impediments to a functioning market for corporate control.
The final estimates in the table show the results for unlisted E.U. commercial banks.
The estimate for the underperforming banks is insignificantly different from zero suggesting
that they face no pressure to raise profits. The point estimate for the relatively high profit
banks is negative (i.e. they tend to move away from the equilibrium value) but insignificantly
different from zero, implying that competition pressure is also absent. The failure of underperforming banks to improve is not surprising, but the absence of competitive pressures
among unlisted commercial banks is noteworthy. To explore this further we examined
whether either finding was due to banks in one individual country. This does not appear to be
the case, so we do not report the results; we obtain the same results as shown for the unlisted
European banks when we re-estimate the regressions omitting each country.
[Table 6 about here]
As a final assessment of the unlisted European banks, we re-estimate equation (2)
using the within-country mean ROA for unlisted commercial banks as ROA*. The results are
reported in Table 6. The first column shows that profits do converge to these country-specific
targets profit rates. The estimate for λ is 0.258 and hence is close to the estimate for listed
banks (from Table 3). The next two columns show that both under-performing and high
profit banks also converge, although the estimate for the high profit banks is only marginally
significant. 17
When we repeat this test for listed banks we find no convergence, i.e. the profits of
listed banks in each country do not converge to the average profits of the unlisted banks in
that country.18 Hence, there appears to be incomplete integration between listed banks on the
one hand and unlisted banks on the other. Put differently, we do not find any proxy for target
profitability that governed both the listed and unlisted European banks, even within countries.
The overall picture that emerges is one of limited bank integration throughout Europe
and of incomplete bank integration even within countries in Europe. For the relatively few
banks whose shares are publicly traded, profit rates do tend to move in tandem and converge
17

If we repeat this exercise for the cooperative and savings banks in Europe their ROAs also converge to the
within country mean ROA of cooperative and savings banks. As in the case of the U.S. savings and cooperative
banks, the estimated coefficients for these regressions seem implausibly large.
18
To save space we do not show the results, but the point estimate for λ that is analogous to the specification
shown in the first column of Table 6 is 0.16 with a standard error of 0.345.

17

to the E.U. average rate. But the vast majority of banks are not listed. These banks’ profits
do not tend to move in step with the listed banks and instead tend to converge only to a
country-specific target.
It may be tempting to argue that these results are attributable to the very simple
econometric specification that we have used. That the same specifications deliver a very
different set of results in the U.S. suggests otherwise.19 In the U.S. the listed banks profits
converge to the average level (although at a much faster rate than in Europe). Likewise, the
high profit unlisted banks also see their profits competed away and they converge to the same
profit rate as for listed banks. This suggests to us that there is nothing mechanical about our
procedure that precludes finding integration in a market.
We use ROA as our baseline measure because given differences in taxes alluded to
above, bank leverage ratios could differ, and hence expected returns on equity could differ.20
As a robustness check, however, we also re-estimated the model using return on equity, ROE,
rather than the return on assets, ROA as our profit measure.
Table 7 shows the results for the most noteworthy specifications reported in Tables 5
and 6 with ΔROEt as the dependent variable and ROE* in place of ROA*. As before, we find
convergence for listed banks in both the U.S. and the E.U. and convergence of unlisted banks
to the listed ROE* only in the U.S. Unlisted banks in Europe do not show any convergence
towards the equilibrium ROE. The difference to the results with ROA are mainly in the speed
of adjustment of listed banks in the E.U., which is now of comparable magnitude to that of
listed banks in the U.S. We also confirm the finding that underperforming listed banks adjust
up and high profit listed banks adjust down in the U.S. and the E.U. For unlisted banks, high
profits are competed away in the U.S., but underperforming unlisted banks continue to do so
in the U.S. Neither mechanism seems to be operable for unlisted banks in the E.U. All of this
is consistent with the results for ROA in Tables 5 and 6.

19
We also doubt that the difference in the U.S. and EU results are attributable to other econometric problems.
For instance, we know that the coefficient of the lagged dependent variable in regressions of the form as in
equation (2) is biased. Phillips and Sul (2003) show that the bias that affects the lagged dependent variable can
also lead to bias in the coefficient on other variables in the equation. Unfortunately their results suggest that the
direction of the bias is a complicated function of several factors which make it difficult to determine even the
sign of the bias. We re-estimated equation (2) using the second lag of ΔROA as an instrument for the lagged
dependent variable. This does alter the coefficient on the lagged dependent variable substantially, usually
making it closer to zero, but the patterns of convergence across different groups of banks and across regions
remain robust to this change in estimation procedure.
20
ROA, in contrast, may be affected by the degree to which banks have off-balance sheet operations, while ROE
would not.

18

5.3. The role of the euro
Unfortunately, because we are forced to rely on changes in ROA* to estimate the speed of
convergence, our short sample does allow us to generate meaningful pre- and post-euro
estimates. So quantifying any changes in the state of integration that have been associated
with the introduction of the euro is not possible.21 Nevertheless, the structure of our test
suggests that competition policy and corporate governance reforms will be needed to promote
more banking integration. Obviously the common currency does not directly influence either
of these factors, so any impact of the euro would be through an indirect channel.
Has the euro had an effect on the ease with which banks can enter markets across
countries? At first glance, it is difficult to see how the euro could have had a first order
impact. Regulatory reform during the late 80s and early 90s, and in particular the 2nd Banking
Directive of 1989, permitted (in theory) the establishment of subsidiaries and branches of any
bank residing in the E.U. in any other E.U. country. Legally, it eliminated any impediments
to cross-country banking and cross-country establishments of branches or subsidiaries within
the E.U.
What could explain the lack of cross border contestability in this paper? Entry can
take place through takeovers, the establishment of branches and subsidiaries or the initiation
of direct cross-border operations. As regards to takeovers, Köhler (2009) presents evidence
that impediments seem at least to some extent to relate to nationalist motives. Köhler shows
that opaque merger control procedures significantly reduce the likelihood of foreign
ownership of a bank especially if this bank is large. Opaque procedures permit more
discretion by the supervisor or other government authorities in blocking the acquisition of a
domestic bank by a foreign bank. Prominent recent examples where authorities seem to have
thwarted cross-border transactions include the failed takeovers of Banca Antonveneta and
Banca Nazionale de Lavoro by foreign banks in Italy or the French reluctance to permit
foreign bidders for Societe Generale. 22 Clearly, if national authorities are able to block crossborder mergers, this may also prevent the market for corporate control from operating
efficiently.

21

The descriptive evidence (section 4) shows that mean profit rates of listed banks, and for savings and
cooperative banks converged somewhat across European countries since 2004. We cannot, however, exclude the
possibility that the convergence is due to reasons unrelated to the regime shift in monetary policy.
22
See Köhler (2009) for more details on these and other similar episodes involving different countries in Europe.

19

In terms of direct cross-border retail business, the common currency may have been
helpful. Exchange rate risk has been eliminated and rates and conditions may be easier to
compare across countries. Retail flows remain small (ECB, 2008), however, although there is
a bit of evidence of an increase in cross-border retail activity in the vicinity of some borders
(Fidrmuc and Hainz, 2008). On balance, it seems that there are likely many factors that
impede the contestability of retail banking markets in Europe.23
What about the market for corporate control? We already mentioned national
objectives that may be an obstacle. There is considerable evidence that following the
introduction of the euro money markets have become integrated (ECB, 2008), which should
have equalized the cost of funds across countries. Combined with the elimination of
exchange rate volatility this should facilitate the comparability of rates of returns of banks in
different countries. The under- or over-performance of a bank, therefore, can be more easily
compared and evaluated. In addition deeper equity and bond markets permit easier financing
of large scale transactions (ECB, 2008). Hence, the euro may have improved the corporate
governance of listed banks in the euro area. Martynova and Renneboog (2006) find that nonfinancial cross-border corporate takeovers did increase in the euro area more strongly than
domestic takeovers since 1998. Ekkayokkaya et al. (2007) present results are consistent with
increased cross-border competition among bidders for banks in the post-euro era. This is
consistent with the rates of ROA convergence among E.U. listed banks that we found.
The effect of increasing profit convergence on financial stability is ambiguous ex
ante. The usual trade-off between greater diversification of banks’ portfolios (increasing
financial stability) and the fact that the similarity of the portfolios may increase overall
systemic risk seems to apply (Wagner, 2009). The integration among listed banks in the E.U.
which is suggested by our metric is consistent with the evidence in Gropp et al. (2009), who
present evidence that cross border contagion within Europe may have increased among large
listed banks.
However, unlisted commercial banks, savings and cooperative banks constitute about
50% of total assets of the banking systems of the major European countries studied here and
the retail market share may be even larger. The governance of these banks is not subject to
the same mechanisms as the governance of listed banks. The evidence shows that they
neither respond to competitive pressures as much as listed commercial banks, nor do these
banks face pressure to remedy underperformance through a threat of takeover. These
23

It is plausible that cultural factors as in Guiso et al. (2004) are important, in particular with respect to retail
banking services. We are not aware of systematic evidence on this and other factors affecting cross-border entry
of markets, however.

20

rigidities remain in place, and as far as we can see would be unaffected by the introduction of
the common currency.24

6. Conclusion
This paper argues that tests conducted in the previous literature for retail banking integration
in the euro area may be misleading. The tests are neither necessary nor sufficient conditions
for integration and tend to ignore efficiency and equilibrium concepts. We propose an
alternative that tries to address these shortcomings and we argue that the convergence of the
return on assets of banks may be a superior measure of banking integration in at least two
dimensions. One, the return is an equilibrium concept in the sense that it reflects both price
and quantity effects, as well as demand and supply aspects. Second, the test we propose also
comes with natural diagnostics that help us interpret what might be responsible for a lack of
integration.
Estimates from a partial adjustment model suggest that banking markets in the U.S.
and Europe are very different. In the U.S. listed and unlisted banks profits converge towards
the same target level of profitability. For both types of banks, if profitability is above average
it tends to be pushed back towards ROA*. For unlisted U.S. banks, there is no evidence that
underperforming banks are pushed towards an improvement in their performance by a threat
of a takeover. Hence, for unlisted commercial banks integration fails even in the U.S. due to
poor corporate control.
In Europe, only the listed banks appear to be governed by a common ROA*. For
unlisted banks, we observed substantial differences across European countries in the mean
profitability (Chart 4) and we find no evidence that unlisted commercial banks converge to a
common equilibrium value. Perhaps somewhat surprisingly we find evidence not only for
impediments to a properly operating market for corporate control but also evidence for
impediments to competition. For unlisted commercial banks in Europe, rents do not tend to
get competed away. This suggests not only impediments to integration across borders among
unlisted commercial banks in Europe but also lack of integration within individual countries
between listed banks and unlisted banks.
Our approach also highlights the importance to shift attention to mechanisms that
permit an effective functioning of the market for corporate control and bank entry in a cross-

24

Hartmann et al. (2006) show that the high share of these banks may have had an adverse effect on growth in
the euro area, evidence which is consistent with the evidence presented in this paper.

21

border dimension. The paper shows that the large market share of unlisted, savings and
cooperative banks may be an important impediment to banking integration in Europe. Our
estimates also suggest focusing more attention on understanding the differences between
listed and unlisted banks, and more specifically seeking to understand why the two groups are
so much more different in the Europe than in the U.S.

22

References
Adam, Klaus, Jappelli,Tulio Menchini, Annamaria, Padula, Mario and Marco Pagano, 2002,
Analyse, compare and apply alternative indicators and monitoring methodologies to
measure the evolution of capital market integration in the EU, Economic Studies on the
Internal Market, European Commission, Brussels.
Affinito, Massimiliano and Fabio Farabullini, 2009, “An empirical analysis of national
differences in the retail bank interest rates of the euro area”, International Journal of
Central Banking, forthcoming.
Baele, Lieven, Ferrando,Annlise, Hördahl,Peter, Krylova, Elizaveta and Cyril Monnet, 2004,
“Measuring financial integration in the euro area”, ECB Occasional Paper No 14.
Berk, Jonathan and Peter DeMarzo, 2007, Corporate Finance, Addison Wesley, Boston.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Eduardo Engel, 2004, “Adjustment is much slower than you think”,
mimeo, MIT and Yale University.
Cabral, Ines, Dierck, Frank and Jukka Vesala, 2002, “Banking Integration in the Euro Area”,
Occasional Paper No 6, European Central Bank, Frankfurt.
Cochrane, John H., 2001, Asset Pricing, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Critchfield, Tim, Davis,Tyler, Davison, Lee, Gratton, Heather, Hanc, George, and Katherine
Samolyk, 2004, ”Community Banks: Their Recent Past, Current Performance, and Future
Prospects”, FDIC Banking Review, 16(3), pp. 1-56.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Harry Huizinga, 1998, “Determinants of commercial bank interest
margins and profitability”, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 1900, March.
DeYoung Robert, 1999, “Bank Mergers, X-Efficiency, and the Market for Corporate
Control”, Managerial Finance, 23 (1), p. 32-47.
Ekkayokkaya, Manapol, Holmes, Phil and Krishna Paudyal, 2008, “The Euro and the
Changing Face of European Banking: Evidence from Mergers and Acquisitions”
European Financial Management, forthcoming.
European Central Bank, 2008, Financial integration in Europe, April.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 2000, “Forecasting Profitability and Earnings”,
Journal of Business, 73(2), pp. 161-175.
Fidrmuc, Jarko and Christa Hainz, 2008, “Integrating with their feet: Cross border lending at
the German-Austrian border” CESifo Working Paper No 2279, April.
Gropp, Reint, Vesala, Jukka and Marco Lo Duca, 2009, “Cross-border Bank contagion in
Europe” International Journal of Central Banking, forthcoming.
Gual, Jordi, 2004, “The integration of EU banking markets” CEPR Working paper No 4212.
23

Guiso, Luigi., Sapienza, Paola and Luigi Zingales, 2004, "Cultural Biases in Economic
Exchange," NBER Working Paper No 11005, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hartmann, Philipp, Ferrando, Annalisa, Fritzer, Friedrich, Heider, Florian, Lauro, Bernadette,
and Marco Lo Duca, 2006, “The Performance of the European Financial System”, mimeo
European Central Bank, August.
Hughes, Joseph and Loretta Mester, 2008, “Efficiency in Banking: Theory, Practice, and
Evidence” Oxford Handbook of Banking, forthcoming.
Jones, Kenneth D. and Tim Critchfield, 2005, “Consolidation in the U.S. Banking Industry: Is
the “Long, Strange Trip” About to End?”, FDIC Banking Review, 17(4), pp. 31-61.
Köhler, Matthias, 2007, “M&A control as barrier to EU Banking market integration” mimeo,
Centre for European Economic Research (ZEW), August.
Köhler, Matthias, 2009, “Transparency of Regulation and Cross-Border Bank Mergers”,
International Journal of Central Banking, forthcoming.
Martynova, Marina and Luc Renneboog, 2006, “Mergers and Acquisitions in Europe” Tilburg
University Finance Working Paper No 114/2006, January.
Mintz, Jack, 2006, “The 2006 Tax Competitiveness Report: A Proposal for Pro-Growth Tax
Reform,” C.D. Howe Institute, www.cdhowe.org/pdf/commentary_239.pdf.
Nickell, Stephen, 1981, Biases in dynamic models with fixed effects, Econometrica 49, pp.
1417-1426.
Perez, Daniel., Salas-Fumas, Vincente, and Jesus Saurina, 2005, “Banking Integration in
Europe” Bank of Spain Working Papers No 0519.
Phillips, Peter and Donggyu Sul, 2003, “Bias in Dynamic Panle Estimation with Fixed
Effects, Incidental Trends and Cross Section Dependence” Cowles Foundation Discussion
Paper No. 1438, September.
Salop, Steven and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1982, “The Theory of Sales: A Simple Model of
Equilibrium Price Dispersion with Identical Agents,” American Economic Review, 72(5),
pp. 1121-1130.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, 1988, “Value Maximisation and the Acquisition
Process” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2(1), pp. 7-20.
Stigler, George J., 1963, Capital and Rates of Return in Manufacturing Industries, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Varian, Hal, 1985, "Price discrimination and social welfare," American Economic Review, 75
(4), pp. 870-875.
Wagner, Wolf, 2009, “Efficient Asset Allocations in the Banking Sector and Financial
Regulation” International Journal of Central Banking, forthcoming.
24

Chart 1. Standard view of financial integration

Price

S3
S2
S1

P1
P2
P3

D

Q1

Q2

Q3

Quantity

Chart 2. Alternative view of financial integration

Price

S

P1
P2
P3
D3
D2
D1
Q1

Q2

Q3

Quantity

25

Chart 3

Chart 4

27

Chart 4 continued

28

Table 1. Sample country composition
Country

Number of Banks

Percent

17,013

46.61

764

2.09

France (FR)

2,720

7.45

United Kingdom (UK)

1,378

3.78

Italy (IT)

2,686

7.36

United States (U.S.)

11,940

32.71

All

36,501

100.00

Germany (DE)
Spain (ES)

Table 2. Sample bank type composition
Bank Type

Number of Banks

Percent

15,645

42.9

9,271

25.4

Cooperative Bank

11,585

31.7

Total

36,501

100.00

Commercial Bank 1/
Savings Bank

Bank type determined based on Bankscope variable ”Specialisation (General)”.
1/ Includes banks classified by Bankscope as Bank Holding companies, medium and
long-term credit banks, and mortgage banks.

29

Table 3. Descriptive Statistics

Return on assets
Change in return on assets
Return on equity
Change in return on equity

Mean

Median

0.0062
0.00003
0.084
-0.0005

0.0045
0
0.072
-0.0006

Standard
Deviation
0.0058
0.0027
0.059
0.049

Kurtosis

Num. Obs.

6.89
8.12
4.19
21.18

36,501
36,501
36,501
36,501

Return on assets is Pre-Tax Profits (Bankscope variable I28) divided by Total Assets (Bankscope variable A61).
Return on equity is Pre-Tax Profits (Bankscope variable I28) divided by Total Equity (Bankscope variable L42).

Table 4. ROA convergence
OLS estimates of equation (2) in the text. Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the bank level in parentheses. Sample is taken from Bankscope as described in the text. The
dependent variable is ΔROAt of bank i. ΔROAt-1 is the dependent variable lagged by one period. ΔROA* represents the first difference of the mean of ROA of the regional subsample for different groups of banks as indicated in the table. ***, **, * indicates significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively. Bank types (Listed, unlisted commercial
banks, savings banks and cooperative banks) are classified using Bankscope variable Specialisation (General).

Proxy for ROA*
Region
ΔROA*
ΔROAt-1
Constant
R2
N
Number of banks

Overall listed
mean
All countries
0.533***
(0.075)
-0.245***
(0.019)

Listed banks
Overall listed
U.S. listed
mean
mean
All countries
U.S.
without U.S.
-0.14
0.849***
(0.166)
(0.102)
-0.245***
-0.242***
(0.049)
(0.196)

E.U. listed
mean
E.U.

Unlisted commercial banks
U.S. listed
E.U. listed mean
mean
U.S.
E.U.

Savings banks and Coops
U.S. listed
E.U. listed mean
mean
U.S.
E.U.

0.326**
(0.134)
-0.241***
(0.048)

0.431***
(0.101)
-0.189***
(0.2)

-0.014
(0.082)
-0.158***
(0.022)

1.147***
(0.136)
-0.15***
(0.026)

-0.064**
(0.030)
-0.304***
(0.011)

0.00004
(0.00003)

0.0004***
(0.00006)

0.00009***
(0.00003)

0.0003***
(0.00007)

0.0001***
(0.00004)

0.00006
(0.00005)

0.00006
(0.00006)

0.000
(0.00001)

0.0706
5362
699

0.0658
1198
164

0.0813
4166
535

0.0697
1199
164

0.0404
5377
666

0.0246
5237
721

0.0544
2397
287

0.0848
18125
2184

30

Table 5. Mean Reversion for Relatively High and Low Profit Banks
OLS estimates of equation (2) in the text. Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the bank level in parentheses. Sample is taken from Bankscope as described in the text. The
dependent variable is ΔROAt of bank i. ΔROAt-1 is the dependent variable lagged by one period. ΔROA* represents the first difference of the mean of ROA of the regional subsample for different groups of banks as indicated in the table. Adjustment from below” and “Adjustment from above” refers to sample splits according to whether ROA of bank i
was below or above the respective sample mean ROA* during period t. ***, **, * indicates significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively. Bank types (listed or unlisted
commercial ) are classified using Bankscope variable Specialisation (General).
Proxy for ROA*
Region
ΔROA*
ΔROAt-1
Constant
R2
N
Number of banks

U.S. listed
mean
U.S.
Adjustment
from below
0.922***
(0.144)
-0.254***
(0.028)

Listed banks
U.S. listed
E.U. listed
mean
mean
U.S.
E.U.
Adjustment
Adjustment
from above
from below
0.656***
0.317*
(0.129)
(0.169)
-0.151***
-0.274***
(0.034)
(0.067)

E.U. listed
mean
E.U.
Adjustment
from above
0.273
(0.207)
-0.165**
(0.067)

U.S. listed
mean
U.S.
Adjustment
from below
0.16
(0.145)
-0.197***
(0.028)

Unlisted commercial banks
U.S. listed
E.U. listed
mean
mean
U.S.
E.U.
Adjustment
Adjustment
from above
from below
0.45***
0.101
(0.133)
(0.083)
-0.115***
-0.113***
(0.029)
(0.030)

E.U. listed
mean
E.U.
Adjustment
from above
-0.244
(0.158)
-0.146***
(0.030)

0.0005***
(0.00006)

-0.0004***
(0.00005)

0.0006***
(0.0001)

-0.00005
(0.0001)

0.0007***
(0.00006)

-0.0004***
(0.00006)

0.0005***
(0.00006)

-0.0005***
(0.00009)

0.0901
2026
440

0.0368
2140
403

0.0842
629
127

0.0352
570
108

0.0437
2486
525

0.0166
2891
536

0.0127
3164
591

0.0224
2073
502

31

Table 6. Country-Specific Mean Reversion for unlisted European commercial banks
OLS estimates of equation (2) in the text. Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the bank level in parentheses. Sample is taken from Bankscope as described in the text. The
dependent variable is ΔROAt of bank i. ΔROAt-1 is the dependent variable lagged by one period. ΔROA* represents the first difference of the mean of ROA of the regional subsample for different groups of banks as indicated in the table. ΔROA* represents the first difference of the country-specific mean of ROA for unlisted banks as indicated in the table.
“Adjustment from below” and “Adjustment from above” in columns 3 and 4 refers to sample splits according to whether ROA of bank i was below or above the respective sample
mean ROA* during period t. ***, **, * indicates significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively. Unlisted commercial banks are identified using Bankscope variable ”listed
institution” and “Specialisation (General)”
.
Proxy for ROA*

Unlisted commercial banks
CountryCountryCountryspecific
specific
specific
unlisted mean unlisted mean unlisted mean

Region

E.U.

ΔROA*
ΔROAt-1
Constant
R2
N
Number of banks

0.258***
(0.077)
-0.156***
(0.022)

E.U.
Adjustment
from above
0.281*
(0.154)
-0.140***
(0.03)

E.U.
Adjustment
from below
0.184**
(0.081)
-0.117***
(0.031)

0.000
(0.000)
0.027
5237
721

-0.0006***
(0.00008)
0.0217
2001
494

0.0004***
(0.00005)
0.016
3236
603

32

Table 7. Robustness: Return on Equity
OLS estimates of a modified version of equation (2) in the text; the dependent variable is ΔROEt of bank i. ΔROEt-1 is the dependent variable lagged by one period. ΔROE*
represents the first difference of the mean of ROE of the regional sub-sample for different groups of banks as indicated in the table. Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the
bank level in parentheses. Sample is taken from Bankscope as described in the text. ***, **, * indicates significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively. Bank types (Listed,
unlisted commercial banks,) are classified using Bankscope variable Specialisation (General).

Listed banks

Unlisted commercial
banks
U.S. listed E.U. listed
mean
mean

U.S. listed
mean

U.S. listed
mean

Unlisted commercial
banks
U.S. listed U.S. listed
mean
mean

0.090
(0.096)
-0.389***
(0.025)

U.S.
Adjustment
from below
0.663***
(0.126)
-0.408***
(0.063)

U.S.
Adjustment
from above
0.706***
(0.122)
-0.215***
(0.063)

U.S.
Adjustment
from below
-0.097
(0.170)
-0.317***
(0.046)

U.S.
Adjustment
from above
0.534***
(0.163)
-0.188***
(0.037)

E.U.
Adjustment
from below
0.659***
(0.221)
-0.330***
(0.065)

E.U.
Adjustment
from above
0.655**
(0.260)
-0.414***
(0.092)

E.U.
Adjustment
from below
0.047
(0.097)
-0.331***
(0.034)

E.U.
Adjustment
from above
-0.026
(0.210)
-0.306***
(0.045)

-0.0006
(0.0005)

0.001
(0.0007)

0.005
(0.0008)

-0.006***
(0.0007)

0.010***
(0.001)

-0.01***
(0.001)

0.015***
(0.002)

-0.014***
(0.003)

0.01***
(0.001)

-0.024***
(0.002)

0.09
5377
666

0.12
5237
721

0.15
2013
445

0.06
2153
410

0.09
2357
512

0.03
3020
555

0.12
706
139

0.15
493
113

0.09
3677
663

0.07
1560
440

Proxy
for
ROE*
Region

U.S. listed
mean

E.U. listed
mean

U.S.

E.U.

U.S.

E.U.

ΔROE*

0.775***
(0.099)
-0.357***
(0.049)

0.815***
(0.174)
-0.423***
(0.045)

0.353***
(0.127)
-0.304***
(0.029)

Constant

0.0005
(0.0004)

0.002
(0.001)

R2
N
Number
of banks

0.13
4166
535

0.17
1199
164

ΔROEt-1

Listed banks

Listed banks
E.U. listed
mean

E.U. listed
mean

Unlisted commercial
banks
E.U. listed E.U. listed
mean
mean

33

