NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CREDIT CRISIS:
CONJECTURES ABOUT CAUSES AND REMEDIES
Douglas W. Diamond
Raghuram Rajan
Working Paper 14739
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14739

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2009

Diamond and Rajan acknowledge support from the Center for Research on Securities Prices at the
University of Chicago’s Booth School of Business. Rajan also acknowledges support from the Initiative
on Global Markets and the Stigler Center at the Booth School. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Credit Crisis: Conjectures about Causes and Remedies
Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 14739
February 2009
JEL No. E52,F33,G21
ABSTRACT
What caused the financial crisis that is sweeping across the world? What keeps asset prices and lending
depressed? What can be done to remedy matters? While it is too early to arrive at definite answers
to these questions, it is certainly time to offer informed conjectures, and these are the focus of this
paper.

Douglas W. Diamond
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
d-diamond@uchicago.edu
Raghuram Rajan
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
rajan@chicagogsb.edu

The Credit Crisis: Conjectures about Causes and Remedies
Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram G. Rajan
Abstract
What caused the financial crisis that is sweeping across the world? What keeps asset prices
and lending depressed? What can be done to remedy matters? While it is too early to arrive at
definite answers to these questions, it is certainly time to offer informed conjectures, and these
are the focus of this paper.
Introduction
What caused the financial crisis that is sweeping across the world? What keeps asset prices
and lending depressed? What can be done to remedy matters? While it is too early to arrive at
definite answers to these questions, it is certainly time to offer informed conjectures, and these
will be the focus of our paper.
There is some consensus on the proximate causes of the crisis: (i) the U.S. financial sector
misallocated resources to real estate, financed through the issuance of exotic new financial



University of Chicago Booth School of Business, 5807 S. Woodlawn Ave., Chicago, IL 60637.

Douglas W. Diamond, Merton H. Miller Distinguished Service Professor of Finance.
Raghuram G. Rajan, Eric J. Gleacher Distinguished Service Professor of Finance.
douglas.diamond@chicagogsb.edu, raghuram.rajan@chicagogsb.edu. We acknowledge support
from the Center for Research on Securities Prices at the University of Chicago’s Booth School of
Business. Rajan also acknowledges support from the Initiative on Global Markets and the
Stigler Center at the Booth School.

1

instruments; (ii) a significant portion of these instruments found their way, directly or indirectly,
into commercial and investment bank balance sheets; (iii) these investments were largely
financed with short-term debt. Let us first dig deeper into the more fundamental reasons for
these proximate causes.
I. Misallocation of Investment
This is a crisis born in some ways from previous financial crises. A wave of crises swept
through the emerging markets in the late 1990’s: East Asian economies collapsed, Russia
defaulted, and Argentina, Brazil, and Turkey faced severe stress. In response to these crises,
emerging markets became far more circumspect about borrowing from abroad. Their
corporations, governments, and households cut back on investment and reduced consumption.
From net absorbers of financial capital from the rest of the world, a number of these countries
became net exporters of financial capital.
Clearly, the net financial savings generated in one part of the world have to be absorbed by
deficits elsewhere. Industrial country corporations initially absorbed these savings by expanding
investment, especially in information technology, but investment was cut back sharply following
the collapse of the IT bubble.
Extremely accommodative monetary policy by the world’s central banks, led by the Federal
Reserve, ensured the world did not suffer a deep recession. The low interest rates in a number of
countries ignited demand for housing. House prices started rising as did housing investment.
The United States was not by any means the highest in terms of price growth. Housing
prices reached higher values relative to rent or incomes in Ireland, Spain, the Netherlands, the
United Kingdom, and New Zealand, for example. Then, why did the crisis first manifest itself in

2

the United States? Probably because the U.S. went further on financial innovation, thus drawing
more marginal-credit-quality buyers into the market!
A home mortgage loan is very hard for an international investor to hold directly because it
requires servicing, is of uncertain credit quality, and has a higher propensity to default than an
arm’s-length conservative investor feels comfortable with. Securitization dealt with some of
these concerns. If the mortgage was packaged together with mortgages from other areas,
diversification would reduce the risk. Furthermore, the riskiest claims against the package could
be sold to those who had the capacity to evaluate them and an appetite for bearing the risk, while
the safest AAA-rated portions could be held by international investors. Indeed, because of the
demand from international investors for AAA paper, securitization became focused on squeezing
out the most AAA paper from an underlying package of mortgages (see Efraim Benmelech and
Jennifer Dlugosz, 2008); the lower quality securities issued against the initial package of
mortgages were packaged together with similar securities from other packages, and a new range
of securities, including a large quantity rated AAA, issued by this “Collateralized Debt
Obligation.”
The “originate-to-securitize” process had unintended consequences. Because rating agencies
were at a distance from the homeowner, they could process only hard information such as the
credit score of the homeowner and the loan-to-value ratio, and per force had to ignore the
detailed soft information that loan officers collected in assessing borrower creditworthiness (see
Uday Rajan, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, 2008). In turn, this meant originators stopped
collecting this useful information, and focused instead only on ensuring borrowers had good
credit scores and observable low loan-to-value ratios. Of course, originators could not
completely ignore the true quality of borrowers since they would be responsible for initial
3

defaults, but because house prices were rising steadily over this period, even this source of
discipline weakened; the house price rise would give the homeowner the “equity” with which he
could finance loan repayment.
Moreover, the slicing and dicing through repeated securitization of the original package of
mortgages created very complicated securities. The problems in valuing these securities were
not obvious when house prices were rising and defaults were few. But as the house prices
stopped rising and defaults started increasing, the valuation of these securities became very
complicated.
II. Why Did Banks Hold These Instruments?
Given that originators would have understood the deterioration of the underlying quality of
mortgages, it is surprising that they held on to so many of the mortgage-backed securities (MBS)
in their own portfolios. These were not just the low-rated equity portions that would have
signaled their faith in the packages, but also the high-rated tranches that found a ready market
around the world.
The amounts of MBS held seemed too high to be purely inventory. Some holdings could
have been portions of the package they could not sell, but then this would not explain why banks
held on to AAA-rated securities, which seemed to be the most highly demanded of mortgage
backed securities. The real answer seems to be that bankers thought these securities were
worthwhile investments, despite their risk.1 Investment in MBS seemed to be part of a culture of

1

As the crisis developed, some banks bought AAA-rated tranches and sold lower quality

securities as a partially hedged bet on the further deterioration of the housing market. This came
back to haunt them as the AAA-rated portion deteriorated more than the low-rated securities.
4

excessive risk taking that had overtaken banks (see Raghuram G. Rajan, 2005; and Anil K.
Kashyap, Raghuram G. Rajan, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2008).
A key factor contributing to this culture is that, over short periods of time, it is very hard,
especially in the case of new products, to tell whether a financial manager is generating true
excess returns adjusting for risk, or whether the current returns are simply compensation for a
risk that has not yet shown itself but that will eventually materialize. Consider the following
specific manifestations of the problem.
A. Incentives at the Top
The performance of CEOs is evaluated based in part on the earnings they generate relative to
their peers. To the extent that some leading banks can generate legitimately high returns, this
puts pressure on other banks to keep up. Follower-bank bosses may end up taking excessive
risks in order to boost various observable measures of performance. Indeed, even if managers
recognize that this type of strategy is not truly value-creating, a desire to pump up their stock
prices and their personal reputations may nevertheless make it the most attractive option for
them. There is anecdotal evidence of such pressure on top management.2
B. Flawed Internal Compensation and Control

2

Perhaps most famously, Citigroup Chairman, Chuck Prince, describing why his bank continued

financing buyouts despite mounting risks, said: “When the music stops, in terms of liquidity,
things will be complicated. But, as long as the music is playing, you’ve got to get up and dance.
We’re still dancing.” Financial Times, July 9, 2007.

5

Even if top management wants to maximize long-term bank value, it may find it difficult to
create incentives and control systems that steer subordinates in this direction. Given the
competition for talent, traders have to be paid generously based on performance. But, many of
the compensation schemes paid for short term risk-adjusted performance. This gave traders an
incentive to take risks that were not recognized by the system, so they could generate income
that appeared to stem from their superior abilities, even though it was in fact only a market-risk
premium. The classic case of such behavior is to write insurance on infrequent events such as
defaults, taking on what is termed “tail” risk. If a trader is allowed to boost her bonus by treating
the entire insurance premium as income, instead of setting aside a significant fraction as a
reserve for an eventual payout, she will have an excessive incentive to engage in this sort of
trade. Indeed, traders who bought AAA MBS were essentially getting the additional spread on
these instruments relative to corporate AAA securities (the spread being the insurance premium)
while ignoring the additional default risk entailed in these untested securities.
This is not to say that risk managers in a bank are unaware of such incentives. However,
they may be unable to fully control them, because tail risks are by their nature rare, and therefore
hard to quantify with precision before they occur. While they could try and impose crude limits
on the activities of the traders taking maximum risk, these traders are likely to have been very
profitable (before the risk actually is realized), and such actions are unlikely to sit well with a top
management that is being pressured for profits.
III. Short-Term Debt
Given the complexity of bank risk-taking, and the potential breakdown in internal control
processes, investors would have demanded a very high premium for financing the bank long
term. By contrast, they would have been far more willing to hold short-term claims on the bank,
6

since that would give them the option to exit -- or get a higher premium -- if the bank appeared to
be getting into trouble. So, investors would have demanded lower premia for holding short-term
secured debt in light of potential agency problems at banks (as shown in Douglas W. Diamond
and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2001).
From the banker’s perspective, a certain sense of confidence that any troubles were far away
(which is what made them take on tail risk), would have made financing with short-term debt
claims much more attractive to the banks than issuing long-term claims. Clearly, banks should
have been worried about the possibility that they could become illiquid and incapable of rolling
over financing. Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2008, show formally that the
incentive of levered institutions to become more illiquid increases with expectations that future
interest rates would be low. With global savings pouring in, and with the Federal Reserve
emphasizing its willingness to pump in liquidity and cut interest rates dramatically in case of a
sharp downturn (the so-called “Greenspan Put”), it is not surprising that banks were willing to
take illiquidity risk.3
The more general point is that in good times, short-term debt seems relatively cheap
compared to long-term capital and the costs of illiquidity remote. Markets seem to favor a bank
capital structure that is heavy on short-term leverage. In bad times, though, the costs of

3This is why Diamond and Rajan, 2008, argue that regulators may want to raise interest rates

more than strictly necessitated by current economic conditions in good times, so as to offset the
incentive for banks to take on illiquidity when they know it will cut rates sharply in bad times.
7

illiquidity seem to be more salient, while risk-averse (and burnt) bankers are unlikely to take on
excessive risk. The markets then encourage a capital structure that is heavy on capital.4
IV. The Crisis Unfolds
Given the proximate causes of high bank holdings of mortgage-backed securities (as well as
other risky loans, such as those to private equity), financed with a capital structure heavy on
short-term debt, the crisis had a certain degree of inevitability. As house prices stopped rising,
and indeed started falling, mortgage defaults started increasing. MBS fell in value, became more
difficult to price, and their prices became more volatile. They became hard to borrow against,
even short term. Banks became illiquid, the canonical example being Bear Sterns, which was
taken over by JP Morgan in March of 2008.
The Federal Reserve opened new facilities that allowed banks to borrow against illiquid
positions. But as more banks tried to sell out of their positions, prices plummeted further, and
concerns about illiquidity turned to potential insolvency -- despite being able to borrow against
the full value of their illiquid assets -- there was now not enough asset value to offset the
liabilities. Bank runs started, with the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers the trigger for a
worldwide panic. Interbank lending froze up, with banks resuming lending to one another
overnight only after a variety of interventions by central banks and finance ministries, including

4

This suggests a difficulty with countercyclical regulatory capital requirements. They are

inconsistent with the “market capital requirement,” prompting banks to escape stricter regulatory
norms in good times through regulatory arbitrage, while providing little relief in bad times as
banks are held to the higher market norms.

8

guarantees of bank debt and bank recapitalizations. But, even well-capitalized banks still seem
unwilling to lend.
V. The Credit Crunch
As we write this, only overnight credit seems to be available, except for the most
unimpeachable credit risks. Why are banks so reluctant to lend? One possibility is that they
worry about borrower credit risk, though worries need to be extreme to justify the complete
cessation of term lending. A second is that they may worry about having enough liquidity of
their own, if their creditors demand funds. Yet, the many Federal Reserve facilities that have
been opened should assuage these concerns.
Perhaps, however, it is not just the fear of being short of funds to meet creditor demands that
drives the reluctance to lend, but the fear of being short of funds if investment opportunities get
even better. Take, for example, the possibility that a large indebted financial institution becomes
distressed in the future and starts dumping assets in the market. Not only will the price of those
assets fall if there are only a few entities with the liquid funds to buy them, the absorption of
market liquidity by the distressed institution (see Diamond and Rajan, 2005) will ensure that it
will be very hard for any institution that does not already have liquid funds to borrow at that
time. If they expect that banks with liquidity could make a killing in the future (by buying
financial assets or banks at fire sale prices), banks will restrict their lending to very short
maturities and not lock up liquidity in term loans. The point is that it need not be “own” distress
that prevents a bank from lending, expectations of aggregate liquidity shortages that may cause
other distressed entities to sell in a future fire sale can be enough.
This may also explain why markets for some assets have dried up completely. Some
distressed banks clearly possess large quantities of mortgage backed securities (which is why
9

they are distressed). They have some hope that the prices of these securities will rise in the
future, saving them from failure. They will be reluctant to sell those assets today. At the same
time, potential buyers feel they could get better prices down the line. While there is a price today
that reflects those expectations, it is not a price that the distressed banks want to sell at.
VI. Dealing with the Crunch
Banks still fear threats, as well as see opportunities, from future episodes of illiquidity.
Illiquid assets still compose significant portions of bank balance sheets, as well as non-bank
balance sheets. To the extent that they could be unloaded on the market if other institutions have
financing difficulties or become insolvent, price volatility is still a concern. For some, low prices
would render them insolvent. And for others, low prices would be a tremendous buying
opportunity. A resumption of lending will necessitate reducing both fears and potential
opportunities. Note that in this view, central bank intervention to lend against all manner of
collateral may not be an unmitigated blessing because it may have allowed weak entities to
continue holding illiquid assets, serving as an overhang on the market.
There are three possible ways the overhang can be reduced. First, the authorities can offer to
buy illiquid assets through auctions and house them in a federal entity, much as was envisaged in
the original Troubled Asset Relief Program. This can reverse a freeze in the market caused by
distressed entities that are unwilling to sell at prevailing market prices for the reasons described
above. The fact that the government is willing to buy in the future (and now) should raise prices
today because it reduces the possibility of low prices in a future fire sale. Moreover, once
sufficient distressed entities sell their assets, prices will rise simply because there is no longer a

10

potential overhang of future distressed fire sales. Both effects can lead to increased trade in
illiquid assets today, and unlock lending.5
A second approach is for the government to ensure the stability of significant parts of the
financial system that holds illiquid assets through the recapitalization of entities that have a
realistic possibility of survival, and the merger or closure of those that do not. For those entities
that are closed down, this will mean moving illiquid assets into a holding entity that will dispose
them off slowly over time. One issue here is that in order to be successful in avoiding future fire
sales, the authorities might decide that they also have to intervene in institutions in the
unregulated “shadow” financial system. Not only will this create political difficulties if these
interventions provide subsidies (the public appetite for a bailout of hedge funds is rightly small),
interventions without subsidies could result in legal difficulties as the authorities are sued by any
claimholder who argues he is made worse off by the intervention.
The third approach is some mix of the first two, where the authorities buy illiquid assets,
even while cleaning up the regulated financial sector, focusing particularly on resolving entities
that are likely to become distressed. Note that this differs substantially from the current
approach where well-capitalized entities are given even more capital; while the current approach
certainly prevents them from unloading illiquid assets on the market, it does not deal with the

5

A non-issue in our view is the oft-quoted point that recapitalization allows the government more

bang for the government buck than buying assets directly because banks can lever up against the
government equity infusion. If the government wants to limit the amount of dollars devoted to
asset purchases, it can create an entity that buys assets after leveraging an initial government
equity infusion with additional funds borrowed from the market.
11

overhang of illiquid assets that more distressed entities hold. Unless those entities fail or are
forcibly taken over, those illiquid assets are not going to make their way on to the balance sheets
of well-capitalized banks, allowing the overhang of illiquid assets to persist, and forcing lending
to be subdued until the distressed entities actually fail.
We have offered some conjectures on the causes of the crisis and suggested some potential
remedies to the current credit crunch. Time will certainly offer more data allowing us to sharpen
these views.

12

References
Benmelech, Efraim, and Jennifer Dlugosz. 2008. “The Alchemy of CDOs’ Credit Ratings.”
Unpublished.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram G. Rajan. 2001. “Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation
and Financial Fragility: A Theory of Banking.” Journal of Political Economy, 109(2): 287-327.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram G. Rajan. 2005. “Liquidity Shortages and Banking
Crises.” Journal of Finance, 60(2): 615-647.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram G. Rajan. 2008. “Illiquidity and Interest Rate Policy.”
Unpublished.
Kashyap, Anil K., Raghuram G. Rajan, and Jeremy C. Stein. 2008. “Rethinking Capital
Regulation.” Paper presented at the Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY.
Rajan, Raghuram G. 2005. “Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier.” Paper
presented at The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY.
Rajan, Uday, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig. 2008. “The Failure of Models that Predict Failure:
Distance, Incentives, and Defaults.” Unpublished.

13

