                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGES AND EMPLOYMENT OF OLDER MANUFACTURING
           WORKERS IN EARLY TWENTIETH CENTURY AMERICA

                                               Chulhee Lee

                                          Working Paper 14746
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w14746


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2009




I thank Dora Costa, Alexander Field, and the participants in the ASSA Meetings, Hosei Institute of
Aging Workshop, NBER Cohort Studies Meeting, and SNU-Tokyo University Joint Conference for
their helpful comments and suggestions, and J. Kwon, S. Lee, Y. Kim, and D. Oh for their research
assistance. This study is supported by the National Institute of Aging, the National Institutes of Health(PO1
AG10120).The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Chulhee Lee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Technological Changes and Employment of Older Manufacturing Workers in Early Twentieth
Century America
Chulhee Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 14746
February 2009
JEL No. J26,J64,J81,N31

                                              ABSTRACT

This study explores how technological, organizational, and managerial changes affected the labor-market
status of older male manufacturing workers in early twentieth century America. Industrial characteristics
that were favorably related to the labor-market status of older industrial workers include: higher labor
productivity, less capital- and material-intensive production, a shorter workday, lower intensity of
work, greater job flexibility, and more formalized employment relationship. Technical innovations
that improved productivity often negatively affected the quality of the work environment of older workers.
These results suggest that the technological transformations in the Industrial Era brought mixed consequences
to the labor-market status of older workers. On one hand, technical and organizational modifications
improved the elderly workers’ employment prospect by raising labor productivity, diminishing hours
of work, and formalizing employment relations. On the other hand, some types of technical innovations,
which are characterized by additional requirements for physical strength, mental agility, and ability
to acquire new skills, forced older workers out of their jobs. Since the pace and nature of technical
change considerably differed across industries, and possibly across firms within the same industry,
the labor-market experiences of individual older workers should have been highly heterogeneous.


Chulhee Lee
Department of Economics
Seoul National University
Kwanak-ro 599, Kwanak-gu
Seoul 151-742, S. KOREA
chullee@snu.ac.kr
                                          1. Introduction


         A sharp decline in the labor market activity of the elderly male population is
regarded as one of the most significant labor market changes in America in the past century.
In 1880, nearly four out of five men aged 65 and older were gainfully employed in the
United States (Moen 1987, Costa 1998). Today, less than 20% participate in the labor force.
Many economists have attributed the decline to the factors that influence labor supply
decisions of older persons. 2 In particular, the implementation and expansion of social
insurance programs such as the Social Security has been regarded as the major cause of the
long-term decline in the labor force participation rate (LFPR, hereafter) among older men.3
In current literature on this issue, however, it is often neglected that nearly half of the decline
in the economic activity of older men since 1880 happened before the Social Security Act
was passed. As will be surveyed below in detail, it is not entirely clear what made the elderly
male workers leave the labor force earlier than before, even prior to the rise of the welfare
state.
         According to contemporary accounts, the features of the workplace such as
production technology, managerial practices, work organization, employment relations, and
labor market conditions played more important roles in determining the timing of retirement
in the past than they do today. For instance, it was widely believed that the increased speed
and intensity of work forced elderly workers out of labor market either by diminishing their
relative productivity or by making their employment more costly (Squier 1912, Epstein 1928,
Graebner 1980). Some claimed that the decline in job flexibility, often resulting from
changes in work organization and workplace management, made it difficult for elderly
employees to make gradual adjustments in response to the influences of aging. As
2
  Notable exceptions are studies by Hurd (1996) and Hurd and McGarry (1993) who suggested that a
job’s flexibility and financial aspects were important determinants of retirement decisions.
3
  It has been suggested that the Old Age Assistance (OAA) was the main underlying force behind the
sharp decline in the LFPR of older men during the 1930s (Gratton 1988, Parsons 1991). Many have
attributed the decline in the LFPR of older males from the 1960s to the increase in real Social
Security benefits (Boskin 1977, Parsons 1980, Hurd and Boskin 1984). Recent comparative studies
have concluded that measures of work disincentives arising from old-age pension programs were
strongly related to the size of labor-market activity of older males around the world (Gruber and Wise
1999, 2004). Although there is considerable disagreement in the literature as to the magnitude and
direction of the effect of Social Security on labor supply (Krueger and Meyer 2002), it would be hard
to deny that Social Security still remains probably the single most important explanation for the long-
term decline in the LFPR of older males in the United States.

                                                  2
technological advances made formal education and on-the-job training more crucial for
improving productivity, employers increasingly hesitated to hire older workers probably
because their skill sets have rapidly become obsolete and training them would pay off little.
Some of the adverse impacts of industrial changes on the labor-market status of older
workers could have been mediated by deteriorating health.
        The purpose of this article is to study how changes in technology and managerial
practices affected the employment of older manufacturing workers in the early twentieth
century United States. More specifically, the article investigates how the probabilities of
long-term unemployment in 1910 and retirement between 1900 and 1910 were related to the
different features of the industry in which the older worker was employed, such as industry-
specific labor-market conditions, size of establishment, labor productivity, input mix, hours
of work, use of electric power, and employment structure. For this purpose, the Integrated
Public Use Micro Samples (IPUMS) of the 1910 census and a longitudinal sample of Union
Army veterans that have been linked to industry-level data compiled from the 1899 and 1909
manufacturing census reports were utilized.
        This article suggests that the incidence of long-term unemployment among older
males considerably differed across industries. Industrial characteristics that were related to
more favorable labor-market status of older industrial workers include: higher labor
productivity, less capital- and material-intensive production, a shorter workday, lower
intensity of work, greater job flexibility, and more formalized employment relationship.
Technical innovations that improved productivity often affected the quality of work
environment of older workers. Based on the results, it is argued that the technological
transformations in the Industrial Era brought mixed consequences to the labor-market status
of older workers, and that the labor-market experiences of individual older workers were
highly heterogeneous.
        The study may add new quantitative evidence to the literature regarding the labor-
market status of older workers and the nature of retirement in the past. Relatively, there are
abundant micro-level studies pertaining to long-term unemployment and retirement of older
male workers in the early twentieth century (Margo 1993, Moen 1994, Carter and Sutch
1996, Costa 1998, Lee 1998b, 1999, 2002, 2005). However, this study is distinct from
previous works because it examines the roles played by industrial features, together with
personal characteristics. This paper may also help understand why the LFPR of older men

                                              3
declined prior to the Social Security era. Though not directly addressed in the present paper,
the study could offer implications on the issue of how the on-going technological changes,
such as the advances in IT technology (Friedberg 2001) and shifts in the corporate structure
and work organization will change the labor-market activity of older workers.


                             2. Industrialization and Old Labor


        The United States experienced rapid maturing and deepening of industrialization
from the late nineteenth to early twentieth century. This period is often referred to as the
Industrial Era. As a consequence, the proportion of the labor force employed in agriculture
greatly shrank during the period. It is well documented how the change in the industrial
structure affected the employment of older Americans during the period. It has been widely
acknowledged in both contemporary and historical studies that self-employed jobs, farming
in particular, were more favorable for the employment of older workers than wage jobs
because of their greater flexibility. The self-employed can remain in the workforce until old
age by adjusting their work efforts in accordance with changing health, preference, and
economic need. This is similar to the condition in the early twentieth century.4
          This reasoning led early studies on the older labor force to a conclusion that the
decline of agriculture had brought a decline in the labor market involvement of older men
(Durand 1948, Long 1958, Bancroft 1958). Recent quantitative evidence has confirmed that
sectoral shifts that occurred between 1880 and 1940 substantially decreased the overall
LFPR of older males in the United States. Lee (2002) has estimated that the decrease in the
labor force employed in farming accounted for nearly a quarter of the decline in the LFPR of
men aged 60 and older between 1880 and 1940. Lee (2005) has suggested that
industrialization was responsible for growth of the sectors which brought about the strong
pressure on old age employment.
        Although there is still much to be learned, evidence from previous studies offers

4
  Quinn, Burkhauser, and Myers (1990) found that the majority of older self-employed workforce
either reduced their work hours on the career job or became part-time workers, while wage or salary
workers mainly left the labor force. In the early twentieth century United States, self-employed
farmers were much less likely to retire than non-farm wage earners (Lee 2002). It has been reported
that gradual retirement was a possible option for self-employed farmers because they were able to
reduce the hours and intensity of their work by adjusting acreage and crop-mix or by adopting
mechanization (Pedersen 1950).

                                                4
some idea about how the labor-market status of older workers varied across different
occupations and by how much the shifts in industrial structure decreased the LFPR of older
males. However, the reasons that produced the observed differences in the labor-market
experiences of older workers across different sectors are not well understood. More
significantly, very little is known about what caused the within-sector decline in the labor-
market activity, which was more important than the impact of sectoral shift in explaining the
decrease in the LFPR of older men. In particular, it is crucial to understand what happened
within the non-agricultural sector because the rise in the probability of retirement in this
sector accounted for a larger proportion of the overall decline in the LFPR of older males
between 1880 and 1940 (Lee 2002).
        The rise in retirement incomes is a possible explanation for the decline in the
economic activity of older men within each sector. Costa (1998) has reported that 90% of the
decline in the LFPR of older males between 1900 and 1930 could be attributed to secularly
rising incomes. Carter and Sutch (1996) have suggested that many men in early twentieth
century America planned their retirement based on wealth accumulation. In support of this
view, Gratton (1996) has offered that earnings of elderly workers substantially increased
between 1890 and 1950 both in absolute and relative values in comparison with the earnings
of younger employees.
        The rise in incomes perhaps played a significant role in diminishing the average age
of retirement. In particular, wealthier individuals in the past may have voluntarily left their
jobs in order to enjoy leisure as many ordinary people do today. However, it is likely that
retirement in the past was more forced than it is today; and retirement decisions in the pre-
Social Security era were perhaps influenced more strongly by demand-side factors. A study
of longitudinal data of Union Army veterans has suggested that long-term unemployment of
older male workers in 1900 greatly reduced their chances of remaining in the labor force by
1910 (Lee 1998b). Another study from the same source has shown that men who had better
occupations in terms of economic and work conditions in 1900 were less likely to retire by
1910 than were those with poorer jobs, suggesting that retirement in the past was perhaps
more forced than voluntary (Lee 2005). Analyses of the early cost of living surveys and
censuses have indicated that older non-participants in the labor market were much poorer
than active workers of a similar age, and that the support of children was no longer an
important means of old-age security by the early twentieth century (Lee 2004).

                                              5
         Another possible explanation for the rise in retirement of the non-agricultural
population is technological change. Of course, this is not necessarily inconsistent with the
income hypothesis introduced above. Over the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries,
the U.S. economy went through the so-called ‘Second Industrial Revolution,’ characterized
by growth of large modern firms, emergence of new products, power sources, technologies,
and huge transformation of the industrial structure (Chandler 1977, 1990). It was during this
period that scientific knowledge began to be systematically applied to industrial technology,
mass production methods spread, and knowledge of scientific management was adopted in
workplaces. The technological changes of that era were arguably the most critical in all of
modern times in terms of the magnitude of the long-run impact on productivity and human
well-being—even more important than the ‘First Industrial Revolution’ or the ‘Information
Technology Revolution’ in the recent decades (Gordon 2000).
         Contemporary observers believed that elderly workers were reduced to “industrial
scrap heap,” victimized by the consequences of technological changes. According to these
accounts, elderly industrial workers were subject to a greater probability of job loss and
forced retirement due to unfavorable work conditions, such as less flexibility and greater
intensity of work (Squier 1912, Epstein 1928). A well-known anecdote is the exodus of the
elderly operatives from the printing industry upon the adoption of a faster machine
(Graebner 1980). It has also been suggested that industrialization brought greater
disadvantages in employment associated with aging, such as more serious age discrimination
and greater importance of job-specific skills that inhibited the hiring and training of older
workers (Slichter 1917, Haber 1983).5
         A case study of the American shoe industry has described how the mechanization of
production diminished the flexibility of the work and the advantages of experienced workers
as follows:
    The machine ended worker control over their time; factory discipline involved far
    more than fixed hours for starting and stopping the workday and taking meals. The
    flow of work through the factory was tightly scheduled, and each step was a

5
  There are abundant anecdotes about the doomed fate of older workers outside the manufacturing
sector. Greabner (1980) has noted that between 1900 and 1930 older salesmen were pushed out of
their jobs, being criticized for their inability to adopt the method of modern corporation or to adapt to
a changing economic and technological environment (pp. 45-46). It is well documented that it was
difficult for aged railroad operatives in transportation to continue to work because of the great hazard
and increased intensity of their job (Squier 1912, 109).

                                                   6
      carefully regulated part of the whole production process. Workers had to be at their
      machine performing their tasks and no longer controlled the pace of flow of work.
      …. The fragmentation of tasks and their mechanization greatly reduced the length of
      time it took to train a worker……This separation was so complete that even an
      experienced machine operative was unproductive if put on another machine until he
      had gone through the same training period as a new hand.6

                                    3. Conceptual Framework


           The probabilities of long-term unemployment and non-participation in the labor
market at older age are employed in this study as measures of the labor market status of
elderly workers in the early twentieth century. The rationale for using these measures will be
discussed below. The study demonstrates how these measures of labor market status are
affected by changes in the broadly-defined technology including various industry-specific
characteristics of production technology, work organization, managerial practices, and so on.
These measures are denoted as T.               According to the standard search model of
unemployment, the length of job search of an unemployed man would depend on the relative
size of his reservation wage (denoted WR) and the market wage offered to him (W). The
market wage W is assumed to be determined by the worker’s human capital (represented by
a vector of personal characteristics, denoted X), the average labor productivity of the
industry (denoted A) that is a function of T [A(T)], and          labor- and product-markets
conditions of the industry in which the worker is employed (Z). Market wage offered in a
particular industry can then be given as:


                              (1)   W = W [ X , Z , A(T )]


           The study offers three hypotheses. First, an older worker’s reservation wage (WR) is
determined by his or her economic status such as demand for and provision of non-labor
incomes, represented by personal characteristics (X) and the quality of matching between the
job and the worker (θ). Second, the quality of matching is determined by the discrepancy
between the amounts of work effort such as hours and intensity of work required by the
worker’s job (denoted by E ) and the desirable amount of work efforts that the worker would

6
    Mulligan, Jr. (1981), p. 63.

                                                  7
choose under a situation where there are no restrictions (denoted by E i ). Third, the former

( E ) is determined by technology (T) and industry-specific labor-market condition (Z), and
that the latter ( E i ) is determined by the preference and productivity of the worker, captured

by X. Under these assumptions, the reservation wage of the older worker can be written as:


                          (2)       WR = WR [ X ,θ ( X , T , Z )]


This specification of the reservation wage is based on contemporary claims that it became
increasingly costly for older workers to keep working as the speed and intensity of work
increased beyond their physical and mental capacities owing to technological changes.
        The probability of long-term unemployment (denoted PU) depends on the difference
between WR and W, as represented by the following equation:


                 (3)       PU = PU [WR { X ,θ ( X , T , Z )} − W { X , Z , A(T )}]


In this model, a variation in T would affect PU through two different pathways, namely, by
altering the quality of the matching between the job and the work (θ) and by changing the
size of labor productivity of the industry (A), as represented by the following equation:


                           ∂PU  ∂P ∂WR ∂θ ∂PU ∂W ∂A
                 (4)           = U       −
                           ∂T   ∂WR ∂θ ∂T ∂W ∂A ∂T


These two effects will be referred to as “the matching effect” and “the productivity effect,”
respectively. The matching effect in this model captures how technical innovations in
production or organization affect an older worker’s labor-market status by transforming his
work environment and, as a consequence, changing the quality of the matching between the
worker’s characteristics (such as capacity and preferences) and the requirements of his job
(length, intensity, and flexibility of work).
        The purpose of offering this model is simply to illustrate that technical change could
affect the employment of older workers through various pathways other than productivity


                                                    8
change, and that the directions of these effects could be different. Therefore, the matching
effect might be interpreted more broadly than as specified above, even with different names.
This effect might capture how a newly-adopted technology alters the productive efficiency
of older workers relative to that of the younger ones, whereas the productivity effect shows
how it changes overall productivity of the industry. In this model, a decline in employment
of older workers produced by a change in relative productivity would be identified as the
matching effect.
         Suppose the measures of T are included in a reduced-form regression model, such as
the equation given below:


                           (5)       PU = α 1 + β 1 X + γ 1 Z + λ1T + ε 1


Then, the result of a regression based on equation (5) will provide an estimate of the
coefficient for T in which the two terms in equation (4) are mixed. If a change in technology
increased labor productivity, but diminished the quality of matching, the estimated total
effect of T on PU should be smaller than its partial effect on PU through changing θ, because
the two countervailing effects cancel out.
         The empirical strategy employed by the study is to focus on the effect of
technological change on the quality of matching by employing the following regression
model.


                   (6)     PU = α 2 + β 2 X + γ 2 Z + κ 2 A + λ 2T + ε 2


Since a measure of industry-specific labor productivity (A) is included in the regression, the
coefficient for T ( γ 2 ) will only represent the matching effect, holding any change in
productivity caused by the change in T constant. The productivity effect can be estimated by
subtracting the matching effect from the total effects ( γ 1 − γ 2 ).
         The above model of unemployment can be applied to a study on retirement with
very little modifications. Similar to the case of a job search, individuals would compare the
value of retirement (that is determined by non-labor incomes and the quality of matching)
and the market wage offered to them. Thus, this study will virtually use the same

                                                   9
specification and method in analyzing both the probabilities of long-term unemployment and
retirement.


                                              4. Data


         To study how technical change affected the labor-market activity of older workers, it
would be desirable to use firm-level data that contain information on both the technological
characteristics and employment status of workers employed in each firm. Unfortunately, no
such data are currently available for the period this study is looking into. This data limitation
is circumvented by matching micro samples of population censuses (which provide
information on labor-market status of individuals) with published manufacturing census
reports (which offer average statistics on various technological and managerial
characteristics of each industry), as will be explained below. Of course, it is not completely
satisfactory to rely on industry-level analyses, ignoring differences across firms within each
industry. However, if industries are classified into reasonably narrow categories, as in this
study, the between-industry variations in technological characteristics are likely to capture a
large fraction of the overall variations.


4.1. Published Manufacturing Censuses of 1899 and 1909
         Measures of industry-specific technological characteristics have been constructed
from the published manufacturing census reports of 1899 and 1909. These volumes provide
various average statistics for each manufacturing industry. 7 The method of classifying
industries, and the contents and definitions of statistics differ between census years. The
entire manufacturing sector is classified into 350 industries in the 1899 manufacturing
census report, and into 260 industries in the 1909 report.
         To connect these original industry-level data sets to micro samples of population
censuses, the industries in the manufacturing censuses have been reclassified according to
the industry coding schemes of the 1950 population census.8 The 1950 census classifies

7
  These statistics include the number of establishments, percentage of a particular type of ownership
(e.g. shares of corporations and partnerships), number of employees by age, sex, and type of work,
size of capital investments, value of products, amount of expenses on each type of input, amount of
energy used by source, amount of wages paid out, and prevailing hours of work, among others.
8
  The classification of each specific industry was determined based on the full list of industries and

                                                 10
industries more broadly than the published manufacturing census reports.9 Accordingly,
multiple industries in the manufacturing censuses have been combined into a single category
and classified as the same industry in the 1950 population census. These methods of industry
reclassifications for the 1909 manufacturing census are reported in Table A-1 of the
Appendix.10
         In merging multiple manufacturing-census industries into a broader category, the
sum (in the case of the total amount or number) or the weighted average (in the case of the
mean or percentage) of each variable has been computed and assigned to the industrial
category. In these computations, the number of wage earners employed in each industry was
used as its weight, because the major purpose of this study is to examine the labor-market
experiences of workers. As a consequence of this merging process, the original 260-industry
dataset, compiled from the 1909 manufacturing census, was transformed into a new dataset
composed of 56 more broadly classified manufacturing industries. Similarly, the original
350-industry dataset, drawn from the 1899 manufacturing census, was reshaped into a
dataset containing 60 industries.


4.2. IPUMS of the 1910 Census
        To study how the technological characteristics of a particular industry affected the
probability of long-term unemployment of the workers employed in the industry, the
industry variables drawn from the published 1909 manufacturing census have been linked to
the IPUMS of the 1910 census (Ruggles and Sobek 1998). The 1910 census was the first to
report information on both industry and the length of unemployment of individuals. The
empirical analyses were based on a sample of 4,549 male manufacturing workers aged 45
and older. Where the industry variables were utilized, the sample was further restricted to
those who were employed in the 56 manufacturing industries covered by the matched dataset.




their codes as reported in the 1950 population census (U.S. Bureau of the Census 1950).
9
   In the 1909 manufacturing census, for example, “clothing, horse,” “clothing, men’s buttonholes,”
“clothing, men’s, including shirts,” “clothing, women’s,” and “corsets” are all separate industries,
whereas the 1950 population census classifies all these industries into a single category, namely,
“apparel and accessories.”
10
    The methods of industry reclassifications for the 1899 manufacturing census, not reported in this
paper, can be obtained from the author upon request.

                                                 11
4.3. Longitudinal Sample of Union Army Veterans
        A longitudinal sample is needed for studying the probability of retirement. For this
purpose, a sample of white Union Army veterans who had been linked to the 1900 and 1910
censuses, as well as military, pension, and surgeons’ medical records have been matched to
the industry-level datasets explained above. Considering the age distribution of individuals
included in the data (the mean age of the veterans in 1900 was about 58), the Union Army
sample linked to the 1900 and 1910 population censuses should be suitable for examining
retirement patterns.
        In using this sample, a difficulty arose. The 1900 population census did not provide
information on the industry in which a given person was employed. However, occupational
descriptions recorded in the census can be used for the identification of the industry that the
majority of the individuals in the sample was employed in.11 By exploiting this information,
the three-digit 1950 industry codes for 6,699 veterans out of 8,469 men with non-missing
occupational titles was determined. Of these veterans, 793 men (12% of the sample) were
employed in a manufacturing industry. This sample was further restricted to men who were
linked to the 1910 census and who were gainfully employed in 1900.


        5. Industrial Differences in Long-Term Unemployment of Older Workers


        The long duration of unemployment has been cited as one of the major indicatives of
the fragile labor market status of older workers in the early twentieth century. Previous
studies have suggested that though older workers were less likely to be unemployed than
younger workers, they had greater difficulty locating new jobs once laid off (Slichter 1919,
Keyssar 1986, Margo 1993).12 Deteriorating physical strength and health, obsolete skills and
knowledge, and lack of formal education as compared with their younger cohorts are some
of the potential factors that may have limited employment opportunities for elderly workers.
In addition, formal or informal discrimination against elderly workers made it difficult for

11
   To take some examples, there are occupational titles such as “paper manufacturers,” “works and
cigar maker,” “brakeman for railroad company,” “hat factory,” “in boot factory,” and “works for boot
factory,” from which an industrial classification can be inferred.
12
   Unemployment around the turn of the twentieth century was predominantly involuntary for both
young and old workers. According to the surveys conducted in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
century, the primary cause of lost times was lay-offs, followed by sickness and accidents (Lauck and
Sydenstricker 1917, Lee 2005).

                                                12
them to find new jobs.13
         Long-term unemployment, often defined as being unemployed for six months or
longer during a given year, has also been acknowledged as a major reason for leaving the
labor force in the early twentieth century. Margo (1993) has reported that long-term
unemployment among the elderly circa 1900 was an intermediate step toward
nonparticipation. Lee (1998b) has reported that elderly men who were unemployed six
months or more in 1900 were more likely to be out of gainful employment ten years later.
Lee (2005) has suggested that older workers were more likely to leave their job between
1900 and 1910 if initially employed in an occupation in which the relative incidence of long-
term unemployment was higher. In the light of these results, a greater probability of long-
term unemployment among older workers in the early twentieth century may be regarded as
indicative of a greater pressure toward leaving the labor force.
         Table 1 presents the percentage of manufacturing workers in the IPUMS of the 1910
census who were unemployed for 24 weeks or more during the 1910 census year, separately
for prime-age workers (aged 25 to 44) and older employees (aged 45 and older). Men aged
45 and older were classified as “older workers,” on the basis of the contemporary accounts
that many industrial workers in the early twentieth century began to face various
disadvantages in employment associated with aging from their mid-forties. The 1910
population census did not report the weeks of unemployment for a fraction of individuals.
Hence, the full sample was used for the computation, with the assumption that the individuals
                                                                                            14
who did not report the weeks of unemployment were not the long-term unemployed.                  The 56
manufacturing industries were grouped into 17 broader industrial categories for this



13
    Ransom and Sutch (1995) found that the days lost due to illness sharply increased with age after
fifty-five among both farm and industrial workers. With regard to the roles of education and skills,
Gratton (1986) has suggested that clerks in turn-of-the-century Boston were predominantly young
men because younger cohorts had more education and were more likely to be native born and speak
English well without accents. In the early twentieth century, many firms, especially large
corporations, adopted a policy of not hiring anyone over some stated maximum age, the limit being
45 years or sometimes, even lower (Durand 1948, 114-116, Long 1958, 116-171).
14
   According to the result related to the pattern of transition in labor-market status between 1900 and
1910, older men with no related information on the months of unemployment in 1900 were more
similar to persons who did not experience unemployment than to the long-term unemployed (Lee
1996). It is thus likely that the majority of persons with no related information on the weeks of
unemployment were not the long-term unemployed.

                                                  13
computation.15
        The absolute incidence of long-term unemployment for older workers (column 3 of
Table 1) is not a completely appropriate index of disadvantages in the labor market
associated with aging. It is well documented that fluctuations in demand for labor, especially
those resulting from seasonality and industry-specific business cycles, were important causes
of long-term unemployment for both young and old workers during the period under study.
In this respect, it would be sensible to look at a relative measure of long-term unemployment
of the older workers in comparison with prime-age workers in the same industry. 16
Accordingly, the final column of Table 1 offers the ratio of the incidence of long-term
unemployment among males workers aged 45 and older to that among men aged 25 to 44.17
        The result reported in Table 1 shows that the incidence of long-term unemployment
among older manufacturing workers considerably differed across industries even within the
manufacturing sector. The probability of being unemployed for 24 weeks or more in 1910
was particularly high, both absolutely and relatively, among older workers employed in the
textile, lumber and wood working, printing, primary metals, and fabricated metals industries.
In contrast, older workers were much less likely to experience long-term unemployment than
prime-age workers in the apparel, leather, stone, clay, and glass industries.
        Logistic regressions were performed to compare the probability of long-term
unemployment with controlling the personal characteristics of the worker across industries.
This is done to see how much of the observed industrial disparities in the incidence of long-
term unemployment were attributable to the influences of industry-specific employment
conditions rather than the heterogeneity of the labor force across industries. Regressions
were performed for both the full sample and for the sub-sample for whom the weeks of
unemployment was known. Since the results of the regressions based on the two samples
were very similar, subsequent discussions will be based mainly on the results obtained from
the subsample with the complete information on unemployment.
        Age, race, nativity, marital status, household headship, literacy, family size, home

15
   The incidence of long-term unemployment is reported for each of the 56 industries in Table A-2 of
the Appendix.
16
   For the industrial pattern of seasonality in demand for labor, see Lauck and Sydenstricker (1917,
137-152), Kuznets (1933), Lebergott (1964, 168-172), and Engerman and Goldin (1994, 111-116).
17
   Lee (2005) has estimated similar indices for various occupational categories. According to the
result, the relative incidence of long-term unemployment of older workers as compared to the young
in the same occupation was relatively high for craftsmen, operatives, and salesmen.

                                                14
ownership, city size, region, and occupation that have been widely employed in previous
studies as determining factors of retirement decisions were included in the analysis as
variables pertaining to personal characteristics (denoted X in equation 5).18 Variables on
region and the population size of the place were added to consider differences in labor
market conditions by location. The percentage of male workers aged 25 to 44 who were
unemployed for 24 weeks or longer (Young Unemployed) was included as an indicator of
industry-specific labor-market conditions (Z in equation 5). Inclusion of this variable would
allow one to identify the inter-industry differences in labor-market disadvantages associated
with aging, eliminating the effects of variations in seasonality and general labor market
conditions. The apparel industry was chosen as the omitted category because it had the
lowest relative incidence of long-term unemployment.
         The first column of Table 2 presents the result for the probability of unemployment
for 24 weeks or more (denoted by PU, hereafter). The relatively high incidence of long-term
unemployment among older workers employed in several industries remained visible even if
personal characteristics were controlled. In particular, the woodworking and primary metals
industries stood out as having the highest PU for older male workers. Printing and fabricated
metals also showed particularly high PU, although they missed statistical significance by
small margins (p-values are, respectively 0.135 and 0165). The other industries were
statistically not different from the apparel industry, the control group.
         The estimated effects of individual characteristics are summarized as follows. PU
increased with age, as previously reported by Ransom and Sutch (1986) and Margo (1993).
Non-white workers were significantly less likely to be unemployed for 24 weeks or more
than whites. Family size was negatively related to PU. The effects of race and family size
could reflect a lower level of reservation wages of non-whites and men with a large family
arising from their greater economic needs. Dwellers in a city with 500,000 or more residents
were subject to a greater risk of long-term joblessness than individuals who lived in a
smaller place. PU among older men was significantly higher in the Western region than in
other regions. White collar workers were less likely to be unemployed for a prolonged period

18
   Age was included in the regression, implicitly assuming a linear relationship between age and the
probability of long-term unemployment. This specification approximates reasonably well the actual
link between age and long-term unemployment for men aged 45 and older. The study also used
alternative specifications such as dummy variable for each of five-year age intervals and polynomials
of age. The estimated coefficients of other variables were not sensitive to the choice of age variable.

                                                  15
than blue collar workers.
         The industrial differences in the probability of being unemployed for a shorter
period (as offered by the results reported in columns 2 and 3 in Table 2) were much different
from the results for long-term unemployment. The more severe labor-market disadvantages
associated with aging in the four industries cited above were no longer present when short-
term unemployment was concerned. The probability of unemployment for one week or
longer (column 3 of Table 2) was significantly lower in the paper, printing, leather, and
fabricated metals industries than those in other industries. It is notable that there was little
uniformity in the effect of industry on unemployment across the three regressions. In
contrast, the effects of the variables related to personal characteristics were similar across the
three specifications. Perhaps, this is the case wherein the risk of losing a job in the first place
and the likelihood of finding a new job when unemployed were influenced differently by
industrial characteristics.
         The patterns of long-term unemployment among older male workers in the industrial
era may not simply be explained by inter-industry differences in technological progress,
measured by productive efficiency. It is an established fact that the primary and fabricated
metals and printing industries experienced major technological innovations during the late
nineteenth and early twentieth century.19 However, the woodworking industry was not a
forerunner in technical progress by the turn of the twentieth century, although it was one of
the symbols of the American System in the mid nineteenth century.20 Furthermore, the
relative incidence of long-term unemployment among older males was not high in a number
of Chandlerian industries such as food, chemicals (including petroleum and rubber),


19
   In ferrous metals, mass production of steel employing the new Bessemer and open-hearth
processes had been established. In nonferrous metals, the adoption of electrolytic refining radically
transformed the copper industry (Temin 1964, Chandler 1977). In the printing industry, the
introduction of the direct-linecasting machine built by Ottmar Mergenthaler resulted in the
replacement of the older, slower workers between 1895 and 1915 (Graebner 1980, 21-23).
20
   Engineers in the early twentieth century believed that the technical progress of the woodworking
industry was underdeveloped. For example, B. A. Parks wrote in 1921, “The woodworking industry
in one of the oldest industries extant, and yet it has shown the least development and has been
slowest to adopt modern principles of manufacturing of any industry of which the writer has
knowledge” (Hounshell 1985, p. 126). Chandler (1977, p. 248) reiterated this belief by noting, “By
the outbreak of the Civil War, nearly all the machines needed to mass produce wooden products had
been perfected…..The speed and volume of throughput increased steadily but slowly…..Total output
was increased more by adding men and machines than by continuing technological and
organizational innovation.”

                                                 16
machinery (including electric machinery), and transportation equipment in which large
modern corporations in the United States were heavily concentrated in, and which were
regarded as the most capital- and technology-intensive industries of the time.21 Thus, it is
not sensible to relate the different labor-market status of older workers simply to variations
in conventionally-defined technical progress. This calls for looking into a broader range of
industrial characteristics representing work environment as well as productive efficiency,
which will be discussed in the latter part of this article.


               6. Measuring Industry-Specific Technological Characteristics


         Based upon the industrial statistics reported in the 1909 manufacturing census, the
variables that were likely to be related to the employment of older workers were derived. As
a measure of labor productivity (A in equation 5), the log of the value of product per
production worker (Productivity) was employed.22 Three variables, namely, the size of
establishment, choice of input mix, and use of electricity were selected as both indices of
technology and measures of work environment. The size of establishment (Firm Size) was
measured by the log of the value of total product. The expenditure on non-labor inputs, such
as materials and fuels, as percentage of the total costs was employed as the relative
importance of non-labor inputs (Non-labor Input). Firm Size might capture a wide range of
technical and organizational transformations accompanied by the rise of modern large firms
famously documented by Chandler (1977, 1990). Inclusion of Non-labor Input allows one to
consider the influences of capital-using and material-using biases that were present in the
technical progress in the U.S. manufacturing (Cain and Paterson 1981).

21
    In 1917, 122 out of 200 largest industrial enterprises in the United States belonged to these
industries. The primary and fabricated metals accounted for another 42 (Chandler 1990, 21). Also,
meat-packing (included in the food industry in this study), tobacco, and light machinery have been
listed by Chandler (1977) as examples of the industries in which mass-production was first combined
with mass-distribution in response to technological changes that made the existing distribution
system inadequate.
22
     Wherever possible, this study constructed multiple measures for a particular industrial
characteristic. For example, wages per production worker in addition to the value of product per
production worker were considered as an index of productivity. As measures of firm size, the value of
product, the number of employees, the value of capital per establishment, and the percentage of
establishment with values of capitalization of one million dollars or more were considered. The
discussions in the paper focus on the results that were obtained based on the measures most strongly
correlated with the probability of long-term unemployment of older workers.

                                                 17
         It has been believed that electrification greatly transformed the work environment,
as well as the productive efficiency in the U.S. manufacturing in the early twentieth
century. 23 By 1909, electric drive accounted for 25% of total capacity for driving
machinery.24 When electricity was first used for driving machinery in the manufacturing
sector in the 1880s, the major form of driving system was “electric line shaft drive” that
replaced a steam engine with one or more electric motors, leaving the power distribution
system unchanged. During the first two decades of the twentieth century, this rather
primitive system was rapidly replaced by the “group drive” (referring to a system in which a
group of machinery was operated by an electric motor), and then by the “unit drive.”
         On one hand, these changes in power system greatly improved working environment
and flexibility of production, which perhaps favorably affected the employment condition of
older workers. Absence of the belts, pulleys, and shafts, required for overhead power
transmission, led to improvements in illumination, ventilation, and cleanliness.25 The group
or unit drive enhanced the flexibility of production by allowing the operator to conveniently
vary the speed of his or her machine. On the other hand, electrification may have increased
the intensity of work. Adoption of the group or unit drive diminished time lost by making it
possible to shut down only a single or a small number of machinery rather than the entire
factory when a mechanical problem or need for speed change occurred. New technology and
scientific management procedure, often believed to be closely related to electrification of
production (Whaples 1990b), may have intensified the work as well. To take into account
these potential impacts of utilizing electric power, the total horse power driven by electricity
per production worker (Electricity) was included in the analysis.
         In addition, several indirect measures of hours, intensity, and flexibility of work
were employed in the study. First, the percentage of workers employed in an establishment
in which the prevailing hours of work was 60 and over (Hours 60 and Over) was considered.
Lengthy work was perhaps a major factor that prohibited older workers from continuing to
work. A study of micro-census linked to city-level statistics has suggested that older workers


23
   This paragraph is largely based on Devine, Jr. (1983).
24
   During the first decade of the twentieth century, 60 to 70% of the electric motors in manufacturing
plants were powered with electricity generated by the manufacturing establishments themselves.
25
   Devine, Jr. (1983) states: “With unit drive, lights could be provided in places formerly occupied by
belts, pulleys, and shafts. Some new buildings incorporated skylights, thus improving ventilation, as
well as illumination (p. 365).

                                                  18
had a higher labor force participation rate when the work week fell (Whaples 1990a).
         Second, the percentage of female workers (Female) was considered as a proxy
variable of the requirement for physical strength and other types of human capital. Goldin
(1990, 81) has reported that the manufacturing industries circa 1900 were heavily segregated
along the gender lines and that many of the male-intensive industries required substantial
amounts of strength or more trainings. Thus, industries with a larger fraction of female
employees could have been more favorable for the employment of older male workers. This
conjecture seems to be consistent with the fact that Female was positively correlated with
some indexes of lower work requirements and higher flexibility.26 If female workers were
inferior to male workers in the early-twentieth-century manufacturing industries, a higher
proportion of women in an industry might indicate a tighter labor market condition that led
employers to turn to less-preferred job candidates. However, this conjecture was not
supported well by the patterns of correlation between industry variables.27
         Third, the number of superintendents and managers per 100 production worker
(Manager) was included as a proxy variable of work organization and managerial practices.
Until the early twentieth century, the overall operation of work-floor in manufacturing units,
including decisions on employment, wage, and work-organization, was largely controlled by
foremen (Jacoby 1985). According to a Marxist account, companies hired more managers
and superintendents in an effort to curb the power of the so-called “craft control” during the
late nineteenth and early twentieth century (Lazonick 1990). Thus, Manager could have been
related to the development of more formal management of workplaces. Indeed, Manager
was positively correlated with some measures of the stability of employment relationship.28


26
   These correlations have been computed using the industry-level data (including 260 industries)
compiled from the 1909 manufacturing census. The percentage of female workers was negatively
correlated with wages per worker [correlation coefficient, (denoted ρ, hereafter) = -0.571, p-value (p)
< 0.0001), the capital-labor ratio (ρ = -0.241, p < 0.0001), the value of product per worker (ρ = -
0.209, p = 0.0007), and the percentage of workers employed in an establishment in which the
prevailing hours of work was 72 and over (ρ = -0.0625, p = 0.3129). On the other hand, it was
positively correlated with the percentage of child workers (ρ = 0.640, p < 0.0001).
27
   The percentage of female workers was weakly but positively correlated with the long-term
unemployment rate of younger workers (p-value = 0.2567), and uncorrelated with the percentage of
older workers, another type of marginal workers (p-value = 0.5755).
28
   The number of managers per production worker was negatively correlated with the long-term
unemployment rate of older workers (ρ = -0.329, p = 0.0333) and the long-term unemployment rate
of younger workers (ρ = -0.226, p = 0.1307). On the other hand, this index was positively correlated
to the percentage of workers aged 45 and older.

                                                  19
It is likely that the formalization of workplace management began in more advanced and
productive industries. If this was the case, Manager should be positively correlated with
measures of technological and managerial development. Indeed, this was the case. It was
positively and statistically significantly correlated with capital-labor ratio, electric power use
per worker, percentage of expenditure on non-labor inputs, and the value of product per
worker.29
         Finally, the number of clerks per 100 production workers (Clerk) as a measure of
production technology and demand for white-collar workers was considered. It has been
widely acknowledged that technology and skilled labor are complementary in production.
Since white collar workers employed in manufacturing in the early twentieth century were
largely skilled workers, a higher proportion of clerks could be regarded as an index of
technological progress. In fact, Clerk was positively correlated with measures of higher
productivity and more advanced production technology.30 Clerks in the early nineteenth
century were recruited mostly from a pool of younger and more educated persons. Thus,
compared to production workers and older workers who, on the average were less educated,
a larger value of Clerk might indicate lower demand for older workers as well.
         Table 3 presents the sample means of these industry variables computed for each
industry group. The selected measures of work environment were markedly different across
industries, even within the group of sectors in which the extent of technical progress was
arguably comparable. For example, the chemicals/petroleum/rubber and primary metals
industries were among the leading sectors with technical and organizational innovations in
that era (Chandler 1977). This reputation was reflected in the result that shows these two
industrial groups at or near the top of the orders of Firm Size and Productivity with relatively
similar values. However, there were substantial differences between the two industries in
terms of Electricity, Hours 60 and Over, Female, Manager, and Clerk. These suggest that
technical improvements and organizational innovations in the manufacturing industries,

29
   The results for the long-term unemployment rate and for the share of older workers are obtained
by analyzing the industry-level data set (including 56 industries) matched to the 1910 population
census, because information on the age composition of employees and unemployment can be drawn
only from the population census.
30
   It was positively correlated with the capital-labor ratio (ρ = 0.285, p < .0001), electric power use
per worker (ρ = 0.128, p = 0.0389), the percentage of expenditure on non-labor inputs (ρ = 0.226, p =
0.0002), and the average wages (ρ = 0.134, p = 0.0301). These correlations have been computed
using the industry-level data (including 260 industries) collected from the 1909 manufacturing census.

                                                 20
though introduced for the same purpose of improving productivity, considerably differed
across industries in terms of their features and their influences on the work environment of
older workers.


         7. Technology and Employment of Older Workers: Regression Results


7.1. Regression Analyses for Long-Term Unemployment
        Logistic regressions were conducted to examine how the variables pertaining to
industrial characteristics introduced in the preceding section influenced the probability of
long-term unemployment (PU). The same variables on personal characteristics employed in
the previous regressions reported in Table 2 were included in addition to the industry
variables. The results are reported in Table 4. The regression results for individual variables
were remarkably similar to those reported in Table 2
        A few variables pertaining to technological and managerial features exerted
significant effect on PU. Young Unemployed was positively related to PU. Productivity was
negatively associated with PU. On the other hand, Non-labor Input was positively related to
PU, whereas, Firm Size and Electricity had no significant effect. This suggests that although
more efficient production itself was innocuous for elderly workers, more capital- or material-
intensive production technology tended to hurt their labor-market status.
        As iterated above, measures of length, intensity, and flexibility of work turned out to
be significant predictors of long-term unemployment of older workers. Hours 60 and Over
was positively associated with PU, and Female had a negative effect on PU. Clerk also had a
strong positive effect on PU. Lastly, more formal employment relationship was perhaps
beneficial for older workers, as indicated by the strong positive effect of Manager on PU.
        In addition to this baseline regression, similar regressions were performed in which
the probabilities of being unemployed for 16 weeks or more, and one week or more were
used as dependent variables (columns 2 and 3 of Table 4). A comparison of these results
reveals that industry variables had stronger effect on long-term unemployment than on
unemployment for a shorter period. In contrast, occupational differences in the probability of
unemployment were smaller for lengthier joblessness than for short-term unemployment.
This implies that inter-industry differences in technological and managerial characteristics
largely affected the degree of difficulty of finding a new job when unemployed rather than

                                              21
the risk of losing one’s job.31
         The regression results were generally consistent with the inter-industry differences
in the labor-market status of older workers. The particularly higher incidence of long-term
unemployment in several industries (Table 2) is explained reasonably well by the results
reported in Tables 3 and 4. For example, in case of the primary metals industry, the
particularly high value of Hours 60 and Over and low value of Female were perhaps the
major reasons that produced the highest incidence of long-term unemployment.32 Similarly,
the very low values of Productivity and Female, as well as the relatively high value of Hours
60 and Over might at least partially explain the high rate of long-term unemployment among
older males employed in the woodworking and lumber industry. A regression result, not
reported in the paper, offers that the inter-industry differences in long-term unemployment
(presented in Table 2) were no longer present if the variables related to industry-specific
technology and work environment were controlled. This indicates that different industrial
characteristics captured by the variables considered in this analysis could explain a large
fraction of the differences in labor-market status of older males across industries.


7.2. Regression Analyses for Retirement
        Employing a similar regression model presented in equation 5 (replacing PU with PR,
denoting the probability of leaving the labor market between 1900 and 1910), and using a
sample of 316 Union Army veterans who were active manufacturing workers in 1900, the
study investigated how industrial characteristics affected retirement decisions. Some minor
modifications have been made to consider some differences in data. The log value of Union
Army pensions was added to consider the previous results that stated that Union Army
pensions greatly increased the probability of retirement of veterans (Costa 1998, Lee 1998b,
31
   Similar regressions were conducted separately for the sub-samples, namely, relatively older (ages
55 and older) and middle-age (ages 45 to 54) manufacturing workers. The results of the two
regressions, presented in Table A-3 of the Appendix, were generally similar. However, the effects of
industry variables on PU were somewhat larger in magnitude and more significant for older workers
than for middle-aged persons. In particular, the effects of Non-labor Input and Clerk were much
stronger for older men than younger workers. This indicates that technical changes should have
severely hurt the labor-market prospect of older workers than that of younger ones. On the other hand,
PU of a younger worker was strongly influenced by personal characteristics such as age, race, and
family size more than that of an older worker.
32
   Hours 60 and Over was 28.312, as compared to 0.466 in the apparel industry (the control group),
the second highest of all industries following the paper industry (33.744). Female was 2.953 as
compared to 60.134 in the apparel industry, the fourth from the bottom.

                                                 22
2005). Since the amount of Union Army pensions was determined based on health status,
age, and military experiences, this variable might capture the effects of both non-labor
incomes and health. For industry variables, the average of the 1899 and 1909 values were
used, wherever possible, to have a closer measure of work environment that the veterans
were exposed to during the entire decade under study. For Hours 60 and Over, Manager, and
Clerks, which were not available from the 1899 manufacturing census, the 1909 values were
used.33 Separate regressions were conducted for men aged 55 and older to consider the fact
that not many males under age 55 left the labor market for good in the early twentieth
century.34 The results are reported in Table 5.
         In spite of some serious limitations arising from the small and selected sample used
for the analysis, the regression results are at least suggestive. The estimated coefficients for
Hours 60 and Over, Female, and Manager were all significant, and their signs were the same
as those estimated from the regression for long-term unemployment. The parameters for
Non-labor Input and Clerk had the same signs, too, although they were statistically
insignificant. On the other hand, unlike the results for long-term unemployment, PR was
related positively to Firm Size, and negatively to Electricity.
         As noted above, the present results are neither representative nor reliable. Moreover,
it is difficult to determine whether differences between the two regressions are attributed to
employing different measures of labor-market status of older men or to utilizing different
samples. Nevertheless, if accepted as real, this result strengthens the argument that length,
intensity, and flexibility of work were powerful determinants of labor-market status of older
workers. This also suggests that the rise of large corporations had brought about adverse
consequences for the employment of elderly workers. The negative relationship between PR
and Electricity could be explained by the improvements in the working environment allowed
by electrification of the workplace (Devine, Jr. 1983).




33
   It is unlikely that hours of work in manufacturing industries changed much between 1899 and
1909 during which nine hours per day was the standard in many industries (Whaples 1990b).
34
   Other minor changes were as follows: The dummy variable for race was eliminated because the
sample is composed of white veterans. Taking into account the small sample size and its geographic
concentration in the Northeast and Mid West, the dummy variables pertaining to the city size, region,
and occupation were reconstructed in ways to represent broader categories of individuals.

                                                 23
7.3. Productivity Effect versus Matching Effect
        According to the simple model introduced above, each of the industry variables
could have affected the probabilities of long-term unemployment and retirement through two
different pathways, namely, by changing the quality of matching between the job and the
worker (the matching effect) and by changing the size of labor productivity of the industry
(the production effect). Since a measure of labor productivity was included, the estimated
regression coefficients reported above represented only the matching effect.
        To estimate the total effects of the industry variables, regressions were performed
from which Productivity was excluded. The results of these regressions are presented in
Table A-4 of the Appendix. To compare the matching and productivity effects more
conveniently, Table 6 summarizes the results of the two regressions. The differences between
the two were calculated and reported in column 3. According to the model, these differences
represent the productivity effect. It should be emphasized that this analysis did not intend to
accurately decompose the employment effect of technological change. Admittedly, the model
and the measures of technology employed in this analysis were too crude to be able to do so.
However, this exercise might offer some useful hints as to the question of whether higher
productivity generated by technical innovations went hand in hand with improved work
environment for older workers.
        The results show that the signs of the productivity and matching effects were
generally opposite for the industrial variables representing more favorable work environment.
This suggests that technical innovations that increased productivity tended to deteriorate the
quality of matching among older workers. To take some examples, an increase in Non-labor
Input would encourage the employment of older workers by enhancing labor productivity on
one hand, but would push elderly workers out of the labor market on the other hand by
making their work more demanding or by substituting non-labor inputs for labor. A
technological shift represented by an increase in Clerk would bring similar consequences.
Shorter prevailing hours, physically less demanding work, and more formalized workplace
management, represented by Hours 60 or Over, Female, and Managers respectively, would
make work conditions more favorable for older workers although these positive effects were
partially offset by lowered Productivity.
        Another notable regularity observed in Table 6 is the larger magnitude of the
matching effect compared to that of the productivity effect for most of the industry variables.

                                              24
In the case of the regression for retirement in particular, the total effect was largely
dominated by the matching effect, except for Non-labor Input. Likewise, for long-term
unemployment, the size of matching effect was larger in absolute magnitude than that of the
productivity effect, except for Firm Size and Non-labor Input. This result indicates that the
transformation of the work environment was perhaps a more important pathway than change
in productivity since any variation in these industry variables affected the employment of
older workers. Putting it differently, an exogenous change in work environment (such as a
decrease in Hours 60 and Over) would have a much greater positive direct effect on the
employment of older workers than negative indirect effect through reduced productivity.


                              8. Conclusions and Implications


        This study has explored how technological, organizational, and managerial changes
affected the labor-market status of older male manufacturing workers in the early twentieth
century United States. For this purpose, industry-level data have been compiled from the
1899 and 1909 manufacturing censuses and linked to the IPUMS of the 1910 census and a
longitudinal sample of Union Army veterans.
        The incidence of long-term unemployment among older workers relative to that of
prime-age workers, an index of labor-market status of the elderly, was particularly higher in
the primary metals, woodworking, printing, and fabricated metals industries than in other
sectors. The incidence is true when the personal characteristics of the workers employed in
these industries were held constant. Differences in the extent of conventionally defined
technical progress did not explain well the industrial differences in the employment status of
elderly workers.
        It was hypothesized that technological change affected the labor-market status of
older men through two different pathways. These are: changing the quality of matching
between the job and the worker, referred to as the matching effect and changing labor
productivity of the industry or the productivity effect. Based on this model, this study
examined how the probabilities of long-term unemployment and retirement among older
workers were related to industry variables pertaining to the length, intensity, and flexibility
of work, as well as production and managerial efficiency.
        The regression results suggested that industrial characteristics that were favorably

                                              25
related to the labor-market status of older industrial workers were: higher labor productivity,
less capital- or material-intensive production technology, shorter workday, lower intensity of
work, greater job flexibility, and more formalized employment relationship. These industrial
characteristics accounted for the observed inter-industry differences in the incidence of long-
term unemployment. Further analyses showed that the productivity and matching effects
were generally opposite in direction for the majority of industrial variables representing
more favorable work environment. This suggests that the technical innovations that
increased productivity tended to affect negatively the quality of work environment that older
workers were exposed to.
        The U.S. manufacturing industries experienced tremendous transformations in
production technology, work-organization, and managerial practices in the late nineteenth
and early twentieth century. Table 7 offers a partial picture of these changes from 1889 to
1919 by providing selected average statistics of the whole manufacturing sector, many of
which were considered in this study. It is apparent from the result that firms rapidly grew in
size, labor productivity soared, and production became more heavily dependent on materials
and energy especially on electric power. It has been well documented that the prevailing
hours of work decreased during the period, especially after 1909, although the prevalence of
shorter workdays probably came with strengthened intensity of work (Whaples 1990b). In
addition, the number of managers per worker and the number of clerks per worker appear to
have been increasing.35 The proportion of female workers in manufacturing remained stable
over the period under investigation in spite of the gradual rise in the LFPR of females.
        The results of the study suggest that the transformations in the U.S. industry had
probably brought about both favorable and adverse consequences to the labor-market status
of older manufacturing workers. On one hand, technical progress and organizational
modifications may have improved their employment prospect by improving labor
productivity, diminishing hours of work, and formalizing employment relations. On the other
hand, some types of technical innovations that led to a more capital- and material-intensive
production may have forced older workers out of their jobs by augmenting the requirements
for physical strength, mental agility, and ability to acquire new skills. Given that the pace

35
   The data this observation was based on were gathered from 1909 and 1919 only. In the 1899
and 1929 manufacturing censuses, the number of managers and clerks are reported in a combined
category, making it difficult to calculate their numbers separately.

                                              26
and features of technical change differed across industries, and possibly across firms within
the same industry, the experiences of individual older workers were presumably highly
heterogeneous. In some industries, a few elderly workers probably fell to the state of
‘industrial scrap heap,’ as claimed by some contemporary critics. However, such a
pessimistic view of older workers cannot be generalized for the entire manufacturing
industries.
         Further questions remain as to which of the two opposite effects were stronger. This
is related to the issue of whether technological change actually lowered the overall LFPR of
older men within each sector. This is difficult to answer in the light of the evidence offered
by this study. This calls for a deeper knowledge of the labor market, technological change,
and social progress in that era. Such knowledge offers understanding as to how the
environment in workplaces and its relationship to technical progress changed over time. It
should also determine how the relationship between productivity improvement and labor-
market status of elderly workers changed.36 These issues are beyond the scope of the present
study. Therefore, these should be considered as future research agenda.




36
   The cross-sectional evidence as of 1910, provided in this study, suggests that it was positive, but it
is not warranted that it continued to remain that way.

                                                   27
                                           References

Bancroft, G. (1958), The American Labor Force: Its Growth and Changing Composition, New York:
  John Wiley and Sons.
Boskin, M. J. (1977), “Social Security and Retirement Decisions,” Economic Inquiry 15, 1-25.
Cain, Louis, P., and Donald G. Paterson (1981), “Factor Biases and Technical Change in
  Manufacturing: The American System, 1850-1919,” Journal of Economic History 41(2), 341-360.
Carter, Susan, Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael Haines, Alan Olmstead, Richard Sutch, and Gavin
  Wright, eds. (2006), Historical Statistics of the United States, Millennial Edition, Vol. 4.
Carter, S. B., and R. Sutch (1996), “Myth of the Industrial Scrap Heap: A Revisionist View of Turn-
  of-the-Century American Retirement,” Journal of Economic History 56, 5-38.
Chandler, Alfred D. (1977), The Visible Hand. Cambridge, MA: Belknap.
Chandler, Alfred D. (1990), Scale and Scope. Cambridge, MA: Belknap.
Costa, Dora. L. (1998), The Evolution of Retirement, Chicago; University of Chicago Press.
Devine, Jr., Warren (1983). “From Shafts to Wires: Historical Perspective on Electrification,”
  Journal of Economic History 43 (2), 347-372.
Durand, J. D. (1948), The Labor Force in the United States, 1890-1960, New York: Social Science
  Research Council.
Engerman, S., and C. Goldin (1994), “Seasonality in Nineteenth Century Labor Markets,” In T.
  Weiss and D. Schaefer. eds., American Economic Development in Historical Perspective.
  Stanford: Stanford Univ. Press.
Epstein, A. (1928), The Challenge of the Aged, New York: The Vanguard Press.
Friedberg L. (2001), “The Impact of Technological Change on Older Workers: Evidence from Data
  on Computer Use,” NBER Working Paper No. 8297.
Goldin, Claudia (1990), Understanding the Gender Gap, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gordon Robert. J. (2000), “Does the 'New Economy' Measure up to the Great Inventions of the
  Past?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14, 49-74.
Graebner, W. (1980), A History of Retirement: The Meaning and Function of an American Institution.
  New Haven: Yale University Press.
Gratton, B. (1986), Urban Elders. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Gratton, B. (1988), “The New Welfare State: Social Security and Retirement in 1950,” Social
  Science History 12, 171-196.
Gratton, B. (1996), “The Poverty of Impoverishment Theory: The Economic Well-Being of the
  Elderly, 1890-1950,” Journal of Economic History 56, 39-61.
Gruber J. and Wise D. (1999), Social Security and Retirement around the World, Chicago: University
  of Chicago Press.
Gruber J. and Wise D. (2004), Social Security Programs and Retirement around the World: Micro
  Estimation, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Haber, C. (1983), Beyond Sixty-Five: The Dilemma of Old Age in America’s Past. New York:
  Cambridge University Press.
Hounshell, David A. (1984), From the American System to Mass Production, 1800-1932, Baltimore:


                                               28
  Johns Hopkins University Press.
Hurd M. D. (1996), “The Effect of Labor Market Rigidities on the Labor Force Behavior of Older
  Workers,” in Advanced in the Economics of Aging, edited by D Wise, pp 11-59. Chicago: The
  University of Chicago Press.
Hurd, M. D., and Boskin, M. J. (1984), “The Effect of Social Security on Retirement in the Early
  1970s,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 99, 767-90.
Hurd M. D and McGarry K. (1993), “The relationship between Job Characteristics and Retirement,”
  NBER Working Paper No. 4558.
Jacoby, Sanford. (1985), Employing Bureaucracy, New York: Columbia University Press.
Keyssar, A. (1986), Out of Work: The First Century of Unemployment in Massachusetts, New York:
  Cambridge Univ. Press.
Krueger A., and Meyer B. D. (2002), “Labor Supply Effects of Social Insurance,” NBER Working
  Paper No. 9014.
Kuznets, S. (1933), Seasonal Variations in Industry and Trade, New York: National Bureau of
  Economic Research.
Lazonick, William (1990), Competitive Advantage on the Shop Floor, Harvard University Press.
Lebergott, S. (1964), Manpower in Economic Growth: The American Record since 1800, New York:
  McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Lauck, W. J., and R. Sydenstricker (1917), Conditions of Labor in American Industries: A
  Summarization of the Results of Recent Investigations, New York: Funk & Wagnalls Company.
Lee, Chulhee (1996), “Retirement and Wealth Accumulation in the United States, 1850-1990,” Ph.D.
  Dissertation, University of Chicago.
Lee, Chulhee (1998a), “Rise of the Welfare State and Labor Force Participation of Older Males,”
  American Economic Review 88, 222-226.
Lee, Chulhee (1998b), “Long-Term Unemployment and Retirement in Early-Twentieth-Century
  America,” Journal of Economic History 58, 844-856.
Lee, Chulhee (1999), “Farm Value and Retirement of Farm Owners in Early-Twentieth-Century
  America,” Explorations in Economic History 36, 387-408.
Lee, Chulhee (2002), “Sectoral Shift and Labor Force Participation of Older Males in the United
  States, 1880-1940,” Journal of Economic History 62, 512-523.
Lee Chulhee (2004), “Intra-Household Transfers and Old-Age Security in America, 1890-1950,”
  International Economic Journal 18 (1), 79-102.
Lee Chulhee (2005), “Labor Market Status of Older Males in the United States, 1880-1940,” Social
  Science History 29: 77-105.
Long, C. (1958), The Labor Force Under Changing Income and Employment. Princeton: Princeton
  Univ. Press.
Margo, Robert. A. (1993), “The Labor Force Participation of Older Americans in 1900: Further
  Results,” Explorations in Economic History 30, 409-423.
Moen, J. R. (1987), Essays on the Labor Force and Labor Force Participation Rates: The United
  States from 1860 through 1950, Ph.D. Dissertation, The University of Chicago.
Moen, J. R. (1994), “Rural Nonfarm Households: Leaving the Farm and the Retirement of Older


                                              29
   Men, 1860-1980,” Social Science History 18, 55-75.
Mulligan, William, H. (1981), “Mechanization and Work in the American Shoe Industry: Lynn,
   Massachusetts, 1852-1883,” Journal of Economic History 41(1), 59-63.
Parsons, D. O. (1980), “The Decline in Male Labor Force Participation,” Journal of Political
   Economy 51, 657-674.
Parsons, D. O. (1991), “Male Retirement Behavior in the United States, 1930-1950,” Journal of
   Economic History 51, 657-674.
Pedersen, H. (1950), “A Cultural Evaluation of the Family Farm Concept,” Land Economics 26, 52-
   64.
Quinn, Joseph, Richard Burkhauser, and Daniel Meyers (1990), Passing the Torch: The Influence of
   Economic Incentives on Work and Retirement, Kalamazoo, MI: Upjohn Institute.
Ransom, R. L. and R. Sutch (1986), “The Labor of Older Americans: Retirement of Men On and Off
   the Job, 1870-1937,” Journal of Economic History 46, 1-30.
Ransom, R. L. and R. Sutch (1995), “The Impact of Aging on the Employment of Men in American
   Working-Class Communities at the End of the Nineteenth Century,” In Kertzer, D., and P. Laslett,
   eds., Aging in the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Slichter, S. H. (1919), The Turnover of Factory Labor, New York: D. Appleton and Company.
Squier, L. W. (1912), Old Age Dependency in the United States, New York: Macmillan.
Temin, Peter (1964), Iron and Steel in Nineteenth Century America: An Economic Inquiry, MIT.
United Statues Bureau of the Census (1950), 1950 Census of Population Alphabetical Index of
   Occupations and Industries, Washington DC: GPO.
Whaples, Robert (1990a), “The Shortening of the American Work Week: An Economic and
   Historical Analysis of Its Context, Causes, and Consequences,” Journal of Economic History 51(2),
   454-457.
Whaples Robert (1990b), “Winning the Eight-Hour Day, 1909-1919,” Journal of Economic History
   50, 393-406.




                                                30
                                                     Table 1
                             Incidence of Long-term Unemployment by Industry in 1910

                                                       Age 25-44                 Age 45 and Older
                                                                                                        (5)
                  Industry                                       (2)                          (4)
                                                  (1)                            (3)
                                                              Long-term                    Long-term   (4)/(2)
                                                Number                         Number
                                                             Unemployed                   Unemployed
   (20) Food                                        1023          1.08            490          1.63      1.51
   (21) Tobacco                                      231          1.30            131          1.53      1.18
   (22) Textile                                      756          1.72            383          3.66      2.13
   (23) Apparel                                      523          4.59            200          2.50      0.54
   (24) Lumber/Woodworking                          1479          1.56            630          3.49      2.24
   (25) Furniture                                    271          2.58             119         2.52      0.98
   (26) Paper                                        181          1.10              70         1.43      1.30
   (27) Printing                                    1218          2.79            504          3.97      1.42
   (28-30) Chemical/Petroleum/ Rubber                364          1.37            152          1.32      0.96
   (31) Leather                                      479          3.76            260          2.69      0.72
   (32) Stone/ Clay/ Glass                           685          3.21            268          1.87      0.58
   (33) Primary Metals                              1325          5.36            438          8.22      1.53
   (34) Fabricated Metals                            807          2.60            321          4.36      1.68
   (35-36) Machinery                                 824          2.79            391          2.30      0.82
   (37) Transportation Equipments                    773          4.27            297          4.04      0.95
   (38) Instruments                                   56          3.57              32         3.13      0.88
   (39) Miscellaneous/Unclassified                   263          1.90            146          3.42      1.80
   (20-39) All Industries                         10,941          2.82           4666          3.44      1.22
Source: IPUMS of the 1910 Census.
Note: Two-digit Standard Industrial Classification code is given in parentheses.




                                                          31
                                                         Table 2
          Logistic Regressions: Industrial Differences in the Probability of Long-Term Unemployment in 1910
                                   Male Manufacturing Workers Aged 45 and Older

                                                       (1)                      (2)                      (3)
                                                Unemployed for 24        Unemployed for 16        Unemployed for one
                                    Mean          weeks or longer          weeks or longer          week or longer
                                                ∂P/∂x       P-value      ∂P/∂x       P-value      ∂P/∂x      P-value
 Age                                  53.524     0.049       <.0001       0.027       0.0028       0.012      0.0321
 Nonwhite                               0.049   -0.918       0.0158      -0.734       0.0039      -0.307      0.0893
 Foreign                                0.438    0.087       0.6515       0.106       0.4977       0.011      0.9054
 Married                                0.804   -0.065       0.7867      -0.250       0.1430      -0.126      0.2935
 Head of household                      0.819    0.265       0.3757       0.203       0.3735      -0.043      0.7398
 Illiterate                             0.075    0.231       0.5048       0.571       0.0450       0.325      0.0631
 Family size                            4.206   -0.065       0.0915      -0.050       0.0983       0.025      0.1862
 Residence Owned                        0.407   -0.173       0.2985      -0.094       0.4935      -0.150      0.0692
 City size
    Under 2,500                         0.219          NI           NI        NI         NI          NI            NI
    2,500-49,999                        0.305      -0.080       0.7643    -0.285     0.1042      -0.060        0.6087
    50,000-499,999                      0.243       0.504       0.1287    -0.047     0.8179      -0.124        0.3077
    500,000 and over                    0.233       1.298       0.0032     0.597     0.0291       0.299        0.0571
 Region
    Northeast                           0.509          NI           NI        NI         NI          NI            NI
    Midwest                             0.312      -0.191       0.3063    -0.148     0.3284      -0.138        0.1438
    South                               0.126       0.307       0.3766     0.102     0.6918      -0.126        0.3819
    West                                0.053       1.110       0.0296     0.864     0.0265       0.543        0.0215
 Occupation
    White collar I                      0.059      -0.551       0.1327    -0.557     0.0869      -0.739        <.0001
    White collar II                     0.052      -0.687       0.0551    -0.642     0.0510      -0.809        <.0001
    Craftsmen                           0.310          NI           NI        NI         NI          NI            NI
    Operatives                          0.344       0.017       0.9377     0.548     0.0121       0.393        0.0019
    Service                             0.027      -0.224       0.6412     0.097     0.8373      -0.296        0.2475
    Manual labor                        0.208       0.251       0.3421     0.891     0.0009       0.636        <.0001
    Young Unemployed                    2.709       0.109       0.2558     0.108     0.1440       0.088        0.0575
 Industry Dummy
    Food                                0.098       0.328       0.6733    -0.609     0.0551      -0.375        0.1016
    Tobacco                             0.026       0.060       0.9486    -0.104     0.4180       0.258        0.4840
    Textile                             0.084       1.067       0.2300    -0.104     0.7851      -0.261        0.2599
    Apparel                             0.040          NI           NI        NI         NI          NI            NI
    Lumber/Woodworking                  0.091       2.539       0.0374     0.204     0.6557      -0.053        0.8448
    Furniture                           0.028       0.252       0.7714    -0.455     0.2740      -0.342        0.2006
    Paper                               0.017       0.001       0.9997    -0.786     0.1519      -0.567        0.0659
    Printing                            0.109       1.179       0.1350    -0.039     0.9118      -0.362        0.0707
    Chemical/Petroleum                  0.032       0.004       0.9964    -0.639     0.1395      -0.276        0.3533
    Leather                             0.059       0.283       0.6867    -0.524     0.0781      -0.360        0.0819
    Stone/Clay/Glass                    0.060       0.081       0.9076    -0.310     0.3639      -0.036        0.8866
    Primary Metal                       0.104       2.630       0.0128     0.235     0.5237      -0.072        0.7417
    Fabricated Metal                    0.058       1.378       0.1645    -0.168     0.6769      -0.308        0.2000
    Machinery                           0.088       0.366       0.6066    -0.258     0.4518      -0.413        0.0410
    Transportation Equipment            0.069       0.775       0.3095     0.077     0.8339      -0.138        0.5417
    Instrument                          0.007       0.470       0.7354    -0.579     0.4175       0.409        0.4773
    Miscellaneous                       0.032       0.872       0.3690    -0.386     0.3608      -0.349        0.1907
Number of observations                            3769                   3769                  3769
-2 Log L without covariates                       1317.876               1892.056              3888.758
-2 Log L with covariates:                         1205.159               1749.981              3663.520
Likelihood Ratio                                   112.717(p< 0.0001)      142.075(p<0.0001)      225.237(p<0.0001)
Source: IPUMS of the 1910 census linked to the published 1909 manufacturing census.
Note: The dependent variable for each regression is one if the person was unemployed for 24 weeks or longer during the
year prior to the enumeration of the 1910 census, and zero, otherwise. The mean of the dependent variable is 0.042 for (1),
0.069 for (2), and 0.211 for (3). The sample was limited to individuals for whom the number of weeks unemployed was
reported. Statistically significant variables are given in bold numbers.

                                                           32
                                                                           Table 3
                                                 Sample Means of Industrial Characteristics by Industry Group


                                                                                Non-labor                       Hours 60
             Industry                     N       Firm Size    Productivity                    Electricity                   Female       Manager        Clerk
                                                                                  Input                         and Over

(20) Food                                     485        11.654         9.039         92.141            0.975       22.390       11.214       3.036       13.385
(21) Tobacco                                  131        10.103         7.747         81.049            0.067        0.419       48.218       1.300        4.966
(22) Textile                                  361        12.618         7.530         77.765            0.514        8.566       43.728       0.770        1.984
(23) Apparel                                  200        11.233         7.734         78.671            0.124        0.466       60.148       1.085        8.041
(24) Lumber/Woodworking                       435        10.207         7.396         69.760            0.201       10.451        2.818       1.681        3.072
(25) Furniture                                119        11.047         7.549         71.923            0.393        0.196        4.330       1.765        6.237
(26) Paper                                     70        12.415         8.002         81.938            1.479       33.744       18.731       1.605        4.893
(27) Printing                                 504         9.995         7.874         72.941            0.880        0.269       22.399       3.005       20.619
(28-30) Chemical/Petroleum/Rubber             151        12.365         8.666         90.432            1.176       15.061       10.687       2.665       13.730
(31) Leather                                  260        12.057         7.973         82.040            0.311        0.155       25.120       1.509        6.385
(32) Stone/ Clay/Glass                        268        10.408         7.278         58.623            1.011       11.473        2.420       1.965        3.985
(33) Primary Metals                           438        13.534         8.188         81.374            2.287       28.312        2.953       1.478        6.573
(34) Fabricated Metals                        265        11.643         8.092         79.424            0.672       13.361        7.036       1.986       10.056
(35-36) Machinery                             391        11.642         7.767         73.135            1.136        0.799        5.324       2.159       10.337
(37) Transportation Equipments                297        11.528         7.528         65.581            0.725        5.798        0.542       1.645        5.297
(38) Instruments                               28        12.229         7.258         61.792            0.279        0.970       45.034       1.021        4.428
(39) Miscellaneous/Unclassified               146        11.067         7.729         75.124            0.327        4.578       24.689       1.565        8.297
(20-39) All Industries                      4549         11.470         7.908         76.648            0.835        9.942       16.041       1.932        8.700
Source: IPUMS of the 1910 census linked to industry-level data compiled from the published report of the 1909 manufacturing census.
Note: See text for definition of variable. N denotes the number of men aged 45 and older included in the IPUMS of the 1910 census who were employed in the
given manufacturing industry.
                                                         Table 4
           Logistic Regressions: Industrial Characteristics and the Probability of Long-Term Unemployment
                                   Male Manufacturing Workers Aged 45 and Older

                                                    (1)                     (2)                      (3)
                                              Unemployed for 24       Unemployed for 16       Unemployed for one
                                  Mean         weeks or longer         weeks or longer          week or longer
                                              ∂P/∂x      P-value      ∂P/∂x      P-value      ∂P/∂x      P-value
Individual Variables
 Age                              53.524       0.050       <.0001        0.026       0.0032        0.012      0.0429
 Nonwhite                          0.049      -0.979       0.0153       -0.739       0.0034       -0.296      0.1031
 Foreign                           0.438       0.114       0.5595        0.134       0.3957        0.007      0.9418
 Married                           0.804      -0.106       0.6495       -0.241       0.1215       -0.131      0.2726
 Head of household                 0.819       0.301       0.3195        0.223       0.3296       -0.031      0.8112
 Illiterate                        0.075       0.259       0.4600        0.638       0.0283        0.345      0.0495
 Family size                       4.206      -0.061       0.1132       -0.045       0.1320        0.025      0.1777
 Residence Owned                   0.407      -0.168       0.3115       -0.090       0.5132       -0.142      0.0865
 City size
      Under 2,500                  0.219          NI            NI          NI           NI           NI          NI
      2,500-49,999                 0.305      -0.101       0.6990       -0.297       0.0848       -0.071      0.5425
      50,000-499,999               0.243       0.490       0.1365       -0.053       0.0739       -0.118      0.3342
      500,000 and over             0.233       1.248       0.0040        0.585       0.0305        0.346      0.0301
 Region
      Northeast                    0.509          NI            NI          NI           NI           NI          NI
      Midwest                      0.312      -0.198       0.2829       -0.149       0.3215       -0.107      0.2591
      South                        0.126       0.422       0.2365        0.210       0.4312       -0.082      0.5749
      West                         0.053       1.209       0.0193        0.982       0.0135        0.551      0.0192
 Occupation
      White collar I               0.059      -0.512       0.1757       -0.544       0.0979       -0.728      <.0001
      White collar II              0.052      -0.665       0.0708       -0.632       0.0574       -0.805      <.0001
      Craftsmen                    0.310          NI            NI          NI           NI           NI          NI
      Operatives                   0.344       0.044       0.8383        0.518       0.0152        0.450      0.0004
      Service                      0.027      -0.166       0.7375        0.130       0.7853       -0.287      0.2638
      Manual labor                 0.208       0.335       0.2166        0.926       0.0006        0.683      <.0001
Industry Variables
    Young Unemployed               2.709       0.172       0.0239        0.200       0.0004        0.119      0.0005
    Firm Size                     11.516      -0.039       0.7517       -0.067       0.4949       -0.071      0.2285
    Productivity                   7.900      -0.899       0.0036       -0.663       0.0418        0.009      0.9745
    Non-labor Input               76.515       0.095       0.0175        0.028       0.2835       -0.015      0.2717
    Electricity                    0.850      -0.176       0.4232       -0.059       0.7509       -0.097      0.3604
    Hours 60 and Over              9.886       0.024       0.0470        0.012       0.2132        0.017      0.0015
    Female                        15.891      -0.032       0.0008       -0.015       0.0354        0.002      0.6753
    Manager                        1.898      -0.560       0.0049       -0.467       0.0048       -0.221      0.0215
    Clerks                         8.559       0.155       0.0007        0.092       0.0041        0.021      0.2001
Number of observations                       3769                      3769                      3769
-2 Log L w/o covariates                      1317.876                  1892.056                  3888.758
-2 Log L with covariates:                    1206.352                  1755.332                  3666.221
Likelihood Ratio                               111.5239(p= 0.0002)        136.725(p<0.0001)         222.5366(p<0.0001)
Source: IPUMS of the 1910 census linked to the published 1909 manufacturing census.
Note: The dependent variable for each regression is one if the person was unemployed for 24 weeks or longer during the
year prior to the enumeration of the 1910 census, and zero, otherwise. The sample was limited to individuals for whom
the number of weeks unemployed is reported. Statistically significant variables are given in bold numbers.
                                                        Table 5
      Logistic Regressions: Industrial Characteristics and the Probability of Retirement between 1900 and 1910
                                       Union Army Veterans Aged 45 and Older

                                                       (1)                                      (2)
                                                  All veterans                  Older veterans (ages 55 and older)
                                         Mean        ∂P/∂x           P-value    Mean          ∂P/∂x        P-value
 Individual Variables
  Age                                   57.996         0.120        <0.0001         60.191        0.132     0.0006
  Foreign                                0.225        -0.265         0.3674          0.222       -0.512     0.0755
  Married                                0.877        -0.577         0.0881          0.852       -0.506     0.2072
  Head of household                      0.899         0.415         0.5465          0.887        0.011     0.9867
  Illiterate                             0.019         0.163         0.8755          0.017        0.429     0.7369
  Family size                            3.547         0.162         0.0397          3.309        0.117     0.2143
  Residence Owned                        0.525        -0.303         0.2218          0.548        0.051     0.8884
  Reside in urban areas                  0.329        -0.132         0.6542          0.309       -0.140     0.6827
  Region
       Northeast                         0.500            NI              NI         0.491           NI         NI
       Midwest/ South/West               0.500         0.002         0.9942          0.509        0.081     0.8138
  Occupation
     Unskilled                           0.316            NI              NI         0.274           NI         NI
     Skilled                             0.573        -0.303         0.2542          0.609       -0.360     0.2227
     White collar                        0.111        -0.073         0.8796          0.117       -0.292     0.5595
     Log of UA pension                   1.735         0.339         0.0412          1.762        0.233     0.2059
 Industry Variables
     Firm Size                          11.544         0.412         0.0672         11.547        0.471     0.0882
     Productivity                        7.984        -0.480         0.3803          7.969       -0.376     0.5749
     Non-labor Input                    78.846         0.011         0.7972         78.544        0.015     0.7469
     Electricity                         0.402        -0.442         0.4421          0.403       -0.867     0.0368
     Hours 60 and Over                  10.077         0.015         0.3887         10.261        0.042     0.0376
     Female                             15.077        -0.041         0.0014         15.637       -0.045     0.0023
     Manager                             2.068        -0.231         0.4242          2.064       -0.541     0.0563
     Clerk                               9.410         0.018         0.7633          9.209        0.094     0.2269
 Number of observations                316                                         230
 -2 Log L w/o covariates               405.873                                     305.075
 -2 Log L with covariates:             351.060                                     266.913
 Likelihood Ratio                       54.8129 (p < 0.0001)                        38.1620 (p = 0.0085)
Source: Longitudinal sample of Union Army veterans linked to 1900 and 1910 censuses, and published 1899 and
1909 manufacturing censuses.
Note: The dependent variable for each regression is one if the person was not gainfully employed when the 1910
census was enumerated, and zero, otherwise. The sample is limited to individuals for who were gainfully employed in
1900. The average of the 1899 and 1909 values were used for the following industry variables: Productivity, Non-
labor Input, Electricity, and Female; the values for 1909 were used for the following industry variables: Hours 60
and Over, Manager, and Clerk. Statistically significant variables are given in bold numbers.




                                                        35
                                                     Table 6
                            Comparison of the Matching Effect and the Productivity Effect

                                           Long-Term Unemployment                            Retirement
                                       (1)           (2)             (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)
                                      Total      Matching       Productivity     Total       Matching     Productivity
 Firm Size                           -0.119        -0.039           -0.080       0.415          0.471         -0.056
 Non-labor Input                    -0.001          0.095           -0.106      -0.007          0.015         -0.022
 Electricity                        -0.082         -0.442            0.360      -0.870         -0.867         -0.003
 Hours 60 and Over                    0.022         0.024           -0.002       0.039          0.042         -0.003
 Female                             -0.012         -0.032            0.020      -0.042         -0.045          0.003
 Manager                            -0.488         -0.560            0.072      -0.546         -0.541         -0.005
 Clerk                                0.074         0.155           -0.081       0.087          0.094         -0.007
Sources: Columns (1), (2), (4), and (5) were drawn from, respectively, regression (1) of Appendix Table 4, regression
(1) of Table 4, regression (2) of Table 5, and regression (2) of Appendix Table 4; Column (3) = (1) – (2); Column (6)
= (4) – (5).
Note: “Total” refers the total effect of each industry variable on the dependent variable; “matching” denotes the effect
of each industry variable on the dependent variable through changing quality of matching between the job and the
worker; “Productivity” stands for the effect of each industry variable on the dependent variable through changing the
labor productivity of the industry. See equation (4) and related text for more detailed explanations. Statistically
significant variables are given in bold numbers.




                                                           36
                                                   Table 7
               Changes in Selected Average Characteristics of Manufacturing Industries, 1889-1929

            Industrial Characteristics                 1889       1899          1909          1919           1929
(1) Value of capital per establishment (dollar)        18,359     19,165         68,636      153,228
(2) Value of product per establishment(dollar)         26,370     25,386         76,993      215,157       333,879
(3) Value of product per worker (dollar)                1,989      2,450          3,125        6,862          7,969
(4) Expenses on materials / Wages                        2.26       3.16           3.54         3.55           3.32
(5) Power per 100 workers (horse power)                   140        218            288          333            491
(6) Share of Electric power (percent)                                 4.8          25.4         55.0           82.3
(7) Share of Female workers (percent)                    19.5       20.0           20.6         20.1           21.0
(8) Managers per 100 worker                                                          2.0          3.1
(9) Clerks per 100 worker                                                            8.7        11.4
(10) Managers & clerks per 100 worker                                 7.5          10.7         14.5           15.4
Source: Calculated from published manufacturing censuses of 1889, 1899, 1909, 1919, and 1929, except for (5) and
(6) that were drawn from Carter et al. (2006), Table Dd848-853.




                                                      37
                                                     Appendix Table A-1
            Industry Reclassifications for Matching the 1910 Population Census to the 1909 Manufacturing Census

                                               Number of       Number of
    Industries in Population Census                                                Industries in Manufacturing Census
                                             Establishments   Wage Earners
Sawmills, planing mills, and mill work           40671          826978       Lumber and timber products
Miscellaneous wood products                       4033          59189        Baskets, and rattan and willow ware
                                                                             Boxes, cigar
                                                                             Cooperage and wooden goods, not elsewhere
                                                                               specified
                                                                             Lasts
                                                                             Looking-glass and picture frames
                                                                             Wood carpet
                                                                             Wood preserving
                                                                             Wood, turned and carved
Furniture and fixtures                           4453           148451       Furniture and refrigerators
                                                                             Mattresses and spring beds
                                                                             Show cases
                                                                             Window shades and fixtures
Glass and glass products                         1094              88222     Glass
                                                                             Glass, cutting, staining, and ornamenting
                                                                             Mirrors
Cement, concrete, gypsum, and plaster            4625              61338
                                                                             Artificial stone
products
                                                                             Cement
                                                                             Lime
                                                                             Wall plaster
Structural clay products                         4263              91615     Brick and tile
                                                                             Crucibles
Pottery and related prods                         862              53331     China decorating
                                                                             Pottery, terra-cotta, and fire-clay products
Miscellaneous nonmetallic mineral and            5491              78086
                                                                             Emery and other abrasive wheels
stone products
                                                                             Kaolin and ground earths
                                                                             Marble and stone work
                                                                             Sand and emery paper and cloth
                                                                             Statuary and art goods
                                                                             Steam packing
Blast furnaces, steel workers, and rolling        731           336106
                                                                             Galvanizing
mills
                                                                             Iron and steel, blast furnaces
                                                                             Iron and steel, steel works and rolling mills
                                                                             Tin plate and terneplate
                                                  385              25899     Horseshoes, not made in steel works or rolling
Other primary iron and steel industries
                                                                                mills
                                                                             Iron and steel, bolts, nuts, washers, and rivets,
                                                                                not made in steel works or rolling mills
                                                                             Iron and steel, doors and shutters
                                                                             Iron and steel forgings



                                                              38
                                                            Iron and steel, nails and spikes, cut and wrought,
                                                               including wire nails, not made in steel works
                                                               or rolling mills
Primary nonferrous industries          5725     146244      Babbitt metal and solder
                                                            Brass and bronze products
                                                            Copper, tin, and sheet-iron products
                                                            Gold and silver, leaf and foil
                                                            Gold and silver, reducing and refining, not from
                                                               the ore
                                                            Lead, bar, pipe, and sheet
                                                            Smelting and refining, copper
                                                            Smelting and refining, lead
                                                            Smelting and refining, zinc
                                                            Smelting and refining, not from the ore
                                       1537     23336       Jewelry
Fabricated steel products              4664     173083      Cuttery and tools, not elsewhere specified
                                                            Electroplating
                                                            Enameling and japanning
                                                            Engravers' materials
                                                            Engraving and diesinking
                                                            Files
                                                            Firearms and ammunition
                                                            Gas, illuminating and heating
                                                            Safes and vaults
                                                            Saws
                                                            Screws, wood
                                                            Springs, steel, car and carriage

                                                            Stoves and furnaces, including gas and oil stoves

                                                            Wire
                                                            Wirework, including wire rope and cable
                                       656          17875
Fabricated nonferrous metal products                        Gas and electric fixtures and lamps and reflectors

                                                            Vault lights and ventilators
Agricultural machinery and tractors    674          56789   Agricultural implements
                                                            Windmills
Office and store machines              176          12438   Scales and balances
                                                            Typewriters and supplies
Miscellaneous machinery                14882    607867      Food preparations
                                                            Foundry and machine-shop products
                                                            Foundry supplies
                                                            Pumps, not including steam pumps
                                                            Screws, machine
                                                            Type founding and printing materials
                                                            Washing machines and clothes wringers
Electrical machinery, equipment, and   1411         88451
                                                            Brushes
supplies
                                                            Electrical machinery, apparatus, and supplies



                                               39
                                                              Phonographs and graphophones
Motor vehicles and motor vehicle          743         96060
                                                              Automobiles, including bodies and parts
equipment
Ship and boat building and repairing      1353    43564       Shipbuilding, including boat building
Railroad and miscellaneous                7471    470911
                                                              Bicycles, motorcycles, and parts
transportation equipment
                                                              Carriages and wagons and materials
                                                              Cars and general shop construction and repairs
                                                                by steam-railroad companies
                                                              Cars and general shop construction and repairs
                                                                by street-railroad companies
                                                              Cars, steam-railroad, not including operations of
                                                                railroad companies
                                                              Cars, street-railroad, not including operations of
                                                                railroad companies
                                                              Cash registers and calculating machines
                                                              Wheelbarrows
Professional equipment                    2265        49784   Dentist's materials
                                                              Hosiery and knit goods
                                                              Instruments, professional and scientific
                                                              Optical goods
                                                              Surgical appliances and artificial limbs
Photographic equipment and supplies       16           353    Moving pictures
Watches, clocks, and clockwork-operated   120         15775   Clocks and watches, including cases and
devices                                                         materials
Miscellaneous manufacturing industries    4799    105545      Artificial flowers and feathers and plumes
                                                              Artists' materials
                                                              Billiard tables and materials
                                                              Candles
                                                              Carriages and sleds, children's

                                                              Coffins, burial cases, and undertakers' goods

                                                              Cork, cutting
                                                              Fire extinguishers, chemical
                                                              Fireworks
                                                              Furs, dressed
                                                              Hair work
                                                              Hand stamps and stencils and brands
                                                              Ink, writing
                                                              Jewelry and instrument cases
                                                              Lapidary work

                                                              Models and patterns, not including paper patterns

                                                              Musical instruments and materials, not specified

                                                              Musical instruments, pianos and organs and
                                                                materials
                                                              Needles, pins, and hooks and eyes



                                                 40
                                                                  Pens, fountain, stylographic, and gold
                                                                  Pipes, tobacco
                                                                  Signs and advertising novelties
                                                                  Silverware and plated ware
                                                                  Soda-water apparatus
                                                                  Sporting and athletic goods
                                                                  Toys and games
                                                                  Umbrellas and canes
                                                                  Wool pulling
                                                                  All other industries
Meat products                                1641         88352   Slaughtering and meat packing
Dairy products                               8736         22962   Butter, cheese, and condensed milk
                                                                  Butter, reworking
                                                                  Dairymen's poulterers', and apiarists' supplies
Canning and preserving fruits,               3767         67219
                                                                  Canning and preserving
vegetables, and seafoods
Grain-mill products                           87          1930    Flax and hemp, dressed
                                                                  Rice, cleaning and polishing
Bakery products                              23926        84956   Bread and other bakery products
Confectionery and related products           2017         21159   Chocolate and cocoa products
                                                                  Confectionery
                                                                  Peanuts, grading, roasting, cleansing, and
                                                                    shelling
Beverage industries                          7464         77288   Cordials and sirups
                                                                  Liquors, distilled
                                                                  Liquors, malt
                                                                  Liquors, vinous
                                                                  Malt
                                                                  Mineral and soda waters
Miscellaneous food preparations and          4540         61322
                                                                  Baking powders and yeast
kindred products
                                                                  Beet sugar
                                                                  Coffee and spice, roasting and grinding
                                                                  Flavoring extracts
                                                                  Glucose and starch
                                                                  Ice, manufactured
                                                                  Oleomargarine
                                                                  Sugar and molasses
                                                                  Vinegar and cider
Not specified food industries                11691        41787   Flour-mill and gristmill products
Tobacco manufactures                         15822        90417   Tobacco manufactures
Dyeing and finishing textiles, except knit    426         36486
                                                                  Dyeing and finishing textiles
goods
Carpets, rugs, and other floor coverings     567          21147   Carpets and rugs, other than rag
                                                                  Carpets, rag
Yarn, thread, and fabric                     3433     331283      Cotton goods, including cotton small wares
                                                                  Haircloth
                                                                  Silk and silk goods, including throwsters
                                                                  Upholstering materials


                                                     41
                                                                   Wool scouring
                                                                   Woolen, worsted, and felt goods, and wool hats
Miscellaneous textile mill products            434         24863   Cordage and twine and jute and linen goods
                                                                   Hats, straw
                                                                   Oilcloth and linoleum
                                                                   Shoddy
                                                                   Waste
Apparel and accessories                       15790    224177      Clothing, horse
                                                                   Clothing, men's, buttonholes
                                                                   Clothing, men's, including shirts
                                                                   Clothing, women's
                                                                   Corsets
                                                                   Fur goods
                                                                   Furnishing goods, men's
                                                                   Hat and cap materials
                                                                   Hats and caps, other than felt, straw, and wool
                                                                   Hats, fur-felt
                                                                   Millinery and lace goods
Misc fabricated textile products              1273         10199   Awnings, tents, and sails
                                                                   Bags, other than paper
                                                                   Cloth, sponging and refinishing
                                                                   Flags, banners, regalia, society badges and
                                                                     emblems
                                                                   Hammocks
                                                                   House-furnishing goods, not elsewhere specified
Pulp, paper, and paper-board mills            777          68497   Paper and wood pulp
Paperboard containers and boxes               1443         22573   Boxes, fancy and paper
                                                                   Fancy articles, not elsewhere specified
Miscellaneous paper and pulp products          880         22079   Bags, paper
                                                                   Card cutting and designing
                                                                   Labels and tags
                                                                   Paper goods, not elsewhere specified
                                                                   Paper patterns
                                                                   Pulp goods
                                                                   Stationery goods, not elsewhere specified
                                                                   Wall paper
Printing, publishing, and allied industries   32014    212753      Engraving, wood
                                                                   Photo-engraving
                                                                   Printing and publishing
                                                                   Stereotyping and electrotyping
Drugs and medicines                           3667         12141   Drug grinding
                                                                   Patent medicines and compounds and druggists'
                                                                     preparations
Paints, varnishes, and related products       791      13207       Paint and varnish
Miscellaneous chemicals and allied            5445     152579      Blacking and cleansing and polishing
products                                                             preparations
                                                                   Bluing




                                                      42
                                         Appendix Table A-2
         Incidence of Long-term Unemployment by Industry in 1910: Original Industry Classification

                                                                                  % Long-Term % Long-Term
                                                                      % Workers
                      Industry                             Number                 Unemployed, Unemployed,
                                                                      aged 45+
                                                                                   aged 25-44  aged 45+
Logging                                                      776        25.13         2.64        1.03
Sawmills, planing mills, and mill work                      1716        19.29         0.88        4.23
Miscellaneous wood products                                  352        29.55         2.60        5.77
Furniture and fixtures                                       507        23.47         2.58        2.52
Glass and glass products                                     277        18.77         5.07        3.85
Cement, concrete, gypsum, and plaster products               244        22.13         3.39        1.85
Structural clay products                                     465        17.42         2.76        0.00
Pottery and related prods                                     76        28.95         2.78        0.00
Miscellaneous nonmetallic mineral and stone products         236        25.00         2.16        3.39
Blast furnaces, steel workers, and rolling mills            1515        19.08         6.20        8.30
Other primary iron and steel industries                      857        17.39         3.91        8.05
Primary nonferrous industries                                335        18.81         2.16        1.59
Fabricated steel products                                    867        23.30         1.57        4.46
Not specified metal industries                               324        17.28         5.68        7.14
Agricultural machinery and tractors                          214        36.92         2.13        1.27
Office and store machines                                     69        21.74         3.13        0.00
Miscellaneous machinery                                     1077        23.03         2.68        2.42
Electrical machinery, equipment, and supplies                332        14.76         3.41        4.08
Motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment                   415        13.98         1.28        1.72
Ship and boat building and repairing                         290        26.55         3.77        0.00
Railroad and miscellaneous transportation equipment          709        22.85         6.33        6.79
Professional equipment                                        34        23.53         5.00
Photographic equipment and supplies                           14        28.57
Watches, clocks, and clockwork-operated devices               57        35.09          3.33          5.00
Miscellaneous manufacturing industries                       560        26.07          1.90          3.42
Meat products                                                382        23.56          0.99          2.22
Dairy products                                               243        15.64          1.43          0.00
Canning and preserving fruits, vegetables, and sea foods      57        29.82          3.57
Crain-mill products                                          229        36.68          0.00          0.00
Bakery products                                              260        16.54          0.73          6.98
Confectionery and related products                           174        19.54          0.00          2.94
Beverage industries                                          411        31.39          0.97          0.78
Miscellaneous food preparations and kindred products         208        24.04          2.06          2.00
Not specified food industries                                 13        38.46
Tobacco manufactures                                         478        27.41          1.30          1.53
Knitting mills                                               107        20.56          2.33          4.55
Dyeing and finishing textiles, except knit goods              91        25.27          0.00          8.70
Carpets, rugs, and other floor coverings                     101        26.73          4.65          3.70
Yarn, thread, and fabric                                    1227        23.63          1.52          3.45
Miscellaneous textile mill products                          101        20.79          2.50          0.00
Apparel and accessories                                      940        20.43          4.61          2.60


                                                      43
    Miscellaneous fabricated textile products                   55          14.55            4.17
    Pulp, paper, and paper-board mills                         284          20.07            1.27            1.75
    Paperboard containers and boxes                             23          26.09
    Miscellaneous paper and pulp products                       31          22.58
    Printing, publishing, and allied industries               2430          20.74            2.79            3.97
    Drugs and medicines                                         35          22.86
    Paints, varnishes, and related products                     81          23.46            4.17
    Miscellaneous chemicals and allied products                281          25.62            0.65            1.39
    Petroleum refining                                         105          21.90            0.00            0.00
    Miscellaneous petroleum and coal products                     1          1. 00
    Rubber products                                            164          17.68            2.33            0.00
    Leather: tanned, curried, and finished                     306          21.57            5.81            1.52
    Footwear, except rubber                                    569          24.96            3.10            2.82
    Leather products, except footwear                          147          35.37            1.52            3.85
Source: IPUMS of the 1910 Census.
Note: Estimates of long-term unemployment rate are not given for age-industry cells including less than 20 persons;
cells including 20 to 29 persons are marked by underlines.




                                                        44
                                               Appendix Table A-3
       Logistic Regressions: 1910 Industrial Characteristics and the Probability of Long-Term Unemployment
                           For Male Manufacturing Workers Aged 45 and Older by Age

                                                  (1)                                   (2)
                                   Older Workers (ages 55 and older)        Younger Workers (ages 45 to 54)
                                   Mean         ∂P/∂x       P-value         Mean       ∂P/∂x         P-value
Individual Variables
  Age                              61.327         0.055       0.0083      48.937         0.076        0.0790
  Nonwhite                          0.043        -0.999       0.9785       0.053        -0.872        0.0523
  Foreign                           0.455         0.216       0.4622       0.428         0.063        0.8196
  Married                           0.779         0.028       0.9366       0.819        -0.221        0.4867
  Head of household                 0.835         0.188       0.6513       0.810         0.372        0.4015
  Illiterate                        0.072        -0.112       0.8149       0.077         0.587        0.2648
  Family size                       3.810        -0.013       0.8267       4.443        -0.101        0.0604
  Residence Owned                   0.443        -0.264       0.2365       0.386        -0.112        0.6494
  City size
       Under 2,500                  0.214            NI           NI       0.224            NI             NI
       2,500-49,999                 0.318        -0.132       0.7295       0.297         0.029        0.9392
       50,000-499,999               0.228         0.811       0.1278       0.252         0.346        0.4384
       500,000 and over             0.240         1.200       0.0605       0.228         1.484        0.0182
  Region
       Northeast                    0.544            NI           NI       0.489            NI             NI
       Midwest                      0.284        -0.027       0.9267       0.328        -0.352        0.1480
       South                        0.131        -0.166       0.7227       0.122         1.122        0.0491
       West                         0.041         2.000       0.0245       0.060         0.721        0.2660
  Occupation
       White collar I               0.054        -0.371       0.5442       0.062        -0.544        0.2955
       White collar II              0.058        -0.789       0.1344       0.049        -0.500        0.3566
       Craftsmen                    0.316            NI           NI          NI            NI             NI
       Operatives                   0.318         0.323       0.3654       0.359        -0.253        0.5742
       Service                      0.049        -0.410       0.4887       0.013         1.121        0.3418
       Manual labor                 0.205         0.923       0.0457       0.210        -0.012        0.9731
Industry Variables
     Young Unemployed               2.661         0.000       0.9974       2.737         0.324        0.0038
     Firm Size                     11.476        -0.067       0.6885      11.541        -0.015        0.9380
     Productivity                   7.882        -0.919       0.0219       7.914        -0.875        0.0722
     Non-labor Input               76.277         0.110       0.0631      76.707         0.086        0.1372
     Electricity                    0.817        -0.097       0.7719       0.870        -0.167        0.5987
     Hours 60 and Over              9.440         0.028       0.1130      10.164         0.017        0.3543
     Female                        16.131        -0.030       0.0253      15.768        -0.034        0.0174
     Manager                        1.919        -0.572       0.0202       1.892        -0.543        0.1035
     Clerk                          8.569         0.190       0.0020       8.578         0.113        0.1129
Number of observations           1394                                   2375
-2 Log L w/o covariates           618.168                                 686.313
-2 Log L with covariates:         556.485                                 621.498
Likelihood Ratio                   61.683 (p = 0.0002)                      64.814 (p < 0.0001)
 Source: IPUMS of the 1910 census linked to the published 1909 manufacturing census.
 Note: The dependent variable for each regression is one if the person was unemployed for 24 weeks or longer
 during the year prior to the enumeration of the 1910 census, and zero, otherwise. The sample was limited to
 individuals for whom the number of weeks unemployed was reported. Statistically significant variables are given
 in bold numbers.




                                                       45
                                                  Appendix Table A-4
                                Logistic Regressions without Labor Productivity Measure

                                                        (1)                                         (2)
                                             Probability of Long-Term                    Probability of Retirement
                                                 Unemployment                            (Men aged 55 and older)
                                             (Men aged 45 and older)
                                          Mean         ∂P/∂x       P-value              Mean          ∂P/∂x      P-value
  Industry Variables
      Firm Size                             11.516        -0.119        0.2916         11.547         0.415      0.1067
      Non-labor Input                       76.515        -0.011        0.4720         78.544        -0.007      0.7819
      Electricity                            0.850        -0.082        0.7054          0.403        -0.870      0.0352
      Hours 60 and Over                      9.886         0.022        0.0579         10.261         0.039      0.0447
      Female                                15.891        -0.012        0.0660         15.637        -0.042      0.0021
      Manager                                1.898        -0.488        0.0032          2.064        -0.546      0.0540
      Clerk                                  8.559         0.074        0.0177          9.209         0.087      0.2557
  Number of observations                   3769                                       230
  -2 Log L w/o covariates                  1317.876                                   305.075
  -2 Log L with covariates:                1217.182                                   267.229
  Likelihood Ratio                          100.694 (p < 0.0001)                       37.846 (p = 0.0062)
Source: (1) IPUMS of the 1910 census linked to the published 1909 manufacturing census; (2) Longitudinal sample
of Union Army veterans linked to 1900 and 1910 censuses, and published 1899 and 1909 manufacturing censuses.
Note: 1. Regression (1): The dependent variable is one if the person was unemployed for 24 weeks or longer during
the year prior to the enumeration of the 1910 census, and zero, otherwise. The sample was limited to individuals for
whom the number of weeks unemployed is reported. All independent variables used in the regressions reported in
Table 4 are included, but the results for individual variables are omitted from this table.
     2. Regression (2): The dependent variable is one if the person was not gainfully employed when the 1910 census
was enumerated, and zero, otherwise. The sample was limited to individuals for who were gainfully employed in
1900. The average of the 1899 and 1909 values were used for the following industry variables: Productivity, Non-
labor Input, Electricity, and Female; the values for 1909 were used for the following industry variables: Hours 60
and Over, Manager, and Clerk. All independent variables used in the regressions reported in Table 5 were included,
but the results for individual variables were omitted from this table. Statistically significant variables are given in
bold numbers.




                                                           46
