                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE INTERNET AND LOCAL WAGES:
                             CONVERGENCE OR DIVERGENCE?

                                          Chris Forman
                                           Avi Goldfarb
                                         Shane Greenstein

                                       Working Paper 14750
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14750


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2009




We thank Mercedes Delgado and seminar participants at Arizona State University, Carnegie Mellon
University, Hunter College, London School of Economics, Northwestern University, Temple University,
University of Arizona, University of Colorado, the University of Toronto, University of Vermont,
Washington University, the NBER Productivity Lunch, and WISE 2008 for comments. We also thank
Harte Hanks Market Intelligence for supplying data. All opinions and errors are ours alone. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Chris Forman, Avi Goldfarb, and Shane Greenstein. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Internet and Local Wages: Convergence or Divergence?
Chris Forman, Avi Goldfarb, and Shane Greenstein
NBER Working Paper No. 14750
February 2009, Revised July 2010
JEL No. O33,R11

                                            ABSTRACT

How did the diffusion of the internet affect regional wage inequality? We examine the relationship
between business use of advanced internet technology and local variation in US wage growth between
1995 and 2000. We find no evidence that the internet contributed to regional wage convergence. Advanced
internet technology is associated with larger wage growth in places that were already well off. These
are places with highly educated and large urban populations, and concentration of IT-intensive industry.
Overall, advanced internet explains over half of the difference in wage growth between these counties
and all others.


Chris Forman                                       Shane Greenstein
Georgia Institute of Technology                    The Elinor and Wendell Hobbs Professor
College of Management                              Kellogg School of Management
800 West Peachtree Street, NW                      Northwestern University
Atlanta                                            2001 Sheridan Road
GA 30308                                           Evanston, IL 60208-2013
USA                                                and NBER
chris.forman@mgt.gatech.edu                        greenstein@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Avi Goldfarb
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St George St
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
agoldfarb@rotman.utoronto.ca
       1.      Introduction

       A growing body of evidence suggests that investment in information technology (IT) in

the 1990s produced gains in US productivity and economic growth at the national, industry, and

firm levels. Such findings raise questions concerning the distribution of income growth across all

parts of the country. Little analysis addresses the links between the distribution of economic

growth and the distribution of business investment in information technology. This study

contributes new empirical evidence to this topic.

       We analyze the relationship between internet investment and changes in regional wage

inequality. Did the internet contribute to divergence or convergence in wages across US

counties? That is, did the deployment of the internet help well-off counties get even wealthier or

did it help the poorer counties catch up to the rich? Overall our evidence rejects convergence and

suggests divergence. Specifically, business internet use is correlated with larger wage growth in

well-off locations than elsewhere, and our analysis is suggestive of a causal relationship.

       Our study contributes to an old debate about the relationship between economic growth,

technological development, and cities. With few exceptions, that literature concluded that

information technology (IT) is skill-biased and advanced IT leads to increased wage inequality

across workers. A related literature has emphasized that better local infrastructure and thick labor

markets for skilled workers generate large benefits from IT in urban areas, leading to increased

inequality across locations.

       The rise of the commercial internet in the 1990s reshaped the terms of debate. A common

optimistic forecast predicted that the economic gains from the internet would not primarily

accrue to skilled workers in urban locations. In this view information and communications

technology would generate growth in low-density locations because easier electronic

communication would provide poor isolated areas with access to suppliers and markets. While


                                                 1
this view has received widespread attention—e.g. Cairncross’s (1997) The Death of Distance and

Friedman’s (2005) The World is Flat— the hypothesis went untested.

        We do not doubt the potential for the internet to lower the costs of engaging in economic

activity in geographically isolated locations,1 but that does not settle the open question about

whether its diffusion contributed to convergence or divergence. Even in the presence of growth

in all locations, convergence or divergence depends on where the internet caused more (and less)

growth to occur, and whether pre-internet income levels correlated with the effect of the internet

on growth.

        Lack of local US data has prevented systematic testing of convergence or divergence. We

present novel data measuring the impact of internet investment as of December 2000 and relate it

to county-level wages paid by local businesses from 1995 to 2000. As in prior research (Forman,

Goldfarb, and Greenstein 2005), we look beyond the diffusion of email and web browsing,

focusing on the diffusion of advanced internet applications. Unlike basic internet applications,

advanced internet enabled possible productivity advances due to lower costs of communicating

with suppliers and customers over long distances. Also unlike basic internet, advanced internet

necessarily required skilled labor to implement and operate.

        We focus on the change from 1995 to 2000 because this was the period of most rapid

growth in business internet connectivity. It was also the first period of business internet adoption.

The internet was largely unknown at the beginning of 1995 (Bill Gates’ memo “The Internet

Tidal Wave” was written in May 1995), but many firms had undertaken large investments by

2000. This period of rapid early investment is particularly conducive to a test of the starkly

different short run implications of the competing hypotheses: divergence leads to faster short-run

wage growth in counties that were already well off; convergence leads to the opposite.

1
  Prior work (Forman, Goldfarb and Greenstein 2005) showed that basic internet use was disproportionately adopted
by businesses in low-density areas. Furthermore, lower communication costs have enabled the delivery of a set of
tradable services at distances from the point of final demand (Arora and Gambardella 2005; OECD 2006).
                                                       2
        While almost all counties were growing in the boom of the late 1990s, we find that the

internet helps explain why wages in already well-off counties grew faster. We develop this

argument in steps. First, we find a statistically significant but economically small positive

correlation between internet investment and wage growth across all counties. This positive

correlation remains robust to numerous specifications and changes in controls. More

interestingly, we find that that this relationship is more pronounced in the 163 counties that, as of

1990, had a population over 150,000 and were in the top quartile in income, education, and

fraction of firms in IT-intensive industries. Overall, the internet explains more than half of the

difference in wage growth between the 163 counties that were already doing well and all other

counties.

        We address the assumption that internet investment is exogenous. First, although we add

many controls for factors known to shape investment decisions, the results do not change.

Second, we instrument for advanced internet in several ways. One, the Bartik procedure, is

familiar to the literature in labor economics. The others are tailored to our setting, taking

advantage of features of the cost structure for internet and communications technology. Third,

we directly address omitted variables bias by showing that the timing of divergence is strongly

associated with the timing of the diffusion of the business internet. The strong association

between internet adoption and growth for those 163 counties that were already doing well starts

in 1996, after the diffusion of the internet.

        A scatterplot of the raw data forecasts our core results. Figure 1a shows the relationship

between advanced internet investment and local wage growth for all types of counties in the raw

data. While the regression line is upward sloping (it is also significantly positive), advanced

internet is clearly not an important explanation of wage growth. In contrast, Figure 1b compares

the 163 counties that were already doing well with the other counties. For the 163 counties that


                                                 3
were already doing well (i.e., counties with high income, population, education, and

agglomeration of IT-intensive firms), advanced internet is strongly correlated with wage growth;

for the other counties, there is no relationship between advanced internet and wage growth.2 Of

course, our analysis goes far beyond this scatter-plot, but the result continues to hold after a wide

battery of corrections and tests.

          Our study sits between several different literatures. While there is a large macroeconomic

literature on the causes of regional convergence and divergence,3 we are the first study to

examine the internet’s role. In doing this we follow in the spirit of research showing that IT-

using industries, firms, and locations had exceptionally good economic performance in the

1990s.4

          Our paper also complements the literature on skill-biased technical change.5 Our findings

show that internet technology follows the skill-biased pattern observed with previous generations

of IT. However, our results suggest that rich human capital in the form of a highly educated labor

force is insufficient for a location to realize wage gains from internet investments. For internet

investments to generate wage gains, there also must be other factors that shape local labor

markets, coincident with local population size, industry composition, and income. It is the

combination of all of these factors that appears to shift labor demand sufficiently to generate

wage gains.



2
  Figure 1 truncates the picture by removing some counties with very low and very high internet use. The results are
qualitatively similar when we include these counties, though visually not as clean.
3
  See Magrini (2004) for a recent survey on the causes of convergence/divergence in regional growth. Also see, e.g.,
Glaeser et al (1992), Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1991), and Higgins, Levy, and Young (2006). Related is Glaeser and
Ponzetto (2007), who argue that low communication costs help rich, idea-producing areas more than poor, goods-
producing areas. They do not empirically focus on IT, but show that an increase in the share of skilled occupations is
associated with greater local wage growth.
4
  This holds whether performance is measured at the national (Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh 2005), city (Beaudry,
Doms, and Lewis 2006; Kolko 2002), industry (Stiroh 2002), firm (Brynjolfsson and Hitt 2003), or establishment
(Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen 2007) levels.
5
  There is an extensive literature on wage inequality and skilled-biased technical change (e.g., Katz and Autor 1999).
Recent literature has begun to investigate how the demand for computing has affected wage inequality (e.g., Autor,
Levy, and Murnane 2003; Autor, Katz, and Kearney 2006).
                                                          4
       While our results suggest that it is the combination of these factors that leads to

disproportionate wage growth in response to advanced internet investment, we do not have

empirical evidence that fully links our findings to the literature on biased technical change

through comparisons of skilled and unskilled wages, mainly due to data limitations. In particular,

data from this period are not detailed enough to allow examination of whether wage gains are

greatest for high- or low-skilled occupations within a local labor market, nor are there sufficient

data to examine how internet use changes the wage distribution within a location.

       Our findings also speak to the difference between the experience of IT-using and IT-

producing industries in the 1990s that is emphasized by Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2005). In

contrast to the perspective that focuses on agglomeration of IT-producing industries in a handful

of locations such as Santa Clara and Boston, we stress the somewhat broader economic growth

that arose from deploying, building, and using new technology in both IT-producing and IT-

using industries.

       Our results have important public policy implications. A wide array of policies

subsidizing internet infrastructure have arisen since the diffusion of the internet. In contrast to

the motivation frequently given for these subsidies, we find little economic impact from the

internet on wages in low density areas. Furthermore, while our results show that the first wave of

advanced internet technology investment primarily benefited areas with educated workers and

IT-using industry, the most common policies for subsidizing infrastructure include little or no

provision for developing the human capital required to employ advanced IT.


   2. Motivation

       In this section we present a simple framework focusing on shifts in labor demand to

describe how the diffusion of the internet could have generated divergence in average wages

across US counties. This contrasts with an alternative potential framework that advanced internet

                                                5
led to convergence by disproportionately raising the benefit of geographically isolated

computing capital. We describe how the shift in labor demand due to advanced internet

investment likely varied with the local presence of skilled labor, IT-using industry, and high

population. We will focus on average wages for practical reasons, namely, the absence of

detailed measures of skilled and unskilled wages in a county and their growth during the

deployment of the internet. There is, however, data about the level of average wages for every

county in the US and about changes to those averages during the time when the internet diffused.

           Corresponding with the internet’s history and our data, we focus on understanding the

short run response in demand and wages and assume the local labor supply curve does not shift.6

Most incumbent vendors and users in communications and computing markets, as well as IT-

intensive users in the economy as a whole, were caught by surprise in late 1994 and 1995 as the

commercial internet privatized and began to acquire the advanced capabilities affiliated with the

growing World Wide Web. This almost sudden realization by so many firms contributed to a

non-gradual response in investment (Greenstein 2010), yielding the short run consequences on

local economies that we examine in this paper (and, potentially, long run consequences after

supply-side adjustments such as labor mobility and skill acquisition).

           The introduction of internet technology lowered both the cost of communication and the

cost of information processing (the latter by reducing the cost of shared computing resources

such as databases on servers). If we let computing capital represent a bundle of information

processing and communication capabilities,7 we can interpret the availability and deployment of

advanced internet for commercial purposes as a large one-time fall in the price of the computing

capital. That enabled firms to explore development of a range of new applications (Forman and

Goldfarb 2006). As shown in a number of existing models of skill-biased technical change (e.g.


6
    In our empirical analysis, we include controls for potential changes in labor supply such as migration.
7
    This is a common assumption. See, e.g. Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg (2006) and Bloom et al. (2009).
                                                            6
Autor, Katz, and Kearney 2006), a fall in the price of computing capital will shift the demand for

skilled labor, thereby raising the price of skilled labor relative to unskilled labor. Consequently,

places with high levels of investment in advanced internet are likely to have higher growth in

wages for skilled workers. And, due to basic arithmetic, places with a high fraction of skilled

workers were likely to experience particularly high growth in average wages in association with

advanced internet investment.

         We further posit that the rise in demand for skilled labor was location-biased. First, its

rise will be linked to geographic variance in pre-existing installations of computing capital.

Investment in advanced internet had two distinct effects. It raised the productivity of all future

computing capital investments in a wide range of applications, and it raised the potential

productivity of the existing stock of long-lived computing capital in the range of applications

where inexpensive retrofitting investments could be made. In practice the demand for IT

investments in retrofitting existing installations, and the associated demand for skilled labor, are

linked closely to the location of existing installations.8 Therefore, locations that already had large

numbers of IT-intensive firms were particularly well-positioned to benefit from advanced

internet, especially if there were skilled workers present to help implement the changes. In these

places, we expect to see a larger shift in labor demand and a larger increase in wages.

         In addition to accruing in places with a large existing stock of IT, we expect these

benefits to accrue disproportionately in large cities, due to Marshallian externalities.9


8
  Other types of demand for IT investments may or may not be tied to existing installations, depending on the
specific needs of the enterprise. While prior evidence of the analysis of demand for other types of information
technology has suggested that future demand is frequently tied to existing installations (e.g., Forman and Goldfarb
2006), in motivating our empirical analysis it is sufficient to focus on the harder-to-dispute effects on demand for
retrofitting existing installations.
9
  A rich literature in urban economics has provided evidence on the presence of increasing returns and productivity
benefits associated with location in an urban area, particularly for skilled labor. We note that Jacobs-type
urbanization effects would produce observationally equivalent predictions. In particular, Jacobs-type effects would
cause the prices of IT to fall faster in large cities. This would not influence the shift in skilled labor for a given level
of IT investment, but would influence the extent of IT investment across cities. It would lead to an association
between advanced IT and high wage growth.
                                                             7
Historically, the presence of thicker labor markets, greater input sharing, and greater knowledge

spillovers in cities lowered the costs of successful adoption of frontier information technologies

(Henderson 2003; Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein 2008). Because cities with these features

have also become home to skilled labor (long before the arrival of the business internet) and

because these features facilitate the successful implementation of advanced internet investments,

the relationship between advanced internet investment and average wages should be particularly

strong in large cities, especially those with a high fraction of skilled workers and a large number

of industries using prior generations of IT.

       The prevalence of IT-intensive industries, high population, and educated labor are

positively correlated with income across counties (perhaps because income is an alternative

measure of skill). Hence, this discussion suggests that places that already had high levels of

income were likely to gain disproportionately from advanced internet investment, leading to

divergence.

       While we expect demand for skilled labor to rise from the deployment of the internet, this

framework suggests three plausible explanations why we might not observe large changes in

wages in some places that did see some investment in advanced internet. First, if unskilled wages

were static or fell, and they are a large proportion of the labor force, overall wages could remain

unchanged. Second, an elastic supply of skilled labor (US unemployment rates for skilled labor

are higher outside of cities) could lead to small wage gains, even in the face of large demand

shifts. Third, competitive forces, such as international competition, could reduce the returns to

investment in the short run, leading to advanced internet investment without wage gains.

       This simple framework motivates our empirical analysis. We begin by examining

whether advanced internet investment is correlated with local wage growth. Then, we examine

three main predictions from this framework: (1) Advanced internet investment has a particularly


                                                8
large effect on wages in educated, high income, populated areas with a concentration of IT-

intensive industries, (2) Advanced internet investment is associated with stronger employment

growth in these well-off counties than in other counties, and (3) The effects of advanced internet

investment on wages are strongest in places with tight labor markets, particularly for skilled

workers.


   3. Measuring the Localization of Growth

   Our statistical approach proceeds in two broad steps. We first measure the average

relationship between internet use and wage growth across all counties. Next, we examine

whether advanced internet investment led to faster growth in areas that were already doing well.

       Step 1, Advanced internet and local wage growth: We compare the wages of a time

period before advanced internet technologies diffused (1995) to those of a period when we

observe use (2000). We take advantage of the fact that many local features that shaped labor

markets and enterprises in 1995 had not changed by 2000. Our endogenous variable will be the

log difference in wages between 1995 and 2000, yielding:

       (1)     Log(Yi00)- Log(Yi95) =αXi+βInterneti+εi,

       Here, Interneti measures the extent of advanced internet investment by businesses in

location i in 2000. We have assumed that εi is a normal i.i.d. variable. We include two kinds of

controls in Xi: Controls for pre-existing initial conditions that may affect wage growth such as

income, population, and education levels and controls for changes in the factors not directly

related to income over time and for which we have data, including internet use by local

households (see Table 1b for a complete list).

       Our hypothesis is that increases in local business use of advanced internet will be

associated with growth in local wages: A test of β > 0 against the null of β = 0.



                                                 9
       Step 2, Use of the internet and convergence/divergence: We test the predictions of our

framework against the starkest alternative, that the internet would improve growth prospects in

many locations, and especially in poor, economically isolated locations where internet services

may be particularly valued for lowering communications costs.

       In our first approach we test the simplest version of this hypothesis, namely, that the

internet leads to divergence in local wages:

       (2)     Log(Yi00)- Log(Yi95) =αXi+βInterneti+φ(Interneti×HighIncomei) +εi,

       Here, φ measures the difference in the relationship between wages and advanced internet

for higher and lower income counties. Divergence caused by the internet will produce φ > 0 and

convergence φ < 0 against a null of φ = 0. Rejecting the null does not depend on β, but the

estimate for β (combined with the estimate for φ) does shape our interpretation of the effect.

       Focusing on income is suggestive, but our framework emphasizes how the presence of

local county-level characteristics such as skills (measured by education), population, and IT-

intensity shape the relationship between advanced internet investment and local wages. We focus

in particular on the extreme position that locations with the combination of these factors and

income will exhibit the strongest relationship between advanced internet and wage growth. We

use this extreme position because it provides a way to simplify the underlying five-way

interaction into a single variable. Those counties that score high on all factors are termed

HighAllFactors. To investigate these comparative statics of our framework, we estimate the

following:

       (3)    Log(Yi00)- Log(Yi95) = α1Xi+βInterneti+φ1(Interneti×HighIncomei)
              + φ2(Interneti×HighEducationi) + φ3(Interneti×HighPopulationi)
              + φ4(Interneti×HighITIntensityi)+ φ5(Interneti×HighAllFactorsi) +εi,

       Here, φ1 measures the difference between counties with high and low incomes, and φ5

measures differences between counties with HighAllFactors and other counties. If φ1 = 0 but
                                                10
φ5 > 0, then divergence in incomes is isolated to locations with high income, education,

population, and IT-intensity.

       A finding of φ1 = 0 but φ5 > 0 also has implications for identification in the presence of

potential omitted variables. If this result is a false positive caused by positive covariance between

changes in εi and advanced internet investment, then it suggests this covariance is isolated only

to locations that have a high income. While it is always possible that such unobservables may

exist, we find it difficult to identify a specific economic mechanism that produces such

unobservables in just a limited number of places.

       More generally, a potential concern in this framework is that unobservable changes to

local firm or worker characteristics may be correlated with both wage growth and internet use.

We provide considerable suggestive evidence that, when combined, shows that advanced internet

investment is strongly correlated with local wage growth. First, as noted above, we include many

controls for the initial conditions of the county to address omitted variables bias at the county

level. Additionally, we include controls for changes in county characteristics such as population

and age distribution. We also show results with controls for changes in closely related margins of

consumer and business IT investment—such as basic internet investment, PCs per employee, and

internet use at home— changes that vary considerably across locations. If advanced internet

investment is associated with wage growth controlling for these other margins of IT investment,

then omitted variable bias must be specific to advanced internet.

       Second, we present instrumental variables regressions that use measures of local

telecommunications infrastructure costs, local industry, and the programming capabilities of

related locations as instruments for local internet investment. As we describe in greater detail

below, changes in the values of these instruments will proxy for variance in the local costs of

advanced internet but are unlikely to be systematically correlated with local wage growth.

                                                 11
        Finally, the internet’s sudden deployment gives us an additional test for the role of

location-specific omitted variables: It enables us to employ a useful falsification test. We should

not see any affiliation between internet investment and the divergence in local economic activity

before 1995.10 If our assumptions of the orthogonality between the internet and changes in local

unobservables are violated, then our data will produce false positive associations between future

use and wage divergence in a period prior to 1995. If we find false positives, then it suggests that

violations of our identification assumptions are artificially inducing a divergence between the

counties that were already doing well and the other counties in the sample. If not, then it boosts

confidence in our exogeneity assumptions.


     4. Data

        To measure how internet investment influenced growth in wages, we combine several

data sources about medium and large establishments and about US counties.11 Our IT data come

from the Harte Hanks Market Intelligence Computer Intelligence Technology database (hereafter

CI database). The database contains rich establishment- and firm-level data including the number

of employees, personal computers per employee, and use of internet applications. Harte Hanks

collects this information to resell as a tool for the marketing divisions of technology companies.

Other economic researchers have used this source as a fruitful way to learn about enterprise IT

use.12 Interview teams survey establishments throughout the calendar year; our sample contains

the most current information as of December 2000.



10
   Dating the rise of the commercial internet is not an exact science, but a few well-known events provide useful
benchmark for understanding why investment began to boom in 1996 and not before. The first non-beta version of
the Netscape browser became available in early 1995, followed by the firm’s IPO in August 1995. Certainly no
serious vendor in IT markets was ignoring the commercial internet by December 1995, after Microsoft’s
announcement of its change in strategy, neither was any large-scale investor in IT applications.
11
   This section contains an overview of our data. Further details—in particular on the construction of our measure of
internet investment and of our controls—are available in the Data Appendix.
12
   There is an increasingly long list of papers that have built on this data source and its predecessor from CI,
including our own prior work.
                                                         12
        Harte Hanks tracks over 300,000 establishments in the United States. We exclude

government, military, and nonprofit establishments because the availability of advanced internet

for these establishments and their relationship between adoption and labor demand is likely to be

systematically different than for private establishments. For example, many military

establishments had access to ARPANET as early as 1970. Furthermore, our framework

emphasizing a link between the price of computing capital and wages is focused on for-profit

enterprises. Our sample from the CI database contains commercial establishments with over 100

employees—in total 86,879 establishments.13 While the sample only includes relatively large

establishments, we do not view this as a problem because very few small establishments

deployed advanced internet technology in the late 1990s. The primary investors were large

establishments making large-scale enterprise-wide investments worth tens of millions of dollars,

and, in some large multi-establishment organizations, hundreds of millions of dollars per year.14

        We focus on those facets of internet technology that became available only after 1995 in

a variety of different uses and applications. Our raw data include at least twenty different specific

applications, from basic access to software for internet-enabled ERP business applications

software. Advanced internet involves frontier technologies and significant adaptation costs. We

identify advanced internet from the presence of substantial investments in e-commerce or e-

business applications.15

        We stress that the investments we consider include several aspects of an enterprise’s

operations, not just the most visible downstream interactions with customers. These often


13
   Establishments were surveyed at different times from June 1998 to December 2000. To control for increasing
adoption rates over time, we reweight our adoption data by the ratio of average adoption rates in our sample between
the month of the survey and the end of 2000.
14
   All our available evidence suggests that adoption monotonically increased in firm size, even controlling for many
other determinants. Hence, our sample represents the vast majority of adopters.
15
   In previous work this was labeled enhancement because it enhanced existing IT processes and contrasted with
participation, that is, the use of basic internet technologies, such as email or browsing (e.g. Forman, Goldfarb, and
Greenstein 2002, 2005). In this paper, the contrasts are not the central focus, so we simply call it advanced internet,
and, when necessary, we will contrast it with basic internet and personal computers.
                                                          13
involve upstream communication with suppliers and/or new methods for organizing production,

procurement, and sales practices. We look for commitment to two or more of the following

internet-based applications: ERP, customer service, education, extranet, publications, purchasing,

or technical support. Most often, these technologies involve inter-establishment communication

and substantial changes to business processes. We also experimented with a variety of alternative

measures of business internet use and our results are qualitatively similar under these alternative

definitions.

       To obtain location-level measures of the extent of advanced internet investment, we

compute average rates of use for a location. Because the distribution of establishments over

industries may be different in our sample from that of the population, we compare the number of

establishments in our database to the number of establishments in the Census. We calculate the

total number of establishments with more than 50 employees in the Census Bureau’s 1999

County Business Patterns data and the number of establishments in our database for each two-

digit North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code in each location. We then

calculate the total number in each location. Therefore, to account for over- and under-sampling

in the Harte Hanks data, we weight a NAICS-location by

        Total # of census establishments in location-NAICS
            Total # of census establishments in location
             Total # of establishments in our data in location
        ×
          Total # of establishments in our data in location-NAICS

       We sum the weighted county-NAICS-level rates of use across NAICS within a county to

obtain county-level estimates of the extent of advanced internet investment. We show robustness

to alternative weighting schemes.

       Prior research has shown that this measure has several attractive properties. For example,

when aggregated to the industry level, this measure positively correlates with Bureau of

Economic Analysis measures of industry-level differences in IT investment, as we would expect.
                                                  14
Examples of industries that tend to have high advanced internet investment are Electronics

Manufacturing, Automobile Manufacturing and Distribution, and Financial Services (Forman,

Goldfarb, and Greenstein, 2002). Yet, it captures more than just the industry, varying

considerably across establishments in different firms and regions. Among the biggest cities, areas

with high use are those where a high fraction of local employment is in internet-intensive (as

well as IT-intensive) industries, such as the San Francisco Bay Area, Seattle, Denver, and

Houston (Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein 2005). Thus, both the industry composition and the

features of local areas shape use in the direction that economic intuition would forecast.

       We obtain county-level data about businesses on average weekly wages paid and total

employment from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages, a cooperative program of

the Bureau of Labor Statistics and the State Employment Security Agencies. Matching these data

to our internet data leaves a total of 2743 county observations. We drop 372 of the total 3115

counties because we lack data on internet investment. We retain almost every urban and

suburban county, as well as most rural ones. The vast majority of the dropped counties come

from the lowest quartile of the population distribution. Results are robust to using multiple

imputation to deal with the missing data.

       To examine divergence, we use our previously defined set of factors as variables to

interact with our measure of advanced internet. We focus on the roles of income, education,

population, and IT-intensity. The data on population, education, and income come from the 1990

US Census. For IT-intensity, we measure the fraction of firms in IT-using and IT-producing

industries in the county as of 1995 from the US Census County Business Patterns data. National

aggregate data shows that such industries have unusually high returns from investment in IT in

the 1990s. We define these industries using the classification reported in Jorgenson, Ho, and

Stiroh (2005, p. 93).


                                                15
        We combine these data with county-level information from a variety of sources. This

information allows us to control for the underlying propensity of the counties to grow and

innovate. First, the 1990 US Census provides county-level information on population, median

income, net migration to the county (from 1995 data), and the percentage of university graduates,

high school graduates, African Americans, persons below the poverty line, and persons over age

65. We also use the 2000 US Census to control for changes in non-income-related factors:

population, net migration to the county, and percentages of university graduates, high school

graduates, persons over age 65, and African Americans. The 2000 Current Population Survey

(CPS) Computer and Internet Use Supplement provides our data on the percentage of county

households adopting the internet at home. We use four measures of county-level propensity to

innovate: (1) The number of students in Carnegie rank 1 research universities in 1990, (2) The

fraction of students enrolled in engineering programs, (3) The percentage of the county’s

workforce in professional occupations in 1990, and (4) The number of patents granted in the

1980s in that county, as found in the NBER patent database.16

        Table 1a includes descriptive statistics on IT use and our measures of local wages and

employment. Table 1b includes a description of control variables.


     5. Empirical Results

        We initially establish a link between advanced internet and wages, and show that

advanced internet technology differs from basic internet and personal computers. We then

present the main result that advanced internet investment is only associated with wage growth in

counties with high levels of income, education, population, and IT-intensity industry. This is

followed by robustness checks, instrumental variables analysis, and an analysis of the timing of

the relationship between internet investment and wage growth in the counties that were already

16
   Downes and Greenstein (2007) showed that the first three factors help explain availability of internet
infrastructure such as ISPs.
                                                   16
doing well. Finally, we explore some additional implications of advanced internet investment.


5.1 Internet investment and average wages

       In Table 2, we show the baseline results across counties. Column 1 shows the correlation

between advanced internet investment and wage growth at the county level without any controls.

As suggested by the scatterplots in Figure 1, the correlation is significant and positive. Column 2

provides what we view as our main specification: Namely, it includes controls for levels of

presample demographics (such as county income and population in 1990) and presample

innovativeness. It also includes controls for changes in non-income demographics (such as

population from 1990 to 2000 and net migration from 1990 to 2000) and changes in home

internet adoption (effectively zero in 1995). Column (3) uses an alternative weighting for the

advanced internet variable, equal to Total number of establishments in our data in location-

NAICS divided by Total # of census establishments in locations-NAICS. Column 4 includes the

370 counties which contained no firms surveyed by Harte Hanks (and therefore lacking internet

data). We use multiple imputation (from the values for the other county-level covariates) to

impute values for the missing data.

       In the main specification the coefficient on advanced internet is 0.0278. That is, regions

with an average level of advanced internet (8.9%) experienced wage growth 0.247 percentage

points above that of regions with no internet use. A one standard deviation increase in the use of

the internet is associated with 0.370 percentage point increase in wage growth. The data are

skewed, so it is also interesting to look at the top decile of advanced internet, which is 21.6%.

That leads to a 0.353 percentage point increase in wage growth above the mean. Consistent with

Figure 1a, this suggests that advanced internet was not the primary force behind the 20% wage

growth across all counties in our data from 1995 to 2000.



                                                17
        Even with such a small coefficient, omitted variable bias is an important concern in this

analysis. Below, after presenting our main results on regional variation in the relationship

between wage growth and internet investment, we use instruments and the timing of divergence

to argue for a causal explanation of our results.

        In Table 3, we examine whether this first set of findings are specific to advanced internet,

or if advanced internet might proxy for other kinds of IT. We examine how county-level wages

change with advanced internet investment, basic internet investment, and PCs per employee.

These are all measured using the Harte Hanks database and aggregated to the county level.17

        The results suggest that advanced internet is distinct from other measures of IT. While

PCs per employee are positively correlated with wage growth, this relationship is not statistically

significant. Furthermore, including PCs per employee and basic internet as controls does not

substantially change the marginal relationship between advanced internet and wages. This table

suggests that advanced internet investment is not simply a surrogate measure of IT intensity but

that the relationship between wage growth and advanced internet is related to advanced internet

technology in particular.

        The lack of correlation between basic internet technologies (e.g., email and web

browsing) and wage growth is surprising because levels of adoption were high across

establishments and locations by 2000. Revealed preference suggests the benefits were high,

especially for a technology with so little use only five years earlier. We speculate that our

intuition about revealed preference applies to an inframarginal adopter: When the technology is

almost universally adopted, the data may be identifying an uninteresting margin in the benefits of

participation. In other words, with basic internet technology there may simply be too little

variation in the independent variable.


17
  Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein (2005) use the same measure of basic internet investment and show it was widely
adopted by 2000. The measure of PCs per employee resembles that used by Beaudry, Doms, and Lewis (2006).
                                                      18
5.2 When Was Advanced Internet Investment Related to Local Wage Growth?

        In this section, we provide evidence that advanced internet investment led to divergence

in wages across counties. In particular, as suggested by our framework, advanced internet

investment was especially correlated with county-level wage increases in counties with high

income, education, and population, and a large percentage of IT-intensive firms.

        Based on equations (2) and (3), our regression results in Table 4 explore this pattern in

several steps. Column 1 shows that advanced internet is significantly associated with wage

growth in counties in the top quartile of median income as of 1990. In contrast, counties in other

quartiles with high levels of advanced internet did not experience especially rapid wage growth.

In short, advanced internet contributes to wage divergence.

        Columns 2 through 4 show how the impact of advanced internet investment is influenced

by variation in local education levels, IT-intensity, and population. Like Column 1, Column 2

shows that advanced internet use is associated with wage growth only for high education

counties. The similarity of results is not surprising because 60% of the counties overlap. Column

3 shows that counties with over 150,000 people display a strong association between advanced

internet use and wage growth.18

        Column 4 examines counties in the top quartile in IT-intensity. This specification shows

that there is no statistically significant incremental gain from advanced internet investment in

high IT-intensity counties. Still, we include IT-intensity for three reasons. First and perhaps most

importantly, IT-intensity has been emphasized in much of the previous literature linking IT to

average productivity and therefore forms part of the framework presented in section 2. Second,

the coefficient is positive and when added to the coefficient on the main effect in the first row, it




18
   We use 150,000 as our threshold though results are robust to a continuous specification and to using other
thresholds such as 100,000 and 200,000.
                                                     19
is significantly different from zero with 95% confidence. Third, we tried several specifications

and the coefficient was sometimes significantly positive and never negative.

        Column 5 shows that when we include all four measures of pre-internet county strength

(income, education, population, and IT-intensity), only population appears significant. This may

not be surprising given that there is considerable overlap between the measures: Each measure

contains roughly 680 counties (high population, which is not based on quartiles, contains 315),

of which 163 are in the top group in all measures. Column 6 shows that in these 163 counties

advanced internet is strongly correlated with wage growth. Column 7 shows that it is the

combination of more than one factor that drives the relationship between advanced internet and

wage growth.

         What does this mean? Increases in advanced internet investment will lead to higher wage

growth in the 163 counties than in the other 2580 counties in the sample. These results suggest

that advanced internet is related to 22.7% (6.5 percentage points out of 28.6 on average) of the

total wage growth in the 163 counties that were already doing well in 1990. For the other

counties, advanced internet explains just 1% (0.21 percentage points out of 20.5 on average) of

overall wage growth.19 Using back of the envelope calculations, this means that advanced

internet explains over half of the 8.1 percentage point difference in wage growth between the

average for those 163 counties and the other 2580 counties in the sample.20 These 163 counties

represent 42% of the US population. While our results do not pertain to all of the population in

these counties, we believe it is evidence that the internet explains a substantial part of faster

wage growth for the skilled labor force in those areas.


19
   These calculations use the coefficient estimates in Table 4 column 6, the average internet use for the 163 counties,
and the average internet use in all other counties.
20
   More precisely, for the approximately 40 counties out of the sample of 163 counties with low internet investment,
the investment contributes little to explaining the difference in wage growth. Similarly, for the approximately 80
counties with mean values or higher, the internet explains as much as half and or more of the differences in wage
growth. Indeed, at the max 0.253 (Arapahoe, CO) the internet can explain all the additional wage growth.
                                                          20
        The core results of Table 4 are robust to using continuous measures of income, education,

population, and IT-intensity. Income loses statistical significance and IT-intensity gains

significance, but the significance and importance of the interaction term remains. Furthermore,

adding all two-way interactions to Column 6 (i.e., high income and high education, high income

and high population, etc.) does not change the core result: There is a large and significant

coefficient for the 163 counties that were already doing well on all four measures.21

        We stress these results reflect a general experience found in a special set of urban

counties. It does not arise solely from the inordinate influence of canonical outliers. For example,

removing Santa Clara or San Francisco from the data set does not change the qualitative results.

In part, this should not be surprising; no single variable, not even advanced internet investment,

could possibly explain the anomalous experience in Santa Clara in this time period (i.e., over

80% wage growth in five years). More to the point, these counties shared similar demographic

and industrial traits prior to the internet’s diffusion and reacted to the adoption and use of the

internet in business with similar economic experiences, and heterogeniety in experience is

consistent with the general explanation. Counties with high advanced internet use and wage

growth are often centers of IT production and use; counties with high advanced internet use but

low wage growth are often small cities where the labor markets are not very tight; and counties

with high wage growth but low internet use are relatively rare.22




21
   These results are available in the Appendix. Adding the complete set of three-way interactions leads everything to
be insignificant. There is likely too much overlap in the measures to get significant estimates.
22
   Counties among the top 163 that have high advanced internet use and wage growth (both at least one standard
deviation above the mean) include San Mateo and Santa Clara CA (both in San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose MSA);
Boulder and Arapahoe CO (Denver-Boulder-Greeley MSA); Fairfax VA (Washington-Baltimore MSA); Travis TX
(Austin-San Marcos MSA); and Washington OR (Portland-Salem MSA). Those with high advanced internet use
(one standard deviation above mean) but relatively low wage growth (below mean) include Madison AL (Huntsville
AL MSA), Lake OH (Cleveland-Akron MSA), Kalamazoo MI (Kalamazoo-Battle Creek MSA), and Middlesex CT
(New London-Norwich MSA). Only Hudson NJ (New York-Northern New Jersey-Long Island MSA), has high
wage growth (one standard deviation above mean) but relatively low advanced internet use (below mean).

                                                         21
5.3: Justifying a causal interpretation: Instrumental variables and the timing of divergence

           This section provides the results of a variety of additional tests we run to address omitted

variable bias and simultaneity. We first discuss the results of a series of instrumental variables

estimates. Three of our instruments are correlated with local costs of internet investment. First,

we instrument using variance in the costs of internet deployment among establishments in multi-

establishment firms in the county. We measure the total number of programmers in other

establishments and other counties, but in the same firm. Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein

(2008) show that establishments that are part of firms with many programmers in other locations

adopt faster (even if there are few programmers at the focal establishment). They argue for a

causal interpretation, partly because these programmers would have been hired for reasons other

than internet investment. In other words, programmers elsewhere in the firm make internet

investment at the focal establishment more likely. We use the average across establishments

within a county as an instrument. In these regressions, we also include a control for multi-

establishment firms, since the variable is defined only for such firms.

           Our second instrument is the number of local county connections to ARPANET—a wide

area data communications network that was a predecessor of the internet—which will capture

local data communications infrastructure and expertise.

           Our third instrument proxies for local deployment costs: the year in which the local state

capped the prices that ILECs could charge entrants, including data communications companies.23

By influencing local costs of internet deployment through additional regulation, this variable

should be correlated with local county internet adoption.

           All three of these variables are unlikely to be correlated with unobservables influencing

local wage growth. Our programmers variable reflects the presence of IT skills in linked

counties; ARPANET reflects historical decisions (from the 1970s) about connectivity to
23
     Based on data from Abel and Clements (1998).
                                                    22
Department of Defense or US university networks; and price caps reflect exogenous state

government decisions.

        Our last instrument is an industry-level proxy of the demand for advanced internet

investment outside the focal county, which is sometimes called a Bartik index.24 For each

county, we compute the mean propensity to adopt internet by industry. This is average industry

adoption excluding the establishments in the focal county. We then sum these industry

propensities up, using as weights the percentage of establishments in each industry in the local

county.25 To the extent that it reflects industry-level propensities to adopt advanced internet and

variance in industry composition across counties this variable should be correlated with

adoption; however it excludes local and establishment-specific features of the county and so

should be uncorrelated with local wage growth. This instrument therefore links industry to wage

growth, and assumes advanced internet as the mechanism.

        Table 5 presents the results of LIML instrumental variable estimates of Table 2 Column

2. We present the results of just-identified median-unbiased results using only the programmers

and Bartik index instruments in Columns 1 and 2, a combination of these two instruments in

Column 3, and the combination of all four of our instruments in Column 4. We focus on the

programmers and Bartik instruments because they are stronger in the first stage. The first stage

results suggest that advanced internet investment is increasing in the number of linked

programmers found elsewhere in county establishments, in industry propensity to adopt

advanced internet, (weakly) in the number of historical ARPANET nodes, and (weakly) when

the state adopted price cap regulations earlier. The F-statistic for the first stage instruments

ranges from 14.16 for our just-identified estimates using programmers to a weaker 2.84 for our


24
  Our index shares similarities with similar indexes used by Bartik (1991) and Blanchard and Katz (1992).
25
   Formally, for each county i, and industry j, compute  , the average adoption rate for industry j excluding the
establishments in county i. The instrument is equal to   ∑   , where  is the share of establishments in
industry j in county i.
                                                         23
just-identified estimates using the Bartik measure of industry propensity to adopt advanced

internet. The results of these regressions remain qualitatively similar to our main specification in

Column 2 of Table 2, with the coefficient on advanced internet remaining statistically significant

at the 5% level in all results except for those in Column 2. A Hausman test retains the null that

the coefficients in Table 5 and Column 2 of Table 2 are the same with p- ranging between 0.9982

and 1.0000. For the overidentified regressions, the p-value of the overidentification test statistic

ranges between 0.2110 and 0.2229. While the results are somewhat noisy, consistent with our

OLS estimates in Table 2 these IV estimates do suggest a statistically significant but

economically weak link between advanced internet investment and wage growth.

       Next, we turn to instrumental variables analysis of our stronger divergence results. Table

6 presents the results of regressions that instrument for advanced internet and its interaction with

HighAllFactors. We interact each of our original instruments with an indicator for being located

in one of the HighAllFactors counties. The resulting instruments are combined with the original

set to form a total of 8 instruments for 2 potentially endogenous variables. The F-statistics for the

first stage estimates for advanced internet range from 10.26 to 11.04 and for the first stage of

advanced internet and HighAllFactors they range from 161.08 to 175.35. Therefore, as is clear

from the significance of the interactions in the first stage, the instruments for the HighAllFactors

and advanced internet interaction are quite strong. The second stage estimates support the results

of Column 6 of Table 4 that the marginal effect of advanced internet on local wages is stronger

in HighAllFactors counties than in other counties. Moreover, with the exception of Column 1,

advanced internet’s interaction with HighAllFactors is positive and statistically significant, and

of similar magnitude to the related estimate in Column 6 of Table 4. Further, a Hausman test

retains the null that the coefficients in Table 6 and Column 6 of Table 4 are the same (with p-

values ranging between 0.9998 and 1.0000). Further, in Columns 3 and 4, the p-value of the


                                                 24
overidentification test statistic ranges between 0.1738 and 0.3611. Because of the strength of the

interacted instruments in the first stage and the robustness of the results in the second stage, we

view Table 6 as suggestive of a causal relationship from advanced internet investment to wage

growth.

       Next, we examine the timing of divergence. As noted above, advanced internet

investment should only contribute to divergence in wages in the latter half of the 1990s. So, as a

falsification test, we examine whether our measure of internet investment contributes to

divergence prior to 1995.

       Figure 2 provides a graphical representation of the results of this falsification test. It

shows a replication of the results in Column 6 of Table 4 using a panel of all years from 1990 to

2000. The controls are the same as in Column 6 and the dependent variable is logged wages. We

interact year dummies from 1991 to 2000 with the measure of advanced internet (as of 2000) and

the interaction of advanced internet with HighAllFactors. This generates a measure of the

association between advanced internet (measured as of 2000) and wage divergence over the

period. We expect no relationship between the advanced internet measure and divergence prior

to the actual diffusion of the internet. Figure 2 clearly shows this pattern: advanced internet is not

correlated with divergence until 1996 (when the internet began to diffuse widely). Between 1991

and 1995 the coefficients on both variables are statistically indistinguishable from zero in every

year. In other words, there is no evidence of a correlation between advanced internet investment

and divergence between 1990 and 1995. Starting in 1996, we begin to see divergence associated

with advanced internet investment. In these latter years, the association between advanced

internet and local wage growth in well-off counties is larger than that in other counties, and this

difference is statistically significant. Further, all of the coefficients for the interaction between




                                                 25
advanced internet and HighAllFactors counties over 1996-2000 are greater than the coefficients

for the same interaction over 1991-1994 (and these differences are also statistically significant).


5.4 Additional Implications of Advanced Internet Investment

       In this section we discuss several additional implications of our labor demand framework

and extensions of our main results. In particular, we first examine the implications of advanced

internet investment for growth in employment. Next, we study the implications for wages in

counties where the elasticity of supply is likely to be high. We also examine whether the effects

persisted after the dot-com crash.

       In Table 7 we examine the implications of advanced internet investment for employment

growth. The results are consistent with the prediction that advanced internet increased labor

demand in counties with high skill, income, population, and levels of IT-intensive firms. Column

2 shows that employment growth is significantly correlated with advanced internet in

HighAllFactors counties (the coefficient is 0.2025). At average values of advanced internet

within HighAllFactors counties (13.5%), this suggests that HighAllFactors counties experienced

employment growth 2.7 percentage points larger than all other counties as a result of investment

in advanced internet. In addition, our findings show no measurable relationship between

advanced internet and employment for other counties.

       One implication of our framework is that the effects of advanced internet on local wages

will be strongest in places with tight labor markets, particularly for skilled workers. Table 8

shows the results of two approaches to explore this hypothesis. In Columns 1 through 4 we

provide estimates of the association between advanced internet and local wages for subsamples

of counties where the overall unemployment rate and unemployment rate among skilled workers

(college graduates and above) was above and below the median. We use 1990 Census data from



                                                 26
the 532 metropolitan area counties for which skilled unemployment data are available.26 Re-

estimating the model in Column 2 of Table 2 over each of these subsamples demonstrates a clear

pattern. While advanced internet has an economically strong and statistically significant

association with local wages for counties where the overall unemployment and skilled

unemployment rate are below the median, there is no such connection between advanced internet

and local wages in other counties.

        In Columns 5 and 6 of Table 8 we examine the association between advanced internet

and wages for counties inside and outside the rust belt.27 Rust belt counties will have, on

average, both more elastic labor markets and weak output markets relative to other counties.

Outside of the rust belt we find the results continue to hold: advanced internet is related to local

wage growth. However, we find no connection between advanced internet and wage growth

within the rust belt. In sum, we interpret the results of Table 8 as providing evidence in support

of our framework’s prediction about the implications for advanced internet in locations where

local labor supply is elastic: while the labor demand curve may shift in response to advanced

internet investment, wages do not adjust accordingly.

        Table 9 examines whether the counties that gained disproportionately from the internet

lost these gains after the dot-com crash. Specifically, it repeats the regressions in Column 2 of

Table 2 and Column 6 of Table 4, but uses wage growth between 1999 and 2005 as the

dependent variable. The results suggest that these counties maintained their new position in

absolute terms. They did not grow faster, but their gains were not reversed either.




26
   Our source of unemployment data is the 5% microdata sample from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series
(IPUMS) data. We focus on metropolitan area counties because non-metro areas have small cell sizes and because
converting from public use microdata areas (in the IPUMS data) to counties gives rise to additional errors in
variables in our sample.
27
   The rust belt is defined as Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, Wisconsin, Michigan, New York outside of the New York City
CMSA, Pennsylvania outside of the Philadelphia CMSA, Maryland, and West Virginia.
                                                       27
5.5 Open Issues about Biased Technical Change

       Our study emphasizes the role of regional variation in the economic impact of

information technology: advanced internet investments benefited locations that were already

doing well. Furthermore, the benefits were not simply accruing to the IT-producing firms in

Silicon Valley and Route 128 outside Boston. Combined, this raises a number of questions that

are beyond the scope of currently available data.

       Specifically, our findings motivate further research on the mechanisms connecting these

results to the extant literature on skill-biased technical change. Two broad hypotheses are

consistent with our results: (1) It is primarily workers in the information technology sector whose

wages rise with advanced internet, and their wages rise sufficiently in some places to increase

average wages. (2) The gains from advanced internet investment are experienced throughout the

skilled workforce. Unfortunately, outside of a handful of major cities, consistent wage data at the

county level for programmers and other IT-intensive occupations were not kept earlier than

1999. This means that our current framework is unable to distinguish between these hypotheses.

        A second open question relates to the long run impact of advanced internet investments

(and information and communication technology more generally) on geographic variation in

wages. With time, labor mobility might dampen the impact of further investments in advanced

internet on wage disparity, or perhaps that the wage divergence may disappear over time. While

the results of Table 9 suggest that there was no reversion by 2005, understanding the longer run

effects requires a more recent census of advanced internet investment. Following the dot-com

crash, Harte Hanks scaled back the scope of their survey and, to our knowledge, no private or

public sector survey has arisen to take its place. In the absence of a new survey, it will be

difficult to assess the impact of the internet’s diffusion.




                                                  28
       A third open question is the impact of advanced internet investment on real wages. We do

not attempt to measure whether nominal wage increases become permanent changes in worker

income or eventually become a transfer to landowners through higher rents. The distinction is

inessential to our goal of measuring geographic variance in wage growth across the country.


6. Discussion

       In this study, we find evidence of an association between investment in advanced internet

technology and local wage growth. We also find that wage gains associated with advanced

internet investment were isolated to relatively populated locations in which IT production and

use were concentrated, and where income and skills were high. This appears to have led to a one-

time relative gain in wages for these locations. In addition, we find evidence that use of advanced

internet was associated with employment growth in these top locations, but find little evidence of

a connection between internet and employment growth elsewhere. Last, we find that the

association between internet and wages holds primarily where labor markets were tight.

       Thus, despite recent assertions that internet use may lower the costs of geographically

isolated economic activity, there is no evidence in our data that advanced internet contributed to

convergence in wages. In particular, our results suggest the existence of a considerable divide in

the benefits of advanced internet investment across urban and rural areas.

       Because our work suggests that the returns to IT use may be higher when several factors

appear together, we believe the debate about the economic impact of IT must change to focus

attention on regional variation. Our work also points to the key role the internet played in recent

experience. That suggests the impact of its diffusion should be treated as a factor quite distinct

from other aspects of computing, such as the impact of the PC.

       Our finding that the internet does not contribute to convergence runs counter to the

motivations for a wide array of policies encouraging internet business use outside of urban areas,

                                                29
such as policies to subsidize rural broadband development. In the absence of considerable

investment in human (and computing) capital, our results suggest that efforts to subsidize

internet development in low density settings would have little economic impact.



References

Abel, Jaison and Michael E. Clements. 1998. A time series and cross sectional classification of
       state regulatory policy adopted for local exchange carriers," NRRI report 98-25,
       Columbus Ohio, The National Regulatory Research Institute. December.

Arora, Ashish and Alfonso Gambardella. 2005. From Underdogs to Tigers: The Rise and
       Growth of the Software Industry in Brazil, China, Ireland, and Israel. Oxford: Oxford
       University Press.

Autor, David, Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2006. The Polarization of the U.S.
       Labor Market. American Economic Review 96(2): 189-194.

———, Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane. 2003. The Skill Content of Recent Technological
   Change: An Empirical Exploration. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4), 1279–334.

Barro, R. J. and X. Sala-i-Martin. 1991 Convergence across States and Regions. Brookings
       Papers on Economic Activity 1: 107-158.

Bartik, Timothy. 1991. Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?
        Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute.

Beaudry, Paul, Mark Doms, and Ethan Lewis. 2006. Endogenous Skill Bias in Technology
      Adoption: City-Level Evidence from the IT Revolution. Federal Reserve Bank of San
      Francisco. Working Paper #06-24.

Blanchard, Olivier and Lawrence Katz. 1992. Regional Evolutions. Brookings Papers on
      Economic Activity 1992: 1-61.

Bloom, Nicholas, Luis Garicano, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen. 2009. The distinct
      effects of Information Technology and Communication Technology on Firm
      Organization. NBER Working Paper #14975.

Bloom, Nicholas, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen. 2007. Americans Do IT Better: US
      Multinationals and the Productivity Miracle. CEP Discussion Paper No. 788.

Brynjolfsson, Erik and Lorin Hitt. 2003. Computing Productivity: Firm-Level Evidence. Review
       of Economics and Statistics 85(4): 793-808.

Cairncross, F. 1997. The Death of Distance. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

                                               30
Downes, Tom and Shane Greenstein. 2007. Understanding Why Universal Service Obligations
     May be Unnecessary: The Private Development of Local Internet Access Markets.
     Journal of Urban Economics 62(1): 2–26.

Forman, Chris and Avi Goldfarb. 2006. Diffusion of Information and Communication
      Technologies to Businesses. In Handbook of Information Systems, Volume 1: Economics
      and Information Systems, ed. Terrence Hendershott. 1–52. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

———, ———, and Shane Greenstein. 2002. Digital Dispersion: An Industrial and Geographic
   Census of Commercial Internet Use. NBER Working Paper #9287.

———, ———, and———. 2005. How Did Location Affect the Adoption of the Commercial
   Internet? Global Village vs Urban Density. Journal of Urban Economics 58(3): 389–420.

———, ———, and———. 2008. Understanding the Inputs into Innovation: Do Cities
   Substitute for Internal Firm Resources? Journal of Economics and Management Strategy
   17(2): 295–316.

Friedman, Thomas. 2005. The World is Flat: A Brief History of the Twenty-First Century. New
      York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux.

Garicano, Luis and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2006. Organization and Inequality in a Knowledge
       Economy. Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(4): 1383-1485.
Glaeser, E. L., H. D. Kallal, J. A. Scheinkman, and A. Shleifer. 1992. Growth in Cities. Journal
       of Political Economy 100: 1126–52.

——— and Giacomo A. M. Ponzetto. 2007. Did the Death of Distance Hurt Detroit and Help
   New York? NBER Working Paper 13710.

Greenstein, Shane, 2010, “Innovative Conduct in Computing and Internet Markets,” (Eds)
       Bronwyn Hall and Nathan Rosenberg, Handbook of Economics of Technical Change.
Henderson, J. Vernon. 2003. Marshall’s Scale Economies. Journal of Urban Economics 53: 1-
      28.

Higgins, Matthew J., Daniel Levy, and Andrew T. Young. 2006. Growth and Convergence
      across the United States: Evidence from County-Level Data. Review of Economics and
      Statistics 88(4): 671–81.

Jorgenson, Dale, Mun S. Ho, and Kevin Stiroh. 2005. Productivity Volume 3: Information
       Technology and the American Growth Resurgence. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Katz, Lawrence F. and David H. Autor. 1999. Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings
       Inequality. In Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3A, eds. Orley Ashenfelter and
       David Card, 1463-1558.


                                              31
Kolko, Jed. 2002. Silicon Mountains, Silicon Molehills: Geographic concentration and
      convergence of internet industries in the US. Information Economics and Policy 14(2):
      211–32.

Magrini, Stefano. 2004. Regional (Di)Convergence. In Handbook of Regional and Urban
      Economics, Volume 4, eds. J. Vernon Henderson and Jacques-Francois Thisse, 2243–92.
      Amsterdam: Elsevier North-Holland. .

Marshall, Alfred. 1920. Principles of Economics. 8th edition. New York: Porcupine Press.

OECD. 2006. OECD Information Technology Outlook 2006. Paris: OECD.

Stiroh, Kevin J. 2002. Information Technology and the U.S. Productivity Revival: What Do the
        Industry Data Say? American Economic Review 92(5): 1559-76.




                                              32
Table 1a: Descriptive statistics for dependent variables, IT measures, and instruments (for 2000)
    Variable                             Mean      Std. Dev.    Minimum Maximum             Number of
                                                                                           observations
    Log(average weekly wage)             6.153     0.2189       5.4931       7.333          2743
    Log(employment)                      9.190     1.4695       4.3175       15.08          2743
    Advanced internet                    0.0890    0.1332       0            1              2743
    Basic internet                       0.7869    0.4499       0            1              2743
    PCs per employee                     0.2253    0.1719       0            1.937          2743
    Average number of programmers in
    other establishments in the same firm
                                            47.32       70.09          0              1137.6             2743
    Bartik index                            0.1126      0.0216         0              0.2664             2743
    ARPANET connections                     0.0215      0.2383         0              7                  2743
    Average cost per phone line by state    24.06       3.92           14.92          36.42              2743

    Table 1b: Description of control variables
    Variable                       Definition                                Source                      Mean
    Home internet use              Percentage of households with internet    Current Population Survey   0.444
                                   at home (2000)                            (CPS) internet Use
                                                                             Supplement (Census)
    Home internet data missing     Dummy indicating no data on home          Current Population Survey   0.9213
                                   internet use                              (CPS) internet Use
                                                                             Supplement (Census)
    Total Population               Total population as of Decennial          US Census                   89173
                                   Census (1990)
    % African American             % Population African American as of       US Census                   0.0908
                                   Decennial Census (1990)
    % University Graduates         % Population university graduates as of   US Census                   0.1379
                                   Decennial Census (1990)
    % High School Graduates        % Population high school graduates as     US Census                   0.6996
                                   of Decennial Census (1990)
    % Below Poverty Line           % Population below poverty line as of     US Census                   0.1622
                                   Decennial Census (1990)
    Median Household Income        Median county household income as of      US Census                   24493
                                   Decennial Census (1990)
    # enrolled in Carnegie Rank    Per capita number of students enrolled    Downes-Greenstein           0.0081
    1 research university          in local PhD-granting institutions        (2007)
    # in Engineering Program       Per capita number of students enrolled    Downes-Greenstein           0.0010
                                   in engineering programs at local          (2007)
                                   universities
    # Patents Granted in the       Total number of patents from inventors    USPTO                       155.7
    County in the 1980s            located in county, 1980-1989
    % professional                 % of county’s workforce employed in       US Census                   0.3258
                                   professional occupations
    Net Migration                  Net migration to county                   US Census                   123.5
    % Population over Age 65       % of county population over 65 as of      US Census                   0.1452
                                   Decennial Census




                                                            33
Table 2: Wages increase with internet use
                                (1)                           (2)                   (3)                    (4)
                                No controls                   Full set of           Alternative           Multiple imputation of
                                                              controls              weighting             missing data on
                                                                                                          advanced internet
Advanced internet                        0.0372               0.0278                0.0245                         0.0243
                                         (0.0132)***          (0.0126)**            (0.0111)**                   (0.0143)*
Home internet use                                             0.0823                0.0832                         0.0873
                                                              (0.0379)**            (0.0377)**                  (0.0393)**
Home internet data missing                                    0.0281                0.0288                         0.0337
                                                              (0.0170)*             (0.0170)*                    (0.1778)*
Log population in 1990                                        -0.0065               -0.0066                       -0.0037
                                                              (0.0019)***           (0.0019)***                  (0.0021)*
Percentage African Americans in                               0.0133                0.0134                         0.0232
 1990                                                         (0.0118)              (0.0118)                     (0.0130)*
Percentage university graduates                               0.5720                0.5731                         0.4219
 in 1990                                                      (0.0789)***           (0.0785)***                (0.0912)***
Percentage high school graduates                              -0.1555               -0.1539                       -0.0590
 in 1990                                                      (0.0520)***           (0.0521)***                   (0.0656)
Percentage below poverty line in                              -0.1615               -0.1605                       -0.0646
 1990                                                         (0.0464)***           (0.0464)***                   (0.0500)
Median income in 1990 ($000)                                  -0.0006               -0.0006                        0.0002
                                                              (0.0006)              (0.0006)                      (0.0007)
Percentage population attending                               0.0320                0.0311                         0.0322
  Carnegie Type 1 schools in 1990                             (0.0475)              (0.0467)                      (0.0463)
Percentage population enrolled in                             -0.2202               -0.2127                       -0.1197
  engineering program in 1990                                 (0.3630)              (0.3588)                      (0.3447)
# of patents granted to inventors in                          0.0165                0.0165                         0.0153
  the county in the 1980s (000)                               (0.0043)***           (0.0043)***                (0.0043)***
Percentage professional in 1995                               -0.0102               -0.0124                         0.448
                                                              (0.0535)              (0.0536)                      (0.0674)
Percentage of persons over age                                0.0443                0.0449                         0.1485
 65 in 1990                                                   (0.0513)              (0.0512)                    (0.0650)**
Net migration into the county in                              0.0033                0.0033                         0.0022
 1995 (000)                                                   (0.0032)              (0.0032)                      (0.0032)
Change in log total population                                0.0527                0.0522                         0.0820
 between 1990 and 2000                                        (0.0152)***           (0.0152)***                (0.0176)***
Change in percentage of African                               0.0265                0.0319                        -0.0422
 American 1990 to 2000                                        (0.0756)              (0.0754)                      (0.0814)
Change in percentage of university                            0.8219                0.8235                         0.6358
 graduates 1990 to 2000                                       (0.1604)***           (0.1605)***                (0.1799)***
Change in percentage of high                                  -0.0224               -0.0214                       0.07760
 school graduates 1990 to 2000                                (0.0947)              (0.0947)                      (0.1200)
Change in percentage of persons                               -0.5628               -0.5602                       -0.4853
 over age 65 1990 to 2000                                     (0.1192)***           (0.1192)***                (0.1326)***
Change in net migration into the                              0.0020                0.0020                         0.0011
 county 1990 to 2000 (000)                                    (0.0037)              (0.0037)                      (0.0037)
Constant                           0.1848                     0.2995                0.2983                         0.1597
                                   (0.0017)***                (0.0458)***           (0.0458)***                (0.0524)***
Observations                       2743                       2743                  2743                            3133
R-squared                          0.004                      0.131                 0.131                      N/A (F=12.4)
Dependent variable is change in logged wages from 1995 to 2000. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                       34
Table 3: Is advanced internet different from other measures of IT use?
                                                 (1)                  (2)                      (3)
                                            Compare all            Compare             Compare advanced
                                         three measures of advanced internet          internet and PCs per
                                               IT use          and basic internet           employee
Advanced internet                        0.0247               0.0261                 0.0248
                                         (0.0135)*            (0.0132)**             (0.0133)*
Basic internet                           0.0007               0.0050
                                         (0.0078)             (0.0075)
PCs per employee                         0.0152                                      0.0156
                                         (0.0108)                                    (0.0104)
Home internet use                        0.0822               0.0823                 0.0822
                                         (0.0379)**           (0.0378)**             (0.0379)**
Home internet data missing               0.0282               0.0279                 0.0282
                                         (0.0170)*            (0.0170)               (0.0170)*
Log population in 1990                   -0.0068              -0.0067                -0.0068
                                         (0.0019)***          (0.0019)***            (0.0019)***
Percentage African Americans in          0.0124               0.0134                 0.0123
  1990                                   (0.0119)             (0.0119)               (0.0118)
Percentage university graduates in       0.5590               0.5671                 0.5594
  1990                                   (0.0807)***          (0.0802)***            (0.0802)***
Percentage high school graduates in      -0.1589              -0.1569                -0.1587
  1990                                   (0.0522)***          (0.0522)***            (0.0521)***
Percentage below poverty line in         -0.1598              -0.1600                -0.1600
  1990                                   (0.0463)***          (0.0464)***            (0.0464)***
Median income in 1990 ($000)             -0.0006              -0.0005                -0.0006
                                         (0.0006)             (0.0006)               (0.0006)
Percentage population attending          0.0338               0.0323                 0.0338
  Carnegie Type 1 schools in 1990        (0.0480)             (0.0476)               (0.0480)
Percentage population enrolled in        -0.2357              -0.2162                -0.2367
  engineering program in 1990            (0.3647)             (0.3648)               (0.3644)
# of patents granted to inventors in the 0.0160               0.0164                 0.0160
  county in the 1980s (000)              (0.0043)***          (0.0043)***            (0.0043)***
Percentage professional in 1995          -0.0089              -0.0078                -0.0093
                                         (0.0543)             (0.0543)               (0.0537)
Percentage of persons over age 65 in     0.0470               0.0435                 0.0472
  1990                                   (0.0513)             (0.0512)               (0.0513)
Net migration into the county in         0.0034               0.0033                 0.0034
  1995 (000)                             (0.0032)             (0.0032)               (0.0032)
Change in log total population           0.0539               0.0528                 0.0539
  between 1990 and 2000                  (0.0153)***          (0.0152)***            (0.0153)***
Change in percentage of African          0.0251               0.0248                 0.0253
  American 1990 to 2000                  (0.0759)             (0.0759)               (0.0758)
Change in percentage of university       0.8161               0.8169                 0.8167
  graduates 1990 to 2000                 (0.1613)***          (0.1617)***            (0.1605)***
Change in percentage of high school      -0.0259              -0.0227                -0.0260
  graduates 1990 to 2000                 (0.0947)             (0.0948)               (0.0947)
Change in percentage of persons          -0.5621              -0.5629                -0.5620
  over age 65 1990 to 2000               (0.1190)***          (0.1191)***            (0.1190)***
Change in net migration into the         0.0022               0.0020                 0.0022
  county 1990 to 2000 (000)              (0.0037)             (0.0037)               (0.0037)
Constant                                 0.3006               0.2978                 0.3009
                                         (0.0460)***          (0.0460)***            (0.0458)***
Observations                             2743                 2743                   2743
R-squared                                0.13                 0.13                   0.13
        Dependent variable is change in logged wages from 1995 to 2000. Controls are the same as in Table 2.
        Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                35
Table 4: Effect primarily occurs in places that are already high income, education, IT-intensity, AND population
                                                        (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)             (7)
Advanced internet                                       0.0168          0.0120          0.0246         0.0214          0.0049         0.0239          0.0067
                                                        (0.0137)        (0.0125)        (0.0127)*      (0.0159)        (0.0149)       (0.0128)*       (0.0150)
Advanced internet and                                   0.0960                                                         0.0442                         0.0377
 High income county                                     (0.0389)**                                                     (0.0492)                       (0.0496)
Advanced internet and                                                   0.1101                                         0.0770                         0.0757
 High education county                                                  (0.0455)**                                     (0.0548)                       (0.0547)
Advanced internet and                                                                   0.3631                         0.2378                         0.0182
 High population county                                                                 (0.0934)***                    (0.1018)**                     (0.1027)
Advanced internet and                                                                                  0.0206          0.0134                         0.0102
 High IT-intensity county                                                                              (0.0228)        (0.0235)                       (0.0237)
Advanced internet and High income, education,                                                                                         0.4588          0.3393
 IT-intensity, and population county                                                                                                  (0.1585)***     (0.1904)*

Observations                                               2743         2743            2743             2743            2743           2743            2743
R2                                                         0.13         0.13            0.13             0.13            0.14           0.14            0.14
Dependent variable is change in logged wages from 1995 to 2000. In addition to the controls in table 2, regressions include dummies for the main effects of the interactions where
appropriate (high income, high eduction, high IT-intensity, high population, and high all factors). Internet at home is not included because Internet home data missing is collinear
with high population. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses.
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                                                        36
       Table 5: Instrumental variables analysis of Table 2 column 2
                                                      (1)             (2)                   (3)               (4)
Instrument→                                 Programmers in       Bartik index         Both main       Two main
                                            other establishments                      instruments     instruments plus
                                            within the same firm                                      ARPANET nodes
                                                                                                      and year when state
                                                                                                      adopted a price cap
FIRST STAGE: Dependent variable is advanced internet
Programmers in other establishments 0.0002                                            0.0002           0.0002
 within the same firm               (0.0000)***                                       (0.0001)***      (0.0001)***
Bartik index                                         0.2990                           0.2584           0.2554
                                                     (0.1774)*                        (0.1788)         (0.1791)
ARPANET nodes                                                                                          0.0055
                                                                                                       (0.0046)
Year when state adopted a price cap                                                                    0.0013
                                                                                                       (0.0008)

Partial R-squared                            0.0082                 0.0022            0.0098           0.0106
F-Statistic                                  14.16                  2.84              8.39             5.26
Observations                                 2743                   2743              2743             2743
R-squared                                    0.0282                 0.0223            0.0298           0.0217

SECOND STAGE: Dependent variable is logged wages
Advanced internet               0.3691                              0.0156            0.3174           0.4014
                                (0.1450)**                          (0.2374)          (0.1356)**       (0.1549)***

Overidentification test (p-value)            N/A                    N/A               0.2110           0.2229
Hausman test (p-value)                       0.9997                 1.0000            0.9999           0.9982
Observations                                 2743                   2743              2743             2743
R-squared                                    0.131                  0.133             0.133            0.133
Dependent variable is change in logged wages from 1995 to 2000. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. *
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                              37
Table 6: Instrumental variables analysis of Table 4 column 6
                                                             (1)                (2)             (3)                   (4)
                                                   Programmers in             Bartik        Both main Two main instruments
                                                 other establishments         index        instruments plus ARPANET nodes
                                                 within the same firm                                   and year when state
                                                                                                         adopted a price cap
FIRST STAGE: Dependent variable is advanced internet
Programmers in other establishments within 0.0001                                          0.0001           0.0001
  the same firm                            (0.0000)***                                     (0.0000)***      (0.0000)***
Bartik index                                                               0.2681          0.2227           0.2296
                                                                           (0.1809)        (0.1813)         (0.1822)
ARPANET nodes                                                                                               0.0089
                                                                                                            (0.0173)
Year when state adopted a price cap                                                                         0.0012
                                                                                                            (0.0008)
Programmers in other establishments within        0.00005                                  0.00005          0.00005
  the same firm and high all factors              (0.0001)                                 (0.0001)         (0.0001)
Bartik index and high all factors                                          0.4084          0.1282           0.1988
                                                                           (0.7077)        (0.7325)         (0.7160)
ARPANET nodes and high all factors                                                                          -0.0051
                                                                                                            (0.0175)
Year when state adopted a price cap and high                                                                0.0007
  all factors                                                                                               (0.0012)
Partial R-squared                            0.0076            0.0017                      0.0073           0.0097
F-Statistic                                  10.98             10.48                       11.04            10.26
FIRST STAGE: Dependent variable is advanced internet and high all factors
Programmers in other establishments within   -4.44e-07                                     -3.93e-07        -2.96e-07
  the same firm                              (4.36e-07)                                    (4.09e-07)       (3.86e-07)
Bartik index                                                   0.0009                      0.0009           0.0010
                                                               (0.0015)                    (0.0014)         (0.0011)
ARPANET nodes                                                                                               -0.0002
                                                                                                            (0.0006)
Year when state adopted a price cap                                                                         -0.00003
                                                                                                            (0.00001)**
Programmers in other establishments within        0.0002                                   0.0002           0.0002
  the same firm and high all factors              (0.0001)**                               (0.0001)*        (0.0001)*
Bartik index and high all factors                                          1.3382          0.9366           0.9976
                                                                           (0.5054)***     (0.5180)*        (0.4966)**
ARPANET nodes and high all factors                                                                          0.0052
                                                                                                            (0.0030)*
Year when state adopted a price cap and high                                                                0.0020
  all factors                                                                                               (0.0007)***
Partial R-squared                              0.0656                      0.0443          0.0856           0.1260
F-Statistic                                    169.80                      175.35          174.30           161.08
SECOND STAGE: Dependent variable is logged wages
Advanced internet                              0.3273                      -0.1218         0.1660           0.3690
                                               (0.1452)**                  (0.2892)        (0.1565)         (0.1782)**
Advanced internet and High income,             0.6139                      1.9206          1.1108           0.9331
education, IT-intensity, and population county (0.5595)                    (0.8584)**      (0.5531)**       (0.4692)**

Overidentification test (p-value)                 N/A                     N/A              0.1738            0.3611
Hausman test (p-value)                            1.000                   1.000            1.000             0.9998
Observations                                      2743                    2743             2743              2743
R2                                                0.07                    0.06             0.08              0.08
Dependent variable is change in logged wages from 1995 to 2000. In addition to the controls in table 2, regressions include
dummies for the main effects of the interactions where appropriate (high income, high education, high IT-intensity, high
population, and high all factors. Internet at home is not included because it is collinear with high all factors. Heteroskedasticity-
robust standard errors in parentheses.
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%



                                                                   38
Table 7: Employment
                                                         (1)             (2)
                                                      Full set of      High all
                                                       controls        factors
                                                                     interaction
                                                                     and full set
                                                                     of controls
Advanced internet                                    -0.0190         -0.0206
                                                     (0.0164)        (0.0166)
Advanced internet and High income,                                   0.2025
education, IT-intensity, population county                           (0.1096)*

Observations                                         2743            2743
R2                                                   0.32            0.32
Dependent variable is change in logged employment from 1995 to 2000. In column (1) controls are the same as table 2. In
column (2) controls are the same as table 4. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. + significant at 10%; *
significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




Table 8: Additional implications of advanced internet investment
                                  Unemployment rate           Unemployment rate among                  The Rust Belt
                                                                 college graduates
                                  (1)              (2)            (3)           (4)                 (5)            (6)
                                 Below            At or         Below          At or              In rust       Outside
                                 median          above          median        above                belt         rust belt
                                                 median                       median
Advanced internet             0.1027          0.0787          0.1665             -0.0203        0.0030        0.0311
                              (0.0599)*       (0.0682)        (0.0507)***        (0.0730)       (0.0327)      (0.0138)**

Observations                  266             266             263                269            642           2101
R2                            0.31            0.29            0.33               0.30           0.10          0.16
Dependent variable is change in logged wage growth from 1995 to 2000. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in
parentheses. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.

Columns (1) through (4) show estimates of the association between advanced internet and local wages for subsamples of counties
where the overall unemployment rate and unemployment rate among skilled workers was above and below the median.
Dependent variable is logged wages. Controls are the same as in Table 2. We found reliable county-level unemployment numbers
for 532 counties.

Columns (5) and (6) show estimates of the association between advanced internet and local wages for subsamples of counties
inside and outside the rust belt. Dependent variable is logged wages. Controls are the same as table 2. The rust belt is defined as
Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, Wisconsin, Michigan, New York outside of the New York City CMSA, Pennsylvania outside of the
Philadelphia CMSA, Maryland, and West Virginia.




                                                                39
Table 9: Wage growth from 1999 to 2005 is not related to early use of advanced internet
                                                      (1)             (2)
Advanced internet                                     -0.0057         -0.0053
                                                      (0.0132)        (0.0134)
Advanced internet and High income, education,                         0.0007
 IT-intensity, and population county                                  (0.1023)

Observations                                          2743            2743
R2                                                    0.06            0.06
Dependent variable is change in logged wage growth from 1999 to 2005. In column (1) controls are the same as table 2. In column
(2) controls are the same as table 4.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                             40
Figure 1a: Advanced Internet Investment and Wage Growth by County


              1
  wage growth 1995 to 2000
              0.5




                             0                       .1                       .2                             .3
                                                fraction firms with advanced internet




Figure 1b: Advanced Internet Investment and Wage Growth by County Type
               1
  wage growth 1995 to 2000
              .5
               0




                             0                          .1                       .2                               .3
                                                   fraction firms with advanced internet

                                 Not top county in income, education, population, and IT-intensity in 1990

                                 Top county in income, education, population, and IT-intensity in 1990




                                                                              41
Figure 2: Marginal effect of advanced internet year-by-year in top counties

   0.3



  0.25



   0.2



  0.15



   0.1



  0.05



     0
           1991        1992       1993        1994       1995        1996       1997       1998   1999   2000

  -0.05

                                            Top Counties               Other Counties


      This is based on a panel version of the regression model is table 4 column 6 where
      each year from 1990 to 2000 is included in the regression and a separate effect of
      advanced internet (as of 2000) and the interaction was estimated for each year.
      Controls are the same as in table 4.




                                                       42
       ONLINE APPENDIX TO




THE INTERNET AND LOCAL WAGES:
CONVERGENCE OR DIVERGENCE?


         A: Data Appendix

        B: Appendix Tables




       NOT FOR PUBLICATION
    A. Data Appendix

        In this section we discuss the construction of our data set. We first describe the

construction of our measures of internet investment, and then briefly describe our measures of

county characteristics that we interact with advanced internet. Last we describe the construction

of our instruments.

A.1 Construction of measures of advanced internet investment.

        As noted in the paper, our IT data come from the Harte Hanks Market Intelligence

Computer Intelligence Technology database (hereafter CI database). Harte Hanks tracks over

300,000 establishments in the United States. For the reasons described in the paper, we exclude

government, military, and nonprofit establishments. Our sample from the CI database contains

commercial establishments with over 100 employees—in total 86,879 establishments.1

        The CI database contains several measures of internet usage that we use to construct

measures of advanced internet. Advanced internet is the type of investment that has been

historically described in books on electronic commerce. Typically this involves altering sales,

manufacturing, production, or distribution systems within the firm. We aggregate many

applications under this umbrella. Business-to-business or business-to-consumer e-commerce fall

in this category, so too does TCP/IP versions of software such as enterprise resource planning or

customer relationship management. Our measure of advanced internet assumes nothing about the

intensity of use, nor about complexity.

        An establishment is counted as making an investment in advanced internet when two or

more of the following conditions hold: (1) the establishment uses two or more languages

common in web applications, such as Active-X, Java, CGI, Perl, VB Script, or XML; (2) the


1
 Parts of this section draw from an earlier paper on the dispersion of internet investment, Forman, Goldfarb, and
Greenstein (2002).

                                                       1
establishment has over five internet developers; (3) the establishment has two or more “e-

business” applications such as customer service, education, extranet, publications, purchasing, or

technical support; (4) the establishment reports LAN software that performs one of several

functions: e-commerce, enterprise resource planning, web development, or web server; (5) the

establishment has an internet server that is a UNIX workstation or server, mainframe, or

minicomputer, or has 5 or more PC servers, or has internet storage greater than 20 gigabytes (this

was a lot of storage in 2000); (6) the establishment indicates the use of three or more applications

related to internet server software, internet/web software, or intranet applications.

       We tested this definition and found that it generated many false positives. These false

positives arose more frequently when an establishment was experimenting with, but not actually

regularly using, advanced internet applications. In other words, they were trying something small

or contracting out for a test. To correct for this, we exclude establishments if: (a) They indicate

they have outsourced hosting of their internet/web servers; (b) These experimenters responded

affirmatively to exactly two of (1) through (6) but not any question about e-commerce. Such

establishments typically had not yet done very much advanced internet as of the time of our

sample (but might someday). Previous work compared the baseline measure of advanced internet

with one that includes such “experimenters” (Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein 2002). While

that latter measure shows higher levels of internet penetration (23.2% v. 12.6%), the quantitative

difference between the two measures remains similar across geographic regions.

       Our measure of basic internet (used in Table 4) is constructed similarly. To be counted as

investing in basic internet, an establishment must engage in two or more of the following

activities: (1) have an internet service provider; (2) indicate it has basic access; (3) use

commerce, customer service, education, extranet, homepage, publications, purchasing or



                                                  2
technical support; (4) indicate that it has an intranet or email based on TCP/IP protocols; (5)

indicate there are internet users or internet developers on site; or (6) outsource some internet

activities. We looked for two or more activities to guard against “false positives”. As it was, this

was a minor issue. Most respondents responded affirmatively to many of these criteria.

       The CI database also contains information on the number of personal computers and

number of employees at the establishment. We divide the number of establishment personal

computers by the number of employees to obtain our PCs per employee measure.

       Timing bias and sampling bias are two concerns with these measures. We first discuss

timing bias. Establishments in our sample were surveyed between July 1998 and August 2000.

Because advanced internet diffused between 1998 and 2000, earlier respondents are likely to

have a lower adoption rate. To control for increasing adoption rates over time, we reweight our

adoption data by the ratio of average adoption rates in our sample between the month of the

survey and the end of 2000. Specifically, we divide our sample into six semi-annual periods

between 1998 and 2000. For establishments who are surveyed in some semi-annual period t prior

to the end of 2000, we reweight the adoption rate by (average adoption rate in county at end of

2000) / (average adoption rate in county in semi-annual period t).

       To obtain location-level measures of the extent of advanced internet investment, we

compute average rates of use for a location. Because the distribution of establishments over

industries may be different in our sample from that of the population, we compare the number of

establishments in our database to the number of establishments in the Census to correct for

sampling bias. We calculate the total number of establishments with more than 50 employees in

the Census Bureau’s 1999 County Business Patterns data and the number of establishments in

our database for each two-digit North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code in



                                                 3
each location. We then calculate the total number in each location. Therefore, to account for

over- and under-sampling in the Harte Hanks data, we weight a NAICS-location by


Total # of census establishments in location-NAICS
    Total # of census establishments in location
     Total # of establishments in our data in location
×
  Total # of establishments in our data in location-NAICS

        In other words, the weights are the proportion of establishments in a location that are a

given NAICS code, divided by the proportion of times it is in our database. This means that if

our data undersamples a given two-digit NAICS at a location, then each observation in that

NAICS-location is given more importance. We divide establishment adoption by the above

weights and then sum the weighted county-NAICS-level rates of use across NAICS within a

county to obtain county-level estimates of the extent of advanced internet. As a robustness check,

we also show results with the following weights

Total # of establishments in our data in location
                                                  .
 Total # of census establishments in location

A.2 Construction of variables measuring county characteristics

        The construction of our controls for county characteristics is described in Table 1b; here

we describe the computation of the variables that we interact with advanced internet. As noted in

the paper, we focus on the roles of income, education, population, and IT-intensity; these

measures are equal to one when the corresponding continuous variable is in the highest quartile

of the distribution. Income, education, and population data are from the 1990 Census: High

Income is based upon median household income, High Education is based upon the fraction of

the population that is university graduates, and High population is based upon 1990 county

population estimates.      For IT-intensity, we measure the fraction of firms in IT-using and

producing industries in the county as of 1995 from the US Census County Business Patterns

                                                      4
data. National aggregate data shows that such industries have unusually high returns from

investment in IT in the 1990s. We define these industries using the classification reported in

Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2005, p. 93).2

A.3 Construction of the instruments

         Here we discuss the computation of our four instruments: the number of programmers in

other establishments within the same firm, the “Bartik index” of expected local internet demand,

the number of local ARPANET nodes, and the year when a state adopted a price cap.

         To compute the number of programmers in other establishments, we use information on

establishment programmers from the CI database. For each establishment that is part of a multi-

establishment firm, we compute the number of programmers that reside within the same firm but

in other counties. This variable is based on the “organizational capabilities” measure used in

Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein (2008). We then compute the weighted average number of

programmers for the county, using the weights described in section A.1.

         Our measure of the Bartik index for local propensity of internet adoption uses our

establishment-level internet data. For each county in our sample, we compute average industry

adoption of advanced internet excluding the contribution of establishments in the industry-

                                                                                 3
county, for industry j in county i we label this                         .       This is equal to the average

propensity for an establishment in industry j to have advanced internet, excluding the

contribution of establishments in county i. We then compute an index of advanced internet

2
  Specifically, they include the following industries: Communications (SIC 48), Business Services (Including
Computer Services; SIC 73), Wholesale Trade (SIC 50-51), Finance (SIC 60-62, 67), Printing and Publishing (SIC
27), Legal Services (SIC 81), Instruments and Miscellaneous Manufacturing (SIC 38-39), Insurance (SIC 63-64),
Machinery (Including Computers and Office Equipment; SIC 35), Gas utilities (SIC 492, parts of 493, 496),
Professional and Social Services (SIC 832-839), Other Transportation Equipment (SIC 372-379), Other Electronic
Machinery (including Communications Equipment and Electronic Components; SIC 36).
3
  Again, we use weighted adoption, where the weights are analogous to our location weights in section A.1. That is,
we weight establishment adoption by ((total Census establishments in a location-industry)/(total Census
establishments in an industry))×((total establishments in our data in an industry)/(total establishments in our data in
a location-industry)).

                                                          5
investment in county i by weighting these industry propensities according to the fraction of

establishments in county i that are in industry j,  . That is,    ∑      
                                                                                                .


This is a generalization of similar share-weighted local demand proxies used in earlier work such

as Bartik (1991) and Moretti (2009).

       Our measure of number of local ARPANET nodes is simply a count of the number of local

nodes, compiled from Hobbes’ Internet Timeline http://www.zakon.org/robert/internet/timeline/

accessed Dec. 2008) and the ARPANET map (http://som.csudh.edu/cis/lpress/history/arpamaps/

accessed Dec. 2008).

       Our measure indicating the year when a state adopted a price cap or freeze, is the year

that the state froze (or capped) the prices incumbent carriers could change entrants (source: Abel

and Clements 1998). These regulatory caps were attempts to facilitate entry by competitive local

exchange carriers.


References

Abel, Jaison and Michael E. Clements. 1998. A time series and cross sectional classification of
       state regulatory policy adopted for local exchange carriers," NRRI report 98-25,
       Columbus Ohio, The National Regulatory Research Institute. December.

Bartik, Timothy. 1991. Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?
        Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute.

Forman, Chris, Avi Goldfarb, and Shane Greenstein. 2002. Digital Dispersion: An Industrial and
      Geographic Census of Commercial internet Use. NBER Working Paper #9287.

Forman, Chris, Avi Goldfarb, and Shane Greenstein. 2008. Understanding the Inputs into
      Innovation: Do Cities Substitute for Internal Firm Resources? Journal of Economics and
      Management Strategy 17(2): 295–316.

Jorgenson, Dale, Mun S. Ho, and Kevin Stiroh. 2005. Productivity Volume 3: Information
       Technology and the American Growth Resurgence. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Moretti, Enrico. 2009. Real Wage Inequality. Working Paper, University of California, Berkeley.


                                                6
     B. Appendix Tables

Online Appendix Table 1: Continuous measures for income, education, IT-intensive industry, and population
                                              (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)                (5)          (6)             (7)
Advanced internet                             -0.0371             -0.0424             0.0251              -0.0169            -0.0853      0.0242          -0.0411
                                              (0.0472)            (0.0360)            (0.0128)*           (0.0299)           (0.0570)     (0.0127)*       (0.0548)
Advanced internet x                           3.02e-06                                                                       -9.06e-07                    -1.83e-06
county-level income                           (2.13e-06)                                                                     (3.60e-06)                   (3.61e-06)
Advanced internet x                                               0.5897                                                     0.6510                       0.5850
county-level education                                            (0.3050)*                                                  (0.4413)                     (0.4526)
Advanced internet x                                                                   1.52e-07                               1.09e-07                     -1.79e-07
county-level population                                                               (9.84e-08)                             (9.34e-08)                   (1.16e-07)
Advanced internet x                                                                                       0.1947             0.2332                       0.1738
county-level IT-intensity                                                                                 (0.1006)*          (0.1007)**                   (0.1011)*
Advanced internet x income x                                                                                                              9.88e-11        1.12e-10
education x population x IT-intensity                                                                                                     (2.66e-11)***   (3.66e-11)***

Observations                                  2743                2743                2743                2742               2742         2742            2742
R2                                            0.13                0.13                0.13                0.13               0.14         0.14            0.15
Dependent variable is logged wages. Controls are the same as in table 5. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses.
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                                         7
Online Appendix Table 2: Further robustness
                                                           (1)                    (2)                 (3)              (4)                 (5)
                                                      Includes two-                     MSA only                             No controls
                                                     way interactions
Advanced internet                             0.0001                       0.0860              0.0528            0.0372            0.0232
                                              (0.0152)                     (0.0362)**          (0.0392)          (0.0132)***       (0.0133)*
Advanced internet and High income, education, 0.4166                                           0.3949                              0.6702
IT-intensity, and population county           (0.1996)**                                       (0.1566)**                          (0.1864)***
Advanced internet and                         0.0832
 High income county                           (0.0469)*
Advanced internet and                         0.1130
 High education county                        (0.0653)*
Advanced internet and High IT-intensity       0.0269
county                                        (0.0231)
Advanced internet and High population         -0.0654
county                                        (0.1152)
Advanced internet and High IT-intensity and   0.0164
population county                             (0.0670)
Advanced internet and High education and      -0.0814
IT-intensity county                           (0.0579)
Advanced internet and High income and IT-     -0.0708
intensity county                              (0.0570)
Advanced internet and High income and         0.0483
population county                             (0.0579)
Advanced internet and High education and      0.0910
population county                             (0.0585)
Advanced internet and High income and         -0.0918
education county                              (0.0712)
Observations                                  2743                         843                 843               2744              2743
R2                                            0.14                         0.33                0.34              0.004             0.05
        Dependent variable is logged wages. . In columns (2) and (4) controls are the same as table 2. In columns (1), (3), and (5) controls are the same as table 4.
        Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                                         8
Online Appendix Table 3: Robustness to alternative weighting in constructing the advanced internet variable
                                                          (1)            (2)                  (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)                (7)             (8)
                                                      Weight is # observations in                   No weights              No weights for county              No weights for time
                                                           our data over #                                                       differences                        differences
                                                       observations in census
Advanced internet                                     0.0245            0.0217          0.0227    0.0195                 0.0236     0.0205                  0.0264          0.0229
                                                      (0.0111)**        (0.0112)*       (0.0130)* (0.0131)               (0.0119)** (0.0120)*               (0.0142)*       (0.0144)
Advanced internet and High income,                                      0.2220                    0.5847                            0.5243                                  0.3163
education, IT-intensity, and population county                          (0.0907)**                (0.1792)***                       (0.1627)***                             (0.1355)**
Observations                                          2743              2743            2743      2743                   2743       2743                    2743            2743
R2                                                    0.13              0.14            0.13      0.14                   0.13       0.14                    0.13            0.14
        Dependent variable is logged wages. . In columns (1), (3), (5), and (7) controls are the same as table 2. In columns (2), (4), (6), and (8) controls are the same as table 4.
        Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                                          9
Online Appendix Table 4: Robustness to multiple imputation of missing data

                                                                    (1)               (2)

        Advanced internet                                      0.0243            0.0239
                                                               (0.0143)*         (0.0127)*
        Advanced internet and High income,                                       0.4587
        education, IT-intensity, and population county                           (0.1585)***

        Observations                                           3133              2743
        F statistic                                            12.43             15.49

       Dependent variable is logged wages. In column (1) controls are the same as table 2. In column (2) controls are the same as table 4.
       Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                                     10
Appendix Table 5A: Full set of coefficients for Table 5 (First stage)

                                                   (1)                   (2)               (3)                        (4)
Instrument→                              Programmers in other      Bartik index      Both main         Two main instruments plus
                                         establishments within                       instruments       ARPANET nodes and year
                                         the same firm                                                 when state adopted a price cap
Programmers in other establishments        0.0002                                     0.0002            0.0002
  within the same firm                     (0.0000)***                                (0.0001)***       (0.0001)***
Bartik index                                                        0.2990            0.2584            0.2554
                                                                    (0.1774)*         (0.1788)          (0.1791)
ARPANET nodes                                                                                           0.0055
                                                                                                        (0.0046)
Year when state adopted a price cap                                                                     0.0013
                                                                                                        (0.0008)
Average number of establishments in        -0.0252                  -0.0116           -0.0260           -0.0264
  Harte Hanks firms                        (0.0141)*                (0.0141)          (0.0141)*         (0.0141)*
Home internet use                          0.0350                   0.0345            0.0319            0.0355
                                           (0.0325)                 (0.0327)          (0.0327)          (0.0326)
Home internet data missing                 0.0190                   0.0191            0.0176            0.0178
                                           (0.0150)                 (0.0151)          (0.0151)          (0.0151)
Log population in 1990                     0.0097                   0.0107            0.0009            0.0092
                                           (0.0033)***              (0.0033)***       (0.0033)***       (0.0033)***
Percentage African Americans in 1990       0.0266                   -0.0325           -0.0356           -0.0348
                                           (0.0153)                 (0.0267)          (0.0266)          (0.0267)
Percentage university graduates in         0.5340                   0.1010            0.0752            0.0620
  1990                                     (0.0864)                 (0.1223)          (0.1225)          (0.1233)
Percentage high school graduates in        -0.1865                  0.0624            0.0626            0.0600
  1990                                     (0.0670)                 (0.1240)          (0.1234)          (0.1235)
Percentage below poverty line in 1990      -0.1874                  0.0559            0.0513            0.0526
                                           (0.0560)                 (0.0996)          (0.0988)          (0.0990)
Median income in 1990 ($000)               -0.0003                  -0.0004           -0.0003           -0.0002
                                           (0.0010)                 (0.0010)          (0.0010)          (0.0010)
Percentage population attending            0.0324                   0.0315            0.0327            0.0323
  Carnegie Type 1 schools in 1990          (0.0594)                 (0.0578)          (0.0593)          (0.0597)
Percentage population enrolled in          -0.3791                  -0.4261           -0.3662           -0.3242
  engineering program in 1990              (0.5477)                 (0.5531)          (0.5466)          (0.5497)
# of patents granted to inventors in the   0.0004                   0.0035            0.0033            0.0021
  county in the 1980s (000)                (0.0026)                 (0.0027)          (0.0026)          (0.0027)
Percentage professional in 1995            -0.0615                  -0.0438           -0.0457           -0.0411
                                           (0.0870)                 (0.0873)          (0.0874)          (0.0877)
Percentage of persons over age 65 in       0.0387                   0.0527            0.0458            0.0656
  1990                                     (0.0927)                 (0.0933)          (0.0926)          (0.0935)
Net migration into the county in 1995      -0.0018                  -0.0019           -0.0018           -0.0015
  (000)                                    (0.0015)                 (0.0015)          (0.0015)          (0.0015)
Change in log total population between -0.0057                      -0.0058           -0.0015           -0.0040
  1990 and 2000                            (0.0266)                 (0.0268)          (0.0265)          (0.0265)
Change in percentage of African            0.2834                   0.2829            0.2879            0.2889
  American 1990 to 2000                    (0.1465)*                (0.1465)*         (0.1464)**        (0.1474)*
Change in percentage of university         -0.1989                  -0.2016           -0.2126           -0.2141
  graduates 1990 to 2000                   (0.2781)                 (0.2781)          (0.2888)          (0.2780)
Change in percentage of high school        0.0885                   0.0719            0.0798            0.0737
  graduates 1990 to 2000                   (0.2190)                 (0.2197)          (0.2187)          (0.2190)
Change in percentage of persons over       -0.0895                  -0.0407           -0.0596           -0.0526
  age 65 1990 to 2000                      (0.2261)                 (0.2292)          (0.2277)          (0.2279)
Change in net migration into the           -0.0023                  -0.0024           -0.0022           -0.0019
  county 1990 to 2000 (000)                (0.0017)                 (0.0017)          (0.0016)          (0.0016)
Constant                                   -0.0501                  -0.1081           -0.0812           -0.2098
                                           (0.0804)                 (0.0826)          (0.0829)          (0.1208)*
Partial R-squared                          0.0082                   0.0022            0.0098            0.0106
F-Statistic                                14.16                    2.84              8.39              5.26
Observations                               2743                     2743              2743              2743
R-squared                                  0.0282                   0.0223            0.0298            0.0217
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%



                                                                 11
Appendix Table 5A: Full set of coefficients for Table 5 (Second stage)

                                                  (1)                    (2)                   (3)               (4)
Instrument→                                Programmers in           Bartik index           Both main    Two main instruments
                                         other establishments                             instruments   plus ARPANET nodes
                                         within the same firm                                            and year when state
                                                                                                          adopted a price cap
Advanced internet                         0.3691                 0.0156                0.3174           0.4014
                                          (0.1450)**             (0.2374)              (0.1356)**       (0.1549)***
Home internet use                         0.0730                 0.0865                0.0750           0.0718
                                          (0.0380)*              (0.0387)**            (0.0378)**       (0.0382)*
Home internet data missing                0.0232                 0.0305                0.0242           0.0225
                                          (0.0174)               (0.0175)*             (0.0173)         (0.0175)
Average number of establishments          -0.0159                -0.0195               -0.0164          -0.0156
 in Harte Hanks firms                     (0.0080)**             (0.0067)***           (0.0076)**       (0.0083)*
Log population in 1990                    -0.0096                -0.0055               -0.0090          -0.0100
                                          (0.0029)***            (0.0031)*             (0.0027)***      (0.0030)***
Percentage African Americans in           0.0266                 0.0158                0.0250           0.0275
 1990                                     (0.0153)*              (0.0135)              (0.0144)*        (0.0158)*
Percentage university graduates in        0.5340                 0.5767                0.5402           0.5301
 1990                                     (0.0864)***            (0.0835)***           (0.0837)***      (0.0879)***
Percentage high school graduates          -0.1865                -0.1661               -0.1835          -0.1884
 in 1990                                  (0.0670)***            (0.0537)***           (0.0631)***      (0.0694)***
Percentage below poverty line in          -0.1873                -0.1734               -0.1853          -0.1886
 1990                                     (0.0560)***            (0.0468)***           (0.0533)***      (0.0576)***
Median income in 1990 ($000)              -0.0005                -0.0007               -0.0005          -0.0005
                                          (0.0007)               (0.0006)              (0.0007)         (0.0007)
Percentage population attending           0.0183                 0.0293                0.0199           0.0173
  Carnegie Type 1 schools in 1990         (0.0336)               (0.0490)              (0.0354)         (0.0326)
Percentage population enrolled in         -0.0447                -0.2015               -0.0676          -0.0304
  engineering program in 1990             (0.3243)               (0.3832)              (0.3225)         (0.3269)
# of patents granted to inventors in      0.0149                 0.0162                0.0151           0.0148
  the county in the 1980s (000)           (0.0042)***            (0.0044)***           (0.0042)***      (0.0042)***
Percentage professional in 1995           0.0052                 -0.0168               0.0020           0.0072
                                          (0.0620)               (0.0551)              (0.0597)         (0.0631)
Percentage of persons over age 65         0.0155                 0.0313                0.0178           0.0141
 in 1990                                  (0.0582)               (0.0515)              (0.0559)         (0.0595)
Net migration into the county in          0.0039                 0.0032                0.0038           0.0040
 1995 (000)                               (0.0032)               (0.0032)              (0.0032)         (0.0032)
Change in log total population            0.0600                 0.0562                0.0595           0.0604
 between 1990 and 2000                    (0.0176)***            (0.0153)***           (0.0170)***      (0.0181)***
Change in percentage of African           -0.0648                0.0333                -0.0504          -0.0737
 American 1990 to 2000                    (0.0996)               (0.0993)              (0.0958)         (0.1046)
Change in percentage of university        0.8811                 0.8157                0.8715           0.8871
 graduates 1990 to 2000                   (0.1902)***            (0.1665)***           (0.1832)***      (0.1960)***
Change in percentage of high              -0.0643                -0.0354               -0.0601          -0.0670
 school graduates 1990 to 2000            (0.1196)               (0.0960)              (0.1129)         (0.1241)
Change in percentage of persons           -0.5470                -0.5735               -0.5508          -0.5446
 over age 65 1990 to 2000                 (0.1411)***            (0.1198)***           (0.1353)***      (0.1454)***
Change in net migration into the          0.0028                 0.0019                0.0027           0.0029
 county 1990 to 2000 (000)                (0.0037)               (0.0038)              (0.0037)         (0.0037)
Constant                                  0.3330                 0.3069                0.3292           0.3354
                                          (0.0550)***            (0.0478)***           (0.0526)***      (0.0560)***
Overidentification test (p-value)         N/A                    N/A                   0.2110           0.2229
Hausman test (p-value)                    0.9997                 1.0000                0.9999           0.9982
Observations                              2743                   2743                  2743             2743
R-squared                                 0.131                  0.133                 0.133            0.133
Dependent variable is logged wages. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%



                                                              12
       Appendix Table 6: Other instrumental variables applied to table 2 column 2
                                         (1)                 (2)                      (3)                    (4)
Instrument→                                           ARPANET nodes                         Year when state adopted a price cap
                                        First stage             Second stage          First stage                 Second stage
Advanced internet                                            2.4859                                          0.7180
                                                             (2.1301)                                        (0.5994)
ARPANET nodes                            0.0058
                                         (0.0048)
Year when state adopted a price cap                                                    0.0011
                                                                                       (0.0008)
Home internet use                           0.0380                -0.0078              0.0417               0.0597
                                            (0.0323)              (0.1065)             (0.0325)             (0.0476)
Home internet data missing                  0.0207                -0.0206              0.0207               0.0159
                                            (0.0149)              (0.0553)             (0.0149)             (0.0228)
Average number of establishments in         -0.0101               0.0055               -0.0104              -0.0124
  Harte Hanks firms                         (0.0140)              (0.0403)             (0.0140)             (0.0129)
Log population in 1990                      0.0116                -0.0342              0.0118               -0.0137
                                            (0.0031)***           (0.0258)             (0.0031)***          (0.0075)*
Percentage African Americans in 1990        -0.0304               0.0909               -0.0295              0.0372
                                            (0.0267)              (0.0920)             (0.0268)             (0.0286)
Percentage university graduates in          0.1178                0.2777               0.1114               0.4917
  1990                                      (0.1229)              (0.4091)             (0.1231)             (0.1313)***
Percentage high school graduates in         0.0586                -0.3090              0.0547               -0.2067
  1990                                      (0.1240)              (0.3308)             (0.1240)             (0.1038)**
Percentage below poverty line in 1990       0.0400                -0.2710              0.0405               -0.2011
                                            (0.0990)              (0.2583)             (0.0990)             (0.0838)**
Median income in 1990 ($000)                -0.0003               0.0003               -0.0002              -0.0004
                                            (0.0009)              (0.0026)             (0.0009)             (0.0009)
Percentage population attending             0.0308                -0.0474              0.0308               0.0075
  Carnegie Type 1 schools in 1990           (0.0579)              (0.1290)             (0.0583)             (0.0322)
Percentage population enrolled in           -0.4383               0.8941               -0.4088              0.1101
  engineering program in 1990               (0.5553)              (1.5685)             (0.5564)             (0.4595)
# of patents granted to inventors in the    0.0029                0.0069               0.0034               0.0136
  county in the 1980s (000)                 (0.0027)              (0.0113)             (0.0026)             (0.0049)***
Percentage professional in 1995             -0.0619               0.1367               -0.0579              0.0269
                                            (0.0869)              (0.2568)             (0.0871)             (0.0877)
Percentage of persons over age 65 in        0.0452                -0.0791              0.0629               -0.0001
  1990                                      (0.0934)              (0.2458)             (0.0941)             (0.0830)
Net migration into the county in 1995       -0.0020               0.0080               -0.0015              0.0046
  (000)                                     (0.0015)              (0.0060)             (0.0015)             (0.0034)
Change in log total population between -0.0105                    0.0828               -0.0134              0.0638
  1990 and 2000                             (0.0268)              (0.0725)             (0.0269)             (0.0243)***
Change in percentage of African             0.2819                -0.6522              0.2746               -0.1616
  American 1990 to 2000                     (0.1481)*             (0.6487)             (0.1468)*            (0.2168)
Change in percentage of university          -0.1869               1.2731               -0.1852              0.9457
  graduates 1990 to 2000                    (0.2786)              (0.7923)             (0.2786)             (0.2771)***
Change in percentage of high school         0.0820                -0.2375              0.0757               -0.0929
  graduates 1990 to 2000                    (0.2200)              (0.5711)             (0.2201)             (0.1832)
Change in percentage of persons over        -0.0750               -0.3884              -0.0680              -0.5208
  age 65 1990 to 2000                       (0.2278)              (0.5775)             (0.2279)             (0.1976)***
Change in net migration into the            -0.0027               0.0080               -0.0020              0.0037
  county 1990 to 2000 (000)                 (0.0016)              (0.0072)             (0.0016)             (0.0040)
Constant                                    -0.0748               0.4890               -0.1939              0.3587
                                            (0.0804)              (0.2503)*            (0.1161)*            (0.0833)***
Partial R-squared                           0.0001                                     0.0007
F-Statistic                                 1.4690                                     2.0315
Hausman Test                                1.0000                                     1.0000
Observations                                2743                  2743                 2743                 2743
R-squared                                   0.0203                0.13                 0.0209               0.13
Dependent variable is logged wages. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                             13
Appendix Table 7: Other instrumental variables applied to Table 4 column 6

                                                           (1)               (2)

                                                 ARPANET nodes           Year when
                                                                        state adopted
                                                                         a price cap
FIRST STAGE—Advanced internet
ARPANET nodes                                   0.0116
                                                (0.0172)
Year when state adopted a price cap                                    0.0011
                                                                       (0.0008)
ARPANET nodes and high all factors              -0.0077
                                                (0.0174)
Year when state adopted a price cap and high                           0.0004
  all factors                                                          (0.0012)
Partial R-squared                               0.0001                 0.0007
F-Statistic                                     10.42                  10.03
FIRST STAGE—Advanced internet and high
all factors
ARPANET nodes                                   -0.0011
                                                (0.0008)
Year when state adopted a price cap                                    -0.00005
                                                                       (0.00002)***
ARPANET nodes and high all factors              0.0072
                                                (0.0032)**
Year when state adopted a price cap and high                           0.0016
  all factors                                                          (0.0008)*
Partial R-squared                               0.0098                 0.0195
F-Statistic                                     171.35                 265.90
SECOND STAGE
Advanced internet                              -0.0724                 0.7416
                                               (0.7287)                (0.6297)
Advanced internet and High income,             3.0077                  0.3859
education, IT-intensity, and population county (1.2898)**              (1.0988)

Overidentification test (p-value)
Hausman test (p-value)                            0.9415              1.0000
Observations                                      2743                2743
R2                                                0.04                0.04
Dependent variable is logged wages. Controls same as table 4. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                 14
Appendix Table 8: Full set of coefficients for Table 4
                                                  (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)            (6)          (7)
Advanced internet                           0.0168        0.0120        0.0214        0.0246        0.0049        0.0239        0.0067
                                            (0.0137)      (0.0125)      (0.0159)      (0.0127)*     (0.0149)      (0.0128)*     (0.0150)
Advanced internet and                       0.0960                                                  0.0442                      0.0377
 High income county                         (0.0389)**                                              (0.0492)                    (0.0496)
Advanced internet and                                     0.1101                                    0.0770                      0.0757
 High education county                                    (0.0455)**                                (0.0548)                    (0.0547)
Advanced internet and                                                   0.0206                      0.0134                      0.0102
 High IT-intensity county                                               (0.0228)                    (0.0235)                    (0.0237)
Advanced internet and                                                                 0.3631        0.2378                      0.0182
 High population county                                                               (0.0934)***   (0.1018)**                  (0.1027)
Advanced internet and High income,                                                                                0.4588        0.3393
education, IT-intensity, & population county                                                                      (0.1585)***   (0.1904)*
High income county                           -0.0136                                                -0.0093       -0.0067       -0.0102
                                             (0.0062)**                                             (0.0066)      (0.0050)      (0.0067)
High education county                                     -0.0158                                   -0.0134       -0.0067       -0.0132
                                                          (0.0061)***                               (0.0066)**    (0.0048)      (0.0066)**
High IT-intensity county                                                0.0101                      0.0086        0.0094        0.0083
                                                                        (0.0039)***                 (0.0040)**    (0.0034)***   (0.0041)**
High population county                                                                -0.0231       -0.0119       0.0078        0.0058
                                                                                      (0.0117)**    (0.0125)      (0.0061)      (0.0121)
High income, education, IT-intensity, and                                                                         -0.0370       -0.0250
population county                                                                                                 (0.0214)*     (0.0239)
Log population in 1990                      -0.0062       -0.0060       -0.0068       -0.0084       -0.0083       -0.0080       -0.0080
                                            (0.0017)***   (0.0018)***   (0.0017)***   (0.0022)***   (0.0022)***   (0.0022)***   (0.0022)***
Percentage African Americans in 1990        0.0128        0.0122        0.0125        0.0100        0.0098        0.0098        0.0100
                                            (0.0118)      (0.0118)      (0.0118)      (0.0118)      (0.0118)      (0.0118)      (0.0118)
Percentage university graduates in 1990     0.5712        0.6022        0.5693        0.5576        0.5855        0.5821        0.5774
                                            (0.0784)***   (0.0845)***   (0.0787)***   (0.0785)***   (0.0848)***   (0.0855)***   (0.0848)***
Percentage high school graduates in 1990    -0.1491       -0.1537       -0.1466       -0.1407       -0.1351       -0.1301       -0.1309
                                            (0.0519)***   (0.0517)***   (0.0514)***   (0.0513)***   (0.0509)***   (0.0513)**    (0.0510)**
Percentage below poverty line in 1990       -0.1449       -0.1483       -0.1398       -0.1490       -0.1326       -0.1327       -0.1309
                                            (0.0473)***   (0.0462)***   (0.0460)***   (0.0465)***   (0.0471)***   (0.0470)***   (0.0470)***
Median income in 1990 ($000)                -0.0000       -0.0003       -0.0003       -0.0004       -0.0000       -0.0000       0.0000
                                            (0.0007)      (0.0006)      (0.0006)      (0.0006)      (0.0007)      (0.0007)      (0.0007)
Percentage population attending Carnegie    0.0311        0.0237        0.0297        0.0310        0.0251        0.0289        0.0257
  Type 1 schools in 1990                    (0.0478)      (0.0427)      (0.0469)      (0.0480)      (0.0448)      (0.0475)      (0.0450)
Percentage population enrolled in           -0.1939       -0.1418       -0.1582       -0.1318       -0.0542       -0.0884       -0.0549
  engineering program in 1990               (0.3652)      (0.3390)      (0.3629)      (0.3612)      (0.3440)      (0.3595)      (0.3436)
# of patents granted to inventors in the    0.0161        0.0161        0.0160        0.0130        0.0121        0.0104        0.0102
  county in the 1980s (000)                 (0.0043)***   (0.0043)***   (0.0044)***   (0.0041)***   (0.0040)***   (0.0040)***   (0.0041)**
Percentage professional in 1995             -0.0118       -0.0112       -0.0322       -0.0244       -0.0427       -0.0443       -0.0431


                                                                                15
                                             (0.0535)          (0.0533)        (0.0525)         (0.0538)      (0.0529)      (0.0532)      (0.0530)
Percentage of persons over age 65 in 1990    0.0564            0.0605          0.0577           0.0566        0.0549        0.0507        0.0536
                                             (0.0508)          (0.0508)        (0.0513)         (0.0515)      (0.0510)      (0.0507)      (0.0506)
Net migration into the county in 1995        0.0038            0.0037          0.0037           0.0040        0.0040        0.0037        0.0038
 (000)                                       (0.0031)          (0.0032)        (0.0031)         (0.0030)      (0.0030)      (0.0029)      (0.0029)
Change in log total population between       0.0530            0.0531          0.0589           0.0570        0.0636        0.0647        0.0647
 1990 and 2000                               (0.0151)***       (0.0152)***     (0.0158)***      (0.0152)***   (0.0156)***   (0.0154)***   (0.0154)***
Change in percentage of African American 0.0208                0.0275          0.0068           0.0048        -0.0051       0.0001        -0.0014
 1990 to 2000                                (0.0736)          (0.0738)        (0.0746)         (0.0734)      (0.0736)      (0.0739)      (0.0738)
Change in percentage of university graduates 0.8301            0.8466          0.8044           0.8190        0.8400        0.8228        0.8394
 1990 to 2000                                (0.1618)***       (0.1598)***     (0.1596)***      (0.1590)***   (0.1594)***   (0.1601)***   (0.1592)***
Change in percentage of high school          -0.0106           -0.0198         -0.0154          -0.0045       -0.0025       0.0006        -0.0017
 graduates 1990 to 2000                      (0.0941)          (0.0937)        (0.0939)         (0.0936)      (0.0928)      (0.0934)      (0.0928)
Change in percentage of persons over age     -0.5471           -0.5380         -0.5198          -0.5210       -0.4755       -0.4881       -0.4745
 65 1990 to 2000                             (0.1191)***       (0.1196)***     (0.1202)***      (0.1198)***   (0.1203)***   (0.1205)***   (0.1202)***
Change in net migration into the county      0.0025            0.0024          0.0023           0.0030        0.0031        0.0030        0.0031
 1990 to 2000 (000)                          (0.0037)          (0.0037)        (0.0037)         (0.0035)      (0.0035)      (0.0034)      (0.0034)
Constant                                     0.3075            0.3107          0.3190           0.3372        0.3270        0.3205        0.3216
                                             (0.0407)***       (0.0394)***     (0.0390)***      (0.0428)***   (0.0445)***   (0.0447)***   (0.0447)***
Observations                                 2743              2743            2743             2743          2743          2743          2743
R-squared                                    0.13              0.13            0.13             0.13          0.14          0.14          0.14

Dependent variable is logged wages. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                       16
Appendix Table 9: Benefits of early internet use do not spill over to adjacent locations
                                                                       (1)           (2)
Advanced internet and in same MSA as High income,               -0.0118       -0.0008
 Education, IT-intensity, and population county                 (0.0300)      (0.0309)
Advanced internet                                               0.0354        0.0075
                                                                (0.0293)      (0.0314)
Advanced internet and                                                         0.0377
 High income county                                                           (0.0497)
Advanced internet and                                                         0.0757
 High education county                                                        (0.0548)
Advanced internet and                                                         0.0178
 High population county                                                       (0.1045)
Advanced internet and                                                         0.0101
 High IT-intensity county                                                     (0.0236)
Advanced internet and High income, education, IT-               0.4478        0.3390
 intensity, and population county                               (0.1606)***   (0.1903)*

Observations                                                    2743          2743
R2                                                              0.14          0.14
Dependent variable is logged wages. Controls are the same as in Table 4.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses.
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                                                 17
Appendix Table 10: Coefficients used to generate Figure 2
                                                                      Advanced           Advanced
                                                                       internet         internet and
                                                                                       HighAllFactors
Interacted with 1991                                               0.0014             -0.0226
                                                                   (0.0068)           (0.0263)
Interacted with 1992                                               0.0134             0.0157
                                                                   (0.0089)           (0.0257)
Interacted with 1993                                               0.0108             0.0050
                                                                   (0.0099)           (0.0246)
Interacted with 1994                                               0.0108             -0.0007
                                                                   (0.0098)           (0.0255)
Interacted with 1995                                               0.0162             0.0147
                                                                   (0.0115)           (0.0278)
Interacted with 1996                                               0.0178             0.0677
                                                                   (0.0114)           (0.0312)**
Interacted with 1997                                               0.0289             0.1270
                                                                   (0.0131)**         (0.0386)***
Interacted with 1998                                               0.0218             0.1521
                                                                   (0.0128)*          (0.0373)***
Interacted with 1999                                               0.0313             0.1777
                                                                   (0.0163)*          (0.0441)***
Interacted with 2000                                               0.0418             0.2656
                                                                   (0.0144)***        (0.0587)***

Observations                                                                      30173
R2                                                                                 0.87
Dependent variable is logged wages. This table presents the results of one panel regression of 11 years (1990-2000) and 2743
counties. Base year in 1990. Controls are the same as in Table 4, but separately interacted with each year (e.g.
1991×MedianIncome1990, 1992×MedianIncome1990, 1993×MedianIncome1990, etc.). Year dummies also included. County
fixed effects are differenced out. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. + significant at 10%; * significant at
5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                                 18
Appendix Table 11: Advanced internet and number of establishments
                                                           NUMBER OF
                                                        ESTABLISHMENTS
                                                         (1)          (2)
                                                      Full set of   High all
                                                       controls     factors
                                                                  interaction
                                                                  and full set
                                                                  of controls
Advanced internet                                    -0.0023      -0.0033
                                                     (0.0123)     (0.0124)
Advanced internet and High income,                                0.0637
education, IT-intensity, population county                        (0.1248)

Observations                                         2743            2743
R2                                                   0.46            0.46
In columns (1) and (3) controls are the same as table 2. In columns (2) and (4) controls are the same as table 4.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                                19
