                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         RISK PREFERENCES IN THE PSID:
                INDIVIDUAL IMPUTATIONS AND FAMILY COVARIATION

                                          Miles S. Kimball
                                          Claudia R. Sahm
                                         Matthew D. Shapiro

                                        Working Paper 14754
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14754


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2009




The views presented are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal
Reserve Board or its staff. Kimball and Shapiro gratefully acknowledge the support of National Institute
on Aging grant 2-P01-AG10179. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Miles S. Kimball, Claudia R. Sahm, and Matthew D. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Risk Preferences in the PSID:¸˛Individual Imputations and Family Covariation
Miles S. Kimball, Claudia R. Sahm, and Matthew D. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 14754
February 2009
JEL No. C42,D12,D81,E21,J12

                                              ABSTRACT

Survey measures of preference parameters provide a means for accounting for otherwise unobserved
heterogeneity.This paper presents measures of relative risk tolerance based on responses to survey
questions about hypothetical gambles over lifetime income.It discusses how to impute estimates of
utility function parameters from the survey responses using a statistical model that accounts for survey
response error. There is substantial heterogeneity in true preference parameters even after survey response
error is taken into account.The paper discusses how to use the preference parameters imputed from
the survey responses in regression models as a control for differences in preferences across individuals.
This paper focuses on imputations for respondents in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID).It
also studies the covariation of risk preferences among members of households.It finds fairly strong
covariation in attitudes about risk -- between parents and children and especially between siblings
and between spouses.


Miles S. Kimball                                     Matthew D. Shapiro
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
University of Michigan                               University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                             611 Tappan St
and NBER                                             Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
mkimball@umich.edu                                   and NBER
                                                     shapiro@umich.edu
Claudia R. Sahm
Federal Reserve Board
Washington DC 20551
Claudia.R.Sahm@frb.gov
Unobserved heterogeneity greatly complicates empirical analysis in economics. Unobserved

heterogeneity in preferences is particularly troublesome because there are so few theoretical

restrictions on the distribution of preference parameters in the population. Therefore, despite

potential pitfalls, we have developed direct survey measures of preference parameters based on

hypothetical choices and econometric techniques for dealing with the inevitable measurement

error in any such measures. Our work on survey measures of preference parameters focuses on

risk tolerance (Robert B. Barsky, F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro

1997 [BJKS hereafter] and Kimball, Claudia R. Sahm, and Shapiro 2008 [KSS hereafter]), time

preference and the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (BJKS), and labor supply elasticities

(Kimball and Shapiro 2008).

   Risk tolerance is central to portfolio choice and many other economic decisions, such as

choices about insurance and career choices. In this paper, we discuss how to go from categorical

survey responses to imputed values of preference parameters. The procedure takes into account

measurement error from survey response, and has implications for the appropriate use of imputed

preference parameters in econometric analysis. We present the risk tolerance imputations for the

survey responses in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). We also present quantitative

evidence on the covariation in risk preferences within families.

                            I. Survey Measures of Risk Preferences

Numerous surveys have fielded measures of an individual’s willingness to take risk, including

the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), which pioneered the use of hypothetical gambles in a

large survey to measure the economic preference parameter of risk tolerance (BJKS 1997). In
this paper, we analyze the gambles fielded in the 1996 PSID that ask respondents the following1:

    Suppose you had a job that guaranteed you income for life equal to your current, total

    income. And that job was (your/your family's) only source of income. Then you are given

    the opportunity to take a new, and equally good, job with a 50-50 chance that it will double

    your income and spending power. But there is a 50-50 chance that it will cut your income

    and spending power by a third. Would you take the new job?

Individuals who answered that they would take this risky job were then asked about a riskier job:

    Now, suppose the chances were 50-50 that the new job would double your (family) income,

    and 50-50 that it would cut it in half. Would you still take the new job?

In contrast, individuals who would not take the initial risky job were asked about a less risky job:

    Now, suppose the chances were 50-50 that the new job would double your (family) income,

    and 50-50 that it would cut it by 20 percent. Then, would you take the new job?

Conditional on their first two responses, individuals are asked to consider a risky job with either

a 75 percent downside risk or a 10 percent downside risk. These responses allow us to order

individuals into six categories. Unlike the HRS, the PSID only asked these questions of working

family respondents and did not ask them of other household members. The targeting of the

questions to workers in the PSID particularly affects the selection of the youngest and oldest

respondents, so we have limited our analysis to respondents between the ages of 20 and 69.

    After collecting over ten years of gamble responses in the HRS and similar questions in

surveys like the PSID and the National Longitudinal Survey, a number of lessons on measuring

risk preferences have emerged. First, the gamble responses are subject to considerable

measurement error. KSS report a rank correlation in the gamble response categories of 0.27

1
 This question was included in the 1996 PSID (both original respondents and offsprings in split-
off households).


                                                 2
across individuals’ responses in the first two waves of the HRS. In addition, Sahm (2007) shows

that much of the transitory variation in the gamble responses remains unexplained even after

including a rich set of individual and household covariates. To address the problem of

measurement error, BJKS (1997), KSS (2008), Sahm (2007), and this paper use multiple

responses from some individuals to isolate the variance owing to measurement error from the

variance in true risk preference.

   Second, extraneous details in the description of the gambles can affect the measurement of

risk preferences. For example, in the original HRS version and the PSID version of the question,

the risky job is described as a new job. This frame has the potential to induce status quo bias in

which individuals are averse to taking the new job independent from its income risk. Starting in

the 1998 wave, the HRS addressed this potential problem by using a scenario in which the

individual has to move for health reasons and is given a choice between two new jobs. This

variation in the question wording in the HRS also allows us to estimate the degree of status quo

bias in the original version and to correct the estimates of risk tolerance from the PSID. Finally,

the interpretation of a job-related gamble may vary across workers who are at different stages of

their career. In designing the question, a choice of jobs was used to create a large shock to

lifetime resources. The fraction of lifetime income associated with labor income, however,

likely declines with age. The job gamble may be particularly hard for retirees and other non-

workers to interpret. The HRS now uses an investment gamble related to an unexpected

inheritance for respondents age 65 and older, and gives the job-gamble question only to those

under age 65. Similarly, the PSID targeted its job-related question only to workers.

                                    II. Individual Imputations

The responses to hypothetical gambles in the PSID suggest that most individuals have a low




                                                 3
tolerance for risk, though there is substantial heterogeneity. The first column of Table 1 shows

that 31 percent of the respondents rejected all of the risky jobs, but almost 7 percent accepted all

the risky jobs. An advantage of the hypothetical gambles relative to qualitative measures of risk

tolerance is that one can use them to quantify the degree of risk tolerance and its dispersion

across individuals. As in BJKS and KSS, we assume that individuals have constant relative risk

aversion utility and will reject the risky job when its expected utility is less than that of the safe

job. Along with the risks specified in the questions, these assumptions allow us to assign a range

for the coefficient of relative risk tolerance to each gamble response category. Previous analysis

from the panel of gambles in the HRS suggests that these questions provide a noisy signal of risk

tolerance reflecting both status quo bias and classical measurement error. Therefore, we estimate

a model of noisy log risk tolerance, ξ = log θ + e , where log θ is distributed N ( μ , σ x 2 ) and the e

is classical measurement error distributed N ( 0, σ e 2 ) . The KSS estimation procedure is an

ordered probit with know cutoffs based on which gambles respondents accept or reject.

    With only a single response from each PSID respondent, it is not possible to identify

separately the variance of true log risk tolerance and the variance of the response error. The

PSID responses identify the mean and the total variance of the noisy signal ξ . We impose the

estimate of the variance of true log tolerance σ x 2 from the HRS to divide the PSID total variance

into variance of true preferences and variance of error. For the PSID, the estimates of the

parameters are μ =-1.05, σ x2 =0.76, and σ e2 =1.69.2 Using these distributional parameters, we

can impute individual-level estimates of preference parameters based on the conditional


2
 The PSID responses are also adjusted by -0.21 for status quo bias (again using the parameter
estimated in the HRS). See the unpublished appendix to this paper, KSS, and
http://www.umich.edu/~shapiro/data/risk_preference/ for details of the estimation and
imputation procedures.


                                                    4
expectation of the true parameter given the individuals’ survey responses. Table 1 provides the

individual imputations for the PSID. The conditional expectation of each preference parameter

is computed using the moment generating function, so as shown in the last two columns, the

reciprocal of imputed risk tolerance is not equal to imputed risk aversion. Researchers interested

in studying differences in risky behavior can use these individual imputations as a covariate. The

                               Table 1. Risk Tolerance in the PSID
                                                          Imputatations
              Response       Percent of      Log Risk         Risk          Risk
              Category      Respondents      Tolerance      Tolerance      Aversion
               1                30.9           -1.60          0.27           6.7
               2                18.2           -1.18          0.40           4.2
               3                15.6           -0.98          0.49           3.5
               4                15.0           -0.77          0.60           2.8
               5                13.7           -0.50          0.79           2.2
               6                6.6            -0.08          1.22           1.4

imputations offer advantages relative to categorical controls for gamble responses. First, the

imputations summarize the sequence of gamble responses in a single cardinal measure of

preferences that can be used to assess the quantitative predictions of behavioral models. Second,

our estimation procedure accounts for the measurement error in the survey responses, so the

imputations are the conditional expectations of the individual’s true preferences. The use of the

imputed values in regression analysis substantially reduces the attenuation bias arising from

survey response error when the imputed values of risk tolerance are used as explanatory

variables. Nonetheless, these imputations conditioning only on individual’s gamble responses

understate the true variation in preferences, so they may not capture all of the relevant

differences in risk attitudes across individuals and would only partially control for risk tolerance

in OLS estimation.

   The application in KSS that uses individual imputations (as in Table 1) to study stock



                                                 5
ownership makes these points more concrete. Using categorical controls for the gamble response

category or imputations that do not account for response error leads to an attenuation bias that

can substantially understate the responsiveness of behavior to risk tolerance. Even with

imputations that address response error, standard multivariate estimators may not be consistent

due to a nonstandard errors-in-variables problem.3 The main issue is that the imputations based

on gamble responses do not capture all the differences in true risk tolerance. To the extent that

other covariates are correlated with the unmeasured part of risk tolerance, they will be correlated

with the error term in the OLS regression that includes the imputations. Thus, the estimated

coefficients on the other covariates would also include the indirect effects of risk tolerance. To

address this issue, KSS provide a consistent GMM estimator using the imputations that scales up

the covariance between imputed risk tolerance and other covariates.4 As an example of the

difference this correction makes, compared to OLS, the estimated difference in stock ownership

rates between men and women is 40 percent lower with the GMM estimator and is no longer

statistically different from zero at the 5% level.

    The PSID illustrates how preference parameters can differ according to values of covariates.

In particular, there are important differences in measured risk preference by age. For example,

61 percent of the individuals in their sixties reject all of the risky jobs versus only 23 percent of

individuals in their twenties. As Table 2 shows, this pattern holds across all six gamble response

categories with older individuals more concentrated in lower, less risk tolerant categories. The




3
  In univariate analysis, the estimated effect of risk tolerance on the behavior of interest would be
consistent, but the R-squared would be underestimated.
4
  The scaling factor is the variance of true risk tolerance divided by the variance of imputed risk
tolerance. This true-to-proxy variance ratio is 6.3 in the HRS and 4.6 in the PSID.


                                                     6
interpretation of such age effects remains open.5 One possibility is that risk tolerance, in terms

of the curvature of the utility function, diminishes with age. Alternatively, consumption

commitments or habits may increase with age and make individuals less willing to risk a loss in

income. Finally, the interpretation of the job-related gamble may simply vary with age in a way

that is unrelated to true risk preferences. In any case, when the individual imputations also

                       Table 2. Distribution of Gamble Responses by Age
                  Response                   Percent by Age Group
                  Category      20-29      30-39     40-49    50-59       60-69
                   1             22.7       27.8      30.5     44.6        60.6
                   2             18.7       18.5      18.8     16.9        13.4
                   3             15.9       16.1      16.5     13.3         9.3
                   4             17.8       16.3      15.5      8.0        6.5
                   5             17.3       13.9      13.0     11.6         4.9
                   6              7.6        7.4      5.6       5.5        5.3

condition on age the differences are sizeable. For example, conditioning on age in addition to

the gamble response category, a 30-year old in the least risk tolerant category has an imputed

risk tolerance of 0.25, whereas a 50-year old with the same gamble responses has an imputed risk

tolerance of 0.16. One option would be to impute risk tolerance to individuals based on both

their gamble response category and their age. This method constrains researchers who want to

use the imputation as a covariate in behavioral studies. The specification of age effects in the

behavioral model has to match those in the risk tolerance estimation or a spurious correlation

between imputed risk tolerance and the behavior under study could arise. In the application in

the next section, we use a rough control for differences in ages.

    In summary, Table 1 provides imputed values of risk preference parameters based on


5
  With a cross-section of responses, the distribution of gamble responses by age may also
incorporate differences in risk tolerance across birth cohorts. Malmendier and Nagel (2008) find
an association between individuals’ current willingness to take financial risks and the path of
aggregate stock market returns experienced over their lifetimes.


                                                 7
responses to a hypothetical gamble about lifetime income in the PSID. The imputations control

for survey response error. Neglecting this response error will substantially understate the

correlation of survey measures of risk preferences with other variables. KSS show how to use

such imputed values in multiple regressions—either by imputing the preference parameters

based on multiple covariates or by using a GMM procedure that adjusts for the fact that the

imputed values do not capture all the cross-sectional variation in the true preferences.

                                             III.   Family Covariation

We now apply the methodology sketched in Section II to study the covariation in preferences

among family members. The PSID has risk preference responses from members of different

generations of the same families and the HRS has responses from both spouses.

    We use our maximum-likelihood approach to quantify the covariation in family members’

preferences. Consider the correlation in risk tolerance between a father f and his adult child c.

Because of the differences across age documented in Table 2, we allow the mean and variance of

                                                                                        (
noisy log risk tolerance ξ to differ across fathers and children, such that ξ f ~ N μ f , σ f
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                    )
            (
and ξ c ~ N μ c ,σ c
                       2
                           ) where, as above, the variances are sums of the variance of the true parameter
log θ and of the response error e.6 Because the response errors e are uncorrelated across family

members, we can estimate Cov (ξ f , ξ c ) = σ 2fc .

    The numbers below the diagonal in Table 3 present the variance-covariance matrix of log

risk tolerance for various family members (standard errors in parentheses). The numbers above

the diagonal (in bold) are correlation coefficients. The main diagonal is the variance of true log

risk tolerance (from estimates presented in Section II). We find a positive association between


6
  An alternative parameterization would be to allow the differences of means of log risk
tolerance μ to be functions of the differences in ages in the family pairs.


                                                        8
parents and their adult children. The correspondence between fathers and their children is

                       Table 3. Family Covariation in Log Risk Tolerance
                                          Variance-Covariance \ Correlation
                                   Father       Mother       Child 1        Child 2
            Father                  0.76          0.41         0.14          0.14
                                   (0.07)
            Mother                  0.32          0.76         0.23          0.23
                                   (0.13)        (0.07)
            Child 1                 0.11          0.18         0.76          0.48
                                   (0.13)        (0.11)       (0.03)
            Child 2                 0.11          0.18         0.37          0.76
                                   (0.13)        (0.11)       (0.06)        (0.03)

relatively weak, though positive. The mother-child covariance is over 60 percent larger than the

father-child covariance and is statistically different from zero at the 10 percent level.7 The

mother-child covariance is over one-fifth of the within-person variance. We do not find a

stronger correlation between parents and children of the same gender. The correlations are

noteworthy given the fact that parents and children with an average age difference of over 20

years are at very different life stages and in most cases have not resided together for some time.

The role of the family in shaping risk preferences is even more apparent in the gamble responses

of siblings. Again, each adult sibling in the pair is either the head or spouse in an independent

family when answering the gambles. The covariance in risk tolerance among siblings is more

than twice the size of the mother-child covariance and is almost 50 percent of the within-person

variance. The average age difference between the siblings is only 5 years, which likely makes

their interpretation of the gambles more comparable. Clearly, there are a number of factors that

could lead siblings to form similar risk preferences: transmission from common parents, shared

7
  The standard deviation of the common mother-child component in log risk tolerance is
statistically different from zero at the 5 percent level. (The 95% confidence interval of the
standard deviation and the 95% confidence interval of the variance cover non-equivalent regions
of the parameter space.)



                                                 9
experiences within the family, and similar peer and social environments.8

    The HRS offers one more dimension of within family variation, since it poses the gamble to

both the husband and wife in a household.9 We find a covariance between spouses that is

similar to the covariance between siblings and is about 40 percent of the within person variation.

Both assortative mating and common experiences in the marriage could help account for the

correlation.

    The substantial covariance within families is also important for interpreting the variance of

risk tolerance on the main diagonal in Table 3. The estimated variance from the HRS uses the

persistent component of individuals’ gamble responses over time to identify risk preference. It is

possible that a repeated misinterpretation of the question could lead to persistent measurement

error that then would bias upward the estimated variance of true risk tolerance. The size of the

sibling and spousal covariances makes it unlikely that the true variance of risk tolerance on the

main diagonal is much smaller. In other words, the size of the sibling and spousal covariances

leaves little room for a large variance of persistent idiosyncratic response error. This finding is

important because there are few other ways to get a handle on the variance of persistent

idiosyncratic response error.

    Our results showing a correlation in risk preferences among family members are largely

consistent with related studies. Using a subset of the PSID gamble responses in their study on

the intergenerational transmission of wealth, Kerwin K. Charles and Erik Hurst (2003) find a

8
  Looking for some evidence on these factors, we tested for a difference in the covariance for
siblings who share both parents as opposed to those who share only one parent. The difference
was statistically insignificant.
9
  One complication is that a spouse is sometimes present during the HRS interview which might
bias an individual’s response and lead to a spurious correlation in gamble responses. We limit
our analysis to pairs of responses that were given in separate interviews in 1992. This may
understate the true correlation if spouses with similar preferences choose to be together during
interviews more than those with dissimilar preferences.

                                                 10
strong correspondence between parent and child risk tolerance, particularly at the tails of the

distribution. They make sample restrictions that result in a more homogeneous group of parent

and child households that leads to a stronger parent-child correlation than we find in the full

sample. Nonetheless, the basic finding of intergenerational transmission in risk preferences is

similar.10 Thomas J. Dohmen et al. (2008) use experimentally-validated qualitative measures of

willingness to take risk in the German Socioeconomic Panel to also show that parents and

children, as well as married couples, have similar attitudes toward risk.

                                            IV. Conclusion

In this paper, we apply a survey-based method for imputing individual risk preferences to

respondents in the PSID. These procedures draw on estimates and previous lessons from

analysis of the HRS gamble responses. We provide individual estimates of risk preferences

based on the gamble response categories that can be used in other behavioral studies—both to

study the effects of risk tolerance and to control for risk tolerance when looking at other effects.

We use the gamble responses to document a substantial covariance in risk preferences among

family members. In addition to its intrinsic interest, this covariance in risk preferences across

family members helps validate these risk tolerance measures by putting an upper bound on the

variance of idiosyncratic response error.




10
  Charles and Hurst (2003) use a different method for assessing the covariation in preferences
across parents and children. Applying our maximum likelihood procedure to their restricted
sample of parent-child pairs yields a covariance of 0.25 (standard error of 0.12). The point
estimate from their parent-child sample is higher than our parent-child covariance estimate of
0.15 (standard error of 0.08), though the difference is not statistically significant.

                                                 11
                                            APPENDIX


This appendix provides additional details on our maximum-likelihood estimates of risk tolerance
in the PSID. For a more thorough discussion of the general approach, see Kimball et al.,
“Imputing Risk Tolerance from Survey Responses” (2008) Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 103(483) 1028-38. Further information on using the imputations is provided at
http://www.umich.edu/~shapiro/data/risk_preference

                              A-I. Interpreting Gamble Responses

The 1996 PSID poses up to three hypothetical gambles to family respondents who are working at
the time of the survey. The gambles differ only by the downside risk associated with the risky
job. Specifically, individuals choose between a job that guarantees their current lifetime income
and one that offers a 50-50 chance of doubling their lifetime income and a 50-50 chance of
cutting it by a fraction π. We assume that an individual accepts the risky job only if its expected
utility exceeds that of the certain job, thus individuals with higher risk tolerance θ are willing to
accept jobs with higher downside risk π. With constant relative risk aversion,
U (C ) = (1 − C 1−1 / θ ) /(1 − 1 / θ ) , gamble responses further imply an upper and lower bound on an
individual’s risk tolerance in the absence of response error. Table A-1 defines the gamble
response categories in terms of the smallest downside risk rejected and the highest downside risk
accepted. The last two columns provide the bounds on relative risk tolerance consistent with
these categories.

                     Table A-1: Risk Tolerance Response Categories
                                   Downside Risk of      Bounds on Risk
                     Response          Risky Job            Tolerance
                     Category     Accepted Rejected      Lower     Upper
                     1              None      1/10         0        0.13
                     2              1/10       1/5        0.13      0.27
                     3               1/5       1/3        0.27      0.50
                     4               1/3       1/2        0.50      1.00
                     5               1/2       3/4        1.00      3.27
                     6               3/4      None        3.27       ∞

The response category is our summary statistic of an individual’s sequence of gamble responses
and we use the implied bounds on risk tolerance in the maximum-likelihood estimation as the
known cut points for an ordered probit (interval regression).

                   A-II. Statistical Model and Estimation of Risk Tolerance

To translate the bounds on response categories to a parameter estimate, we first assume that risk
tolerance is log-normally distributed,




                                                  12
                                                   (
                                   log θ = x ~ N μ , σ x2 ,  )                                           (1)

which corresponds well with the fact that the modal gamble response implies low risk tolerance,
but there is substantial heterogeneity across individuals. Previous analysis of individuals who
answered the gambles repeatedly over several waves of the HRS suggests that the survey
responses provide a noisy signal of risk tolerance. Therefore, we estimate a model of noisy log
risk tolerance from the gamble responses:11

                                   ξ = log θ + ε = log θ + b + e                                         (2)

The survey response error ε includes both a time-constant status quo bias term b and a transitory
                                             (      )
classical measurement error term e ~ N 0,σ e2 . For individuals in the PSID, the probability of
being in response category j is

                                                          ⎛ log θ j − μ − b ⎞  ⎛ log θ j − μ − b ⎞
             P (c = j ) = P ( log θ j < ξ < log θ j ) = Φ ⎜                 ⎟−Φ⎜                 ⎟        (3)
                                                          ⎜ σ 2 +σ 2 ⎟         ⎜     σ 2
                                                                                         + σ 2   ⎟
                                                          ⎝       x     e   ⎠  ⎝       x     e   ⎠

where Φ is the cumulative normal distribution function. However, with only a single response
from each PSID respondent, it is not possible to separately identify the variance of true log risk
tolerance σ x2 from the variance of the response error σ e2 or to estimate the status quo bias
induced by the new/risky job wording. Thus with the PSID gamble responses, we first estimate
the mean μξ = μ + b and variance σ ξ2 = σ x2 + σ e2 of the noisy signal ξ. The first column of Table
A-2 provides the estimates from the PSID that ignore survey response error. The second column
provides the estimates from the HRS panel that account for survey response error.12 Some HRS
respondents answer the gambles in more than one wave, so the variance of true risk tolerance is
identified by the covariance in an individual’s gamble responses at two points in time. This
identification requires that the measurement error in the gamble responses is transitory and that
preferences are the only source of persistence in the gamble responses. The status quo bias is
identified in the HRS, since there are two versions of the question—one in which only the risky
job is new and one in which both the certain and the risky jobs are new. The final column of
Table A-2 shows the estimated distribution of risk tolerance in the PSID that incorporates the
estimated variance of true risk tolerance and status quo bias from the HRS. The mean of true log
risk tolerance is higher and the variance is considerably smaller than in the first column where
there is no correction for measurement error.




11
  To simplify notation, the model equations in the text did not explicitly include the status quo bias term b.
12
  The HRS sample for the estimation in this paper includes original HRS respondents who were between ages 20-69
in 1992 and who were working for pay when they answered the gamble question. Gamble responses from the 1992,
1994, 1998, 2000, and 2002 HRS are included in the panel only if the respondent is working at the time of the
interview. In addition, we require a valid gamble response in 1992 to be in the HRS sample. The sample from the
HRS used in this paper differs from that used in Kimball, Sahm, and Shapiro (2008). That study does not impose
age limits and it includes all respondents, not just those working for pay when they answered the gamble question.


                                                        13
                 Table A-2: Maximum-Likelihood Estimates
                                                   PSID:                  HRS:               PSID:
                                                  Ignoring               Modeling          Calibrating
                                                  Response               Response          Response
                 Parameter                          Error                 Error              Error
                 Log of risk tolerance
                  Mean                              -1.26                  -1.77               -1.05
                                                   (0.02)                 (0.04)              (0.02)
                   Variance                         2.46                   0.76                0.76
                                                   (0.07)                 (0.07)                 -
                 Status-quo bias                                          -0.21               -0.21
                                                                          (0.04)                -
                 Transitory response error
                  Variance                                                 2.03                1.69
                                                                          (0.07)              (0.07)
                 Note: Asymptotic standard errors are in paretheses. The PSID sample includes
                 5,466 respondents in the 1996 PSID. The HRS sample includes 7,648
                 respondents and 10,502 gambles responses in the 1992, 1994, 1998, 2000, and
                 2002 HRS.



                                       A-III. Individual Imputations

Table 1 in the text provides imputations of risk preferences for each of the gamble response
categories. These imputations are the expected value of an individual’s risk preference
conditional on his or her gamble response category. We use the parameter estimates from the
final column of Table A-2 and the following formulas to compute the conditional expectations,
which rely on the log-normality of risk tolerance.

The conditional expectation of log risk tolerance for individuals in response category c is

                                     (                         ) (
                                    φ (log θ j − μ − b) / σ ξ − φ (log θ j − μ − b) / σ ξ           )
                      (
   E(log θ | c) = μ + σ x2 / σ ξ   )Φ (logθ                                                                     (4)
                                      (       j   − μ − b) / σ )− Φ ((log θ
                                                                 ξ                 j   − μ − b) / σ ξ   )
where φ is the standard normal density function. Using the moment-generating function, the
conditional expectation of risk tolerance is


E (θ | c) = exp( μ + σ / 2)
                       2
                                                                           (
                              Φ ( (log θ j − μ − b − σ x2 ) / σ ξ ) − Φ (log θ j − μ − b − σ x2 ) / σ ξ     )   (5)
                       x
                                       (                             )
                                    Φ (log θ j − μ − b) / σ ξ − Φ ( (log θ j − μ − b) / σ ξ )

Finally, the conditional expectation of risk aversion γ = 1/θ is


                                                            14
E (γ | c) = exp(− μ + σ / 2)2
                                                                                (
                                     Φ ( (log θ j − μ − b + σ x2 ) / σ ξ ) − Φ (log θ j − μ − b + σ x2 ) / σ ξ   )   (6)
                            x
                                               (                            )
                                            Φ (log θ j − μ − b) / σ ξ − Φ ( (log θ j − μ − b) / σ ξ )

Again, the formulas for the conditional expectations make clear that the imputation of risk
aversion is not simply the reciprocal of the imputation of risk tolerance.


                                                   A-IV. Family Estimation

We use the unique intergenerational structure of the PSID to examine the covariation of risk
preferences within families. We use pair-wise comparisons of gamble responses from two
different types of family members, such as adult children and their fathers. Similar to the
statistical model of Section A-II, we model the noisy signal of risk tolerance from the first family
member’s gamble response as

                                ξ1 = log θ1 + ε 1 ~ N ( μ ξ 1 , σ ξ21 )                                              (7)

We allow the second family member to have a different mean and variance:

                                ξ 2 = log θ 2 + ε 2 ~ N ( μ ξ 2 , σ ξ22 )                                            (8)

The main parameter of interest (reported in Table 3 in the text) is the covariance between family
members Cov (ξ1 , ξ 2 ) = σ 122 . We assume that the response errors are uncorrelated across family
members, so the covariance term reflects the covariation in true risk preferences. There are two
gamble responses observed for each family, so the likelihood of family member 1 being in
gamble response category j and family member 2 being in response category k is calculated as
                    ur                      ur                     ur                      ur
 P(c1 = j,c2 = k) = Φ( N j1 , N k 2 , ρ ) + Φ(N j1 , N k 2 , ρ ) − Φ( N j1 , N k 2 , ρ ) − Φ( N j1 , N k 2 , ρ ),    (9)

where Φ is the bivariate normal cumulative distribution function, ρ is the correlation between
the two family members, N j1 = (log θ j − μ1 ) / σ ξ 1 ) N j1 = (log θ j − μ1 ) / σ ξ 1 ) ,
N k 2 = (log θ k − μ2 ) / σ ξ 2 ) and N k 2 = (log θ k − μ2 ) / σ ξ 2 ) .13 With two gamble responses from the
same family we can identify the family covariance term; however, with only one response from
each individual we cannot separate the idiosyncratic variance of true risk tolerance from the
variance of response errors. Likewise, with the family pairs, we cannot estimate the status quo
bias, since we only have responses to the “new job” version of the question.

Table A-3 provides the estimated distribution of risk tolerance for the various family members.
As in Table A-2, we adjust the estimates from the family member pairs with the variance of true

13
     The estimator uses Gaussian quadrature to approximate the probability in equation (9).


                                                                 15
log risk tolerance and the status quo bias estimated in the HRS. We assume that the values of
these two calibrated parameters are the same for all family members.

The row labeled “Pair-Specific” Variance provides the estimates that are reported (below the
diagonal) in Table 3 in the text. In line with the age effects discussed in the text, the mean risk
tolerance of the older family member is lower and the variance of the response error is higher.

   Table A-3: Maximum-Likelihood Estimates for Family Members
                                         Family Member Pairs
                             Child-      Child-        Older                               Wife-
   Parameter                 Father      Mother       Sibling                             Husband
   Log of risk tolerance
    Mean, 1st in Pair         -0.71       -0.76        -0.91                                -1.64
                             (0.07)      (0.06)       (0.04)                                (0.09)
    Mean, 2st in Pair         -1.60       -1.79        -1.05                                -1.65
                             (0.10)      (0.08)       (0.04)                                (0.10)

     Variance                             0.76             0.76             0.76             0.76
                                            -                -                -                -
        Idiosyncratic                     0.65             0.59             0.39             0.45
                                            -                -                -                -
        Pair-Specific                     0.11             0.18             0.37             0.32
                                         (0.13)           (0.11)           (0.06)           (0.13)

   Status Quo Bias                        -0.21           -0.21            -0.21            -0.21
                                            -               -                -                -
   Transitory Response Error
    Variance, 1st in Pair                 1.38             1.31             1.83             1.36
                                         (0.20)           (0.17)           (0.11)           (0.28)
     Variance, 2st in Pair                2.91             2.08             1.83             1.91
                                         (0.38)           (0.25)           (0.11)           (0.36)
   Number of Pairs                        557              757             2,300             710

   Mean age diffierence                    26               23                5                7
    (Standard deviation)                   (5)              (5)              (4)              (5)
   Note: The estimates above use the total variance of true log risk tolerance (equal to 0.76) and the
   status quo bias from the HRS and assume that these two parameters are the same for all family
   members. The gambles responses of parents, adult children, and adult siblings are from the 1996
   PSID. The gamble responses of spouses (not interrviewed together) are from the 1992 HRS. Each
   column is a separate estimation.




                                                    16
                          A-V. Survey Questions in PSID and HRS

Both the PSID and HRS pose the gamble as a choice between two jobs. The wording of the
PSID question is similar to the original version of the HRS question.

Specifically, the PSID asks:

     Suppose you had a job that guaranteed you income for life equal to your current, total
     income. And that job was (your/your family's) only source of income. Then you are given
     the opportunity to take a new, and equally good, job with a 50-50 chance that it will double
     your income and spending power. But there is a 50-50 chance that it will cut your income
     and spending power by a third. Would you take the new job?

Similarly, the 1992 and 1994 HRS asks:

     Suppose that you are the only income earner in the family, and you have a good job
     guaranteed to give you your current (family) income every year for life. You are given the
     opportunity to take a new and equally good job, with a 50-50 chance it will double your
     (family) income and a 50-50 chance that it will cut your (family) income by a third. Would
     you take the new job?

Starting in 1998, the HRS modified the frame of the question to avoid the potential for status quo
bias:

     Suppose that you are the only income earner in the family. Your doctor recommends that
     you move because of allergies, and you have to choose between two possible jobs. The
     first would guarantee your current total family income for life. The second is possibly
     better paying, but the income is also less certain. There is a 50-50 chance the second job
     would double your total lifetime income and a 50-50 chance that it would cut it by a third.
     Which job would you take—the first job or the second job?

The italics (added here) highlight the main difference in the questions. Status quo bias is
identified as the average difference in the gamble responses across the two versions in the HRS.




                                               17
                                          References

   Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro. 1997.

“Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health

and Retirement Study.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,112(2):537-579.

   Charles, Kerwin. K. and Erik Hurst. 2003. “Intergenerational Wealth Correlations.” Journal

of Political Economy, 111(6):1155-1182.

   Dohmen, Thomas J., Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde. 2008. “The

Intergenerational Transmission of Risk and Trust Attitudes” IZA Discussion Paper No. 2380.

   Kimball, Miles S., Claudia R. Sahm, and Matthew D. Shapiro. 2008. “Imputing Risk

Tolerance from Survey Responses.” Journal of the American Statistical Association,

103(483):1028-1038.

   Kimball, Miles S. and Matthew D. Shapiro. 2008. “Labor Supply: Are Income and

Substitution Effects Both Large or Both Small?” NBER Working Paper No. 14208.

   Malmendier, Ulrike and Stefan Nagel. 2008. “Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic

Experiences Affect Risk-Taking?” Unpublished paper. Stanford University.

   Sahm, Claudia R. 2007. “How Much Does Risk Tolerance Change?” Finance and Economics

Discussion Series 2007-66. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




                                              18
