                    NBER WORKINO PAPER SERIES




                     TESTING DEVIATTONS FROM
                  PURCHASING POWER PARITY (ppp)


                         Joshua Aizenman



                      Working Paper No 1475




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts venue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October 198)4




I would like to thank Paul DeGrauwe and Jacob Frenkel for useful
discussions, Any errors, however, are mine, Financial support by
the G.S.B., University of Chicago, is gratefully acknowledged. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies and project in Productivity (World Economy)
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not tuiise of the
National Bureau of Economic Research,
                                                 NBER Working Paper #1475
                                                 October 1984




                        Testing Deviations From
                     Purchasing Power Parity (PPP)


                                 AES TEA CT




     The purpose of this paper is to study analytically how the presence of

transportation costs in a model of deviations from PPP affects the testing

procedure of the PPP hypothesis The analysis shows that in the presence of

transportation costs traditional regression analysis will tend to reject the

PPP hypothesis even if goods markets are well arbitraged, because the values

of the regression coefficients are affected systematically by considerations

that are independent of the degree to which markets are arhitraged.    Thus, the

content of the ppp approach cannot be tested satisfactorily without considering

the systematic effects of transportation costs and other costs of goods

arbitrage.



                                              Joshua Aizenman
                                              G.S.B., University of Chicago
                                              1101 East 59th Street
                                              Chicago, IL    60637
                                              (312) 962—7260
I.       Introduction1

     International transmission has been modeled traditionally using two types

of models. One allowed for short-run goods price rigidity and for a flexible

assets market, and focused on issues related to the overshooting hypothesis

(See Dornhusch (1976)), The second considered a sysrnmetric setup, allowing

for flexible goods and assets prices, and focusing on issues related to the

magnification effect (see Frenkel (1976) and Mussa (1976)). The properties of

these •two models have been compared in several recent papers (see Flood (1981)

and Obstfeld and Roqoft (1.984)),

     A major difference between the two approaches is in the treatment of

deviations from purchasing power parity (PPP henceforth). The flexible price

model uses a ppp equation to close the model, whereas the rigid price version

generates short-run deviations from Ppp due to the asymmetric behavior of the

assets and goods market. Those two approaches have been integrated into a

unified model that permits the study of the determinations of the extent and

stochastic properties of deviations from pPp (see Aizenman (1984)) .   In   the

earlier paper, the regimes of preet and flexible prices were combined by a

switching rule, recognizing the role of costs of price adjustment and goods

arbitrage, Prices were preset at their expected Ppp level in each period.

Such a rule generates frequent deviations from pPp within the period. Those

deviations were used as a measure of the forces working towards goods

arbitrage. If such forces are strong enough to overcome the transaction costs

related to goods arbitrage, prices will adjust and the result will be a

flexible price regime, in which a modified version of PPP will hold, The

paper con9idered two types of transaction costs related to goods arbitrage——

transportation costs and costs of contemporaneous goods price adjustment.
This switchinq model has been applied recently by DeGrauwe et al. (1984) to

interpret the regression results of a cross-country analysis of real exchange

rate and inflation variability, His empirical results point out the existence

of a nonlinear, positive association of real exchange rate and inflation

variability. These results are consistent with a version of the switching

model in which transportation costs are significant,

     The purpose of the current paper is to study analytically how the

presence of transportation costs in a switching model of deviations from ppp

affects the testing procedure of the PPP hypothesis. The analysis shows that

in the presence of transportation costs traditional regression analysis will

tend to reject the PPP hypothesis even if goods markets are well arbitraged.

The results of the paper suggest that the content of the PPP approach cannot

be tested satisfactorily without considering the systematic effects of

transportation costs and other costs of goods arbitrage.

     The methodology of the paper is to model an economy in which ,although

goods arbitrage is costly, all markets are well arbitraged, Next, we find for

our economy the predicted values of various regression coefficients that can

be fitted in an attempt to test the PPP hypothesis. We show tht the values

of those coefficients are affected systematically by considerations that are

independent of the degree to which markets are well arbitraged.

     Section II introduces the underlying model, Section III derives the

predicted values of three regressions that attempt to test the pPp hypothesis,

and studies their determinants, Section IV summarizes the paper. The

Appendix summarizes the notation,
II.      The Model

      Let us proceed by using the simplest model of an open economy, i.e., a

small open economy in a world of one traded good and perfect capital

mobility, The suggested approach, however, can be applied to other, more

complicated models of international transmission. The model used here is a

modified version of Aizenman (1984).

      Consider an economy subject to a flexible exchange rate, in which due to

considerations of transaction costs, prices are preset for each period at

their expected PPP leveL


(1)                          Pt =        (p + e),
where lowercase letters stand for the logarithm of the uppercase letters, et

is the exchange rate at time t,p* is the price of the traded good in the

foreign country, p the preset price of the traded good at home and Et_i the

conditional expectation operator (based upon the information available at

period t—1).

      To close the model, let us specify the money market equilibrium, The

demand for real money balances is given by


(2)



where y is the real output, assumed to he exogenously given1,          is the

interest rate, and   c* the semi—elasticity of the demand for money. Assuming

risk neutrality and perfect capital mobility, the interest rate is determined

by the uncovered interest rate parity:


(3)



where i is the foreign interest rate, Thus, the money market equilibrium
                                                  —3—




condition is


                                                        +        -
(4)                        m Pt =

        Equations (1) and (4) allow us, by invoking the rational expectation
hypothesis (and assuming no Thubbles") to solve for the reduced-form value of

the exchange rate in a regime of preset prices. In such a regime we find

frequent deviations from ppp2, given by

                                 °= e+ p- E1(e+ pt).

        suppose     that transportation costs are given by                (defined in percentage

terms). Tn such a case, if                   c, no forces of goods arbitrage are at

work, Suppose, however, that                 c.     Here, at the preset prices


 e+           C > Pt.    Thus, agents will profit by exporting, and forces of goods

arbitrage will induce price adjustment. Let us denote by                        and     the

values of the exchange rate and prices obtained following such an arbitrage,

tn    this   case

(la)                                                           and


(4a)                       m -     =     -              + Et e+1 -   e]
Alternatively,                 - ' et+             < Pt holds, implying that under a

preset price regime imports are profitable, forcing contemporaneous goods

price adjustment. In such a case equilibrium is given by

(ib)                                                p +

(4b)                       m —     =y    —
                                                        + Et e1 -




       The switching regime is summarized by equations (i,la-b) and (4,4a—b),
                                                    —4—




Equations (1) and          correspond to the presetting rule that set prices fqr
                         (4)

period t      at the end of period tel • At period t goods prices will stay at
their preset level if e,j<3. otherwise, prices will adjust to
according to equations (la) and (4a) (if O> ) or equations (lb) and (4b)

 (if          < —6):

                                                    e) if             <3
(Ic)
                               (p, e) a
                                                    e) if             > c

where      p' ,e' denotes the realized values of prices and the exchange rate.
       Several observations are in order. First, if prices adjust, their value
will correspond to a flexible price regime in which foreign prices are
adjusted by the transportation cost:

       -   3 (if       6) or p + 3 (if          —c). Next, due to the symmetric nature


of our pricing rule,3 Et_l             —        —                 Using this fact we can
                                           Pt       Et_i   p4 •


subtract equation (4) from equation (4a), obtaining:


(6)
                                 et_taA(5_ElJ

In.          Transportation     Costs and Regression Analysis
       Assessing the regression results as predicted by our framework would be
useful for the researcher who wished to study our economy by means of
regression analysis or, more specifically, to test the PPP hypothesis • This
assessment is carried out for the case of regressing relative prices on the
exchange     rate   in Section flxa; for    regressing the exchange rate        on price
pressure in section nIb;          and for regressing relative prices on the underlying
shocks      (productivity, money supply, etc.) in Section Inc.
                                              —5—



lila,       Transportation Costs and Relative Price Responsiveness to Exchange

            Rate Variations

        Relative price responsiveness to exchange rate variations can be measured

in various ways. one possible approach is to regress relative prices on the

exchange rate, Denoting by A relative prices (=                       e p
                                                                        +     p), let us

consider the following regression:


                                    =     +
                                                    e + Ut
        Notice that in our framework           is equal also to deviations from pPp,

If the simple PPP hypothesis holds, we obtain                    C)   and      ,   Thus in

our framework, a larger value of              would be consistent with systematic

deviations from ppp, Let us derive the value of 3 implied by our model, To

simplify exposition, we assume the following normalizations:


Eti Pt Eti e =          Eti         0 .   Exposition       is further simplified by

assuming that foreign price shocks are negligible relative to domestic

shocks,5 or that     p 0.
        In such a case we find from definitions that subject to preset prices

 (I8!<)

(8)                                  e =             and




(10)                                           =


If         c, equation (6) implies that


(6a)
                               et
                                    —
                                                    (t
                                                  —6—



Thus:




(8a)                                          =           e


(9a)                              Pt =


(lOa)                                             =
                                          At

Using the same logic we find that if                           —
                                      -
(8b)
                                                      1   +   cz




                                  —
(9b)
                                  Pt


(lob)




                                                                    t
                              e
                                  p, A
                                                                   Pt
                                                                   A
                                                                    t


                      —C

                                                  C
                                                                        t



  et

                           FIGURE -       1
Figure 1 summarizes the state of our economy by plotting the realized value of

prices (pt) ,   exchange rates (e) ,    and deviations from PPP (A) against

the PPP pressure (E3)     Figure 2 summarizes the behavior of the exchange

rate and prices in our system. The presence of transportation costs and costs

of goods price adjustment implies that within the transportation costs band

       < )   exchange rate adjustment will not be correlated with goods price

adjustment, implying a strong correlation between the exchange rate and

relative prices ()      Outside this band we obtain the opposite correlations

pattern, as predicted by the PPP hypothesis,




                                               C




                                FIGURE - 2
                                                                     —8—



       To derive            ,       let   us denote by (z) and ,(z) the standard normal

density function arid cumulative distribution of Z •                                                 It   can be shown that



(ii)                                                     2           Z            (—z) +
                  E(e •      M v0[nz.                +
                                                                         1    +   a         1
                                                                                                2 ci
                                                                                                 +
                                                                                                          z       4(Z)j



(12) 2) ve[H(z) +                            ci )2(          -                    +
                                                                                      2 (-z)                      4ci      z
                                                                     H(z))                           2
                                                                                                              +
                                                                                       (1 + ci)                         (1 + ci)


where H(Z) =       1   — 2          (—Z) -   2       Z •         (Z)          ,   ,   and    Z is the normalized value

of c



(13)                                                             =
                                                                     c/oe

       V8 and               are the variance and the standard deviations of                                                    8


Dividing equation (11) by equation (12) we can find a value for



                                                                          2
(14) (z) = E(e          •
                                )/E(e2)      =   1   -
                                                         a2 +             H(Z) + 2                (—Z) + 2               ci(1 —    2   c(_z))


       Although it has a complicated form, (z) can be shown to satisfy the

following:



(15)         a.                                                               =0
                       V8 +                                  -
                                                             c-*0

             b, 3
                                +0
                       V8

             c.                     < 0



             d.                 >    0
                                             —9--




        In general, forces that enhance goods arbitrage work to reduce the

responsiveness of relative prices to the exchange rate (reducing                     )   by

shifting us more frequently outside the transportation costs band. Within

this band (Jl < C)           3   has a unitary value, whereas outside it                 equal

zero. Thus, higher aggregate volatility and lower transportation costs reduce

 3(15 c,d).     Notice   that        approaches zero as aggregate volatility rises6

In general, however, this observation does not imply that higher volatility

will also reduce deviations from PPP as measured gross of transportation cost

            As was shown    elsewhere7,   the sign of                will depend upon the
                                                             0
importance of transportation costs relative to the direct costs of goods price

adjustment. Our present paper emphasizes the role of transportation costs,

and from Figure 1 and 2 we can conclude that in our case aggregate volatility

reduces relative price responsiveness to the exchange rate (8) and rises the

volatility of deviations from ppP (Vs).

        Formally one finds that



(16)                             ()2 2 (-Z) + V0 • H(z)          ,     and




                                 V>0         V               (-)2
(17)
                             3 V0                V8 ÷


ilib,      Transportation Costs and Exchange Rate Responsiveness to Relative

           Price Pressure

        Various studies of PPP have investigated the elasticity of the exchange

rate with respect to relative price pressure (see, for example, Frenkel

(1976)). They did so by looking at the following regression



(18)
                                 e                  p)   +
        If the simple version of ppp tends to hold, one would expect                                  (S   to be

equal to one. Let us derive the value for                            (S    predicted by our framework:


(19)                                            (S




Using equations, (8, 8a-b) and (9, 9a—b) we find that




(20) E(ep)
                                 2   [z    • (z) + 2 (-z)                 2 a       +   2   a(i   a) z
                 (1       + a)


(21)                             a )2 v{2 (z) + 2z                        cp(z) 4       + 2z2
             E(p2)                                               •
                                                                                                  ]
Equations (20) and (21) allow us to derive                       6 ,       which can be reduced to:

(22)                      6    1 + (1 + -i-)
                                            a
                                                     (—z)   — z • 4(z) +
 (S   satisfies the following:


            a. 6                     =1
(23)                  —
                               0
                      a0




                 a0


            c. —                     > 0



                          a8
                                         —11—




                                                                1
                                                                z




                                      Figure 3



      Figure 3 summarizes the behavior of         and     as a function of 1/2.
More effective goods arbitrage tend
                                      to generate results that are closer to the
predictions of the simple Ppp
                                approach. These predictions hold at the limits
of no transportation costs
                             or high underlying volatility ( + 0)             Both
 3 and 5 depend upon the magnitude of the
                                                 transportation costs relative to
measures of aggregate volatility

IIIc Transportation Costs and Relative Price Responsiveness to

       Exogenouse Shocks

     The regressions considered in Sections iii ab are potentially liable to

simultaneity bias: non of the right hand variables can he identified as

exogenous. In this section, we derive the coefficients obtained by

regressing relative prices on the exogenous variables.       In our model, these

variables are the underlying shocks, like money and
                                                        productivity   shocks. The
                                                —1 2—




derivation demonstrates the same pattern as before: the more volatile the

economy, or the smaller transportation costs, the closer the regression

results to the case where the simple PPP hypothesis holds

       For simplicity of exposition, consider the case in which the only sources

of volatility are the money supply and productivity shocks, and both are

uncorrelated. Let us look at the following regression:


(24)                             a0 + a1         m +                  +
                                                        a2

Thus


(25)
                                 a1        E(L m)/E(m)

       If the simple ppp hypothesis holds,                       0        Consequently, in such a

case a1      a2 = 0      Thus, non—zero values of the a.s would be associated

with a rejection of the simple PPP versions

       Notice that in our economy
                                       c                if 6 >c
                                       -
(26)                                                    if 1O1 < c

                                      —C
                                                        if 0t <—c

       Using the properties of truncated multi-normal distribution one can show

that


(27)
              a1
                      H(Z)
                             +
                                 2     J        (y           +                  (y) dy
                                                                     cm

From which one obtain that


                                        lima
                                                 1
(2e)




                                           lim a        0
                                                 1
(29)                                       —
                                        —+0
                                        C

                                           a0
                                     1 3—




   Once again, we observe that even if goods markets are well arhitraged, the

presence of costs of goods arbitrage generates a system in which a standard

regression analysis will provide misleading results, That is, we will tend to

accept the simple version of PPP if the volatility of the underlying shocks

relative to transportation costs is significant enough, and will reject it

otherwise, Similar results can be derived for a2,
                                        -1 4—




 Iv,        Summary and Concluding Remarks

        The presence of transportation Costs introduces a framework in
                                                                       which a
 standard regression approach will tend to reject the PPp hypothesis even if

 goods markets are well arbitraged (in the sense that profits opportunities are

 absent). In such a case PPP net of transportation costs
                                                            might hold, whereas a
 simple version of PPP will be rejected. This paper derives the coefficients

 of regression of relative prices on the exchange rate; the exchange rate on

 price pressure, and relative prices on the underlying shocks.    The analysis is
 conducted for the case of one traded good, where markets
                                                            are separated by
 transaction costs of goods arbitrage, Unlike the case of no transportation

 costs, the elasticity of relative prices with respect to the exchange rate

will depend upon measures of both relative and absolute
                                                          volatility. Higher
volatility of the underlying shocks, and lower transportation costs, will

reduce this elasticity, which will approach zero at the limit (i.e., no

transaction costs of goods arbitrage or high volatility). This is because

transaction costs of goods arbitrage will introduce a band within which there

is a unitary correlation between the exchange rate and relative prices,

whereas outside this band the correlation is smaller (zero in the case of one

traded good), Aggregate volatility, relative to the size of this band,

dictates the frequency with which we will be outside this band.

              For the three cases studied in this paper, we find that at the

limit of zero transportation costs or high volatility, the predictions of the

simple ppp approach hold, Under any other conditions, the simple Ppp

hypothesis is rejected even if goods markets are well arbitraged.

       The results of this paper suggest that the content of the PPP approach

cannot be tested satisfactorily without considering the systematic effects of
                                    —15—




transportation costs and other costs of goodi àritrage •   The   presence of
costs of goods arbitrage suggests two possible lines of empirical research.
First, one might proceed by estimating the maqnitude of the band defined by
the transaction costs, assessing the frequAncy with which this band is
violated . Alternatively, one might. take an indirect approach, using a cross-
country study to analyse the dependence of various regression coefficients on
aggregate volatility and on transportation costs.




                                                                                 p
                                    Footnotes

     *1 would like to thank Paul UeGrauwe and Jacob Frenkel for useful

discussions. Any errors, however, are mine, Financial support by the G.S.B.,

University of Chicago, is gratefully acknowledged, The research reported here

is part of the NBEP.s research program in International Studies, Any opinions

are those of the author and not those of the NBER,

1.      This assumption is relaxed in izenman (1984), allowing for the

        presence of a short-run Phillips curve.

2.       In the present paper there is only one good, thus PPP and the law of

        one price are identical, The one—good assumption simplifies

         exposition, This approach can be extended to the case of non perfect

         substitutability between domestic and foreign goods.

3.      This symmetry is reflected in the assumption that transportation

        costs for export equal those for imports. It can be shown that a

         symmetric switching rule, of the type summarized by equation (lc),

         implies that expectations about the future exchange rate in the

        combined regime are equal to expectations in a "pure regime (either

        a preset or a flexible price regime).

4,       Because we have assumed a one-good world, equilibrium    is zero. In

        general i should measure the deviations of actual relative prices

         from the relative prices obtained in the the absence of transaction

        costs of goods arbitrage.

S.      Such an assumption has also been applied in hyperinflation studies

         (Frenkel (1976)),

6.      Similar results apply also for the correlation between

          A and e(p).   p approaches   1   if v+O, and   p approaches 0 if
                                      —11—




7.   See   Appendix B in Aizenman (1984) • In     terms   of the notation there,
     we assume in the present paper that cO (where a denotes the
     transaction costs of price adjustment). We need thà presence of a
     marginal c to explain why, within the transportation cost band
               we do not obtain the closed economy, flexible equilibrium
      (IOtIc)
     pricedetermination.
8.   Allowing for volatile foreign prices would affect          6   and B   .   For

     example, if the only volatility 50Ut05       are   foreign prices, one get that

                =0 ,             = 1..       Foreign price volatility does not alter
     61                  9 z+o
     the main prediction of the paper:        higher   aggregate volatility and lower

     transportation    costs generate results that are      closer to the predictions

     of    the simple PPP approach.

9.   For an econometric study of interest rate parity that overcomes this
     problem see Frenkel and Lèviöh (1977).
                                        —1 —



                                      Appendix
     Lower case variables stand for the logarithm of the upper-case letter.

                            the exchange rate in a preset, flexible and the

                            combined regime.

                        =   goods domestic prices in a preset, flexible and the
         p
                            combined regime.

p                       =   foreign   goods prices.

                            domestic interest rate.


i                           foreign interest rate.

                        =   expectation   operator (conditional on information

                            available at tine t

Yt                          output

                            PPP pressure e+             Pt
                        =   realized deviations from ppp e +     p-
C                           transportation     costs.

                        =   standard normal density and the cumulative standard

                            density function.

V x,cx                  =   variance and standard deviations of x
z                       =
                            c/c0
                                      —19—



                                   References

Aizenman, J. "Modeling Deviations from ppp,U International Economic Review,

    Vol. 25, No. 1 (February, 1984), 175—190,

DeOrauWe, M, Janssens and H, Leliart, P. "Real Exchange Rate Variability

    During 1920—1926 and 1973-1982," Discussion Paper, University of Louvain,

    June 1984.

Dornbusch, R, "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of political

    Economy" 84, No. 6 (December, 1976), 1161—1176,

Flood, R. P. "Explanations of Exchange Rate Volatility and Other Empirical

    Regularities in some Popular Models of the Foreign Exchange Market"

    Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on public Policy, 15 (1981), 219—250.

Frenkel, J, A. "A Monetary Approach to the Exchange Rate: Doctrinal Aspects

    and Empirical Evidences" Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 78 (May 1976),

    200-229, Reprinted in Frenkel, 5, A. and H. 0. Johnson, eds, The

    Economics of Exchange Rates: Selected Studies (Reading, MA: Addison

    Wesley, 1978).

Frenkel, 5, A. and R. M. Levich "Transaction Costs and Interest Arbitrage:

    Tranquil Versus Turbulent Periods" Journal of Political Economy, 85, No,

    6, (December 1977), 1209—1226,

Mussa, M. "Monetary and Fiscal Policy Under a Regime of Controlled Floating"

    Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 78 (1976), 229-298. Reprinted in 3, A.

    Frenkel and H, 0, Johnson, Eds., The Economics of Exchange Rates, selected

    studies (Reading, MA: Addison Wesley, 1978).

Obstfeld M, and Rogoff , "Exchange Rate Dynamics with Sluggish Prices Under

    Alternative Price-Adjustment Rules" International Economic Review, Vol.

    25,   No. 1 (February, 1984), 159—174.
