NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ARE STOCKS REALLY LESS VOLATILE IN THE LONG RUN?
Lubos Pastor
Robert F. Stambaugh
Working Paper 14757
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14757

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2009

We are grateful for comments from John Campbell, Peter Christoffersen, Darrell Duffie, Gene Fama,
Wayne Ferson, Michael Halling, Cam Harvey, Anthony Lynch, Matt Richardson, Jeremy Siegel, Georgious
Skoulakis, Pietro Veronesi, Luis Viceira, Rob Vishny, an associate editor, two anonymous referees,
workshop participants at CFA Institute of Chicago, Columbia University, Comenius University, Cornell
University, Erasmus University Rotterdam, George Mason University, Louisiana State University,
Princeton University, Stanford University, Tilburg University, University of Amsterdam, University
of California at Berkeley, University of California Los Angeles, University of Chicago, University
of Pennsylvania, University of Southern California, University of Warwick, Washington University,
WU Wien, and Yale University, and participants in the following conferences: 2010 American Finance
Association, 2009 Western Finance Association, 2009 European Finance Association, 2009 NBER
Summer Institute, 2009 Gerzensee, 2010 Chicago Booth Management Conference, 2010 Q Group,
and the 2009 Symposium on Quantitative Methods in Finance at the University of Texas at Austin.
We also gratefully acknowledge research support from the Q Group, and we thank Hyun Paul Lee
for helpful research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Lubos Pastor and Robert F. Stambaugh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Are Stocks Really Less Volatile in the Long Run?
Lubos Pastor and Robert F. Stambaugh
NBER Working Paper No. 14757
February 2009, Revised March 2011
JEL No. G11,G12,G23
ABSTRACT
According to conventional wisdom, annualized volatility of stock returns is lower when computed
over long horizons than over short horizons, due to mean reversion induced by return predictability.
In contrast, we find that stocks are substantially more volatile over long horizons from an investor’s
perspective. This perspective recognizes that parameters are uncertain, even with two centuries of
data, and that observable predictors imperfectly deliver the conditional expected return. Mean reversion
contributes strongly to reducing long-horizon variance, but it is more than offset by various uncertainties
faced by the investor, especially uncertainty about the expected return. The same uncertainties also
make target-date funds undesirable to a class of investors who would otherwise find them appealing.
Lubos Pastor
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
lubos.pastor@chicagobooth.edu
Robert F. Stambaugh
Finance Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
stambaugh@wharton.upenn.edu

1.

Introduction

Conventional wisdom views stock returns as less volatile over longer investment horizons. This
view seems consistent with various empirical estimates. For example, using two centuries of U.S.
equity returns, Siegel (2008) reports that variances realized over investment horizons of several
decades are substantially lower than short-horizon variances on a per-year basis. Such evidence
pertains to unconditional variance, but a similar message is delivered by studies that condition
variance on information useful in predicting returns. Campbell and Viceira (2002, 2005), for
example, report estimates of conditional variances that decrease with the investment horizon.
We find that stocks are actually more volatile over long horizons from an investor’s perspective.
Investors condition on available information but realize their knowledge is limited in two key
respects. First, even after observing 206 years of data (1802–2007), investors do not know the
values of the parameters of the return-generating process, especially the parameters related to
the conditional expected return. Second, investors recognize that observable “predictors” used to
forecast returns deliver only an imperfect proxy for the conditional expected return, whether or not
the parameter values are known. When viewed from this perspective, the return variance per year
at a 50-year horizon is at least 1.3 times higher than the variance at a 1-year horizon.
Our main object of interest is the predictive variance of rT ,T +k , the k-period return starting at
time T . Predictive variance, denoted by Var(rT ,T +k |DT ), conditions on DT , the data available to

investors at time T . From an investor’s perspective, predictive variance is the relevant variance—
the one suitable for portfolio decisions. Readers might be more familiar with true variance, which
conditions on φ, the parameters of the return-generating process. Investors realize they do not
know φ, and predictive variance incorporates that parameter uncertainty by conditioning only on
DT . In contrast, true variance conditions on φ, whether or not it also conditions on DT . The
true unconditional variance, Var(rT ,T +k |φ), is estimated by the usual sample variance, as in Siegel

(2008). The true conditional variance, Var(rT ,T +k |φ, DT ), is estimated by Campbell and Viceira

(2002, 2005). True variance is the more common focus of statistical inference. For example, an
extensive literature uses variance ratios and other statistics to test whether (1/k)Var(rT ,T +k |φ) is
the same for every investment horizon k.1 We focus on (1/k)Var(rT ,T +k |DT ) instead. That is, we

compare long- and short-horizon predictive variances, which matter to investors. Investors might
well infer from the data that the true variance is lower at long horizons, while at the same time
assessing the predictive variance to be higher at long horizons.
1

A partial list of such studies includes Fama and French (1988), Poterba and Summers (1988), Lo and MacKinlay
(1988, 1989), Richardson and Stock (1989), Kim, Nelson, and Startz (1991), and Richardson (1993).

1

The distinction between predictive variance and true variance is readily seen in the simple case
where an investor knows the true variance of returns but not the true expected return. Uncertainty
about the expected return contributes to the investor’s overall uncertainty about what the upcoming
realized returns will be. Predictive variance includes that uncertainty, while true variance excludes
it. Expected return is notoriously hard to estimate. Uncertainty about current expected return and
about how expected return will change in the future is the key element of our story. This uncertainty
plays an increasingly important role as the investment horizon grows, as long as investors believe
that expected return is “persistent,” i.e., likely to take similar values across adjacent periods.
Under the traditional random-walk assumption that returns are distributed independently and
identically (i.i.d.) through time, true return variance per period is equal at all investment horizons. Explanations for lower true variance at long horizons commonly focus on “mean reversion,”
whereby a negative shock to the current return is offset by positive shocks to future returns, and
vice versa. Our conclusion that stocks are more volatile in the long run obtains despite the presence of mean reversion. We show that mean reversion is only one of five components of long-run
predictive variance:
(i) i.i.d. uncertainty
(ii) mean reversion
(iii) uncertainty about future expected returns
(iv) uncertainty about current expected return
(v) estimation risk.
Whereas the mean-reversion component is strongly negative, the other components are all positive,
and their combined effect outweighs that of mean reversion.
Of the four components contributing positively, the one making the largest contribution at long
horizons reflects uncertainty about future expected returns. This component (iii) is often neglected
in discussions of how return predictability affects long-horizon return variance. Such discussions typically highlight mean reversion, but mean reversion—and predictability more generally—
require variance in the conditional expected return, which we denote by µt . That variance makes
the future values of µt uncertain, especially in the more distant future periods, thereby contributing
to the overall uncertainty about future returns. The greater the degree of predictability, the larger
is the variance of µt and thus the greater is the relative contribution of uncertainty about future
expected returns to long-horizon predictive variance.
Three additional components also make significant positive contributions to long-horizon predictive variance. One is simply the variance attributable to unexpected returns. Under an i.i.d.

2

assumption for unexpected returns, this variance makes a constant contribution to variance per period at all investment horizons. At long horizons, this component (i), though quite important, is
actually smaller in magnitude than both components (ii) and (iii) discussed above.
Another component of long-horizon predictive variance reflects uncertainty about the current
µt . Components (i), (ii), and (iii) all condition on the current value of µt . Conditioning on the current expected return is standard in long-horizon variance calculations using a vector autoregression
(VAR), such as Campbell (1991) and Campbell, Chan, and Viceira (2003). In reality, though, an
investor does not observe µt . We assume the investor observes the histories of returns and a given
set of return predictors. This information is capable of producing only an imperfect proxy for µt ,
which in general reflects additional information. Pástor and Stambaugh (2009) introduce a predictive system to deal with imperfect predictors, and we use that framework to assess long-horizon
predictive variance and capture component (iv). When µt is persistent, uncertainty about the current µt contributes to uncertainty about µt in multiple future periods, on top of the uncertainty
about future µt ’s discussed earlier.
The fifth and last component adding to long-horizon predictive variance, also positively, is one
we label “estimation risk,” following common usage of that term. This component reflects the fact
that, after observing the available data, an investor remains uncertain about the parameters of the
joint process generating returns, expected returns, and the observed predictors. That parameter
uncertainty adds to the overall variance of returns assessed by an investor. If the investor knew the
parameter values, this estimation-risk component would be zero.
Parameter uncertainty also enters long-horizon predictive variance more pervasively. Unlike
the fifth component, the first four components are non-zero even if the parameters are known to
an investor. At the same time, those four components can be affected significantly by parameter
uncertainty. Each component is an expectation of a function of the parameters, with the expectation
evaluated over the distribution characterizing an investor’s parameter uncertainty. We find that
Bayesian posterior distributions of these functions are often skewed, so that less likely parameter
values exert a significant influence on the posterior means, and thus on long-horizon predictive
variance.
The effects of parameter uncertainty on the predictive variance of long-horizon returns are
analyzed in previous studies, such as Stambaugh (1999), Barberis (2000), and Hoevenaars et al
(2007). Barberis discusses how parameter uncertainty essentially compounds across periods and
exerts stronger effects at long horizons. The above studies find that predictive variance is substantially higher than estimates of true variance that ignore parameter uncertainty. However, all three
studies also find that long-horizon predictive variance is lower than short-horizon variance for the
3

horizons considered—up to 10 years in Barberis (2000), up to 20 years in Stambaugh (1999), and
up to 50 years in Hoevenaars et al (2007).2 In contrast, we often find that predictive variance even
at a 10-year horizon is higher than at a 1-year horizon.
A key difference between our analysis and the above studies is our inclusion of uncertainty
about the current expected return µt . The above studies employ VAR approaches in which observed predictors perfectly capture µt , whereas we consider predictors to be imperfect, as explained
earlier. We compare predictive variances under perfect versus imperfect predictors, and find that
long-run variance is substantially higher when predictors are imperfect. Predictor imperfection
increases long-run variance both directly and indirectly. The direct effect, component (iv) of predictive variance, is large enough at a 10-year horizon that subtracting it from predictive variance
leaves the remaining portion lower than the 1-year variance.
The indirect effect of predictor imperfection is even larger. It stems from the fact that predictor
imperfection and parameter uncertainty interact—once predictor imperfection is admitted, parameter uncertainty is more important in general. This result occurs despite the use of informative
prior beliefs about parameter values, as opposed to the non-informative priors used in the above
studies. When µt is not observed, learning about its persistence and predictive ability is more
difficult than when µt is assumed to be given by observed predictors. The effects of parameter uncertainty pervade all components of long-horizon returns, as noted earlier. The greater parameter
uncertainty accompanying predictor imperfection further widens the gap between our analysis and
the previous studies.3
Predictor imperfection can be viewed as omitting an unobserved predictor from the set of observable predictors used in a standard predictive regression. The degree of predictor imperfection
can be characterized by the increase in the R-squared of that predictive regression if the omitted
predictor were included. Even if investors assign a low probability to this increase being larger
than 2% for annual returns, such modest predictor imperfection nevertheless exerts a substantial
effect on long-horizon variance. At a 30-year horizon, for example, the predictive variance is 1.2
times higher than when the predictors are assumed to be perfect.
Our empirical results indicate that stocks should be viewed by investors as more volatile at
2

Instead of actually reporting predictive variance, Barberis reports a closely related quantity: the asset allocation
for a buy-and-hold, power-utility investor. His allocations for the 10-year horizon exceed those for short horizons,
even when parameter uncertainty is incorporated.
3
Schotman, Tschernig, and Budek (2008) find that if the predictors are fractionally integrated, long-horizon variance of stock returns can exceed short-horizon variance. With stationary predictors, though, they find long-horizon
variance is smaller than short-horizon variance. By incorporating predictor imperfection as well as parameter uncertainty, we find that long-horizon variance exceeds short-horizon variance even when predictors are stationary.

4

long horizons. Corporate Chief Financial Officers (CFO’s) indeed tend to exhibit such a view, as
we discover by analyzing survey evidence reported by Ben-David, Graham, and Harvey (2010).
In quarterly surveys conducted over eight years, Ben-David et al. ask CFO’s to express confidence
intervals for the stock market’s annualized return over the next year and the next ten years. From
the reported results of these surveys, we infer that the typical CFO views the annualized variance
of ten-year returns to be at least twice the one-year variance.
The long-run volatility of stocks is of substantial interest to investors. Evidence of lower longhorizon variance is cited in support of higher equity allocations for long-run investors (e.g, Siegel,
2008) as well as the increasingly popular target-date mutual funds (e.g., Gordon and Stockton,
2006, Greer, 2004, and Viceira, 2008). These funds gradually reduce an investor’s stock allocation
by following a predetermined “glide path” that depends only on the time remaining until the investor’s target date, typically retirement. When the parameters and conditional expected return are
assumed to be known, we find that the typical glide path of a target-date fund closely resembles the
pattern of allocations desired by risk-averse investors with utility for wealth at the target date. Once
uncertainty about the parameters and conditional expected return is recognized, however, the same
investors find the typical glide path significantly less appealing. Investors with sufficiently long
horizons instead prefer glide paths whose initial as well as final stock allocations are substantially
lower than those of investors with shorter horizons.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 derives expressions for the five
components of long-horizon variance discussed above and analyzes their theoretical properties.
Section 3 describes our empirical framework, which uses up to 206 years of data to implement two
predictive systems that allow us to analyze various properties of long-horizon variance. Section 4
explores the five components of long-horizon variance using a predictive system in which the conditional expected return follows a first-order autoregression. Section 5 then gauges the importance
of predictor imperfection using an alternative predictive system that includes an unobservable predictor. Section 6 discusses the robustness of our results. Section 7 returns to the above discussion
of the distinction between an investor’s problem and inference about true variance. Section 8 considers the implications of the CFO surveys reported by Ben-David et al. (2010). Section 9 analyzes
investment implications of our results in the context of target-date funds. Section 10 summarizes
our conclusions.

5

2.

Long-horizon variance and parameter uncertainty

Let rt+1 denote the continuously compounded return from time t to time t + 1. We can write
rt+1 = µt + ut+1 ,

(1)

where µt denotes the expected return conditional on all information at time t and ut+1 has zero
mean. Also define the k-period return from period T + 1 through period T + k,
rT ,T +k = rT +1 + rT +2 + . . . + rT +k .

(2)

An investor assessing the variance of rT ,T +k uses DT , a subset of all information at time T . In our
empirical analysis in Section 4, DT consists of the full histories of returns as well as predictors
that investors use in forecasting returns.4 Importantly, DT typically reveals neither the value of µT
in equation (1) nor the values of the parameters governing the joint dynamics of rt, µt , and the
predictors. Let φ denote the vector containing those parameter values.
This paper focuses on Var(rT ,T +k |DT ), the predictive variance of rT ,T +k given the investor’s
information set. Since the investor is uncertain about µT and φ, it is useful to decompose this
variance as
Var(rT ,T +k |DT ) = E{Var(rT ,T +k |µT , φ, DT )|DT } + Var{E(rT ,T +k |µT , φ, DT )|DT }.

(3)

The first term in this decomposition is the expectation of the conditional variance of k-period
returns. This conditional variance, which has been estimated by Campbell and Viceira (2002,
2005), is of interest only to investors who know the true values of µT and φ. Investors who do
not know µT and φ are interested in the expected value of this conditional variance, and they also
account for the variance of the conditional expected k-period return, the second term in equation
(3). As a result, they perceive returns to be more volatile and, as we show below, they perceive
disproportionately more volatility at long horizons. Whereas the conditional per-period variance of
stock returns appears to decrease with the investment horizon, we show that (1/k)Var(rT ,T +k |DT ),
which accounts for uncertainty about µT and φ, increases with the investment horizon.

The potential importance of parameter uncertainty for long-run variance is readily seen in the
special case where returns are i.i.d. with known variance σ 2 and unknown mean µ. In this case, the
mean and variance of k-period returns conditional on µ are both linear in k: the mean is kµ and
the variance is kσ 2. An investor who knows µ faces the same per-period variance, σ 2, regardless
4

We are endowing the investor with the same information set as the set that we use in our empirical analysis. In
that sense, we are putting investors and econometricians on an equal footing, in the spirit of Hansen (2007).

6

of k. However, an investor who does not know µ faces more variance, and this variance increases
with k. To see this, apply the variance decomposition from equation (3):
Var(rT ,T +k |DT )

= E{kσ 2|DT } + Var{kµ|DT }
=

kσ 2 + k 2 Var {µ|DT } ,

(4)

so that (1/k)Var(rT ,T +k |DT ) increases with k. In fact, (1/k)Var(rT ,T +k |DT ) → ∞ as k → ∞.
That is, an investor who believes that stock prices follow a random walk but who is uncertain about
the unconditional mean µ views stocks as more volatile in the long run.
To assess the likely magnitude of this effect, consider the following back-of-the-envelope calculation. If uncertainty about µ is given by the standard error of the sample average return com√
puted over T periods, or σ/ T , then (1/k)Var(rT ,T +k |DT ) = σ 2(1 + k/T ). With k = 50 years
and T = 206 years, as in the sample that we use in Section 4, (1 + k/T ) = 1.243, so the perperiod predictive variance exceeds σ 2 by a quarter. Of course, if the sample mean estimate of µ is
computed from a sample shorter than 206 years (e.g., due to concerns about nonstationarity), then
uncertainty about µ is larger and the effect on predictive variance is even stronger.
When returns are predictable, so that µt is time-varying, Var(rT ,T +k |DT ) can be above or be-

low its value in the i.i.d. case. Predictability can induce mean reversion, which reduces long-run
variance, but predictability also introduces uncertainty about additional quantities, such as future
values of µt and the parameters that govern its behavior. It is not clear a priori whether predictability makes returns more or less volatile at long horizons, compared to the i.i.d. case. At sufficiently
long horizons, uncertainty about the unconditional expected return will still dominate and drive
(1/k)Var(rT ,T +k |DT ) to infinity. At long horizons of relevance to investors, whether or not that
per-period variance is higher than at short horizons is an empirical question that we explore.
In the rest of this section, we assume for simplicity that µt follows an AR(1) process,5
µt+1 = (1 − β)Er + βµt + wt+1 ,

0 < β < 1.

(5)

The AR(1) assumption for µt allows us to further decompose both terms on the right-hand side
of equation (3), providing additional insights into the components of Var(rT ,T +k |DT ). The AR(1)
assumption also allows a simple characterization of mean reversion. Time variation in µt induces
mean reversion in returns if the unexpected return ut+1 is negatively correlated with future values of
µt . Under the AR(1) assumption, mean reversion requires a negative correlation between ut+1 and
5

Our stationary AR(1) process for µt nests a popular model in which the stock price is the sum of a random walk
and a positively autocorrelated stationary AR(1) component (e.g., Summers, 1986, Fama and French, 1988). In that
special case, ρuw as well as return autocorrelations at all lags are negative. See the Appendix.

7

wt+1 , or ρuw < 0. If fluctuations in µt are persistent, then a negative shock in ut+1 is accompanied
by offsetting positive shifts in the µt+i ’s for multiple future periods, resulting in a stronger negative
contribution to the variance of long-horizon returns.

2.1. Conditional variance
This section analyzes the conditional variance Var(rT ,T +k |µT , φ, DT ), which is an important build-

ing block in computing the variance in equation (3). The conditional variance reflects neither
parameter uncertainty nor uncertainty about the current expected return, since it conditions on
both φ and µT . The parameter vector φ includes all parameters in equations (1) and (5): φ =
(β, Er , ρuw , σu , σw ), where σu and σw are conditional standard deviations of ut+1 and wt+1 , respectively. Assuming that equations (1) and (5) hold and that the conditional covariance matrix of
[ut+1 wt+1 ] is constant, Var(rT ,T +k |µT , φ, DT ) = Var(rT ,T +k |µT , φ). Furthermore, we show in the
Appendix that

h

i

¯ uw A(k) + d¯2 B(k) ,
Var(rT ,T +k |µT , φ) = kσu2 1 + 2dρ

(6)

where
1
1 − β k−1
A(k) = 1 +
−1 − β
k
1−β

!

1
1 − β k−1
1 − β 2(k−1)
B(k) = 1 +
−1 − 2β
+ β2
k
1−β
1 − β2
d̄ =

"

1 + β R2
1 − β 1 − R2

#1/2

(7)
!

,

(8)
(9)

and R2 is the ratio of the variance of µt to the variance of rt+1 , based on equation (1).
The conditional variance in (6) consists of three terms. The first term, kσu2 , captures the wellknown feature of i.i.d. returns—the variance of k-period returns increases linearly with k. The
second term, containing A(k), reflects mean reversion in returns arising from the likely negative
correlation between realized returns and expected future returns (ρuw < 0), and it contributes
negatively to long-horizon variance. The third term, containing B(k), reflects the uncertainty
about future values of µt , and it contributes positively to long-horizon variance. When returns are
unpredictable, only the first term is present (because R2 = 0 implies d¯ = 0, so the terms involving
A(k) and B(k) are zero). Now suppose that returns are predictable, so that R2 > 0 and d̄ > 0.
When k = 1, the first term is still the only one present, because A(1) = B(1) = 0. As k increases,
though, the terms involving A(k) and B(k) become increasingly important, because both A(k)
and B(k) increase monotonically from 0 to 1 as k goes from 1 to infinity.
8

Figure 1 plots the variance in (6) on a per-period basis (i.e., divided by k), as a function of the
investment horizon k. Also shown are the terms containing A(k) and B(k). It can be verified that
A(k) converges to 1 faster than B(k). (See Appendix.) As a result, the conditional variance in
Figure 1 is U-shaped: as k increases, mean reversion exerts a stronger effect initially, but uncertainty about future expected returns dominates eventually.6 The contribution of the mean reversion
term, and thus the extent of the U-shape, is stronger when ρuw takes larger negative values. The
contributions of mean reversion and uncertainty about future µT +i ’s both become stronger as predictability increases. These effects are illustrated in Figure 2, which plots the same quantities as
Figure 1, but for three different R2 values. Note that a higher R2 implies not only stronger mean
reversion but also a more volatile µt , which in turn implies more uncertainty about future µT +i ’s.
The key insight arising from Figures 1 and 2 is that, although mean reversion significantly
reduces long-horizon variance, that reduction can be more than offset by uncertainty about future
expected returns. Both effects become stronger as R2 increases, but uncertainty about future expected returns prevails when R2 is high. A high R2 implies high volatility in µt and therefore high
uncertainty about µT +j . In that case, long-horizon variance exceeds short-horizon variance on a
per-period basis, even though φ and the current µT are assumed to be known. Uncertainty about
φ and the current µT exerts a greater effect at longer horizons, further increasing the long-horizon
variance relative to the short-horizon variance.

2.2. Components of long-horizon variance
The variance of interest, Var(rT ,T +k |DT ), consists of two terms on the right-hand side of equation

(3). The first term is the expectation of the conditional variance in equation (6), so each of the three

terms in (6) is replaced by its expectation with respect to φ. (We need not take the expectation with
respect to µT , since µT does not appear on the right in (6).) The interpretations of these terms are
the same as before, except that now each term also reflects parameter uncertainty.
The second term on the right-hand side of equation (3) is the variance of the true conditional
expected return. This variance is taken with respect to φ and µT . It can be decomposed into
two components: one reflecting uncertainty about the current µT , or predictor imperfection, and
the other reflecting uncertainty about φ, or “estimation risk.” (See the Appendix.) Let bT and qT
6

Campbell and Viceira (2002, pp. 95–96) also model expected return as an AR(1) process, but they conclude that
variance per period cannot increase with k when ρuw < 0. They appear to equate conditional variances of singleperiod returns across future periods, which would omit the uncertainty about future expected return.

9

denote the conditional mean and variance of the unobservable expected return µT :
bT = E(µT |φ, DT )

(10)

qT = Var(µT |φ, DT ).

(11)

The right-hand side of equation (3) can then be expressed as the sum of five components:
Var(rT ,T +k |DT ) =
n

E kσu2 |DT

|

{z

o

}

i.i.d. uncertainty

n

¯ uw A(k)|DT
+ E 2kσu2 dρ
|

{z

mean reversion

o

}

n

+ E kσu2 d̄2 B(k)|DT
|

{z

o

}

future µT +i uncertainty





!
 1 − βk 2



1 − βk
+ E
+ Var kEr +
qT |DT
(bT − Er )|DT .
 1−β



1−β
|
|
{z
}
{z
}

current µT uncertainty

(12)

estimation risk

Parameter uncertainty plays a role in all five components in equation (12). The first four components are expected values of quantities that are viewed as random due to uncertainty about φ,
the parameters governing the joint dynamics of returns and predictors. (If the values of these parameters were known to the investor, the expectation operators could be removed from those four
components.) Parameter uncertainty can exert a non-trivial effect on the first four components, in
that the expectations can be influenced by parameter values that are unlikely but cannot be ruled
out. The fifth component in equation (12) is the variance of a quantity whose randomness is also
due to parameter uncertainty. In the absence of such uncertainty, the fifth component is zero, which
is why we assign it the interpretation of estimation risk.
The estimation risk term includes the variance of kEr , where Er denotes the unconditional
mean return. This variance equals k 2 Var(Er |DT ), so the per-period variance (1/k)Var(rT ,T +k |DT )

increases at rate k. Similar to the i.i.d. case, if Er is unknown, then the per-period variance grows
without bounds as the horizon k goes to infinity. For finite horizons that are typically of interest to
investors, however, the fifth component in equation (12) can nevertheless be smaller in magnitude
than the other four components. In general, the k-period variance ratio, defined as
V (k) =

(1/k)Var(rT ,T +k |DT )
,
Var(rT +1|DT )

(13)

can exhibit a variety of patterns as k increases. Whether or not V (k) > 1 at various horizons k is
an empirical question.

10

3.

Empirical framework: Predictive systems

It is commonly assumed that the conditional expected return µt is given by a linear combination of
a set of observable predictors, xt, so that µt = a + b0xt . This assumption is useful in many applications, but we relax it here because it understates the uncertainty faced by an investor assessing
the variance of future returns. Any given set of predictors xt is likely to be imperfect, in that µt is
unlikely to be captured by any linear combination of xt (µt 6= a + b0xt ). The true expected return

µt generally reflects more information than what we assume to be observed by the investor—the
histories of rt and xt. To incorporate the likely presence of predictor imperfection, we employ a
predictive system, defined in Pástor and Stambaugh (2009) as a state-space model in which rt , xt ,
and µt follow a VAR with coefficients restricted so that µt is the mean of rt+1 .7 As noted by Pástor
and Stambaugh, a predictive system can also be represented as a VAR for rt , xt , and an unobserved
additional predictor. We employ both versions here, as each is best suited to different dimensions
of our investigation. Our two predictive systems are specified as follows:
System 1
rt+1 = µt + ut+1

(14)

xt+1 = θ + Axt + vt+1

(15)

µt+1 = (1 − β)Er + βµt + wt+1.

(16)

System 2
rt+1 = a + b0xt + πt + ut+1

(17)

xt+1 = θ + Axt + vt+1

(18)

πt+1 = δπt + ηt+1 .

(19)

In System 1, the conditional expected return µt is unobservable, and we assume 0 < β < 1.
System 2 includes πt as an unobserved additional predictor of return, and we assume 0 < δ < 1.
In both systems, the eigenvalues of A are assumed to lie inside the unit circle, and the vector
containing the residuals of the three equations is assumed to be normally distributed, independently
and identically across t.
System 1 is well suited for analyzing the components of predictive variance discussed in the
previous section, because the AR(1) specification for µt+1 in equation (16) is the same as that in
equation (5). Pástor and Stambaugh (2009) provide a detailed analysis of System 1, and we apply
7
State-space models have been used in a number of studies analyzing return predictability, including Conrad and
Kaul (1988), Lamoureux and Zhou (1996), Johannes, Polson, and Stroud (2002), Ang and Piazzesi (2003), Brandt and
Kang (2004), Dangl and Halling (2006), Duffee (2006), and Rytchkov (2007).

11

their econometric methodology in this study. In the next section, we investigate empirically the
components of predictive variance using System 1.
System 2 is well suited for exploring the role of predictor imperfection in determining predictive variance. To see this, let σπ2 denote the variance of πt+1 in equation (19). As σπ2 → 0, the
predictors approach perfection, and equation (17) approaches the standard predictive regression,
rt+1 = a + b0xt + et+1 .

(20)

By examining results under various prior beliefs about the possible magnitudes of σπ2 , we can
assess the effect of predictor imperfection on predictive variance. We do so in Section 5.
We conduct analyses using both annual and quarterly data. Our annual data consist of observations for the 206-year period from 1802 through 2007, as compiled by Siegel (1992, 2008). The
return rt is the annual real log return on the U.S. equity market, and xt contains three predictors:
the dividend yield on U.S equity, the first difference in the long-term high-grade bond yield, and
the difference between the long-term bond yield and the short-term interest rate.8 We refer to these
quantities as the “dividend yield,” the “bond yield,” and the “term spread,” respectively. These
three predictors seem reasonable choices given the various predictors used in previous studies and
the information available in Siegel’s dataset. Dividend yield and the term spread have long been
entertained as return predictors (e.g., Fama and French, 1989). Using post-war quarterly data,
Pástor and Stambaugh (2009) find that the long-term bond yield, relative to its recent levels, exhibits significant predictive ability in predictive regressions. That evidence motivates our choice of
the bond-yield variable used here. All three predictors exhibit significant predictive abilities in a
predictive regression as in (20), with an R2 in that regression of 5.6%.9 Our quarterly data consist
of observations for the 220-quarter period from 1952Q1 through 2006Q4. We use the same three
predictors in xt as Pástor and Stambaugh (2009): dividend yield, CAY, and bond yield.10

4.

Components of predictive variance (System 1)

This section uses the first predictive system, specified in equations (14) through (16), to empirically assess long-horizon return variance from an investor’s perspective. In the first subsection, we
8

We are grateful to Jeremy Siegel for supplying these data. The long-term bond yield series is constructed from
the yields of federal bonds and high-grade municipal bonds, as described in Siegel (1992).
9
Details of the predictive regression results and the bootstrap significance tests are provided in an Internet Appendix
available on the author’s websites.
10
See that study for more detailed descriptions of the predictors. Our quarterly sample ends in 2006Q4 because the
2007 data on CAY of Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) are not yet available as of this writing. Our quarterly sample begins
in 1952Q1, after the 1951 Treasury-Fed accord that made possible the independent conduct of monetary policy.

12

specify prior distributions for the system’s parameters and analyze the resulting posteriors. Those
posterior distributions characterize the parameter uncertainty faced by an investor who conditions
on essentially the entire history of U.S. equity returns. That uncertainty is incorporated in the
Bayesian predictive variance, which is the focus of the second subsection. We analyze the five
components of predictive variance and their dependence on the investment horizon. For this analysis, we report results using annual data. Results based on quarterly data are summarized later in
Section 6; detailed results are reported in the Internet Appendix.

4.1. Priors and posteriors
For each of the three key parameters that affect multiperiod variance—ρuw , β, and R2 —we implement the Bayesian empirical framework under three different prior distributions, displayed in
Figure 3. The priors are assumed to be independent across parameters and follow the same functional forms as in Pástor and Stambaugh (2009). For each parameter, we specify a “benchmark”
prior as well as two priors that depart from the benchmark in opposite directions but seem at least
somewhat plausible as alternative specifications. When we depart from the benchmark prior for
one of the parameters, we hold the priors for the other two parameters at their benchmarks, obtaining a total of seven different specifications of the joint prior for ρuw , β, and R2 . We estimate
the predictive system under each specification to explore the extent to which a Bayesian investor’s
assessment of long-horizon variance is sensitive to prior beliefs.
The benchmark prior for ρuw , the correlation between expected and unexpected returns, has
97% of its mass below 0. This prior follows the reasoning of Pástor and Stambaugh (2009), who
suggest that, a priori, the correlation between unexpected return and the innovation in expected
return is likely to be negative. The more informative prior concentrates toward larger negative
values, whereas the less informative prior essentially spreads evenly over the range from -1 to 1.
The benchmark prior for β, the first-order autocorrelation in the annual expected return µt , has a
median of 0.83 and assigns a low (2%) probability to β values less than 0.4. The two alternative
priors then assign higher probability to either more persistence or less persistence. The benchmark
prior for R2 , the fraction of variance in annual returns explained by µt , has 63% of its mass below
0.1 and relatively little (17%) above 0.2. The alternative priors are then either more concentrated
or less concentrated on low values. These priors on the true R2 are shown in Panel C of Figure 3.
Panel D displays the corresponding implied priors on the “observed” R2 —the fraction of variance
in annual real returns explained by the predictors. Each of the three priors in Panel D is implied by
those in Panel C, while holding the priors for ρuw and β at their benchmarks and specifying noninformative priors for the degree of imperfection in the predictors. Observe that the benchmark
13

prior for the observed R2 has much of its mass below 0.05.
We compute posterior distributions for the parameters using the Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) method discussed in Pástor and Stambaugh (2009). These posteriors summarize the
parameter uncertainty faced by an investor after updating the priors using the 206-year history of
equity returns and predictors. Figure 4 plots the posteriors corresponding to the priors plotted in
Figure 3. The posteriors of β, shown in Panel B of Figure 4, reveal substantial persistence in the
conditional expected return µt . The posterior modes are about 0.9, regardless of the prior, and β
values smaller than 0.7 seem very unlikely. Comparing the posteriors with the priors in Figure 3,
we see that the data shift the prior beliefs in the direction of higher persistence. The posteriors of
the true R2 , displayed in Panel C, lie to the right of the corresponding priors. For example, for the
benchmark prior, the prior mode for the true R2 is less than 0.05, while the posterior mode is nearly
0.1. The data thus shift the priors in the direction of greater predictability. The same message is
conveyed by the posteriors of the observed R2 , plotted in Panel D.
The posteriors of ρuw are displayed in Panel A of Figure 4. These posteriors are more concentrated toward larger negative values than any of the three priors of ρuw , suggesting strong mean
reversion in the data. The posteriors are similar across the three priors, consistent with observed
autocorrelations of annual real returns and the posteriors of R2 and β discussed above. Equations
(1) and (5) imply that the autocovariances of returns are given by




Cov(rt, rt−k ) = β k−1 βσµ2 + σuw , k = 1, 2, . . . ,

(21)

where σµ2 = σw2 /(1 − β 2). From (21) we can also obtain the autocorrelations of returns,
Corr(rt , rt−k ) = β

k−1



2

q

βR + ρuw (1 −

R2 )R2 (1

−

β 2)



, k = 1, 2, . . . ,

(22)

by noting that σµ2 = R2 σr2 and that σu2 = (1 − R2 )σr2. The posterior modes of ρuw in Figure 4 are
about -0.9, and the posterior modes of R2 and β are about 0.1 and 0.9, as observed earlier. Eval-

uating (22) at those values gives autocorrelations starting at -0.028 for k = 1 and then increasing
gradually toward 0 as k increases. Such values are statistically indistinguishable from the observed
autocorrelations of annual real returns in our sample.11
11

The first five autocorrelations in our 206-year sample are 0.02, -0.17, -0.04, 0.01, and -0.10. To assess the
compatibility of these sample autocorrelations with our predictive system, we proceed as follows. We first draw
the full set of system parameters from their posterior distribution. Using these parameters, we simulate a 206-year
sample of returns by drawing the error terms in equations (14) and (16) from their joint normal distribution. We
then compute the first five autocorrelations for this simulated sample. Repeating this procedure for many posterior
draws of parameters, we obtain many sets of sample autocorrelations simulated from the predictive system. These
simulated sets form a five-dimensional probability density because there are five autocorrelations. We then consider a
five-dimensional grid of autocorrelation values, spaced 0.03 apart, splitting the parameter space into a finite number

14

Panel A of Figure 5 plots the prior and posterior distributions for the R2 in a regression of the
conditional mean µt on the three predictors in xt. This R2 quantifies the degree of imperfection
in the predictors (R2 = 1 if and only if the predictors are perfect), which plays a key role in our
analysis. Both distributions are obtained under the benchmark prior from Figure 3. The prior
distribution for R2 is rather noninformative, assigning nontrivial probability mass to the whole
(0, 1) interval. In contrast, the posterior distribution is substantially tighter, indicating relevant
information in the data. This posterior reveals a substantial degree of predictor imperfection, in
that the density’s mode is about 0.3, and values above 0.8 have near-zero probability.
Further perspective on the predictive abilities of the individual predictors is provided by Panel
B of Figure 5. This panel plots the posteriors of the partial correlations between µt and each
predictor, obtained under the benchmark priors.12 Dividend yield exhibits the strongest relation to
expected return, with the posterior for its partial correlation ranging between 0 and 0.9 and having
a mode around 0.6. Most of the posterior mass for the term spread’s partial correlation lies above
zero, but there is little posterior mass above 0.5. The bond yield’s marginal contribution is the
weakest, with much of the posterior density lying between -0.2 and 0.2. In the multiple regression
of returns on the three predictors, described at the end of Section 3., all predictors (rescaled to
have unit variances) have comparable OLS slope coefficients and t-statistics. When compared
to those estimates, the posteriors in Panel B indicate that dividend yield is more attractive as a
predictor but that bond yield is less attractive. These differences are consistent with the predictors’
autocorrelations and the fact that the posterior distribution of β, the autocorrelation of µt , centers
around 0.9. The autocorrelations for the three predictors are 0.92 for dividend yield, 0.65 for the
term spread, and -0.04 for the bond yield. The bond yield’s low autocorrelation makes it look less
correlated with µt , whereas dividend yield’s higher autocorrelation makes it look more like µt .

4.2. Multiperiod predictive variance and its components
Each of the five components of multiperiod return variance in equation (12) is a moment of a quantity evaluated with respect to the distribution of the parameters φ, conditional on the information
of five-dimensional ‘buckets’. We calculate the empirical frequency F with which the bucket containing the observed
set of autocorrelations (0.02, -0.17, -0.04, 0.01, -0.10) obtains in our simulations. Finally, we compute the p-value as
the fraction of the simulated sets of autocorrelations that fall in buckets whose empirical frequency is smaller than F .
The p-value based on 300,000 simulations is 37%, indicating that the predictive system cannot be rejected based on
sample autocorrelations.
12
The partial correlation of a predictive variable with µt is informative about the variable’s predictive power for
returns, but it does not necessarily measure the variable’s importance for portfolio decisions. For a rebalancing investor,
the contemporaneous correlation of the variable with stock return is important for determining the hedging demand
for the stock. We would like to thank one of the referees for this valid observation.

15

DT available to an investor at time T . In our Bayesian empirical setting, DT consists of the 206year history of returns and predictors, and the distribution of parameters is the posterior density
given that sample. Draws of φ from this density are obtained via the MCMC procedure and then
used to evaluate the required moments of each of the components in equation (12). The sum of
those components, Var(rT ,T +k |DT ), is the Bayesian predictive variance of rT ,T +k .
Figure 6 displays the predictive variance and its five components for horizons of k = 1 through
k = 50 years, computed under the benchmark priors. The values are stated on a per-year basis
(i.e., divided by k). The predictive variance (Panel A) increases significantly with the investment
horizon, with the per-year variance exceeding the one-year variance by about 45% at a 30-year
horizon and about 80% at a 50-year horizon. This is the main result of the paper.
The five variance components, displayed in Panel B of Figure 6, reveal the sources of the greater
predictive variance at long horizons. Over a one-year horizon (k = 1), virtually all of the variance
is due to the i.i.d. uncertainty in returns, with uncertainty about the current µT and parameter
uncertainty also making small contributions. Mean reversion and uncertainty about future µt ’s
make no contribution for k = 1, but they become quite important for larger k. Mean reversion
contributes negatively at all horizons, consistent with ρuw < 0 in the posterior (cf. Figure 4), and
the magnitude of this contribution increases with the horizon. Nearly offsetting the negative mean
reversion component is the positive component due to uncertainty about future µt ’s. At longer
horizons, the magnitudes of both components exceed the i.i.d. component, which is flat across
horizons. At a 10-year horizon, the mean reversion component is nearly equal in magnitude to
the i.i.d. component. At a 30-year horizon, both mean reversion and future-µt uncertainty are
substantially larger in magnitude than the i.i.d. component. In fact, the mean reversion component
is larger in magnitude than the overall predictive variance.
Both estimation risk and uncertainty about the current µT make stronger positive contributions
to predictive variance as the investment horizon lengthens. At the 30-year horizon, the contribution
of estimation risk is about two thirds of the contribution of the i.i.d. component. Uncertainty about
the current µT , arising from predictor imperfection, makes the smallest contribution among the
five components at long horizons, but it still accounts for almost a quarter of the total predictive
variance at the 30-year horizon.
Table 1 reports the predictive variance at horizons of 25 and 50 years under various prior
distributions for ρuw , β, and R2 . For each of the three parameters, the prior for that parameter is
specified as one of the three alternatives displayed in Figure 3, while the prior distributions for the
other two parameters are maintained at their benchmarks. Also reported in Table 1 is the ratio of
the long-horizon predictive variance to the one-year variance, as well as the contribution of each
16

of the five components to the long-horizon predictive variance.
Across the different priors in Table 1, the 25-year variance ratio ranges from 1.15 to 1.42, and
the 50-year variance ratio ranges from 1.45 to 1.96. The variance ratios exhibit the greatest sensitivity to prior beliefs about R2 . The “loose” prior beliefs that assign higher probability to larger
R2 values produce the lowest variance ratios. When returns are more predictable, mean reversion makes a stronger negative contribution to variance, but uncertainty about future µt ’s makes a
stronger positive contribution. Those two components are the largest in absolute magnitude. The
next largest is the positive contribution from i.i.d. uncertainty, which declines as the prior on R2
moves from tight to loose. Recall that i.i.d. uncertainty is the posterior mean of kσu2 . This posterior
mean declines as the prior on R2 loosens up because greater posterior density on high values of R2
necessitates less density on high values of σu2 = (1 − R2 )σr2 , given that the sample is informative
about the unconditional return variance σr2. Prior beliefs about ρuw and β have a smaller effect on
the predictive variance and its components.13
In sum, when viewed by an investor whose prior beliefs lie within the wide range of priors
considered here, stocks are considerably more volatile at longer horizons. The greater volatility
obtains despite the presence of a large negative contribution from mean reversion.

5.

Perfect predictors versus imperfect predictors (System 2)

This section uses the second predictive system, given in equations (17) through (19), to investigate
the extent to which long-run variance is affected by predictor imperfection. Recall that predictor
imperfection in System 2 is equivalent to σπ2 > 0. Incorporating predictor imperfection is a key
difference between our analysis and the studies by Stambaugh (1999) and Barberis (2000), which
analyze the effects of parameter uncertainty on long-run equity volatility. Those studies model
expected return as µt = a + b0xt , so that the observed predictors deliver expected return perfectly if
the parameters a and b are known. The latter “perfect-predictor” assumption yields the predictive
regression in (20), which obtains as the limit in System 2 when σπ2 approaches zero. Combining
the predictive regression in (20) with the VAR for xt in (18) then delivers implications for long-run
variance in the perfect-predictor setting, as in Stambaugh (1999) and Barberis (2000).
To assess the importance of predictor imperfection, we compute predictive variances under
13

This relative insensitivity to prior beliefs about ρuw and β appears to be specific to the long sample of real equity
returns. Greater sensitivity to prior beliefs appears if returns in excess of the short-term interest rate are used instead,
or if quarterly returns on a shorter and more recent sample period are used. In all of these alternative samples, we
obtain variance results that lead to the same qualitative conclusions.

17

various informative prior beliefs about σπ . Non-informative prior beliefs are specified for all other
parameters of the predictive system except δ, the autocorrelation of the additional unobserved
predictor.14 When using the annual data, we specify the prior distribution for δ to be the same as
the benchmark prior in System 1 for β, the autocorrelation of the conditional mean. We shift the
prior for δ somewhat closer to 1.0 when using the quarterly data, since a given persistence for the
expected annual return is likely to correspond to a higher persistence at the quarterly frequency.15
We specify three different priors for σπ . One of the priors has all of its mass at σπ = 0, which
is equivalent to an assumption of perfect predictors. The remaining two priors are displayed in
the uppermost panels of Figure 7. Panel A shows the priors used with annual data, and Panel B
shows those for the quarterly data. The latter densities are shifted closer to zero, consistent with
the higher frequency. Updating these priors with the data produces the corresponding posterior
densities for σπ shown in Panels C and D. The posteriors for σπ shift noticeably to the left versus
the priors, indicating that the sample information plays a nontrivial role in resolving some of the
uncertainty about predictor imperfection.
Investors’ posterior beliefs about predictor imperfection can also be characterized in terms of
∆R2 , defined as the “true” R2 for predicting one-period returns—the R2 when conditioning on
both xt and πt —minus the “observed” R2 when conditioning only on xt. Panels E and F of Figure
7 show the posteriors for ∆R2 . From these plots we see that, after updating with the sample
data, investors in our setting believe predictor imperfection to be rather modest. For example, the
specification with less predictor imperfection (solid line) has the bulk of the posterior mass below
∆R2 = 0.02 for annual data. In other words, after seeing the data, an investor in that case believes
it is fairly unlikely that an unobserved predictor could raise the R2 by more than two percent. With
quarterly data, the corresponding posterior for ∆R2 concentrates on even smaller values.
Even when investors assess potential predictor imperfection to be relatively modest, the imperfection has important consequences for the predictive variance of long-horizon returns. Predictive
variances for horizons up to 50 years are shown in Panel A of Figure 8 for the annual data, while
Panel B shows the corresponding results for the quarterly data. The importance of recognizing
predictor imperfection emerges clearly from these results. In Panel A, the predictive variances at
the longest horizons are about 1.3 times higher when predictor imperfection is recognized than
when predictors are assumed to be perfect. For the quarterly results in Panel B, that ratio is well
over 2.0.
14

The Internet Appendix provides details of the Bayesian procedures, including the specification of priors and the
calculation of predictive variances.
15
With the annual data, the prior for δ is a truncated normal, where the mean and standard deviation of the nontruncated distribution are 0.99 and 0.25. The latter values are 0.99 and 0.15 with the quarterly data.

18

We also see in Figure 8 that predictive variances are substantially greater at long horizons than
at short horizons, once predictor imperfection is recognized. Thus, the results for System 2 deliver
the same overall message as the earlier results for System 1. In Panel A, using annual data, the
predictive variance at the 50-year horizon is 1.4–1.5 times the 1-year variance, depending on the
degree of predictor imperfection. In Panel B, using quarterly data, the 50-year variance is 1.3–1.4
times the 1-year variance.
Stambaugh (1999) and Barberis (2000) investigate the effects of parameter uncertainty using
data beginning in 1952, the same year that our quarterly data begin. With these data, predictor imperfection plays an especially large role—more than doubling the variance at long horizons. With
perfect predictors, consistent with Stambaugh and Barberis, predictive variance is substantially
lower at long horizons: the 50-year variance ratio is then 0.6. In contrast, when predictor imperfection is incorporated, the 50-year variance ratio is 1.3–1.4, as observed above. Thus, when using
post-1951 data, accounting for predictor imperfection rather dramatically reverses the answer to
the question of whether stocks are less volatile in the long run.
We also see that the findings of Stambaugh and Barberis, indicating stocks are less volatile at
longer horizons even after incorporating parameter uncertainty, do not obtain over the longer 206year period. The predictive variances in Panel E are actually higher at long horizons, given perfect
predictors, with a 50-year variance ratio just below 1.2. In all of our results, however, admitting
predictor imperfection produces long-run variance that substantially exceeds not only short-run
variance but also long-run variance computed assuming perfect predictors.

6.

Robustness

6.1. Alternative samples
Our main empirical message—that long-run predictive variance of stock returns exceeds short-run
variance—is robust to various sample specifications for both predictive systems.16 First, we extend
the results for System 1 to the quarterly data included in the results for System 2. We adjust the
prior distributions in System 1 to reflect the different data frequency, shifting the priors for R2
and ρuw to the left and for β to the right.17 We find that the results with the quarterly data are
16

Detailed results are reported in the Internet Appendix.
We shift the prior on R2 to the left because return predictability is likely to be weaker in quarterly data than in
annual data. It is well known that in the presence of persistence in the conditional expected return, there is more
predictability at lower data frequencies. We also shift the prior on ρuw to the left because the correlation between
expected and unexpected returns is likely to be less negative at lower frequencies. Given stationarity in expected
17

19

even stronger than those with our annual data. Using the benchmark priors, the 25-year predictive
variance is 92% larger than the 1-year variance, and the 50-year predictive variance is nearly 3
times the 1-year variance.
Second, instead of using real returns, we compute excess stock returns by subtracting the shortterm interest rate from the realized stock return, and we then repeat the analyses for both predictive
systems using both annual and quarterly data. The results are similar to those with real returns:
all of the 50-year predictive variances exceed short-run variance by substantial amounts. Third,
instead of using three predictors, we use only one, dividend yield, and repeat the analyses for
both predictive systems using both annual and quarterly data. The results are again similar to the
original three-predictor results: consistently higher predictive variances at long horizons.
Fourth, we conduct subperiod analyses for the results based on annual data. For both predictive
systems, we split the 1802–2007 sample in half and estimate the predictive variances separately
as of the ends of both subperiods. Under the same priors used in Figures 6 and 8, the predictive
variance per period rises monotonically with the horizon under both systems in the first subperiod.
In the second subperiod, the predictive variance rises monotonically under System 2, while under
System 1 it exhibits a U-shape with respect to the horizon. In the latter case, the variance decreases
through a horizon of 7 years but thereafter increases, exceeding the 1-year variance beyond an 18year horizon. That is, the negative effect of mean reversion prevails at short horizons, but the
combined positive effects of estimation risk and uncertainty about current and future µt ’s prevail at
long horizons. For both subperiods and both predictive systems, long-horizon predictive variance
exceeds short-run variance across all specifications: the 50-year variance ratio is at least 1.25 under
System 1 and at least 1.8 under System 2.

6.2. Model uncertainty
In general, investors are uncertain about whether expected return is a linear function of a set of observed predictors. In our setting of predictor imperfection, that uncertainty admits the possibility
that an unobserved predictor also plays a role. Another dimension of uncertainty about expected
return is whether one or more observed predictors is necessary. As a simple case, consider an
investor who rules out an unobserved predictor but is uncertain about which observed predictors
belong in the predictive regression that delivers expected return. The latter case of “model uncertainty” is analyzed by Avramov (2002) and Cremers (2002). We analyze predictive variance in this
returns, stock returns measured over increasingly long periods are likely to be increasingly driven by cash flow news
as opposed to discount rate news. Finally, we shift the prior on β to the right because a given persistence in the
expected annual return is likely to correspond to a higher persistence at the quarterly frequency.

20

setting in order to consider an alternative dimension of uncertainty about expected return.
As explained earlier, our data include three observed predictors in both the annual and quarterly
samples. Therefore, for each sample, there are eight (23) possible models that represent different
subsets of the three predictors (including the case of no predictors, i.e. constant expected return).
To this set of models we apply the model-uncertainty framework of Avramov (2002). We change
from his data to ours but otherwise follow his methodology and specifications, which include the
assignment of equal prior probabilities across the possible models.18 Figure 9 reports the resulting
predictive variances, which incorporate not only uncertainty about the parameters within each
model but also uncertainty about which of the eight models best captures expected return. We
see that predictive variance per period increases with the investment horizon for both the annual
and quarterly data. For the annual data, the annualized variance at a 50-year horizon is about
1.24 times the one-year variance; for the quarterly data, the predictive variance per-quarter at a
200-quarter horizon is about 1.75 times the one-quarter variance. We thus see that our study’s
main conclusion—higher predictive variance per period for longer horizons—also obtains from
this alternative perspective on uncertainty about expected return.

6.3. Time-varying volatility
Our implementation of predictive systems assumes that the covariance matrix of the disturbances
is constant over time. This assumption may seem unappealing, given evidence of time-varying
volatility reported in a large literature on that topic. The assumption offers two advantages for
this study. First, it permits a more tractable framework for exploring the importance of parameter
uncertainty and predictor imperfection for long-horizon volatility. We show that much of longhorizon volatility is induced by various aspects of uncertainty about expected returns, such as
uncertainty about the current and future values of µt as well as about the parameters characterizing
the process for µt . Uncertainty related to µt affects the perception of returns over many future
periods; as a result, this uncertainty exerts an increasingly large effect on multiperiod volatility as
the investment horizon increases. It is well known that µt is difficult to estimate, and this difficulty
is highlighted once we recognize that predictors are imperfect. All of these arguments would
remain valid if we allowed the covariance matrix of the disturbances to vary over time.
The second advantage of the constant-covariance-matrix assumption is that it allows us to abstract from fluctuations in short-run volatility that would complicate the question of whether stocks
18

We refer the reader to Avramov (2002) for details, including the procedure for calculating predictive variance. He
does not report variances but instead reports initial buy-and-hold asset allocations for size/book-to-market portfolios
for horizons up to ten years.

21

are more volatile in the long run. To see the latter point, consider a period (such as the fall of 2008)
when the current short-run volatility greatly exceeds its typical level. When looking forward from
that point in time, investors almost surely see stocks as less volatile over longer investment horizons, due to the well-documented mean reversion in short-run volatility. Conversely, when shortrun volatility is unusually low, investors may view stocks as more volatile in the long run simply
because they expect volatility to increase toward its long-run mean. Such observations seem less
interesting than asking whether stocks are less volatile over long horizons, abstracting from effects
that can flip the answer back and forth through time. This question is also the focus of previous
studies, cited earlier, that address long-horizon versus short-horizon equity volatility.
Allowing time-varying volatility need not change the analytical results in Section 2. To see
this, suppose there is time variation in the conditional covariance matrix of κt = [ut vt0 wt ], the
vector of residuals in System 1. Let Σt denote the conditional covariance matrix at time t of κt+1 .
It seems plausible to assume that, if Σt = Σ at a given time t, then




Et κt+i κ0t+i = Σ for all i > 0.

(23)

Such a property is satisfied, for example, by a stationary first-order multivariate GARCH process
of the form
vech(Σt ) = c0 + C1 vech(κt κ0t ) + C2 vech(Σt−1 ),

(24)

where vech(·) stacks the columns of the lower triangular part of its argument. With (23), the
conditional variance of the k-period return in equation (6) is unchanged, provided we interpret it
as Var(rT ,T +k |µT , φ, ΣT = Σ). The introduction of parameter uncertainty is also unchanged, under
the interpretation that Σ is uncertain but that, whatever it is, it also equals ΣT . Setting ΣT = Σ
removes horizon effects due to the mean reversion in ΣT discussed earlier. If ΣT were instead
low relative to Σ, for example, then the reversion of future ΣT +i s to Σ could also contribute to
long-run volatility. Setting ΣT = Σ excludes such a contribution, producing a cleaner assessment
of long-run volatility.
Time variation in volatility could potentially matter for long-horizon investing by inducing
hedging demands. In a setting with dynamic rebalancing, investors could find it valuable to adjust
their stock allocations for the purpose of hedging against adverse movements in volatility. Chacko
and Viceira (2005) estimate the magnitude of the volatility-induced hedging demands by calibrating a model in which the inverse of volatility follows a simple mean-reverting process. They find
that hedging demands are very small, due to insufficient variability and persistence in volatility.
In reaching their conclusion, Chacko and Viceira assume that their parameter estimates are equal
22

to the parameters’ true values. If parameter uncertainty were taken into account, the volatilityinduced hedging demands could potentially be larger. We do not analyze hedging demands since
our portfolio analysis in Section 9 considers a predetermined asset allocation policy. Nonetheless,
we view the analysis of volatility-induced hedging demands in the presence of parameter uncertainty as an interesting topic for future research.

7.

Predictive variance versus true variance

This section provides further perspective on our results by distinguishing between two different
measures of variance: predictive variance and true variance. The “predictive variance,” our main
object of interest thus far, is the variance from the perspective of an investor who conditions on the
historical data but remains uncertain about the true values of the parameters. The “true variance”
is defined as the variance conditional on the true parameter values. The predictive variance and the
true variance coincide if the data history is infinitely long, in which case the parameters are estimated with infinite precision. Estimates of the true variance can be relevant in some applications,
such as option pricing, but the predictive variance is relevant for portfolio decisions.
When conducting inference about the true variance, a commonly employed statistic is the sample long-horizon variance ratio. Values of such ratios are often less than 1 for stocks, suggesting
lower unconditional variances per period at long horizons. Figure 10 plots sample variance ratios
for horizons of 2 to 50 years computed with the 206-year sample of annual real log stock returns
analyzed above. The calculations use overlapping returns and unbiased variance estimates.19 Also
plotted are percentiles of the variance ratio’s Monte Carlo sampling distribution under the null hypothesis that returns are i.i.d. normal. That distribution exhibits positive skewness and has nearly
60% of its mass below 1. The realized value of 0.28 at the 30-year horizon attains a Monte Carlo
p-value of 0.01, supporting the inference that the true 30-year variance ratio lies below 1 (setting
aside the multiple-comparison issues of selecting one horizon from many). Panel A of Figure 11
plots the posterior distribution of the 30-year ratio for true unconditional variance, based on the
benchmark priors and System 1. Even though the posterior mean of this ratio is 1.34, the distribution is positively skewed and 63% of the posterior probability mass lies below one. We thus see
that the variance ratio statistic in a frequentist setting and the posterior distribution in a Bayesian
setting both favor the inference that the true unconditional variance ratio is below 1.
Inference about true unconditional variance ratios is of limited relevance to investors, for two
19

Each ratio is computed as V R(q) in equation (2.4.37) of Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay (1997).

23

reasons. First, even if the parameters and the conditional mean µT were known, the unconditional
variance would not be the appropriate measure from an investor’s perspective, because conditional
variance is more relevant when returns are predictable. The ratio of true unconditional variances
can be less than 1 while the ratio of true conditional variances exceeds 1, or vice versa. At a
horizon of k = 30 years, for example, parameter values of β = 0.60, R2 = 0.30, and ρuw = −0.55
imply a ratio of 0.90 for unconditional variances but 1.20 for conditional variances.20

The second and larger point is that inference about true variance, conditional or unconditional,
is distinct from assessing the predictive variance perceived by an investor who does not know the
parameters. This distinction can be drawn clearly in the context of the variance decomposition,
Var(rT ,T +k |DT ) = E {Var(rT ,T +k |φ, DT )|DT } + Var {E(rT ,T +k |φ, DT )|DT } .

(25)

The variance on the left-hand side of (25) is the predictive variance. The quantity inside the expectation in the first term, Var(rT ,T +k |φ, DT ), is the true conditional variance, relevant only to an

investor who knows the true parameter vector φ (but not µT , thus maintaining predictor imperfection). The data can imply that this true variance is probably lower at long horizons than at short
horizons while also implying that the predictive variance is higher at long horizons. In other words,
investors who observe DT can infer that if they were told the true parameter values, they would
probably assess 30-year variance to be less than 1-year variance. These investors realize, however,
that they do not know the true parameters. As a consequence, they evaluate the posterior mean of
the true conditional variance, the first term in (25). That posterior mean can exceed the most likely
values of the true conditional variance, because the posterior distribution of the true variance can
be skewed (we return to this point below). Moreover, investors must add to that posterior mean
the posterior variance of the true conditional mean, the second term in (25), which is the same
as the estimation-risk term in equation (12). In a sense, investors do conduct inference about true
variance—they compute its posterior mean—but they realize that estimate is only part of predictive
variance.
The results based on our 206-year sample illustrate how predictive variance can be higher at
long horizons while true variance is inferred to be most likely higher at short horizons. Panel B of
Figure 11 plots the posterior distribution of the variance ratio
V ∗ (k) =

(1/k)Var(rT ,T +k |φ, DT )
,
Var(rT +1 |φ, DT )

(26)

for k = 30 years. The posterior probability that this ratio of true variances lies below 1 is 76%, and
20
The relation between the ratios of conditional and unconditional variances is derived in the Appendix. Campbell
and Viceira (2002, p. 96) state that the unconditional variance ratio is always greater than the conditional ratio, but it
appears they equate single-period conditional and unconditional variances in reaching that conclusion.

24

the posterior mode is below 0.5. In contrast, recall that 30-year predictive variance is substantially
greater than 1-year variance, as shown earlier in Figure 6 and Table 1.
The true conditional variance Var(rT ,T +k |φ, DT ) is the sum of four quantities, the first four

components in equation (12) with the expectations operators removed. The posterior distributions
of those quantities (not shown to save space) exhibit significant asymmetries. As a result, less likely
values of these quantities exert a disproportionate effect on the posterior means and, therefore,
on the first term of the predictive variance in (25). The components reflecting uncertainty about
current and future µt are positively skewed, so their contributions to predictive variance exceed
what they would be if evaluated at the most likely parameter values. This feature of parameter
uncertainty also helps drive predictive variance above the most likely value of true variance.

8.

Long-horizon variance: Survey evidence

Our empirical results show investors should view stocks as more volatile over long horizons than
over short horizons. Corporate CFO’s indeed appear to exhibit such a view, as can be inferred from
survey results reported by Ben-David, Graham, and Harvey (2010). Their survey asks each CFO
to give the 10th and 90th percentiles of a confidence interval for the annualized (average) excess
equity return to be realized over the upcoming 10-year period. The same question is asked for a
1-year horizon. For each horizon (k), the authors use the 10th and 90th percentiles to approximate
Var(r̄k ), the variance of the CFO’s perceived distribution of the annualized return. The resulting
standard deviations are then averaged across CFO’s. If we treat the averaged standard deviations
as those perceived by a “typical” CFO, we can infer the typical CFO’s views about long-horizon
variance.
The relation between Var(r̄k ) and the annualized variance of the k-year return, (1/k)Var(rT ,T +k ),
which is our object of interest, must obey
(1/k)Var(rT ,T +k ) = (1/k)Var(

K
X

rT +i )

i=1

= (1/k)Var(kr̄k )
= kVar(r̄k ).

(27)

If CFO’s perceive stocks as equally volatile at all horizons, as in the standard i.i.d. setting with
no parameter uncertainty, then (1/k)Var(rT ,T +k ) = Var(rT ,T +1) and Var(r̄k ) = Var(rT ,T +1)/k. In
√
that case, the perceived standard deviation of the 1-year return should be 3.2 (= 10) times the
perceived standard deviation of the annualized 10-year return. In the survey results reported by
25

Ben-David et al., we observe that the ratios of 1-year standard deviation to the 10-year standard
deviation are substantially below 3.2. Across 33 quarterly surveys from the first quarter of 2002
through the first quarter of 2010, the ratio ranges from 1.25 to 2.14, and its average value is 1.54.
Even the maximum ratio of 2.14 implies
Var(r̄1 )
= (2.14)2 ,
Var(r̄10)

(28)

or, applying (27), a 10-year variance ratio given by
(1/10)Var(rT ,T +10)
10
=
= 2.18,
Var(rT ,T +1)
(2.14)2

(29)

as compared to the value of 1.0 when stocks are equally volatile over long and short horizons. In
other words, the typical CFO appears to view stock returns as having at least twice the variance
over a 10-year horizon than over a 1-year horizon.

9.

Target-date funds

This section explores the long-run riskiness of stocks from the perspective of a very popular investment strategy. Target-date funds, also known as life-cycle funds, represent one of the fastestgrowing segments of the investment industry. Since the inception of these funds in the mid-1990’s,
their assets have grown to about $280 billion in 2010, including a net cash inflow of $42 billion
during the tumultuous year 2008. About 87% of target-date fund assets are held in retirement
accounts as of third-quarter 2010 (Investment Company Institute, 2011).
Target-date funds follow a predetermined asset allocation policy that gradually reduces the
stock allocation as the target date approaches, with the aim of providing a more conservative asset mix to investors approaching retirement.21 A predetermined allocation policy is not optimal
because it sacrifices the ability to rebalance in response to future events, an ability analyzed in
numerous studies of dynamic asset allocation.22 We venture off the well-trod path of that literature to consider a long-horizon strategy that, while suboptimal in theory, has become important in
practice. We do not attempt to explain why so many real-world investors desire a predetermined
path for their asset allocations. We simply take that fact as given and analyze the asset allocation problem within that setting. This focus also seems natural in the context of our study, since
long-horizon equity volatility is relevant for investors making long-horizon equity decisions.
21

See Viceira (2008) for a more detailed discussion of target-date funds.
Recent examples include Balduzzi and Lynch (1999), Barberis (2000), Brandt, Goyal, Santa-Clara, and Stroud
(2005), Brandt, Santa-Clara, and Valkanov (2009), Detemple, Garcia, Rindesbacher (2003), Lynch and Balduzzi
(2000), and Lynch (2001), among others. Wachter (2010) provides a review of the asset-allocation literature.
22

26

To analyze target-date funds using a simple model, we consider an investor who can invest in
two assets, the stock market and a real riskless asset. The investor’s horizon is K years, and his
utility for end-of-horizon wealth WK is given by WK1−A /(1 − A). The investor commits at the

outset to a predetermined investment strategy in which the stock allocation evolves linearly from
the first-period allocation w1 to the final-period allocation wK . The investor solves for the values
of w1 and wK within the (0, 1) interval to maximize expected utility. The investor assumes that the
conditional expected stock return at the beginning of each horizon, µT , is equal to the unconditional
expected return Er , while treating Er as uncertain. This specification removes the effect that a nonzero value of µT − Er would have on the investor’s desired pattern of stock allocations over the

investment horizon. We solve the problem numerically, setting relative risk aversion A to 8 and the
riskless real rate to 2% per year.

Target-date funds are often motivated by arguments related to human capital and labor income.
A typical argument goes as follows.23 Human capital is bond-like as it offers a steady stream of
labor income. Younger people have more human capital because they stand to collect labor income
over a longer time period. Younger people thus have a larger implicit position in bonds. To balance
that position, younger people should invest a bigger fraction of their financial wealth in stocks, and
they should gradually reduce their stock allocation as they grow older.
We consider two frameworks that differ in their treatment of labor income. In the first framework, presented in Section 9.1, the investor invests an initial nest egg and does not invest additional
savings from any labor income. In the second framework, presented in Section 9.2, the investor
also saves a fraction of his labor income. Both frameworks lead to the same conclusions regarding
the effects of parameter uncertainty on the stock allocations of long-horizon investors.

9.1. No Savings from Labor Income
In this subsection, we assume that the investor derives no savings from any labor income. The
investor simply begins with initial financial wealth W0 , which subsequently evolves as follows:
Wt+1 = Wt [1 + wt rS,t+1 + (1 − wt )rf ] ,

(30)

where rS,t is the simple stock return in year t and rf is the risk-free rate.24
23

See, for example, Bodie, Merton, and Samuelson (1992), Viceira (2001), Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2005),
and Gordon and Stockton (2006). Other recent studies that analyze portfolio choice in the presence of labor income
include Gomes and Michaelides (2005), Benzoni, Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein (2007), Gomes, Kotlikoff, and
Viceira (2008), and Lynch and Tan (2009), among others.
24
There is no adjustment for intermediate consumption since the investor is concerned only about terminal wealth.

27

Panels A and B of Figure 12 plot the investor’s optimal initial and final stock allocations, w1
(solid line) and wK (dashed line), for investment horizons ranging from 1 to 30 years. In Panel A,
parameter uncertainty is ignored, in that the parameters characterizing the return process are treated
as known and equal to their posterior means. In Panel B, parameter uncertainty is incorporated by
using the posterior distributions. These come from our baseline setting: System 1 implemented on
the 1802–2007 sample with three predictors and the benchmark prior.
The optimal allocations in Panel A of Figure 12 are strikingly similar to those selected by
real-world target-date funds. The initial allocation w1 decreases steadily as the investment horizon
shortens, declining from about 85% at long horizons such as 25 or 30 years to about 30% at the
one-year horizon, whereas the final allocation wK is roughly constant at about 30-40% across all
horizons. Investors in real-world target-date funds similarly commit to a stock allocation schedule,
or “glide path,” that decreases steadily to a given level at the target date. The final stock allocation
in a target-date fund does not depend on when investors enter the fund, but the initial allocation
does—it is higher for investors entering longer before the target date. Not only the patterns but
also the magnitudes of the optimal allocations in Panel A resemble those of target-date funds. For
example, Viceira (2008) reports that the target-date funds offered by Fidelity and Vanguard reduce
their stock allocations from 90% at long horizons to about 30% at short horizons. In addition,
Vanguard’s stock allocations equal 90% for all horizons of 25 years or longer (see Viceira’s Figure
5.2), which corresponds nicely to the relatively flat portion of the solid line in Panel A.25 In short,
target-date funds seem appealing to investors who maximize expected power utility of wealth at
the target date and who ignore parameter uncertainty.
In contrast, target-date funds do not appear desirable if the same investors incorporate parameter uncertainty, as shown in Panel B. For short investment horizons, the results look similar to those
in Panel A, but for longer horizons, neither w1 nor wK are roughly invariant to the horizon; instead,
they both decrease with K. For example, an investor with a 15-year horizon chooses to glide from
w1 = 62% to w15 = 33%, but an investor with a 30-year horizon chooses lower stock allocations,
gliding from w1 = 57% to w30 = 7%. The long-horizon stock allocations are lower in Panel B
because investors perceive disproportionately more parameter uncertainty at long horizons.
25

Our simplification of target-date funds does not impose the constraint, common in practice, that all investors with
the same time remaining in their horizons also have the same allocation.

28

9.2. Labor Income
In this subsection, we assume that the investor saves a positive fraction of his labor income each
year. The investor’s financial wealth evolves as follows:
Wt+1 = Wt [1 + wt rS,t+1 + (1 − wt )rf ] + sLt+1 ,

(31)

where Lt denotes labor income and s is the savings rate. We assume a constant savings rate,
abstracting from the fact that investors may benefit from dynamically adjusting their savings rates
over time. A constant savings rate is consistent with the fact that the predominant use of targetdate funds is in employer-sponsored retirement plans, where both the employer and employee
contributions are typically predetermined fractions of income. We set s = 2.20%, which is the
average annual ratio of aggregate personal saving to personal income over the past 5 years (2005–
2009), as reported by the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
We assume the following simple process for labor income growth:
Lt+1 /Lt − 1 = ξ (43 − aget ) + t+1 ,

(32)

where ξ is a constant, aget denotes the investor’s age in year t, and t+1 is drawn randomly from
N(0, σ2 ). We set σ = 0.08, which is equal to the estimate of the annualized standard deviation
of wage income growth reported by Heaton and Lucas (2000). The motivation for the age-related
term in equation (32) is the evidence that expected labor income exhibits a hump-shaped pattern
over a typical investor’s lifecycle. For example, Figure 1 in Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2005)
shows that labor income is an inverse-U-shape function of age, for each of three different groups
of households sorted by their education level. To capture the concave pattern in the level of labor
income, we assume that the growth rate of labor income is a linearly decreasing function of age.
We calibrate this function to the middle line in Cocco et al’s Figure 1, according to which expected
labor income grows until age 43 and declines thereafter. We set ξ = 0.0043, so that initial labor
income growth at age 20 is 10%, as in Cocco et al’s Figure 1. We assume that the investor retires
at age 65, which is also the end of his investment horizon, so that aget = 65 − K + t.
Note that labor income growth in equation (32) is uncorrelated with stock market returns. This
assumption is motivated by the evidence that the correlation between wage growth and the stock
market is generally close to zero. For example, Heaton and Lucas (2000) report a correlation of
-0.07, and Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2005) report correlations ranging from -0.02 to 0.01
across three different education levels. However, the assumption of zero correlation is not necessary for our conclusions. In an earlier version of the paper, we modeled labor income growth
29

as a convex combination of returns on the stock market and the T-bill, and we found that our
conclusions were unaffected by relatively large changes in the weight on the stock market.
To capture the fact that younger people (those with higher values of K) tend to have less
financial wealth, we specify the initial ratio of financial wealth to labor income, denoted by FK =
W0 /L0 , as a decreasing function of horizon K. Given the retirement age of 65, FK is the ratio of
financial wealth to labor income for an investor with age0 = 65 − K. We specify FK as


4
FK = exp − K
45



.

(33)

The function in equation (33) is empirically motivated by data from the 2007 Panel Study of
Income Dynamics (PSID) compiled by the University of Michigan. For all ages between 20 and
65, we compute the median ratio of financial wealth to labor income across all households headed
by a person of that age.26 The natural logarithm of this median ratio is an approximately linear
function of age, and its value is about -4 for age 20 and about 0 for age 65. Adopting this linear
approximation and recognizing that K = 65 − age0, we quickly obtain equation (33).
Panels C and D of Figure 12 plot the investor’s optimal initial and final stock allocations, w1
and wK , as a function of the investment horizon. These panels are constructed in the same way
as Panels A and B, except that the investor’s financial wealth follows equation (31) rather than
equation (30). Parameter uncertainty is incorporated in Panel D but not in Panel C.
Similar to Panel A, the optimal allocations in Panel C look very much like those adopted by
target-date funds. The initial allocation w1 decreases from 100% at horizons longer than 15 years
to about 30% at the one-year horizon, whereas the final allocation wK is roughly constant at 3040% across all horizons. Target-date funds thus seem appealing to investors who ignore parameter
uncertainty even if those investors have labor income savings. In contrast, Panel D shows that
target-date funds do not seem appealing if the same investors incorporate parameter uncertainty.
For horizons longer than 23 years, both w1 and wK decrease with K. For example, an investor
with a 23-year horizon chooses to glide from w1 = 100% to w23 = 14%, whereas an investor with
a 30-year horizon glides from w1 = 93% to w30 = 3%. Echoing our earlier observation in the
absence of labor income savings, the long-horizon stock allocations are lower in Panel D because
investors perceive more parameter uncertainty at long horizons.
In Figure 12, investors always optimally choose downward-sloping glide paths, wK < w1 , for
all K > 1. This choice is not driven by mean reversion; wK < w1 remains optimal even if mean
reversion is eliminated by setting ρuw = 0. Instead, the driving force is that future expected returns
26

The financial wealth of each household is computed by adding up items S805, S811, S815, and S819 in PSID.

30

µT +j are unknown and likely to be persistent. As j increases, the future values µT +j become
increasingly uncertain from the perspective of investors at time T . As a result, the future returns
rT +j+1 = µT +j + uT +j+1 become increasingly volatile from the investors’ perspective. In other
words, investors perceive distant future returns to be more volatile than near-term returns. Facing
the need to predetermine their future allocations, investors commit to invest less in stocks in the
more uncertain distant future. This simple logic shows that neither mean reversion nor human
capital are necessary to justify downward-sloping glide paths. If investors must commit to a fixed
schedule of future stock allocations, they will choose lower allocations at longer horizons simply
because they view single-period stock returns as more volatile at longer horizons.
The results in Figure 12 demonstrate how parameter uncertainty makes target-date funds undesirable when they would otherwise be virtually optimal for investors who desire a predetermined
asset-allocation policy. It would be premature, however, to conclude that parameter uncertainty
makes target-date funds undesirable to such investors in all settings. The above analysis abstracts
from many important considerations faced by investors, such as intermediate consumption, housing, etc. Our objective in this section is simply to illustrate how parameter uncertainty can reduce the stock allocations of long-horizon investors, consistent with our results about long-horizon
volatility.

10. Conclusions
We use predictive systems and up to 206 years of data to compute long-horizon variance of real
stock returns from the perspective of an investor who recognizes that parameters are uncertain and
predictors are imperfect. Mean reversion reduces long-horizon variance considerably, but it is more
than offset by other effects. As a result, long-horizon variance substantially exceeds short-horizon
variance on a per-year basis. A major contributor to higher long-horizon variance is uncertainty
about future expected returns, a component of variance that is inherent to return predictability,
especially when expected return is persistent. Estimation risk is another important component of
predictive variance that is higher at longer horizons. Uncertainty about current expected return,
arising from predictor imperfection, also adds considerably to long-horizon variance. Accounting
for predictor imperfection is key in reaching the conclusion that stocks are substantially more
volatile in the long run. Overall, our results show that long-horizon stock investors face more
volatility than short-horizon investors, in contrast to previous research.
In computing predictive variance, we assume that the parameters of the predictive system remain constant over 206 years. Such an assumption, while certainly strong, is motivated by our
31

objective to be conservative in treating parameter uncertainty. This uncertainty, which already
contributes substantially to long-horizon variance, would generally be even greater under alternative scenarios in which investors would effectively have less information about the current values
of the parameters. There is of course no guarantee that using a longer sample is conservative. In
principle, for example, the predictability exhibited in a given shorter sample could be so much
higher that both parameter uncertainty as well as long-run predictive variance would be lower.
However, when we examine a particularly relevant shorter sample, a quarterly post-war sample
spanning 55 years, we find that our main results get even stronger.
Changing the sample is only one of many robustness checks performed in the paper. We have
considered a number of different prior distributions and modeling choices, reaching the same conclusion. Nonetheless, we cannot rule out the possibility that our conclusion would be reversed
under other priors or modeling choices. In fact, we already know that if expected returns are
modeled in a particularly simple way, assuming perfect predictors, then investors who rely on the
post-war sample view stocks as less volatile in the long run. By continuity, stocks will also appear
less volatile if only a very small degree of predictor imperfection is admitted a priori. Our point is
that this traditional conclusion about long-run volatility is reversed in a number of settings that we
view as more realistic, even when the degree of predictor imperfection is relatively modest.
Our finding that predictive variance of stock returns is higher at long horizons makes stocks less
appealing to long-horizon investors than conventional wisdom would suggest. A clear illustration
of such long-horizon effects emerges from our analysis of target-date funds. We demonstrate that
a simple specification of the investment objective makes such funds appealing in the absence of
parameter uncertainty but less appealing in the presence of that uncertainty. However, one must be
cautious in drawing conclusions about the desirability of stocks for long-horizon investors in settings with additional risky assets, such as nominal bonds, additional life-cycle considerations, such
as intermediate consumption, and optimal dynamic saving and investment decisions. Investigating asset-allocation decisions in such settings, while allowing the higher long-run stock volatility
to enter the problem, is beyond the scope of this study but offers interesting directions for future
research.

32

Appendix
A.1.

Derivation of the conditional variance Var(rT,T +k |µT , φ)

We can rewrite the AR(1) process for µt in equation (5) as an MA(∞) process
∞
X

µt = Er +

β iwt−i ,

(A1)

i=0

given our assumption that 0 < β < 1. From (1) and (A1), the return k periods ahead is equal to
rT +k = (1 − β

k−1

)Er + β

k−1

µT +

k−1
X

β k−1−i wT +i + uT +k .

(A2)

i=1

The multiperiod return from period T + 1 through period T + k is then
rT ,T +k =

k
X

rT +i = kEr +

i=1

k−1
k
X 1 − β k−i
X
1 − βk
uT +i.
(µT − Er ) +
wT +i +
1−β
i=1 1 − β
i=1

(A3)

The conditional variance of the k-period return can be obtained from equation (A3) as
"

2(k−1)
σw2
1 − β k−1
21 − β
Var (rT ,T +k | µT , φ) =
+
k
−
1
−
2β
+
β
(1 − β)2
1−β
1 − β2
"
#
1 − β k−1
2σuw
k −1−β
.
+
1−β
1−β

kσu2

#

(A4)

Equation (A4) can then be written as in equations (6) to (9), where d¯ arises from the relation
σw2 = σµ2 (1 − β 2) = σr2R2 (1 − β 2) = (σu2 /(1 − R2 ))R2 (1 − β 2).

A.2.

Properties of A(k) and B(k)

1. A(1) = 0, B(1) = 0
2. A(k) → 1 as k → ∞, B(k) → 1 as k → ∞
3. A(k + 1) > A(k) ∀k, B(k + 1) > B(k) ∀k
4. A(k) ≥ B(k) ∀k, with a strict inequality for all k > 1
5. 0 ≤ A(k) < 1, 0 ≤ B(k) < 1
6. A(k) converges to one more quickly than B(k)

33

(A5)

Properties 1 and 2 are obvious. Properties 3 and 4 are proved below. Property 5 follows from
Properties 1–3. Property 6 follows from Properties 1–4.
Proof that A(k + 1) > A(k) ∀k:
i
1 h
−1 − β(1 + β + . . . + β k−2 + β k−1 )
k+1
i
k 1h
−1 − β(1 + β + . . . + β k−2 + β k−1 )
= 1+
k + 1 k"
#
βk
k
= 1+
A(k) − 1 −
,
k+1
k

A(k + 1) = 1 +

which exceeds A(k) if and only if A(k) < 1 − β k . This is indeed true because
A(k) = 1 −

i
i
i
1 1h 1
1h 0
1h
−
β + . . . + β k−1 = 1 −
β + β 1 + . . . + β k−1 < 1 − kβ k = 1 − β k .
k k
k
k

Proof that B(k + 1) > B(k) ∀k:
B(k + 1)
i
1 h
−1 − 2β(1 + β + . . . + β k−2 + β k−1 ) + β 2(1 + β 2 + . . . + (β 2)k−2 + (β 2)k−1 )
k+1
o
i
k 1 hn
−1 − 2β(1 + β + . . . + β k−2 ) + β 2(1 + β 2 + . . . + (β 2)k−2 ) − 2β k + β 2k
= 1+
k +1k


k
1
k
2k
= 1+
B(k) − 1 +
,
−2β + β
k+1
k

= 1+

which exceeds B(k) if and only if B(k) < 1 + β 2k − 2β k . This is indeed true because



1 1
1 2
1
B(k) = 1 − 2 + − 2 β + . . . + β k−2 + β k−1 +
β + . . . + (β 2)k−2 + (β 2)k−1
k k
k
k
 


i
1 h 2 0
(β ) − 2β 0 + (β 2)1 − 2β 1 + . . . + (β 2)k−1 − 2β k−1
= 1+
k
i
1h  2 k
< 1+
k (β ) − 2β k
k
= 1 + β 2k − 2β k ,

where the inequality follows from the fact that the function f(x) = (β 2)x − 2β x is increasing in x
(because f 0 (x) = 2(lnβ)β x(β x − 1) > 0, for 0 < β < 1).
Proof that A(k) > B(k) ∀k > 1:
"

#


i
1 2 1 − β 2(k−1)
1 − β k−1
1h 2
2 k−1
k−1
B(k) − A(k) =
.
.
+
(β
)
−
β
+
.
.
.
+
β
β
−
β
=
β
+
.
k
1 − β2
1−β
k

=




X
X
1 k−1
1 k−1
β 2i − β i =
β i β i − 1 < 0.
k i=1
k i=1

34

A.3.

Decomposition of Var{E(rT,T +k |µT , φ, DT )|DT }

Let ET ,k = E(rT ,T +k |µT , φ, DT ). The variance of ET ,k given DT can be decomposed as
Var{ET ,k |DT } = E{Var[ET ,k |φ, DT ]|DT } + Var{E[ET ,k |φ, DT ]|DT }.

(A6)

To simplify each term on the right-hand side, observe from equations (1), (2), and (5) that
ET ,k = E(rT +1 + rT +2 + . . . + rT +k |µT , φ, DT )
= E(µT + µT +1 + . . . + µT +k−1 |µT , φ)
1 − βk
= kEr +
(µT − Er ).
1−β

(A7)

Taking the first and second moments of (A7), using (10) and (11), then gives
E[ET ,k |φ, DT ] = kEr +

1 − βk
(bT − Er )
1−β

1 − βk
1−β

Var[ET ,k |φ, DT ] =

!2

(A8)

qT .

(A9)

Substituting (A8) and (A9) into (A6) then gives the fourth and fifth terms in (12), using (3).

A.4.

Relation between conditional and unconditional variance ratios

The unconditional variance (which does not condition on µT ) is given by
Var(rT ,T +k |φ) = E[Var(rT ,T +k |µT , φ, DT )|φ] + Var[E(rT ,T +k |µT , φ, DT )|φ]
1 − βk
= Var(rT ,T +k |µT , φ) +
1−β

1 − βk
= Var(rT ,T +k |µT , φ) +
1−β

!2
!2

Var(µT |φ)
σu2

!

R2
,
1 − R2

(A10)

using equation (A7). It follows from equation (6) that
Var(rT ,T +1|µT , φ) = σu2 .

(A11)

Combining equations (A10) and (A11) for k = 1 gives
Var(rT ,T +1|φ) = Var(rT ,T +1|µT , φ) +

σu2 R2
σu2
Var(rT ,T +1|µT , φ)
=
=
.
2
2
1−R
1−R
1 − R2

(A12)

Denote the conditional variance ratio Vc (k) and the unconditional variance ratio Vu (k) as follows:
Vc (k) =

(1/k)Var(rT ,T +k |µT , φ)
;
Var(rT +1|µT , φ)
35

Vu (k) =

(1/k)Var(rT ,T +k |φ)
.
Var(rT ,T +1|φ)

(A13)

These ratios can then be related as follows, combining (A10), (A12), and (A13):
Vu (k) =

(1/k)Var(rT ,T +k |φ)(1 − R2 )
Var(rT ,T +1|µT , φ)

(1/k)Var(rT ,T +k |µT , φ)(1 − R2 ) 1
=
+
Var(rT ,T +1|µT , φ)
k
1 − βk
1−β

1
= (1 − R )Vc (k) +
k
2

A.5.

!2

1 − βk
1−β

!2

R2

R2 .

(A14)

Permanent and temporary price components in our setting

Fama and French (1988), Summers (1986), and others employ a model in which the log stock price
pt is the sum of a random walk st and a stationary component yt that follows an AR(1) process:
pt = st + yt

(A15)

st = µ + st−1 + t

(A16)

yt = byt−1 + et ,

(A17)

where et and t are mean-zero variables independent of each other, and |b| < 1. Noting that

rt+1 = pt+1 − pt , it is easy to verify that equations (A15) through (A17) deliver a special case of
our model in equations (1) and (5), in which
Er = µ

(A18)

β = b

(A19)

µt = µ − (1 − b)yt

(A20)

ut+1 = t+1 + et+1

(A21)

wt+1 = −(1 − b)et+1 .

(A22)

σuw = Cov(ut+1, wt+1 ) = −(1 − b)σe2 < 0,

(A23)

This special case has the property

implying the presence of mean reversion. We also see
σµ2 = Var(µt ) = (1 − b)2 σy2 = (1 − b)2
and, therefore, using (21),

σe2
1−b 2
=
σ
2
1−b
1+b e

(A24)

b(1 − b) 2
1−b 2
σe − (1 − b)σe2 = −
σ < 0.
(A25)
1+b
1+b e
Thus, under (A15) through (A17) with b > 0, all autocovariances in (21) are negative and all
Cov(rt+1 , rt ) = βσµ2 + σuw =

unconditional variance ratios are less than 1.
36

Table 1
Variance Ratios and Components of Long-Horizon Variance
The first row of each panel reports the ratio (1/k)Var(rT ,T +k |DT )/Var(rT +1 |DT ), where Var(rT ,T +k |DT ) is the
predictive variance of the k-year return based on 206 years of annual data for real equity returns and the three predictors
over the 1802–2007 period. The second row reports Var(rT ,T +k |DT ), multiplied by 100. The remaining rows report
the five components of Var(rT ,T +k |DT ), also multiplied by 100 (they add up to total variance). Panel A contains
results for k = 25 years, and Panel B contains results for k = 50 years. Results are reported under each of three priors
for ρuw , R2 , and β. As the prior for one of the parameters departs from the benchmark, the priors on the other two
parameters are held at the benchmark priors. The “tight” priors, as compared to the benchmarks, are more concentrated
towards −1 for ρuw , 0 for R2 , and 1 for β; the “loose” priors are less concentrated in those directions.

Prior

Tight

ρuw
Bench

Loose

Tight

R2
Bench

Loose

Tight

β
Bench

Loose

Panel A. Investment Horizon k = 25 years
Variance Ratio

1.30

1.36

1.26

1.31

1.36

1.15

1.42

1.36

1.34

Predictive Variance

3.82

3.99

3.68

3.92

3.99

3.28

4.17

3.99

3.93

IID Component
2.59
Mean Reversion
-4.13
Uncertain Future µ
2.91
Uncertain Current µ 0.97
Estimation Risk
1.48

2.60
-4.01
2.86
0.96
1.58

2.59
-4.10
2.84
0.94
1.41

2.75
-3.04
1.70
0.75
1.75

2.60
-4.01
2.86
0.96
1.58

2.43
-4.51
3.51
0.92
0.93

2.58
-4.28
3.14
1.17
1.56

2.60
-4.01
2.86
0.96
1.58

2.60
-3.97
2.79
0.93
1.57

Panel B. Investment Horizon k = 50 years
Variance Ratio

1.76

1.82

1.64

1.72

1.82

1.45

1.96

1.82

1.79

Predictive Variance

5.14

5.34

4.79

5.14

5.34

4.13

5.75

5.34

5.27

IID Component
2.59
Mean Reversion
-5.52
Uncertain Future µ
5.40
Uncertain Current µ 0.95
Estimation Risk
1.72

2.60
-5.36
5.31
0.94
1.85

2.59
-5.42
5.13
0.91
1.59

2.75
-4.32
3.60
0.90
2.21

2.60
-5.36
5.31
0.94
1.85

2.43
-5.61
5.54
0.73
1.03

2.58
-5.80
5.97
1.16
1.85

2.60
-5.36
5.31
0.94
1.85

2.60
-5.28
5.16
0.92
1.87

37

Panel A. Conditional variance of returns
Variance (per year)

0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01

5

10

15

20

25
30
35
40
Horizon (years)
Panel B. The component of variance due to mean reversion in returns

45

50

Variance (per year)

0
−0.02
−0.04
−0.06
−0.08

ρuw = −0.9
ρuw = −0.6
ρuw = −0.3
5

10

15

20

25
30
35
40
45
Horizon (years)
Panel C. The component of variance due to uncertainty about future expected returns

50

5

10

15

20

50

Variance (per year)

0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0

25
30
Horizon (years)

35

40

45

Figure 1. Conditional multiperiod variance and its components for different values of ρuw. Panel A
plots the conditional per-period variance of multiperiod returns from equation (6), Var(rT ,T +k |µT , φ)/k, as
a function of the investment horizon k, for three different values of ρuw . Panel B plots the component of
the variance that is due to mean reversion in returns, σu2 2d̄ρuw A(k). Panel C plots the component of this
variance that is due to uncertainty about future values of the expected return, σu2 d¯2 B(k). For all three values
of ρuw , variances are computed with β = 0.85, R2 = 0.12, and an unconditional standard deviation of
returns of 20% per year.

38

Panel A. Conditional variance of returns
Variance (per year)

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

5

10

15

20

25
30
35
40
Horizon (years)
Panel B. The component of variance due to mean reversion in returns

45

50

Variance (per year)

0
R2 = 0.06
R2 = 0.12

−0.02

R2 = 0.18

−0.04

−0.06

5

10

15

20

25
30
35
40
45
Horizon (years)
Panel C. The component of variance due to uncertainty about future expected returns

50

5

10

15

20

50

Variance (per year)

0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0

25
30
Horizon (years)

35

40

45

Figure 2. Conditional multiperiod variance and its components for different values of R2 . Panel A
plots the conditional per-period variance of multiperiod returns from equation (6), Var(rT ,T +k |µT , φ)/k, as
a function of the investment horizon k, for three different values of R2 . Panel B plots the component of
the variance that is due to mean reversion in returns, σu2 2d̄ρuw A(k). Panel C plots the component of this
variance that is due to uncertainty about future values of the expected return, σu2 d¯2 B(k). For all three values
of R2 , variances are computed with β = 0.85, ρuw = −0.6, and an unconditional standard deviation of
returns of 20% per year.

39

Panel A. Priors for ρuw

Panel B. Priors for β

2.5

8

More informative
Benchmark prior
Noninformative

More persistence
Benchmark prior
Less persistence

7

2
6
5

1.5

4
1

3
2

0.5
1
0
−1

−0.5

0

0.5

0

1

0

Panel C. Priors for the true R2

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Panel D. Priors for the observed R2

25

60

Less predictability
Benchmark prior
More predictability

Less predictability
Benchmark prior
More predictability

50

20

40
15
30
10
20

5

0

10

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0

0.4

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

Figure 3. Prior distributions of parameters. The plots display the prior distributions for β, ρuw , the true
R2 (fraction of variance in the return rt+1 explained by the conditional mean µt ), and the “observed” R2
(fraction of variance in rt+1 explained by the observed predictors xt ). The priors shown for the observed
R2 correspond to the three priors for the true R2 and the benchmark priors for β and ρuw .

40

Panel A. Posteriors for ρuw

Panel B. Posteriors for β

10

8

More informative
Benchmark prior
Noninformative

8

More persistence
Benchmark prior
Less persistence

7
6
5

6

4
4

3
2

2

1
0
−1

−0.8

−0.6

0
0.5

−0.4

2

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

2

Panel C. Posteriors for the true R

Panel D. Posteriors for the observed R

16

25

Less predictability
Benchmark prior
More predictability

14
12

Less predictability
Benchmark prior
More predictability

20

10

15

8
10

6
4

5

2
0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0

0.4

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

Figure 4. Posterior distributions of parameters. Panel A plots the posteriors of ρuw , the correlation
between expected and unexpected returns. Panel B plots the posteriors of β, the persistence of the true
conditional expected return µt . Panel C plots the posteriors of the true R2 (fraction of variance in the return
rt+1 explained by µt ). Panel D plots the posteriors of the “observed” R2 (fraction of variance in rt+1
explained by the observed predictors xt ). The results are obtained by estimating the predictive system on
annual real U.S. stock market returns in 1802-2007. Three predictors are used: the dividend yield, the bond
yield, and the term spread.

41

Panel A. Prior and posterior for R2 from regression of µt on xt

2.5
Posterior
Prior

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Panel B. Posteriors for partial correlations between predictors and µt

6
Dividend Yield
Term Spread
Bond Yield

5
4
3
2
1
0

−0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Figure 5. Distributions of parameters related to predictor imperfection. Panel A plots the (implied)
prior and posterior of the fraction of variance in the conditional expected return µt that can be explained
by the predictors. The values smaller than one indicate predictor imperfection. Panel B plots the posteriors
of partial correlations between each of the three predictors and µt . Benchmark priors are used throughout.
The results are obtained by estimating the predictive system on annual real U.S. stock market returns in
1802-2007. Three predictors are used: the dividend yield, the bond yield, and the term spread.

42

Panel A. Predictive Variance of Stock Returns

0.055

Variance (per year)

0.05
0.045
0.04
0.035
0.03
0.025

5

10

15

20
25
30
Predictive Horizon (years)

35

40

45

50

Panel B. Components of Predictive Variance
0.06

Variance (per year)

0.04
0.02
IID component
Mean reversion
Uncertain future µ
Uncertain current µ
Estimation risk

0
−0.02
−0.04
−0.06

5

10

15

20
25
30
Predictive Horizon (years)

35

40

45

50

Figure 6. Predictive variance of multiperiod return and its components. Panel A plots the variance
of the predictive distribution of long-horizon returns, Var(rT ,T +k|DT ). Panel B plots the five components
of the predictive variance. All quantities are divided by k, the number of periods in the return horizon.
The results are obtained by estimating the predictive system on annual real U.S. stock market returns in
1802-2007. Three predictors are used: the dividend yield, the bond yield, and the term spread.

43

A. Prior for Standard Deviation of π

B. Prior for Standard Deviation of π
1
Density (rescaled)

Density (rescaled)

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0.1

less imperfect
more imperfect

0.8

0

0.02

0.04

σπ
C. Posterior for Standard Deviation of π
Density (rescaled)

Density (rescaled)

0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

less imperfect
more imperfect

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0.1

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

σπ

σπ

E. Posterior for Increase in R2

F. Posterior for Increase in R2

0.1

1
Density (rescaled)

1
Density (rescaled)

0.1

D. Posterior for Standard Deviation of π

0.8

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0.08

1

1

0

0.06
σπ

0

0.01

0.02
∆R

0.03

0.04

0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0.05

2

less imperfect
more imperfect

0.8

0

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

2

∆R

Figure 7. Priors and posteriors for predictor imperfection. The plots display prior and posterior distributions under the predictive system (System 2) in which expected return depends on a vector of observable
predictors, xt , as well as a missing predictor, πt , that obeys an AR(1) process. The top panels display prior
distributions for σπ , the standard deviation of πt, under different degrees of predictor imperfection. The
middle panels display the corresponding posteriors for σπ . The bottom panels display the posterior distributions of ∆R2 , the “true” R2 for one-period returns when conditioning on {xt , πt } minus the “observed” R2
when conditioning only on xt . The left-hand panels are based on annual data from 1802–2007 for real U.S.
stock returns and three predictors: the dividend yield, the bond yield, and the term spread. The right-hand
panels are based on quarterly data from 1952Q1–2006Q4 for real returns and three predictors: the dividend
yield, CAY, and the bond yield.

44

A. Annual Data

Variance (per year)

0.045
less imperfect
more imperfect
perfect (σ =0)
π

0.040

0.035

0.030

0.025

5

10

15

20

25
30
Horizon (years)

35

40

45

50

140

160

180

200

B. Quarterly Data

0.012

Variance (per quarter)

0.010

less imperfect
more imperfect
perfect (σπ=0)

0.008

0.006

0.004

0.002

20

40

60

80
100
120
Horizon (quarters)

Figure 8. Predictive variance under predictor imperfection. The plots display predictive variance under
the predictive system (System 2) in which expected return depends on a vector of observable predictors, xt ,
as well as a missing predictor, πt , that obeys an AR(1) process. Predictive variances are shown for the two
imperfect-predictor cases as well for the case of perfect predictors (σπ = 0). Panel A is based on annual
data from 1802–2007 for real U.S. stock returns and three predictors: the dividend yield, the bond yield,
and the term spread. Panel B is based on quarterly data from 1952Q1–2006Q4 for real returns and three
predictors: the dividend yield, CAY, and the bond yield.

45

A. Annual Data

0.040

Variance (per year)

0.038

0.036

0.034

0.032

0.030

5

10

15

20
25
30
Predictive Horizon (years)

35

40

45

50

140

160

180

200

B. Quarterly Data

Variance (per quarter)

0.014

0.012

0.010

0.008

0.006

20

40

60

80
100
120
Predictive Horizon (quarters)

Figure 9. Predictive variance under model uncertainty. The plot displays predictive variance computed
using the model-uncertainty framework of Avramov (2002). The predictive variance includes uncertainty
about which, if any, of a set of predictors enter a predictive regression for returns. The top panel is based on
annual data from 1802–2007 for real U.S. stock returns and three predictors: the dividend yield, the bond
yield, and the term spread. The bottom panel is based on quarterly data from 1952Q1–2006Q4 for real
returns and three predictors: the dividend yield, CAY, and the bond yield.

46

1.5
sample variance ratio
50th percentile under i.i.d.
10th percentile under i.i.d.
1st percentile under i.i.d.

Variance Ratio

1

0.5

0

0

5

10

15

20

25
30
Horizon (Years)

35

40

45

50

Figure 10. Sample variance ratios of annual real equity returns, 1802–2007. The plot displays the samˆ t,t+k )/(kVar(r
ˆ t,t+1)), where Var(r
ˆ t,t+k ) is the unbiased sample variance of
ple variance ratio V̂ (k) = Var(r
k-year log returns, computed at an overlapping annual frequency. Also shown are the 1st, 10th, and 50th
percentiles of the Monte Carlo sampling distribution of V̂ (k) under the hypothesis that annual log returns
are independently and identically distributed as normal.

47

Panel A. Unconditional Variance Ratio

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

3

3.5

4

Panel B. Conditional Variance Ratio
2

1.5

1

0.5

0

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

Figure 11. Posterior distributions for 30-year variance ratios. Panel A plots the posterior distribution
of the unconditional variance of 30-year stock market returns, Var(rT ,T +30|φ), divided by 30 times the unconditional variance of one-year returns, Var(rT +1 |φ). Panel B plots the analogous ratio for the conditional
variance, Var(rT ,T +30|DT , φ). (The posterior mean of that variance is the first term of the predictive variance in equation (25).) The results are obtained by estimating System 1 on annual real U.S. stock market
returns in 1802-2007. Three predictors are used: the dividend yield, the bond yield, and the term spread.

48

A. Without Parameter Uncertainty, Lt = 0
1

B. With Parameter Uncertainty, Lt = 0
1

Initial Allocation
Final Allocation

0.8
Equity Allocation

Equity Allocation

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

Initial Allocation
Final Allocation

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

10
20
Horizon (years)

0

30

0

C. Without Parameter Uncertainty, L > 0

t

1

1

0.8

0.8
Equity Allocation

Equity Allocation

30

D. With Parameter Uncertainty, L > 0

t

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.6

0.4

0.2

Initial Allocation
Final Allocation
0

10
20
Horizon (years)

0

10
20
Horizon (years)

Initial Allocation
Final Allocation
0

30

0

10
20
Horizon (years)

30

Figure 12. Parameter uncertainty and target-date funds. The figure plots equity allocations w1 (solid
line) and wK (dashed line) for a long-horizon investor with utility for end-of-horizon wealth (W ) given by
W 1−A /(1 − A). At the beginning of a K-period horizon, the investor commits to a strategy in which the
equity allocation evolves linearly from the first-period allocation w1 to the final-period allocation wK . The
remaining portion of the investor’s portfolio is allocated to a riskless asset, assumed to provide a constant
real return of 2% per year. Relative risk aversion (A) equals 8. The investor chooses both w1 and wK on
the interval (0, 1) to maximize expected utility. The investor incorporates parameter uncertainty in Panels
B and D but not in Panels A and C. The investor has no labor income savings in Panels A and B (equation
(30)). In Panels C and D, he does save from labor income, and his wealth evolves as in equation (31).

49

References
Ang, Andrew, and Monika Piazzesi, 2003, A no-arbitrage vector autoregression of term structure dynamics
with macroeconomic and latent variables, Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 745–787.
Avramov, Doron, 2002, Stock return predictability and model uncertainty, Journal of Financial Economics
64, 423–458.
Balduzzi, Pieluigi, and Anthony W. Lynch, 1999, Transaction costs and predictability: some utility cost
calculations, Journal of Financial Economics 52, 47–78.
Barberis, Nicholas, 2000, Investing for the long run when returns are predictable, Journal of Finance 55,
225–264.
Ben-David, Itzhak, John R. Graham, Campbell R. Harvey, 2010, Managerial Miscalibration, Working paper,
Ohio State University and Duke University.
Benzoni, Luca, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, and Robert S. Goldstein, 2007, Portfolio choice over the life-cycle
when the stock and labor markets are cointegrated, Journal of Finance 62, 2123–2167.
Bodie, Zvi, Robert C. Merton, and William F. Samuelson, 1992, “Labor Supply Flexibility and Portfolio
Choice in a Life Cycle Model,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 16, 427–449.
Brandt, Michael W., Amit Goyal, Pedro Santa-Clara, and Jonathan Stroud, 2005, A simulation approach to
dynamic portolio choice with an application to learning about return predictability, Review of Financial
Studies 18, 831–873.
Brandt, Michael W., and Qiang Kang, 2004, On the relationship between the conditional mean and volatility
of stock returns: A latent VAR approach, Journal of Financial Economics 72, 217–257.
Brandt, Michael W., Pedro Santa-Clara, and Rossen Valkanov, 2009, Parametric portfolio policies: Exploiting characteristics in the cross-section of equity returns, Review of Financial Studies 22, 3411–3447.
Campbell, John Y., 1991, A variance decomposition for stock returns, The Economic Journal 101, 157–179.
Campbell, John Y., Yeung Lewis Chan and Luis M. Viceira, 2003, A multivariate model of strategic asset
allocation, Journal of Financial Economics 67, 41–80.
Campbell, John Y., Andrew W. Lo, and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1997, The Econometrics of Financial Markets
(Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ).
Campbell, John Y., and Luis M. Viceira, 2002, Strategic Asset Allocation: Portfolio Choice for Long-Term
Investors (Oxford University Press).
Campbell, John Y., and Luis M. Viceira, 2005, The term structure of the risk-return tradeoff, Financial
Analysts Journal 61.
Chacko, George, and Luis M. Viceira, 2005, Dynamic consumption and portfolio choice with stochastic
volatility in incomplete markets, Review of Financial Studies 18, 1369–1402.
Cocco, Joao F., Francisco J. Gomes, and Pascal J. Maenhout, 2005, “Consumption and Portfolio Choice
over the Life Cycle,” Review of Financial Studies 18, 491–533.

50

Conrad, Jennifer, and Gautam Kaul, 1988, Time-variation in expected returns, Journal of Business 61, 409425.
Cremers, K.J. Martijn, Stock return predictability: A Bayesian model selection perspective, Review of Financial Studies 15, 1223–1249.
Dangl, Thomas, and Michael Halling, 2006, Equity return prediction: Are coefficients time-varying?, Working paper, University of Vienna.
Detemple, Jérôme, René Garcia, and Marcel Rindisbacher, 2005, Intertemporal asset allocation: A comparison of methods, Journal of Banking and Finance 29, 2821–2848.
Duffee, Gregory R., 2006, Are variations in term premia related to the macroeconomy? Working paper,
University of California, Berkeley.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1988, Permanent and temporary components of stock prices,
Journal of Political Economy 96, 246–273.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1989, Business conditions and expected returns on stocks and
bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23–49.
Gomes, Francisco J., Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Luis M. Viceira, 2008, “Optimal Life-Cycle Investing with
Flexible Labor Supply: A Welfare Analysis of Life-Cycle Funds,” American Economic Review: Papers
and Proceedings 98, 297–303.
Gomes, Francisco, and Alexander Michaelides, 2005, “Optimal Life-Cycle Asset Allocation: Understanding the Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Finance 60, 869–904.
Gordon, Katherine D. and Kimberly A. Stockton, 2006, Funds for Retirement: The ‘Life-Cycle’ Approach
(The Vanguard Group, Valley Forge, PA).
Greer, Boyce, 2004, The case for age-based life-cycle investing (Fidelity Investments, Boston, MA).
Hansen, Lars P., 2007, Beliefs, doubts and learning: Valuing macroeconomic risk, American Economic
Review P&P 97, 1–30.
Heaton, John, and Deborah Lucas, 2000, Portfolio choice in the presence of background risk, The Economic
Journal 110, 1–26.
Hoevenaars, Roy, Roderick Molenaar, Peter C. Schotman, and Tom Steenkamp, 2007, Strategic asset allocation for long-term investors: Parameter uncertainty and prior information, Working paper, Maastricht
University.
Investment Company Institute, 2011, The U.S. Retirement Market: Third Quarter 2010. Washington, DC.
Johannes, Michael, Nicholas Polson, and Jon Stroud, 2002, Sequential optimal portfolio performance: Market and volatility timing, Working paper, Columbia University.
Kim, M., Nelson, C. and Startz, R., 1991, Mean reversion in stock prices? A reappraisal of the empirical
evidence, Review of Economic Studies 58, 515-28.
Lamoureux, Christopher G., and Guofu Zhou, 1996, Temporary components of stock returns: What do the
data tell us? Review of Financial Studies 9, 1033–1059.

51

Lettau, Martin, and Sydney C. Ludvigson, 2001, Consumption, aggregate wealth, and expected stock returns, Journal of Finance 56, 815–849.
Lo, Andrew and MacKinlay, Craig A., 1988, Stock market prices do not follow random walks: Evidence
from a simple specification test, Review of Financial Studies 1, 41-66.
Lo, Andrew and MacKinlay, Craig A., 1989, The size and power of the variance ratio test in finite samples,
Journal of Econometrics 40, 203–238.
Lynch, Anthony W., 2001, Portfolio choice and equity characteristics: characterizing the hedging demands
induced by return predictability, Journal of Financial Economics 62, 67130.
Lynch, Anthony W., and Pierluigi Balduzzi, 2000. Transaction costs and predictability: the impact on
portfolio choice, Journal of Finance 55, 2285–2310.
Lynch, Anthony W., and Sinan Tan, 2009, Labor Income Dynamics at Business-cycle Frequencies: Implications for Portfolio Choice, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Pástor, Ľuboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2009, Predictive systems: Living with imperfect predictors, Journal of Finance 64, 1583–1628.
Poterba, James M. and Lawrence H. Summers, 1988, Mean reversion in stock returns: Evidence and implications, Journal of Financial Economics 22, 27–60.
Richardson, Matthew, 1993, Temporary components of stock prices: a skeptics view, Journal of Business
and Economics Statistics 11, 199-207.
Richardson, Matthew, and James H. Stock, 1989, Drawing inferences from statistics based on multiyear
asset returns, Journal of Financial Economics 25, 323–348.
Rytchkov, Oleg, 2007, Filtering out expected dividends and expected returns, Working paper, MIT.
Schotman, Peter C., Rolf Tschernig, and Jan Budek, 2008, Long memory and the term structure of risk,
Journal of Financial Econometrics, forthcoming.
Siegel, Jeremy J., 1992, The real rate of interest from 1800–1990: A study of the U.S. and the U.K., Journal
of Monetary Economics 29, 227–252.
Siegel, Jeremy J., 2008, Stocks for the Long Run, 4th ed. (McGraw Hill, New York, NY).
Summers, Lawrence H., 1996, Does the stock market rationally reflect fundamental values? Journal of
Finance 41, 591–601.
Stambaugh, Robert F., 1999, Predictive regressions, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 375–421.
Viceira, Luis M., 2001, “Optimal Portfolio Choice for Long-Horizon Investors with Nontradable Labor
Income,” Journal of Finance 56, 433-470.
Viceira, Luis M., 2008, Life-cycle funds, forthcoming in Annamaria Lusardi, ed., Overcoming the Saving
Slump: How to Increase the Effectiveness of Financial Education and Saving Programs (University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, IL).
Wachter, Jessica, 2010, Asset allocation, Annual Review of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

52

