                      NBEP WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     BROTHERS AND SISTERS IN THE
                     FAMILY MD THE LABOR MARKET


                              John Bound
                            Zvi Griliches
                          Bronwyn H. Hall


                        Working Paper   No, 1)476




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                            October 198)4




The research reported here is part of the PEER's research        program
is Labor Studies. ny opinions expressed       are   those of the authors
and not those   of the National Bureau or   Econonic Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper '/1476
                                                     October 1984



                     Brothers and Sisters in the
                     Family and the Labor Market

                                ABSTRACT




     This paper investigates the relationship between earnings, schooling, and
ability for young men and women who entered the labor force during the late 60s
and lOs. The emphasis is on controlling for both observed and unobserved family
characteristics, extending a framework developed earlier by Chamberlain and
Griliches (1975) to the analysis of mixed—sex pairs of siblings.    Using the
National Longitudinal surveys of Young Men and Young Women, which drew much of
the sample from the same households, we were able to construct a sample
containing roughly 1500 sibling pairs. For several reasons, particularly the
need to have data on two siblings from the same family, only one third of these
pairs had complete data; this fact led us to develop new methods of estimating
factor models, which combines the data for several 'unbalanced' covariance
matrices.   We use the data on different kinds of sibling pairs (male—male.
female—female, and male—female) together with these new methods to investigate
the question of whether family background, ability, or 'IQ" are the same thing
for males and females, in the sense that they lead to similar consequences for
success in schooling and in the market place. With a simple two factor model to
explain wages, schooling and IQ scores, we are able to test whether these
factors are the same across siblings of different sexes and whether the loadings
on the two factors are similar. The conclusion is that the unobservable factors
appear to be the same and play the same role in explaining the IQ and schooling
of these siblings, while there remains evidence of differences once they enter
the labor market.




John Bound                                    Zvi Crilic'hes
National Bureau of                           National Bureau of
Economic Research                            Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138                          Cambridge, MA 02138


                          Bronwyn H. Hall
                          National Bureau of
                          Economic Research
                          204 Junipero Serra Boulevard
                          Palo Alto, CA 94305
                                             Revised September 1984



              Brothers and Sisters in the Family and    Labor Market1


                  John Bound, Zvi   Oriliches,   and Bronwyn U. Hall




1. Introduction


    Most of the earlier work on earninga functions and returna to schooling

estimat ion haa been done with male data.        Much of the more recent work on the

analysis    of male—female wage differentials haa focused              on   labor—force

participation questions and the correct measurement of work experience and has

bypassed   the family background—ability—sohooling debate which had been      conducted

largely on the basis of data on males. There are a number of stylized facts end

conclusions which have emerged from these literatures:            In the schooling—

ability—family background area the conclusion seemed to be thst, at least as far

as measured IQ and measured family background variables were concerned, their

absence did not bias greatly the estimated schooling coefficients in mile

esrnings functions (see Griliches, 1977, and Hsuser and Daymont. 1977).            The

same conclusion also could be reached as far as unmeasured family background is

concerned, but here the results were much more sensitive to potential errors in

the data which are magnified when within siblings contrasts are used for

estimation (see Behrmsn,    et   *1. 1980; Griliches, 1979). As far as male—female

compairsons were concerned, the estimated schooling coefficients in wage

equations appeared to be somewhat higher for females than for miles while the

estimated age coefficients were lower for women than for men. These differences

were greatly reduced but not entirely eliminated when work experience was




                                        1
  allowed for,       More attention to the quality of the             work experience and
 expectations about labor force attachment reduced tbe estimated average male

 female differentials somewhat further,            without eliminating most of the original

 differential (see Becker. 1983; Mincer and ?olachek, 1974; Sandeil and
                                                                                   Schapiro,
 1976; and Shackett, 1981),          To the extent that the question of        ability hias'
 was investigated using female data, the conclusions did not differ greatly from

 those reached using male data,

         These debates neither posed clearly nor resolved the question of whether

 "family background," "ability," or "10" are the same thing for males and

 females, in the sense that they lead to similar consequences for success in

 schooling and in the market place.              Some of the observed differences in market

 outcomes could arise from a different distribution of abilities across the

 sexes, different rewards in the labor market to these abilities,              and different

 investment responses by family and individuals.

     It is not clear whether such questions
                                                      can be pursued successfully with the
available data.        Ideally we would like to have more detail (a series of
different test scores) and a longer horizon (life cycle data) than is usually

available in the standard economic surveys. Nevertheless, we would like to open

up this question and explore which aspects of it might be answerable with
currently available data,           We were motivated to pursue this topic by the

apparent puzzle thrown up, in passing, in Joyce Shackett's thesis                 (Harvard,
1981),     She found that holding schooling and measured IQ constant, there is

still an unaccounted for correlation in wages between brothers and between

sisters, indicating the presence of an unmeasured family related component of

"ability" or marketable human capital.              But when she examined hrothersister
pairs in a similar fashion, their wage residuals
                                                           were essentially uncorrelted,
suggesting     the    possibility     that        "abilities"   are   either    distributed

differentially among males and females or priced differently in the market,



                                             2
     To check such conjectures and to interpret them in a broader context, we

have updated Bhackett's data and extended the framework developed earlier by

flamberlain and Oriliches (1975 and 1977) to the analysis of sized—sex pairs.

Our analysis is based on the NLS Young lien and Young Women tapes which contain

information on roughly 1500 sibling paira (male, female, and mixed) over the

1966—1980 period, including IQ test scores for about two thirds of the

individuals. Unfortunately, the data are rarely complete for both members of a

sibling pair.    Only about one third of the pairs (about 150 to 200 pairs each)

have complete data on all the variables of interest.   This has led us to adopt

and develop new methods of estimating such models, combining data from several

 unbalanced moment matrices, i.e., matrices with rows and columns missing

(corresponding to the variables for which data are missing in the particular

observational subset).

     We cannot really test directly the hypothesis that          abilities" are

distributed differently across msles and females or that they are priced

differently, without having information on a number of different tsst scores for

both men and women.   flat we can do is, first, to check whether the observed

empirical fact persists in a more complete unobserved factors model which allows

both IQ and schooling to be measured with error; second, to investigate whether

this cross—sex difference appears only in wages or can be traced back to the

earlier EQ—schooling relationship; and finally, we can ask whether the data

imply the presence of more than one ability factor in the sense that the male

and female versions of the ability factor are not perfectly correlated.

    The basic approach of this paper is to specify a relatively simple model

with two common factors for the observed data (test scores, schooling, and two

wages: early and late), one factor reflecting unobserved "ability and the other

measuring common endowments across siblings which are orthogonal to ability,




                                    3
e.g., wealth.         This model is estimated on data for brother—brother, siiter—

sister, and brother—sister pairs, allowing both the factor loadings and the

factors themselves to differ across the sexes. Using this framework, it is

possible to test whether the factor stttcture is alike for males and females, in

the sense that the estimated factor loadings are similar for the two sexes, and

whether the male and female factors are the same, that is, have a correlation of

unity.

     In implementing our model we have chosen to sweep out all of the other

exogenous variables contained in these equations,              both to simplify the
computations and because our samples of men sn lomen have not been drawn in I

completely identical fashion; for example, the survey of men begins in 1966 and

that for women   in   196$.     Accordingly we have removed age,   race, region, city
residence    and the     constant freely from all of the dependent variables and

separately   for males and f!males.       Thus, the. main male—female difference in the
level of wages is already taken out in the first pass at the data and          is   not
explained by the model.   The focus of this paper is on the differences in the
structure and influence of the unmeasured falily components across the two
sexes.
    The plan of the paper is as followsi         Pint1 'We outline briefly a simple

model of 14, schooling, and wages in the context of sibling data and explain

what we are after.            Second, we describe out data and outline the specific

estimation problems caused by the relatively high.frôquency of missing data for

one or both of the siblings.         Third. we pni1aint the results of estimating the

complete model and then discuss the results of testing the equality of the

factor structure across siblings. PiSil,, we venturesome conclusions relating

to the more general topic of male—female differences in earnings.




                                          4
2. Tb. Model

      Consider the standard earnings equation



(1)
                      LWa+S+yI+SX+u
                                                               son tine unit1
                                       rates or earnings per
                  logarithm of wage
where LW is the                                                                I
                                                       "intelligence test,
                                  I is a score on an
 S is the level of schooling,                              shall not consider
                                  variables which we
 represents a
                  set of other
                                                                   and S is a eet
                                         and region; a, 0,    y,
                    such as age, race,
 explicitly here,
                                                          all other unmeasured
                                       and a represents
                     be estimated,
 of parameters to
                                                     but relatively permanent
                              including unmeasured
  determinants of wages,
                                                   individuals and transitory
                         capital levels across
  differences in human                                                        The
                                                          other variables.
                     measurement errora in wages and
  fluctuations and                                                        to focus
                                           Orilichea. 1977) proceeds
                     in this area (e.g.,
  usual discussion
                                                            schooling,' in the
                                 the   'rate of return to
            estimation of $,
  on the                                                   circumstances: the
                   number  of potentially    complicating
   presence of a
                                         and/or the use of a particular error—
   lack of a good "ability' variable                                  of errora
                                       it; and the possibility both
   prone test score   as a  proxy for
                                                                             the
                                             levels and of endogeneity, in
                    in achieved schooling
    of measurement                                                and with the
                                      chosen in anticipation,
    sense that   schooling    may be
                                                             unobservable to the
                                             of u (which is
    knowledge, of some of the components
                                                        model in the absence of
                                  unidentified in this
     analyst). As stated, $ is
                                                                        variables
                               variables such as uessured background
     additional instrumental
                                                                  the LW equation
                                             themselves entering
                           S and I without
     which would affect                                                       they
                                      sibling data are interesting because
                  In this context,
      directly.                                                      values of S
                                                  using the sibling
                                               by
      provide another way of identifying 0
                                                                        primarily on
                                Earlier work of this type focused
      and I ss instruments.


                                               S
      male siblings
                           (see Griliches,
                                                    1979, for a review)
      the first                                                               and this is one of
                      papers to look also at
                                                     sister and
     also Scarr and                                               brother—sister pairs     (see
                           MacAvay, 1982).
             In work that
                                   focuses on male—female
                                                                  wage differentials,       the
     question is often
                              whether the estimated
                                                           differences in         and f3 can be
     explained by incorrect
                                        measurement of the
                                                              components of X (such         as
    different meanings          of work
                                               experience for the
    different                                                             two sexes) or by
                     components of u — the
                                           omitted factors
                                                                              (see Mincer and
    Pollachek, 1974; and
                                   Becker, 1983). While
                                                              sibling data cannot be used
    to identify and interpret what these
                                                       unobservable
   are, they can be used to ask whether                                  components "really's
                                                       the family
                                                                    components are., to any
   extent, sex specific,

           iousider the
                           following simplified factor model for
   and wage:                                                                  IQ, schooling,



  (2) I
                     y1A


                     y2A ÷ TW +
                                   U2

      LW     J3S +
                     y3A       +        =
                                   u3       (y2+y3)A   +
                                                             + "2    +
                                                                         U3

 where
         the story differs from the earlier
                                                        one [eq. 1] in
 outs' in an                                                having "swept—
             unconstrained fashion the other X variables
 exposition and                                           to simplify both
                 computation. The model
                                         contains an unobservable
 factor A, for which I (an                                         ability
                               IQ—type score) is an error prone
 "Ability" affects                                                  proxy.
                   achieved schooling levels and
                                                  may also enter the
                                                                      wage
equations directly, above and beyond
                                      its indirect effect
                                                           via schooling.
In addition there      is a "wealthy'
                                            factor W, which
                                                              affects only schooling




                                                6
                                                                   and nrcOtt1l"
directly.       The followini notatiOfli definitiot5

assumption are aide:



 (3)


               ELI —          a         - 0
                       EAt3       EVu

                                  forj#l

                Eu2u3 S 623


                                                                 assumptions: The A and
                                      reflect the followifli
         The statements above
                                                                        component that is
                       orthogonal. i.e.. I is the            "wealth"
  t factors are
                                                     that is already
                                                                          correlated with
  above and beyond that part of wealth
                                                             orthogonal is a    convenient
                                     (That A and I are
  the ability factor.
                                                      asaumPtion is required      for the
                         Some such rotational
  normaliaatiot
                                                      coefficients.) These factors are
                                     of the factor
   separate identification
                                                                  specific disturbances.
                                          of all the equation
   assumed to be independent
                                                                                     error
                                           pure measurement
   The      error in the test score u is a
                                                            uncorrelated with the other
   untranamitted to other               equations and
                                                  measured with error in (2). or may be
                         Because S may be
   disturbances
                                                                         with u3.
                                      is allowed to be freely correlated
       chosen endogenously. u2
                                                                               instrumental
            As written,
                                  and in the absence of additional
                                                                    underidentifted This
                                          this model is beavily
       variables or restriction5.
                                                                               parameters ——
                                                     the number of unknown
       can be most easily seen by counting
                                                                            and covariancea.
               relative to the number of the observed variances
       nine,
       which is only six.
                                                                which allows us to identify
                                              of sibling data
               It is the yilability
                                                                                a and b or a
                                                    Denoting pair members by
                                  such a model.
        the parameters of




                                                        7
    and f subscripts,
                              and treating them
                                                sYmmetrically (i.e., we assume that
    siblings have the same
                                   variances and coefficients
                                                                at least as long as
    they     are of the same              sex),     we make the
                                                                      following additional
    assumptions:




    (4) A=f+g Ef2=i,                       Eg2=,          W1=W, w2=i
           Eula ulb =Eu u =Eu u
                       2a 2b la 2b                 Eu u       0
                                                     la 3b

        Eu u           Eu u         Eu u
          2alb           2a3b         3a2b
        EIVu.
             jk                   for j      1,,. .,3     and k     a,1,


       Eu       u       2
           3a3b        a
                        ab



  which imply the            following.      A is a factor with
                                                                      a family variance
  components structure with f
                                      representing the family
                                                                     component and g the
  individual one.  We normalize so that the variance of
                                                         £ is one and the
 variance of g is r. W, on the other hands
                                             is a pure family factor with
 no individual
                components and IS normalized
                                              to have a variance of one.
 All of the
                    cross—sibling correlations in I and S are assumed
                                                                                   to be
 captured by the two
                              family components f and W, and hence
                                                                              u2 is not
 correlated with the other
                                     sibling's
                                                    u3, though it is allowed to be
 freely correlated with its Own,
                                                 The residuals in the
                                                                           wage equatio
are allowed, however,
                              a free family structure,
     Note that, under the condition that
                                         we do not distinguish
                                                                                 between
Siblings, we are addixg
                               six covarjances but
                                                          only two parameters and the
model is now identified,
                                    Figure 1 makes clear
                                                                  where identification
comes from,
                    Factor loadings, the
cross--sjb wage covariance are
                                                   Schooling coefficient f3     and the
                                           all    identified within the        cross—sib
                                                           the individual
matrix with the on—sib covariances then identifying
                         covariances.2 The model is recursive with the
residual variances and
                                                the schooling    ccvariances
crosssib   14 covariance identifying y,
                                                       identifying 13' P
                         and then the wage covariances
identifying 'a and i,

and °3ab
                                                           identifying the
     The above is a variant of the standard way of
                                                        for ability and
schooling coefficient in a wage equation. using a proxy

 jstrumenting
                 both schooling and the proxy with fsmily background
                                                                of covariance
 variables. An advantage of setting up the model in terms
                                                       it can be easily
 matrices rather than a standard IV setup is that then
                                            for the sex of the sibling.     We
               to allow for another index
 generalized
                                                   saab sex separately
 assume that the model specified above applies to
                                                                  This
                             specific component to each factor.
 but that there may be a sex
                                                       correlated, and
 implies that the factors will be less than perfectly
                                                  and •W representing the
 introduces two additional parameter5 Pj
                                                          factor.  We
 correlation between the male and female version of each
                       correlations across the brothers' and sisters'
  also allow for free
                                                                     cross—sib
  wages.  The bottom panel of Figure 1 shows the cross—sex
                                                         factor loadings
  covariance matrix implied by this model. Note that the
  ars also assumed to be different for the two sexes.
                              mentioned in tbs introduction, we            ask,
       To test the hypotheses
                                                             the brother
  essentially, how well a factor structure identified within
                                   rationalir' the cross—sex cross—sib
  and sister pairs separately can
                          With the model as specified.       it is not too
  covariance matrix.
                                   conriance matrices since we ate fitting
   difficult to fit the same—sex
                                       but the test on the cross—sex      matrix
   12 covariances with 11 parameters

                          We add nine covariances but only three parameters
   is more stringent.




                                            9
      A' p1 and °3mft The sequence of tests we will use is
                                                           the following:
      First, the test of
                           equality across the sexes of" the
                                                                 wage covariances ia
      a test of whether there
                                are still significant differences
                                                                        in the family
      effect after
                     controlling for ability.     Second, we test whether
                                                                             ability
     is priced differently
                              for men and women by
                                                     testing the equality of the
     factor loadings.      Finally the test that       aid p1 are unityis a test
     that the factors have no sex specific structure,,

          Before we turn to a more detailed description
                                                                 of out data and
     estimation procedures,
                                 several additional points should be mentioned:
     the use of age instead of experience in
                                             our list of predetermJ,ne
    variables and the interpretative
                                        differences this implies,       the use of
    two wage variables,      and the non—use of
                                                    measured family backgrou
    variables.   Most of the work in this
                                                area (e.g, Griliches' 1977      and
    lincer 1974) uses accumulated work experience
                                                       as a variable in the wage
    equation snd defines the
                                schooling coefficient, as estimating the effect
    of schooling 'holding work experience constant.'
                                                           Experien, is usually
    entered in a non—linear fashion
                                       and is a'functjon:of
                                                                  age, schooling,
    and other factors which determine the post—school
                                                      labor                  force
 Participation and employment
                                    experience of an individual.         Prom our
 point of view this interpretation
                                          of experience:is endog'enous to the
 achievement model.       Given the potential
                                                nonlinearity of its effect, it
 would be rather difficult
                           to estend our models'           .
                                                               to incorporate it        4'




 explicitly.     Ye can think then of our model as' one in which
                                                                 this
 variable has been solved
                               out, leaving one of its
                                                           :determinahts. age,
 among the predetermined t variables.
                                                But. éince the 'usual
                                                                        schooling
 coefficient estimates are based
                                     on equations of the form bS +
                                                                   d(Age — S
—   6),   our 'results are to be
                                   interpreted as estimating (b—d)S +       dAGE.
Thus, to conpare        our estimated schooling
                                                  coófficients fi    to earlier


______                                  10
estimates in the literature requires the addition of the estimated age

coefficient to them.

     This    paper differs from our earlier efforts       (Chamberlain—

Griliches, 1975 and 1977) by including two wage variables in the model,

early and late. We do not focus ,however, on the wage or earnings

growth profiles explicitly (on that, see Chamberlain, 1978, for

example),    Moreover, since we do not include work experience in the

wage equations directly, we do not constrain either the schooling

coefficients or the ability coefficients to be the same in the two wage

equations. Implicitly, this allows for an age—schooling interaction in

the wage equation, which we could not allow for explicitly.

     It also differs from some of the other papers in this area by not

including measured family variables such as father's occupation and

mother's education in the equations to be estimated.     Using sibling

data they are subsumed instead in the unobservable family factors f and

W.   One    might be tempted to use them also in a more elaborate MIMIC
type model, but the model to be used by us is already straining our

computational resources and the ability of the data to discrimir.te

between its various slightly different versions.




                                     11
3. Data and Variables


     Our data come from the National Longitudinal Survey of Young Men (1966—

1980) and Young Women (1968—1980).          (See Center for Human Resource Research.

1979, for a detailed description.) Thesc surveys started with about 5000

respondents each, and were down to about 4000 interviewees each by the end of

the last decade (the attrition is for such reasons as death, inability to

looate, and refusal to answer).         When these surveys were originally designed

(including the Older Men and Mature Women panels), they were chosen in a

stratified ran.dorn fashion from a larger underlying household sampling frame.

This has ted to the presence of a number of same household members within and

across      different panels,      In particular,    it   is possible to    identify

approximately 703 households with at least two brothers, 668 households with at

least two sisters, and 1075 with at least one brother-sister pair, The cohorts

covered were originally 14 to 24 years old in 1966 for males, and 14 to 24 years

old in 1968 for females,        The latest surveys available to us at the time this

analysis was initiated followed them through 1980 with the age of respondents

ranging frem 28 through 38 for males and from 26 through 36 for females,

     We have tried to use the data for all the individuals who finished

schooling before or during the survey periods and for whom we could construct

the requisite data.     We use data from three points in these surveys: (1) First

interview   data (196$. fo.r men, 1968 for women) for age, race, and IQ test scores
collected from the respondent' high schools3 (missing for about one—third of
the sample), (2) Schooling level achieved at completion of school (in years)
and wage received on an 'cay job* (after leaving school, not before age 18 and
around age 22 if data are available, later if the school leaving age was higher)
and other assoc iated van ables at that juncture (age, region,      city size, and

                                       12
marital status).      And (3) a flater" wage (around age 28. but at least three

years later tian the early wage) with the same set of associated variables as

of that date.        The rules we followed in selecting our obser'cstions and

constructing our variables are described in greater detail In Appendix S.

     Table 1 shows the sample shea which tesulted when we made various cuts on

good data and gives son idea of the relatively small fraction of our
observations which contains data on siblings.     Among the original 10.000 or so

respondents, it was possible to identify about 1600 pairs or roughly 3000+

individuals who had a sibling in one of these surveys.    By the time we ask that

both siblings should have completed school, had observations on both an early

and later wage and data on IQ scores, we are down to less than one third of the

original number: about 520 pairs or 1040 individuals (see the first line of the

bottom panel of Table 1).     The major attrition occurs due to missing IQ scores

and missing late wage (due to attrition from the sample, late school leaving, or

non labor force participation).    Overall attrition is slightly higher for males

than females.

     From the point of view of our model, we are missing data for two quite

different reasons:     first, because of the usual problems with sample attrition

and nonresponse, many observations have missing values for one or more

variables. Second, each male or female in the sample may or may not have both a

brother and a sister from which we can obtain a full set of covariances.       It

tuna out that both these problems can be solved in the same fly, enabling us to

use the maximal amount of the available data, rather than restricting the

estimation to the subsample whioh is complete.    Ye describe the methodology for

obtaining such estimates in the next section of the paper, and focus here on

more general data selection problems and sample description.

     Table 1 shows that we are relatively short on complete data and on data for




                                     13
 sate—sexed pairs. Our data selection strategy was designed around this First.

 for families with only one or two individuals in the original sample (most of

 our data) the assignment to a particular matrix Us unambiguous.      Foi families

 with three or more siblings, however, we were forced to make selections to avoid

 using individuals more than once. Ye ordered aibaby data availability and then

: issigned all the complete data pairs we could to the brother—brother and sister—

 sister complete data pairs.     The remainder of the complete data pairs •were

 assigned to the cross—sex matrix. All the remaining siblings were either

 assigned to a pair with some data missing, or if no data remained on their

 sibling, they were placed with the residuals and treated as individuals.      The

 consequence of this procedure was to lean us with a nearly balanced design in

 terms of the number of brother, sister, and brother—sister pairs In the data.

 Families are sometimes represented more than tics    but for the vast majority

 this means that a non—matched individual rarely has sibs in the sib—pair

 matrices.4

      This process yielded 24 different momeit matrices with the observationi aid

 data patterns given in the bottom panel of Table 1.      Each person from the

 original sample who has a good observation on completed schooling has been

 placed in one of these matrices.    In sectioI4 we describe bow we combined the

 information in these different matrices when .atLmating the model.

      Table 2 gives the means of the variables in our data.        There are no
 surprises In the male—female differences:   the :iverage mal! wage is higher, and

 seems to grow somewhat faster (witha caveat due to the changing sample) and the

 male variances are higber for our key endogenous variables. Because the original

 surveys overaampled blacks, our sampies hate: a significantly larger non—white

 proportion (.29) and more respondents in the South. (.36) than is true of the

 general U.S. population.    Given that noii—irhitós tend to have larger families,

 this is oven more so for our sibling data. Except for including race and region



                                     14
as conditioning variables we have made no further adjustments for this

discrepancy from national representativeness.

     The table also shows tbat the average age of our respondents is 23 at the

early wage date and 27 at the later one.    This is still quite early in their

labor force careers and just before or approaching Mincer's (1974)   overtaking'

point.   Thus, our results have to be interpreted remembering the relative youth

of these respondents.

     In the next section. we describe the method of estimation which we used;

it essentially involves fitting our model to several matrices of variances and

covariasces of the data simultaneously.      Because of this, each additional

variable we include tends to be rather expensive in terms of computational

costs.   This has led us to preprocess the variables of interest by regressing

each of them on a set of exogenous variables and using the residuals from these

regressions to form the covariance matrices from which we estimate the

parameters of interest.   Prom KaCurdy (1981) we know that the estimates of the

parameters of the covariance matrix (including the structural coefficient $)

which are obtained conditional on these regression estimates are consistent and

asymptotically normally distributed with a covariance matrix which does not

depend on the fact that we preprocessed the variables in this fly.   Ye give the

details of these first stage regressions in Appendix B; briefly, the variables

we removed were the appropriately dated race, age, and region of residence

variables (at the initial survey date for schooling and IQ, at the date of the

observation for the wages) and tunics corresponding to the data sample (that

is, the covariance matrix) into which an observation falls.      These dunies

adjust for missing data which may be randomly missing conditional on the

unobservables but still not randomly missing unconditionally.5




                                   15
4. Econometric Methodology

       The    model we     are   estimating can   be   thànght of as consisting of sight

equations      (four dependent    variables —     I,    S, L'Vl   and LIZ, for each of the two
                                                                                                    *

siblinga).       A version of this model with onlyone wage variable is depicted                in
Figure 1. If one assumes that conditional on the exogenous X's                 (which have   been
swept    out    freely   by the preprocessing) the observed vakiables are distributed

according to a multivariste normal distribution, then the observed moment matrix

is a sufficient statistic.            Figure 1 gives the           expected    values •for the

ccmponents     of this matrix conditional .on:. the correctness of our assumed model.
       Many   econometric models can be   written in the form 8(0),           where 0(0) is the
true    population covsrisnce matrix aesocisted with the assumed multivariate

normal    distribution, and 0 is a vector of pOasetera of interest.                 Denote the
observed     covsriance matrix by S. Then msximizinj         the likelihood function of the
data   with respect to the model parameters comes down to maximizing



(5)       ln L(0 I   8,0) a   k — (n/2)[ln   10(0)1+. tr    Q(Ø)_l


with respect to 0. If 0 is exactly identified,: the estimates are unique               end can
be    solved directly from the definition of Cand             the assumptIon that S is a
consistent estimator of it.            If 8(0) is overidentified, then the maximum
likelihood      procedure fita the model 0(0) tothe data S so as to maximize the

likelihood.       This can be done ci thor using        the LIsunt    program (Joreskog      and

Sorbom   1981) or the MOMENTS program (B.              II. Hall 1979).        If the observed
vsritblee are multivariate normal this estimatoris the full intonation maximum
likelihood estimator for this model.. Even if the data sre not multivsriste
normal but follow some other distribution, satisfying mild regularity conditions6


                                          16
with flsIe) —    0(0),     this is a pssudo— or quasi-maximum likelihood estimator

yielding $   consistent   estimator of 0.    In this case, however, the asymptotic

variance of the estimator is somewhat more complicated to compute and the

standsrd programs do not produce the correct answer.        A later version of this

paper will contain estimates of the standard errors which sre robust to

nonnormality of the data.

     This is fine for a random sample from the underlying population with all

the variables present.        Hut what is to be done if for one—third of the sample

one is missing measurements on one of the variables (say I) or with observations

which have no sibling data at all?           In such situations one can think of the

observed matrix S for one or sore of the relevant sub—samples as missing one (or

more) rows and columns.

     There is no conceptual difficulty in generalizing the sample matrix

approach to a multiple sample situation where the resulting O(O) may depend on

somewhat different parameters.       As long as the different matrices can be taken

as arising independently, their respective contributions to the likelihood

function can be added up. and as long as the 0's have parameters in common.

there is a return from estimating them jointly.            This can be done either

utilizing the multiple samples feature of LISV (see Allison, 1981). or by

extending the EIIRNTS program (Hall. 1979) to the connected—multiple matrices

oase.   The estimation procedure combines these different matrices end their

associated pieces of the likelihood function, and then iterates across them

until a maximum is found. A more detailed description of the mechanics of this

approach is given in Appendix C.

     The main assumption required for the consistency of this approach in the

context of missing data is our ability to treat the various sub—samples as

independent pieces of the likelihood function.         That is. we have to assume no




                                        17
significant sample selection or self—selection problem, treating our data as if

the missinj pieces are missing at random.      This does not mean that the

expected valu, of missing data is the same in all the matrices, only that (in

the newer terminology of kubin 1976 and Little 1982) the data generation process

is ignorable in the sense that the desired parameters can be estimated

consistently from the complete data subsets and that "hissing data" methods use

the rest of the anilable data only to improve the efficiency of such

estimates.7

     To be more precise, the distribution of the missing dats must be.

conditional on the distribution of the anilable data, independent of the fact

that it is missing.    This condition Justifies integrating the full likelihood

over the distribution of the missing data to get a marginal distribution for the

partially observed data.   The marginal 'distribution, sharing parameters of the

original, can add information to our estimates oven then not all would be

identified in the partially observed data alone.

     While these conditions are unlikely to bold exactly in practice, we do

expect them •to hold approximately.      The presence or abaence of siblings ía

likely to be random with respect to ihe parameters of interest to us. Attrition

and labor force participation (especially for young women) is likely to be non—

random with respect to the unobserved wage components, but earlier, work on

sample' selectivity bias in both of these areas (Orilichea, Ranaman, Hall, 1978;

Smith, 1980) has not uncovered a consistent and large biasinj effect. While we

do know that IQ is not missing randomly in an overall sense, conditidnally on

our X's and the unobserved factors it too may be: missing at random.

     We shall proceed assuming that it is indeed legitimate for us to pool these

various matrices. It would be possible to investigate the issue further, but we

shall not do that here.      Under tho maintained asausption, our parameter

estimates should change little as we include mo're data.   We have estimated the



                                    18
wodel using various aaounts of tbe incomplete dsts and have found fe
                           As an ezsaple, results using only the complete   dst
qualitative differences.

are reported in an appendix.




                                     19
  5. Results

      Before we proceed to examine the full model results it is useful to look

 briefly at simple least squares estimates on these data and to exsmine the

 residual correlation matrices for our main variables, by sex and across

 siblings, to get an impression of the type of results one may expect to get with

 these kinds of data and models.
                                   As mentioned earlier, all of the estimation in
 this section has been done with variables from which the mean effects of time,

 age, urban and southern residence, race,       sex,. and data presence have been
 removed using unconstrathed reduced form regressions.

      Table 3 gives the ordinary least         squares and instrumental variable
 estimates of a standard earnings equation for• the brothers and sisters

 separately.   In order to highlight the differences in our estimates which are

due to the estimation method and those which are due to the use of IV

techniques, we show three different sets of estimates.      The first two columns
are OLS estimates based on all those observations
                                                      which had complete data on
schooling, 14, and two wages, The next two columns show 015 estimates obtained

by pooling across several matrices containing.all our dsta, including those

observations which are missing 14 and/or one or more wages. The point estimates

do  not change that much, and the standard errors go don      by about   twenty or
thirty percent, which is somewhat less than the forty
                                                      or      fifty percent which
would be predicted by the increase in the number of. observations alone.       The
last two columns are instrumental variables
                                              estimates obtained with the combined
data sample, using the sibling's TO and schooling as instruments, Since most of

our sample do not have siblings, these estimates
                                                   are effectively based on a much
smaller number than the number of observations ihôwn in the table.

     The OLS estimates of the schooling coefficients are
                                                            relatively low, but


                                   20
when they are combined with the age coefficient from the reduced forr

regression, we obtain more conventional estimates, .061 and .059 for males and

0.096 and .069 for females, similar to those already in      the literature (see
Shackett,    1981, and Sandell and Shapiro, 1974, among others), Instrumenting

both schooling and IQ raises the schooling coefficient by as much as four or

five percent in rate of return units but at the price of much larger standard

errors on both coefficients, due both to the reduction in effective sample size

and the usual increase from IV.

     Table 4 gives the correlation matrices for our main variables (net of the

previously swept out exogenous variables) for our combined data siblings sample,

showing both the individual correlations and the cross—sib ones. These matrices

are pairwise combinations of the set of 24 matrices for which we obtain maximum

likelihood estimates in Table 5.           Taking LW2 as the variable of primary

interest, the observed cross—sib wage correlations are quite low:     .11, .34, and

0.07 for brother, sister, and brother—sister pairs, respectively.        While the

general pattern is similar to that observed earlier by Shackett, (.18, .22, and

0.00), we find less of a contrast between same sex and opposite sex cross—sib

correlations. The pattern in the male and female matrices appears to be very

similar,     except   for somewhat higher correlations for the females          and

correspondingly higher variances for the males.         In fact, the covariance

matrices appear more similar than the correlation matrices.             The other

difference which can be seen in this table is a higher ratio of individual to

family variance for the men, a finding which is confirmed by our estimates later

on (compare the diagonals of the two cross—sib matrices).

     Table 5 gives the maximum likelihood estimates of our model on all of the

available data for each of the sexes, based on the combination of data from 24

matrices.     These matrices were created by considering two dimensions of

"missing":     missing data and missing siblings.    First we have individuals that




                                      21
 have (1) cotplete data on all variables, (2) are sisaing 14 scores, (3) are

 missing wages, and (4) are missing both wages and 14 scores.          Second, we have
 three types of siblings (male, female, and opposite) with matóhing data missing

 patterns and an extra matrix where only. one wage of one sibling is missing. The

 intersection of these two dimensions yields nine matrices for each sex and six

 for the male-female pairs.       The actual distribution of the dats across these

 matrices was given in Table 1.       The final results in Table 5    are bssed on a
 combination of information from 579 sibling pairs and 3262                    additional
 individuals for males and 557   siblings   and .4732 individuals for, females.

      The model for which estimates are presented In Table 5       is. the   model given
by equations (2)—(4)and Figure 1, with the addition of a second wage variable.

Since the coefficients on the wage variables are not constrained and there is a

free correlation between wages both within individuals and acroaa siblings, this

additional wage variable imposes no new constraints on the model, but merely

provides another, later indicator of the individuala lifetime income.                 In
estimating this model in its moat general form, we allowed both for different

(correlated) female and male factors and for different loadings on these factora

across the sexes.     The estimated correlationa for the two factors          were 0.97
(.07) and 0.90 (.16) for the ability and wealth factors respectively and the

  (2) atatiatic for a correlation of unity across male and female factors was

0.8; accordingly, we have constrained the factors but not the factor loadings,

to be tbe same in the results presented.       The eatimatea of the other parameters

are not affected materially by this conatraint.

     The first part of the table gives the estimated coifficienta, standard

errors, and reaidual variances while the second part hats the eatimated

covariances across equations and acrosa siblinga The final panel in this table

shows also the estimated wage covariancea for the cross—sib pairs.           The method




                                     22
of estimation was maximum likelihood snd the stsndard errors reported are the

conventional estimates.8

     There are a number of remarks about these results:          (1) The estimated

faotor loadings for both unobservable faotors. A and I. are quantitatively and

statistically very similar for males and females (12(5) — 6.6).       The estimated

tans (the ratio of individual to fsmily variance components of the ability

factor) do seem to be different, implying a higher overall contribution of the

ability factor to male success, but also, simultaneously, a relative larger role

of the family component for women in this story.        These differences   however,

are only marginally significant, with an estimated t statistic of 1.5.

     (2)   The role of the ability" factor in the wage equation is marginal.

both in the sense that its coefficients are not significantly different from

zero and in the sense that it contributes little to the explanaticn of the

variance of wages. In fact, the model in general adds little (about .01 out of

0.15) to the explanation of the variance of wages once we have swept out the

exogenous variables.

     (3)   The schooling coefficients are not estimated very precisely.       If the

relevant age coefficients from Appendix B are added to them, the resulting

estimates are 0.094, 0.063 and 0.122, 0.069 for LIl, LIZ, and males and females

respectively.   In     spite   of the fact that the   contribution of the "ability
factor in the wage equation is not well defined, it appears to be multi-

collinear with schooling, with the schooling coefficients falling when the

estimated factor coefficients are higher. This basic result Is the same as that

we saw in the OLS—IV contrast in Table 3:      using the sibling's IQ and schooling

as instruments increases the estimated schooling coefficient but also greatly

increases the standard errors on both TO and schooling since the parts of IQ and

schooling which are correlated with the sibling variables are more collinear In

the wage equation.



                                       23
      (4)    There is no significant pattern in the residual covariances        reported

 in the second part of Table S except for the own serial correlation between

 early and late wages, which is estimated at ibout 0.4. Besides this, the only

 covariances which appear to be significant are those across the wage residuals

 of the as—sex siblings. This is the same effect we noted in the data in Table

 4; in these estimates about half of the higher late wage covariance between

 sisters is explained by the stronger family component of the ability factor

 (both on its own in wages and via schooling) while the remainder appears in the

differing estimates of the residual covsriance (.025 versus .016).                  The
difference between the estimated cross—sex. wage covsriance and the same—sex

covarisnces has not been explained by the ability—schooling components of these

variances — the    estimated covarisnces are as far apart as in the original
correlation matrix.    However, a test for the equality of the wage covarisnces

across all the siblings is not rejected due to. their small size and fairly large

standard errors (12(7) a   6.8).
     All of the tests based on estimates in Table S depend on the .          particular
identifying restriction we chose (the second factor appearing only in the

schooling equation and not in LW.          .   We   can ssk, however: how many common
factors are needed to rationalize the cross—sib correlations          independently of
this restriction or any particular rotation.            Depending on whether we include

wages or restrict attention to just EQ and schooling, two or three common family

factors     should be enough to fully rstionalize the same sex                cross—sib

correlations, but if there were sex—specific components of 'sbility, "weslth,

or wages, we would expect to need more than these two or three to fit the

brother—sister correlations.       Again we find to indication of sex—specific
effects.    Using the complete data subset only,: two factots adequately explain

the 1*-schooling correlation (12(3)     0.14) and. three adequately explainthe IL




                                      24
schooling, wage correlations (12(6) aO.88 or 2.28 depending on whether we use

early or late wages. Since by allowing free correlation of the wages across the

siblings we have effectively allowed for a third family factor in the estimating

model, the factor snalysis results conf irm our finding that the unobserved

family factors stay be treated as the same across male and female siblings.

     Each of these approaches leads us to essentially the same conclusion:       At

least as far as the EQ—schooling nexus is concerned, the unobservables that we

can estimate play similar roles in accounting for the observable data and appear

to be the same constructs for males and females.     Families and schools treat

brothers and sisters symmetrically, as far as we can discsru using the rather

gross measures of IQ scores and years of schooling completed.

     The labor market story is somewhat different, however.     Ye know already

that the schooling, age, and race coefficients differ between males and females.

Beyond that it is hard to discern other differences in returns to the

unobservable, non—schooling and IQ related components of human capital.       There

is a alight indication of such differences in the asymmetry of the cross—sex

cross—sib correlations. A sister's EQ and schooling is more helpful in

predicting her brother's wages than vice versa1 implying that those components

of female EQ and schooling which are correlated with their brother's success in

the labor market are less useful in predicting their own success. Nevertheless,

these effects are ssall and not very significant either by statistical or

substantive criteria. A difference of 0.1 in correlation can account for little

of the overall variance in the difference between male and female experiences in

the labor market.




                                   25
6. Conclusion


     The main finding of this paper is that the family effects In the TO—

schooling—wage     relationship are essentially sex—blind.        This result    is

psrticulsrily strong for the TO—schooling relationship, where the observed
differences    in the   data can be accounted for by a higher within family variance

among men of the single unobserved ability fgctor. Although we are also able to

accept equality of the unobserved factors when fitting the wage equations,

conclusions   here are much less   robust since moat of the systematic variation in

wages is taken out when exogenous factors sri controlled for and our model is

able to explain very little of the remsining variance.           One of Ihe other

questions this paper was designed to answer was whether we could gain precision

in our estimates of sibling models by using missing data techniques.             In

comparing estimates on the complete dsts (thick are given in Appendix A) to

those based on the combined sample of 24 matrices containing roughly four times

as many observations, we find that the standard erros did go down in many cases

by a factor of two.        However, for some crucial parameters such as the wage

covsrisnces, they did not go down at ill.       ThIs, of course, should not be too

surprising since the wage covariances are free and infdrmstion on other

components of the model should not really help in estimating them.       The lesson

is that the technology helps only when we hav0 ntis data with information on

the parameters of interest.

     On the substantive issue that iotivatedthis work, whether ability is

priced differently in the marketplace for men and women, we have been able to

say very little.    There are two sources of the-problem: (1) Wage correlations

across the siblings are very important for. answering this question and we have

relatively few wage pairs in these data.          (2) It is difficult for us to



                                       9'
differentiate between the sexes using test scores, since we have oniy one

indicator of ability, IQ, and in designing that indicator attempts were made to

minimize the appearance of sex differences. An interesting extension of this

work might be to apply this framework to a sample with a variety of test

scores,7 such as the recent rTigl   school and I3eyond surveys (NORC, 1980) although

the within person correlation could be a problem when all tests are of the

academic variety; that is, there may be little additional information in them.

     Finally, we remind the reader again that the mean wage for the men aged 27

in this dataset is forty per cent higher than the mean wage for women of the

same age and that this difference is unaccounted for by anything reported in

this paper,    The mean 10 and schooling level for the same men and women are

equal, and our results indicate that they are getting the same returns from

these factors. The cause of the discrepancy must be looked for elsewhere.
                                    Figure 1

     flpected Variances and Covariances Implied by the Model in Equations 2—4


Individual

IQ       y(1+t)+a                 1112(l+t)

s
                                 4(l+t)+n2+4
LW
                                                  (rr2+'r3)2(l+t)+s2(n2+c1)+4+2a   23

Cross—Bibs   (sane sex)

IQ            11                     l2                     Y](BYfl3)

B



LW
                                                         (812n3)2+82n2+a3ftb



Cross—Sex Cross—Sib (male down versus fenale across)

             TlmTl?A               1lm12fA

             1lf12éA             12f1Afm0W
     lf                    (Bm1+Y3) PA+BmflmTlfPW      t2?3? (Bi+i) PA+Bf




                                             28
                               Table 1

                           Data Availability



                             Young   Young     Brother Sister Sibs
                             Men     Women     Sample Sample Sample

Original sample              5225    5159      1499   1464    3042

With good schooling          4901    5027      1402   1410    2906

  And good IQ                3131    3149       885    874    1737

  And an early wage          4291    4060      1253   1162    2498

  And both wages             3110    2876       909    814    1728

  And both wages and 10      2098    2016       594    562    1134



                   Data Arrangement for Estimation

                                     Pairs             Individuals

                             Brother Sister Sibs      Men    Women

Complete data                164     151       204    1616    1604

Missing IQ                   127     101       119     892     792

Missing wages for a male     103                59     232

Missing wages for a female           107        87            278

Missing wages for both        38      40        48

Residual                     147     158       257     112    167


Total                        579     557       774    2852   3398


Note: Cell counts are the number of sibling pairs, or number of
individuals in the case of the last two columns.     Individuals
occur only once, but families occasionally occur more than once
Cove percent in sibling samples, three percent in total sample).
The slight discrepancies in observations counts between the top
and bottom panels are due to the fact that the bottom panel
observations were also required to have good data on the KWW test
score.



                                      29
                                 Table 2

                         Summary Statistics



                        Young Men                     Young Women

Variable      Number     Mean    Standard      Number     Mean   Starthird
                                 Deviation                       Deviation

LW2           3110        6,18     0.49        2876       5.78     0.44
LWI           4291        5,70     0.54        4059       546      0.44
SC            4783       12,8      2.75        4728      12.6      2.41
Ia            3131      101.4     15,9         3149     102.3     15.2
WRITE         4783        0.72     0.45        4729       0.71     0.45
AGE68         4783       18,2      3,2         4729      18.8      3,1
REG68         4783        0,41     0.49        4729       0,32     0.47
AGE1          4291       22.6      2,9         4060      23.0      2.8
SMSA1         4291        0.71     0.45        4060       0.78     0.42
REG1          4291        0.39     0.49        4060       0.32     0,47
YEAR1         4291       70.6      3.6         4060      72.2      3.0
MARl          4?51        0.48     0.50        3396      0.56      0.50
AGE2          3110       27.1      1.5         2876     27,0       2.0
SMSA2         4783        0.46     0.50        4729      0,61      0.49
REG2          4783        0,26     0.44        4729      0.20      0,40
YEAR2         3110       75,1      3.2         2876     75.8       2.3
MAR2          3047        0.67     0.47        2279      0.66      0.48




Variable definitions:

LWI — an early measure of log hourly earnings.
LW2     a late measure of log hourly earnings.
SC      years of schooling completed.
IQ * JO test score,
WRITE— dummy variable,. 1 if respondent is white.
AGE — Age in years (at the time of early or late wage).
SMSA    dummy variable. 1 if respondent lives in SMSA,
REG — dummy variable,. 1 if respondent lives in the South.
YEAR — calendar year corresponding to early or late wage.
MAR — dummy variable, 1 if respondent married, spouse present.
     (This variable was not swept out in reduced form regressions).


Warning:  The means for variables indexed with l's and 2's were
taken over those with early or late wages respectively,     The
changes in these variables should not therefore be interpreted as
changes in the underlying population,




                                          30
                                    Table 3

                      Individual Earnings Equation


                                      Ken

                     OLS                 OLS with             Instrumental
                                        Kissing Data           Verisbisa


____           1W1         LW2          LW1        LW2         LW1       LW2


SC          .007            .023        .017        .030       .054      .043
           (.004)          (.004)      (.003)      (.003)     (.011)    (.011)
Ia          .0013           .0026       .0006       .0019     —.0066    —.0013
           (.0007)         (.0007)     (.0006)     (.0006)    (.0016)   (.0016)
02             .143         .151        .149        .153       .157      .154

Number         2148        2148         4784       4784        4784      4784



                                       Women

                      CU                 015 with             Instrumental
                                        Kissing Data           Variables


___            LW1          LW2         LW1         LW2        LW1       LW2


SC             .050         .050         .052       .051       .091      .073
            (.004)         (.005)       (.003)     (.003)     (.013)    (.014)
IQ           .0027          .0043        .0024      .0042      .0021     .0050
            (.0006)        (.0007)      (.0006)    (.0006)    (.0017)   (.0019)
o              .116         .134         .116       .128       .119      .132

Number         2110         2110        5286        5286       5286      5286




Note: All equations were estimated on fits residuals from
equations which included age, urban and southern residence, race.
and year dummies (in the case of wages).                     The number of
observations shown is the           total   nuaber used for estinstion in
that column.




                                              31
                                           Table 4

                Correlation Nstrio.s of Residuals froM Reduced

                      Pots Equations: Paints. Avsilabli Data


                                          Individual

                      Young Men                             Young Wosen

                 (N 2098—4783)                             (N      2016—4729)

Ia         14.233                                         13.607

SC             .491    2.452                       •


Lii            .059     .112      .383             ..       .241       .367     .365

L12            .144     .208      .430      .399            .258       .341     .528   .382


                      Brothers                                   Sisters

                  (N — 279—611)                             (N     259—581)

10             .440                                         .514

Sc             .330     .479                                .359       .446

Lii            .008     .075      .164                      .221       .187     .204

LIZ            .099     .117      .109     .112             .198       .223     .171   .336


                                    Brother—Sister

                                     (N     213—521)
                                          Brothers.

                Ia         .480       .338     —.006            .137

                Sc         .346       .441         .035         .135
     Sisters
                Lii        .163       .189         .051         .123

                LIZ        .104       .108         .022         .074


Note:   All variables are residualsfróm regressions reported in
Appendix 3 which sweep our exogenous nriables, such as race and age.
Numbers on diagonals in uppermost panels are standard deviations.
Correlations are computed over all available pairs, or individuals.




                                               32.
                                       Tabis 5
       Joint Matson Lik.lihood Estisatss of tb. Pull Mod.i

                 Young Ion                                      Young ioasn
Dsp.
Tsr.    SC         A            V        a2            SC        A          V         a2
IQ                 9.86                  66.0                    9.72            70.7
                  (0.42)                 (9.3)                  (0.39)              (7.9)
SC                1.28         1.16      2.29                   1.22 0.94            2.38
                  (0.08)       (0.09) (0.18)                    (0.07) (0.09) (0.15)
Lii     .040     —.016                   0.15          .076      .013                0.11
       (.019)     (.027)                 (.004) (.023) (.030)                       (.003)
Lii     .027       .034                  0.15          .050      .060                0.13
       (.019)     (.027)                 (.004) (.024) (.032)                       (.004)


               a .48   (.10)                                            a .27(.08)


                               Estimated      Conriances
         Individual             Sibling                TM ividual             Sibling
        SC Lii Lii              Lii      Li2           SC Lii Lii            Lii Lii
SC

Lii    —.11                     .023                   —.11                  .014
       (.07)                   (.008)                  (.07)        (.007)
Lii    —.023 .059               .018 .016              —.043 .052 — .012 .025
       (.07) (.003)            (.007)(.009)            (.076)(.004) (.006)(.008)


                       Estimated Corariances Across Sores
                                          Female
                                 Lii                   Lii
                       Lii       .011                   .003
                                (.008)                 (.008)
               Isle Lii          .005                   .001
                                (.008)                 (.008)

                             Log Likelihood a —22,129.2
5fleseestl.satss sre bssed on the constraint that p a p a 1.0;
the r (2) for equality of the male sad female fsctors ! 0.8.




                                                 .33
                                   Notes



    1.    An earlier version of this paper was presented at the      Conference
on the Economics of the Family, University of Pennsylvania, April 12--13, 1984.
We are grateful to the conference participants for comments and to MarL Watson
for helpful discussions,     We are also indebted to NSF Grant S0C78—04279 for
financial support, to Ted Shi for research assistance, and to Sumauth Addanki
and Clint Cummins for assistance with the computation.


    2. If we were to allow u1 and u3 to be freely correlated, the model would be
exactly identified.   The restriction that EUIAu3A =           0, i.e. that this
                                                     EulBu3B
covariance is fully captured by the variance component g. is in the spirit of IQ
being an error ridden measurement of ability, but is not essential for
identification.


    3. These IQ test scores are in fact from a variety of intelligence tests
collected by the high schools and rescaled to standard IQ units by the NLS,


    4, Less than one percent of families occur twice among the sib data and less
than three percent of unmatched individuals actually have a sib in the sib data,


    5, Necessary conditions are given in MaCurdy 1981. Basically the first and
second partials of the model must be uniformly continuous and possess finite
first and second moments,

    6. Data which is not missing randomly may also change the variances and
distributions of the observed data, This can be accomodated in estimation by (1)
allowing the estimated variances of the unobservables to vary with the samples
and (2) by computing robust standard errors for the model, Neither of these have
been done in the current version of the paper but we plan to do so in the
future.


    7, The standard attack, in this context, on the missing data problem, would
be to compute a correlation matrix based on pairwise complete data and then base
estimates on that,   As long as data is missing at random this method should be
consistent, but it suffers from two drawbacks,.    The standard errors computed
ignoring the differential data availability will be nonsense.    Furthermore the
maximum—likelihood technique shades naturally into estimation that at least
partially models the sample generating mechanism and is thus robust to a certain.
amount of non—randomness.


    8.    A later version of this paper will contain estimates of the standard
errors which are robust to nonnormality of the data,




                                    34
    9. The National Longitudinal Surveys of Young Men and Women alc contain
scores on a "Knowledge of the World of Work" test which we oiigiraJJ ilanned tc
use in this study. Unfortunately, the tests thenselves were not t1e sane across
the two sexes so tFat they could not be used as an indicator     variable which
would provide additional identifying power.     We therefore decided not to use
these scores in the final version of the model.
                               Re f e r once s




Allison, P.O., "Maximum Likelihood Estimation in Linear Models When Data Are
     Missing." Revised version of a paper presented at the 1981 Annual
     Meeting of the American Sociological Association.

Becker,G.S., "The Allocation of Effort, Specific liwnan Capital, and Sexual
     Differences in Earnings and the Allocation of Time," unpublished (1983).

Behrman, JR,, Z. Ilrubec, P. Taubman and T,J. Wales, Socioeconomic
     Success: A Study of the Effects of Genetic Endowments, Family
     Environment, and Schooling (Amsterdam: North Holland, 1980).

Center for Human Resource Research, The National Longitudinal Survey
     Handbook (Columbus, Ohio: Ohio State University, 1979).

Chamberlain, G,, "Omitted Variable Bias in Panel Data: Estimating the
     Returns to Schooling." in, The Econometrics of Panel Data,
     (Paris: Annales do l'INSEE, No, 30/31, pp 49—82, 1978).

—_______ and Z. Griliches, "Unobservables with a Variance—Components
     Structure: Ability, Schooling and the Economic Success of Brothers,"
     International Economic Review 16(2) (1975).

________ "More on Brothers," in, P. Taubman, ed., linometrics: Determinants
     of Socioeconomic Success within and between Families (New York:
     North Holland, 1977).

Griliches, Z., "Estimating the Returns to Schooling: Some Econometric
     Problems," Econometrica 45 (1977), 1—22.

          "Sibling Models and Data in Economics: Beginnings of a Survey,"
     Journal of Political Economy 87(5), Part 2 (1979), S37—S64.

  ______ "Data Problems in Econometrics," in, M, Intriligator and
     Z. Griliches, eds., Handbook of Econometrics, Volume III (Amsterdam:
     North Holland, forthcoming 1985).

    ____ B.H. Ball and l.A. Ilausman "Missing Data and Self—Selection in
     Large Panels," Annales do L'INSEE No. 30—31 (1978),

Hall, B.H,, MOMENTS, the Moment Matrix Processor User Manuel, (Stanford,
California: 1979).

Hauser, R.M. and R,N. Daymont, "Schooling, Ability and Earnings: Crass—
     Sectional Findings 8 to 14 Years After High School Graduation," Soc.
     Educ. 50 (1977), 182—206.

Jencks, C., Who Gets Ahead? (New York: Basic Books, 1979).




                                      36
Joreskog. K.G. and I). Sorboun, LISREL: Analysis of Linear Structural
     Relationships by the Method of Maximum Likelihood (Chicago: National
     Resources, 1981).

Little, P.J.A., "Models for Non—Response in Sample Surveys," Journal of
     the American Statistical Association, 77(378) (1982), 237—250.

Mincer, J., Schooling, Experience, and Earnings (New York: Columbia
     University Press for NBER, 1974).

         and I Polachek, "Family Investments in Human Capital Earnings
     of Women," Journal of Political Economy 82(2), Part II (1974), 576—5108..

NORC, High School and Beyond: A National Longitudinal Survey for the
     1980's, (Chicago: NORC, 1980).

Rubin, D.B., "Inference and Missing Data," Biometrika 63(3) (1976),
     581—592.

Sandell, S.ll. and D. Shapiro, "The Theory of Human Capital and the Earnings
     of Women: A Reexamination of the Evidence," Journal of Human
     Resources 8 (1978), 103—117.

Scarr, S. and C'. McAvay, "Predicting the Occupational Status of Young Adults:
     A Longitudinal Study of Brothers and Sisters in Adoptive and
     Biologically Related Families," Department of Psychology, Yale
     University (unpublished, 1982).

Shackett, JR., Experience and Earnings of Young Women, Ph.D. thesis,
     Harvard University (unpublished, 1981).

Smith, J.P., Female Labor Supply: Theory and Estimation (Princeton:
     Princeton University Press, 1980).




                                     37
                            Appendix C


     In this appendix we describe in soniewhat more detail the
method we use for pooling our estimates across covariance
matrices which may be missing one or more rows due: to missing
data.      Although   developed independently using a different
computer program, our approach is the same as that of Allison
(1981). His paper describes a method for using LISRELV to obtain
maximum likelihood estimates of linear models when data are
missing randomly, conditional on the obServed dta. We apply the
same technique using the program MOMENTS (8. H. Hall 1979); for
the models we consider, this tunis out to bS somewhAt faster than
using LISREL., although we have used that program to check some of
our results.

     Assume that we have T1 obsSrsiMtiôhIona vector of normally
distributed random variables y and T2 observations on a vector
y2. y and y2 are jointly independent across observations.       In

our case y1 and y may include some of the same variables:      for

example, y1 may consist of I, 5, LW1, and LW2 for each of the two

siblings, while y2 may consist of.the same variables, except for
LW2 for one of the siblings.     That is, we have T observations
with complete data, and 12 observations where one of the late
wages is missing.     Our model specifies that y1 " NCO,E1(O)) and

y2      NCO,E2(e)) where E1 is an eight by eight covariance matrix
and E is a seven by seven submatrix of E1..   The parameter vector

0 is in common across the matrices, althbugh sdme elements of it

                                 38
                                            1   .II•V.    :VV:V V:    I..        ...:..::      .•.    .1.. L:.:i: V       .VV       V..1




                                                                                                                      f


             IV       1,1        :I::.VV        ::I.?::.:::1;.   II   .     :               ::I,V::             ::.:::.: ::.fI:,:

                                                   .1.                .:                .j.:IVV..I....I..)LJ                               i,,, 3.
                  I          I




                                       I




—
d(nL
                                                                                                                                                     I) K
C)SL




I   V   •.    •.            ..             VI                .
                                  .1




                                                                                39
                                                                                         -I        ___
                                                                                                   ____
    LEE —-—-
                                    '' L 2                                                         6
                                                                                  • •.                         ':i.:c.
                                                                                                               :Lt.:.Liv:



              I
              L
                                                                                                                         E   i
                                                                   i..:




              —




                  • •.        • ..:                                   ::.         .:-:        .:

:                              •1              .::    :.    •: •     •:     :.:
                                                                                              •    .      1.




        I, •.:_          •'         ..   .t.    ..;



                                                           40
q        ...   !;t' ..t' ..t; r'
                               '•' utC    st.mation*. $ flt-V t1' s'l wmeflt
fl '4, ,                  i .: c''•'' ,13V ,trgl         of the pArdnet
                  Shq        . •'       E9 with y cnpet to the parametRT S
arR *tV tO
  flI.fl 1' C.fl          ::hE                     of this estiiflatt on scheme for
               j t•fL with ,observable5 are qiven in Chapter 4 of
      !M gqnU4                     To do e,timStu1mn with more th ofl
w';              dvant'Qe LA        multiPle ,atrix feature of
whatTh         ;t3C' ihL'i n Ch':1t. I o4 the manual. When 0adinq more
th3ia cin .utariE-1Y r.tL t :t         c;ilmC 0 whi'tt ma? be missiflQ data, we
:.flti         tfll ha     air. • oefl rnrycspondthQ to the missing
          .cs        tne r ;qol'ii rt 4 containS the second wage
LW2 i' thr firt 'nat?)' roW 4 will •3150 contain the second wage
in uotr 7. 3, stc.. vefl it the itecond wage is ssinq for one
of the mAtriCCtt Ira thiS case, you simplY fill in the row and
               with   zstrJ"'       tithen a roW   i missi in the data matrix,
the      tort pcpcdiT' roW nct cc4ufl'fl of Es (0) thhould also be set to
          Ut the .rocr3'" wil3 roatapute the correct likelihood for
the t,hC?t $ nb&t c'i d.s:d. MOMENTS hs been modi4i so that
e:ern rcwW     LI3tUffifl in £i .nd cnu!3 the fol]oWit1O to happen
.tt?lfl                ns t) ds-tttrr. nant of the largest gubmatri)t
:4 tj chii' is hI r:sr4 iS lut.'d tahefl j3nme rows are zero,
an 2) tM' irr,t ci Var lar•C" bm3trtx of t1 which s of
titt r( . S 1tit' tfl'i tho yr3v'fl 3nd column3 4 the Inverse
      y                        .'n the ct ap'nl of the original
 catr V    .. .jr.': r'    • t          . -'th)  1.t .3nd q, is taken
t' j.; iCi' ...: c: '         3 cad tti         on    thy diagonals
correspondLng to the rnissng data rid t.herc;(ure tNe' wi U
contribute to the trace.    Inspocti on c4 tne      1 a fcc ! hs.. I
likelihood should convtnce you that tP;im t'cinique ; equivl:nt
to computing the likelihood fcr & dat's raatrih whiølt contnt cr' .
the subset of S. which is oL'rved
     The   advantage of setting up the problem so th-t all thvz
matrices are oF the sane size comes in proqraz.mirtq tha 'nociai and
its derivatives in the MODEL tor MDLSTR subroutine — tht
computations       will be the same no matter ibhic:h   dat:: qtatrix i
being estimated and the only special progr ammir.g involved i
bookkeeping which keeps tracfr of which row or row.; are missilr.
   In the MOMENTS program. the maximum likelil;oori prtcinriurc
MAXLIK will loop over at. Many covariar,ct matri': a crr
specified by   the MATRIX command or supplied on the MAXLT!( coz'.m,.ul
itself.      The MODEL suhra'tine is called to evaluete the
 ikeiihood functi on and t derivatives for eech o that mtrt:;.
1Z aspecial version of MODEL ontaino th L4trw7 tur ! au.'d'
described here and it calls DLSTR to comctc tha• c, .
matrices as a function of the partmeter vector e for n.ch ttlat:a
matrix tMAT in turn. Th.m allows any oF the eLements crC P.. ?) r
ft to ,e different across tmttrices, or., if yrsu "i:4h thoy ran br?
the same.     T' zero the ro',s of any :tatrix Z it is suX4icittnt tc'
nra the corresponding row of A arid S




                                  42
                                                                              Appendix D

                    ... •. . t.t            •L;..t"             Y                        :c '2uasi "Maxi!PuI1; L;. ::.
                                                                             I .        •r i ttsce: Par,rrneI crn


          fl..:            .i.atti tw and Qt:u,ctcI1c ir ':s tectlc,r. arcs drawn Front
ti&Curdv                 't9S1 ) •                  "Asyg'ototi c:                                    Pruperties                   t.ti'          DL'aLi "Maxirtasn
L.i   kc1th:nd E=L:!,cztcjrt. •n r:;t 'tati&tlcs4" The :JL;rpose uF t!u
pre4r:s%t               ec'cn.. .L; tu rc:•. : .j                             ti,       dErjvo 'r tht. I.)is? nera Fear w..tJ as
the esact.                                                 in us to casti.note                                             :.i:dord errors f or our
model.
          A        u'?', rci                      jc hzt he
                                                    h.            iwitsd                't
informaL Lon 'nti r:.thr c a sat f .'rt.snLc peramoterf W which is
obtairitd ctinii':io;igt ?'i ct .k'C O .t';rYMj1.:i n.arntc tstigr&ttn At
i L:"..l.1:sr.' .r Usc' t'-..ze              I'.L?         CD0  and   ic
,nvvnp I n' i':                        I' tt .$ '.                      ci   t'w.i iU•:t.. J w! tn                                cnsari n::e matrix
                                                                                              A
which         Jot'             ,L ..Lpcar.cI                           ather                                    t            t t;e e!t i mated
thai, :l,e: trtu it:.w:j '.. - t,.        TI1ic_ rc'utt holds for t! geri.ral
r%r3.%i i fl,.gr •T,L:l Li ri 1tt.. rt;? e!.r' mudel with indeocnth,ntl .',
LcJ'e;:ti c sA             •                            t..r.                 •v'            .   :';       t.         :—      i•a3 I .               ttitt ibttt:d
              '    ap                  sa ,s". '                                    .                 •r:•       :t ....'     :rsl         ..lr      1   in ..ti.h
t'IL    ''''c ' : I:'.i •'"• ...                                        ..                                      :..   12                     —?

.riti i      s: '.!at -                                                                                                      lL ra'                i;ut ' V".
                                                                                                                                                                    i
              .,                                           •.                  .                                :.



r:.ayrc.:.vltIt ..t I                  •            •           •
                                                                        •
                                                                                    •
                                                                                                      •.                     I•   •I'.
ti 'r '                         •
                                           ..       . .r            .                                           :;    .fr.s::'t •h                y:.1z1p4: c'.'t   .s

      L                             .5_,        .          .                             .       :.                        :i. i . .i
                   C.          1....        ...                 '
                                                                        —.     •'                     .:                                ht         •' :' -.e:r
                                                                                   43
             :1. H'.'::'J   ..        '-'!'::::..;:i'                ''.'•:'                •'' '.       ":':...:                   'cr"'c"n
                                                                                                                                       ''''rn.'.:




v() =                                                            () H ()
                                                                               cc      ":


                                                        1' 1'         ''
                                                                           ,
                                                                               '
                                                                                   .   .i    I       '
                                                                                                                     .       ' ..'. . .' I .'. '' .   ''



                                                                                                                                    A                 A
   :1''.'.         '.'' 1,';     ,'   .',,'....:',; .' '"'''v...,' .                   c' ''''1          .:''''.'.       '':'' ='          :::I,i




                                                                44
                         cc I..     1::          c. c:       c.    cr cc cc cci dccc cc.               :1. c:ni         E9       c:icccp   Cili ci cc Ciii I 'v Ciii t. cc

;::<c!cncci:.c:cccc                c::       :i.., C::.:H cii ccci ciccic                            . c.:.               ccnci P            :1;:; t.hc:c   cc!::ccccrvcc.c:!

                                                                                                :cccci c;cc:.t:cccl rccc;:i ::ii_;.:c1 cc            C1          'c    :1   th
                                                                                                                                                                            I'..
      ci .1   :1 dc                              .:      c. cc : i. cc.d:. c.   c I cc     ,. I. cli c:Lcc' dcl:!         c:.ccc cf cur ccic:.t :1 mcct ccc:! 9




                     -
                                            I
                                                                                      ___
                                           t.)




CC:     d:!:. I.fc.c.c.' ;:.:                                     cur iiccc:!cc3..                                c:•:ccri.tc•c' c:        ccc



              c:tk       '.—)nc9) i-:                                           A
                                                                                           E.9' I

                                                         ccc:t.:Icrc.ctrcc:I      'cccc:iciu.cI.cc.                   hccn



                                                                                                                  -s
F! c::m t.h :1           cc       ccc     c::ccc!l       c::c.:ic Lc:: cc           :.v!:c :1   cccl ccl c:ciicc;t of p1:1 cc P (9)




                                           ccc:::::!       c!ci (::i *,.HcI:                                                          h.!..:tC,   I.:hccct, if

                                                                                                45
          EkISL =3
1:.   CD C ccy' Cfl 3D :t   c: ann         1: han P ( 6 )          ::':: " H 8    .:1n ci an an cc F::tc: i.:   1c: cc 'L h cc mccc:, 3,


1 1 F:: a Ii, :1. H cc a ci c:a ccc a ci acE:. c:: r' :1 H a ci   :1cc P p an ci .i.




                                                                           46
