NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RATINGS SHOPPING AND ASSET COMPLEXITY:
A THEORY OF RATINGS INFLATION
Vasiliki Skreta
Laura Veldkamp
Working Paper 14761
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14761

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2009

This paper was prepared for the Carnegie-Rochester conference series. Many thanks to David Backus,
Ignacio Esponda, Valerie Bencivenga, Dimitri Vayanos and Lawrence White for useful discussions.
We also thank participants in the Stern Micro Lunch for their helpful suggestions. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Vasiliki Skreta and Laura Veldkamp. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Ratings Shopping and Asset Complexity: A Theory of Ratings Inflation
Vasiliki Skreta and Laura Veldkamp
NBER Working Paper No. 14761
February 2009, Revised April 2009
JEL No. D02,D53,D8,G01,G24
ABSTRACT
Many identify inflated credit ratings as one contributor to the recent financial market turmoil. We
develop an equilibrium model of the market for ratings and use it to examine possible origins of and
cures for ratings inflation. In the model, asset issuers can shop for ratings -- observe multiple ratings
and disclose only the most favorable -- before auctioning their assets. When assets are simple, agencies'
ratings are similar and the incentive to ratings shop is low. When assets are sufficiently complex, ratings
differ enough that an incentive to shop emerges. Thus, an increase in the complexity of recently-issued
securities could create a systematic bias in disclosed ratings, despite the fact that each ratings agency
produces an unbiased estimate of the asset's true quality. Increasing competition among agencies would
only worsen this problem. Switching to an investor-initiated ratings system alleviates the bias, but
could collapse the market for information.

Vasiliki Skreta
Leonard N. Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, Room 7-64
New York, NY 10012
vskreta@stern.nyu.edu
Laura Veldkamp
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 W Fourth Street,Suite 7-77
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
lveldkam@stern.nyu.edu

Most market observers attribute the recent credit crunch to a confluence of factors: excess leverage,
underestimation of risk, opacity, lax screening by mortgage originators, improperly estimated correlation
between bundled assets, market-distorting regulations, a rise in the popularity of new asset classes whose
risks were difficult to evaluate, as well as credit rating agency conflicts of interest.1 This paper investigates
the misrating of structured credit products, widely cited as one contributor to the crisis. Our main objective
is to critically examine two arguments about why ratings problems arose and to show how combining the
two could produce a ratings bias that imperfectly informed investors would not anticipate.
One argument focuses on asset issuers who shop for the highest ratings. The New York Times explains:2
The banks pay only if [the ratings agency] delivers the desired rating . . . If Moody’s and a client
bank don’t see eye-to-eye, the bank can either tweak the numbers or try its luck with a competitor
like S&P, a process known as ratings shopping.
While the issuer-initiated ratings system has been around since the 1970s,3 ratings bias only recently
emerged as a concern. To argue that it took 30 years to detect the bias is to suggest that financialmarket participants learn unrealistically slowly. This raises the question: Is it possible that ratings shopping
previously had either no or a small effect and that something about the credit market changed to amplify
its effect?
A second argument about why many assets were systematically misrated attributes the problem to the
increasing complexity of assets. As Mark Adelson testified before Congress,4
The complexity of a typical securitization is far above that of traditional bonds. It is above the
level at which the creation of the methodology can rely solely on mathematical manipulations.
Despite the outward simplicity of credit-ratings, the inherent complexity of credit risk in many
securitizations means that reasonable professionals starting with the same facts can reasonably
reach different conclusions.
However, the credit market crisis was not generated by independent ratings errors. Only systematic
1 See, for instance, page 1 of the Memorandum for the President from the President’s Working Group on financial-markets
dated March 13, 2008.
2 Quote from New York Times Magazine, “Triple-A-Failure,” April 27, 2008. Other articles making similar arguments include
“Why Credit-rating Agencies Blew It: Mystery Solved,” available from
http://robertreich.blogspot.com/2007/10/they-mystery-of-why-credit-rating.html; “Stopping the Subprime Crisis” New York
Times, July 25, 2007; “When It Goes Wrong” The Economist, September 20, 2007, and “Credit and Blame” The Economist,
September 6, 2007.
3 The credit-rating industry switched from “the investor-pays” to “the issuer-pays” model in the early 1970s. This is believed
to have happened due to the widespread availability of photocopier technology. See, for instance, White (2007).
4 Adelson: Director of structured finance research at Nomura Securities. Testimony before the Committee on Financial
Services, U.S. House of Representatives, September 27, 2007. On January 26, 2008, The New York Times quoted Moody’s
CEO, saying “ In hindsight, it is pretty clear that there was a failure in some key assumptions that were supporting our
analytics and our models.” He said that one reason for the failure was that the “information quality” given to Moody’s,
“both the completeness and veracity, was deteriorating.” See also page 10 of the Summary Report of Issues Identified in the
Commission Staff ’s Examinations of Select credit-rating Agencies, United States Securities and Exchange Commission, July
8, 2008.

1

upward ratings would produce a widespread rise in the prices of credit products. This raises the question:
Is it possible that more dispersion in ratings can translate into higher ratings on average?
We show that the combination of an increase in asset complexity and the ability of asset issuers to shop
for ratings can produce ratings inflation, even if each rating agency produces an unbiased rating. We do
not argue that the complexity of any given asset increased. Rather, the composition of assets being sold
changed so that the more complex type of asset, the structured financial products- particularly those that
were mortgage-backed- became more prevalent. For example, while under $10 billion in structured finance
collateralized debt obligations (CDO’s) were distributed in 2000, nearly $200 billion were issued in 2006
(Hu 2007).
The intuition behind our results is as follows: Each rating agency issues an unbiased forecast of an asset’s
value. However, if the announced rating is the maximum of all realized ratings, it will be a biased signal of
the asset’s true quality. The more ratings differ, the stronger are issuers’ incentives to selectively disclose
(shop for) ratings. For simple assets, agencies issue nearly identical forecasts. Asset issuers then disclose all
ratings because more information reduces investors’ uncertainty and increases the price they are willing to
pay for the asset. For complex assets, ratings may differ, creating an incentive to shop for the best rating.
There is a threshold level of asset complexity such that once this threshold is crossed, shopping becomes
optimal and ratings inflation emerges. Furthermore, the link between asset complexity and ratings shopping
can work in both directions. An issuer who shops for ratings might want to issue an even more complex
asset, to get a broader menu of ratings to choose from. This, in turn, makes shopping even more valuable.
Biased ratings affect securities prices if investors are unaware of the bias. If investors do not know that
the complexity of assets has changed, then based on past data, they would rationally expect ratings to be
unbiased, until they observe a sufficient amount of data to detect the bias.
It is possible that there was no ratings bias and that this episode is simply a bad draw, producing
correlated errors in ratings. Because of the persistence in asset returns and the short sample history of
many of the new credit-derivative products, empirically establishing that their ratings were biased will
be possible only in the far future. However, the pattern of ratings suggests a relationship between asset
complexity and over-optimistic ratings. Mason and Rosner (2007) document that complex CDOs have
significantly higher default rates than simple corporate bonds with identical ratings.5 Similarly, mortgagebacked securities whose underlying credit risk, correlation risk and pre-payment risk are notoriously difficult
to assess, experienced more widespread downgrades than did assets based on other collateral types.6 Lastly,
5 Alan Greenspan acknowledged the greater complexity of CDOs in his May 2005 testimony, “[T]he credit risk profile of CDO
tranches poses challenges to even the most sophisticated market participants.” He cautioned investors “not to rely solely on
rating-agency assessments of credit risk.”
6 “Other collateral types that began to be securitized well after mortgages are far less complex. The first non-mortgage
securitization was equipment leases, followed by credit cards and auto loans, and, more recently, home equity, lease finance,
manufactured housing, student loans, and synthetic structures. All of those types of collateral illustrate tranching structures
that are measurably simpler than those for RMBS.” (Mason and Rosner 2007)

2

even if the primary cause of misrating was bad luck, a failure to address potential sources of bias inherent
in the structure of the ratings industry could generate future problems.
Section 1 models a market for ratings with a few salient, realistic features. In reality, the two largest
agencies, Moody’s and S&P, account for 80 percent of market share. When a structured credit product is
issued, the issuer typically proposes a structure to an agency and asks it for a “shadow rating.” This rating is
private information between the agency and the issuer, unless the issuer pays the agency to make the rating
official and publicize it. In the model, an asset issuer can purchase and make public one or two signals about
the payoff of an asset. We call these signals “ratings.” After choosing the number of ratings to observe and
which ones to make public, the issuer holds an auction for his assets. After each investor submits a menu
of price-quantity pairs, the asset issuer sets the highest market-clearing price for his asset, and all investors
pay that price per share.
As a benchmark, Section 2 solves this model with mandatory disclosure of all observed ratings. Section
3 solves the model with voluntary disclosure. Our main results are in section 4. On average, obtaining
and disclosing a rating benefits an asset issuer, because information makes asset payoffs less uncertain, and
investors pay more for less-risky assets. Interestingly, the value of obtaining an additional rating is nonmonotonic in asset complexity. If assets become more complex and harder to rate, then using additional
ratings to ratings shop becomes more profitable. If assets become very complex, then ratings are so noisy
that investors largely ignore them. This makes asset issuers less willing to pay the issuance fee for a rating
that will have little impact on the price of their asset. Furthermore, if an asset issuer can choose to make his
asset more complex, then knowing that he will shop for ratings can make more asset complexity desirable.
Section 5 uses our model to evaluate the effect of recently-proposed reforms. First, we consider whether
allowing only investor-initiated ratings is viable or desirable. We modify the model to allow any investor to
observe an asset’s rating at a cost. To create the potential for ratings bias, we subject a fraction of investors
to investment-grade securities regulation, which restricts them to only purchasing assets whose ratings exceed
a minimum threshold. Inflated ratings expand their investment-possibility set. However, investors do not
shop for ratings because they optimally use all available information in forming their bids. Thus, if the
source of bias is not ratings agencies themselves, but is, instead, ratings shopping, then investor-initiated
ratings are likely to be less biased. The downsides to investor-initiated ratings are that investors can free-ride
on others’ information and that the ratings market can easily collapse. If investors cannot overcome these
problems, even biased ratings may be better than no information at all.
Another proposed reform is to allow more agencies to compete in providing ratings. For the case of issuerinitiated ratings, we show that having more rating agencies would exacerbate the problem of bias because
there would be more ratings from which to choose. In the investor-initiated ratings model, increasing the
number of agencies is inconsequential. Finally, we consider the logistical problems with mandatory disclosure

3

laws.
A controversial assumption we maintain throughout is that agencies produce unbiased ratings. Appendix
B explores a version of our model that relaxes this assumption. We do not deny that rating agencies may
report biased ratings in an attempt to increase their business. Rather, our point is that even if rating agency
conflicts of interest are resolved, bias could continue to plague ratings.
Our contribution vis-a-vis the existing literature

As a theoretical contribution, our paper builds on

three distinct literatures. First, we add an interaction between ratings and equilibrium asset prices to the
literature on ratings agencies. Other papers that model ratings agencies are quite distinct from our work.
Faure-Grimaud, Peyrache and Quesada (2007) identify circumstances under which the optimal renegotiationproof contract between the rating agency and the firm results in the firm owning its rating. In their setup,
the rating reveals the asset value perfectly, and the price of the asset is exogenous. Farhi, Lerner and Tirole
(2008) focus on other aspects of ratings, such as their transparency and coarseness. In Damiano, Li and
Suen (2008), Bolton, Freixas and Shapiro (2008) and Becker and Milbourn (2008), a rating agency prefers
to inflate its clients’ ratings, but has some reputation cost of reporting a value different from the asset’s
true, exogenous price. Sangiorgi, Sokobin and Spatt (2008) develop an equilibrium explanation for creditrating “notching” and the connection between rating shopping and the “winner’s curse.” The aforementioned
papers investigate the equilibrium level of bias. In contrast, our model’s rating agencies report the truth.
We show that even if ratings agencies produce unbiased ratings, bias in disclosed ratings can still exist.
Second, we extend the literature on information in asset markets by modeling disclosure incentives.7 In
existing models with endogenous information, investors can acquire unbiased signals. Our model explores
how asset issuers choose to both acquire and disclose signals, and the resulting signal bias.
Third, we augment the existing literature on sellers who provide information about their goods by considering how much information to provide.8 In Shavell (1994), either the seller or a buyer can acquire
information. As in our paper, Shavell studies equilibrium information acquisition under voluntary and
mandatory disclosure regimes. But because Shavell’s buyers know that sellers may be hiding information,
any equilibrium without full disclosure unravels. In Jovanovic (1982), the fact that disclosure is costly prevents unraveling. In all these papers, there is a single signal to reveal or not, which precludes the possibility
of shopping for ratings.
More broadly, our findings highlight the role that institutions, rules and market structure play in an industry that produces information. A central question in the mechanism-design literature is: Which institutions
7 For an overview of the role of exogenous information in asset markets, see Brunnermeier (2001). For more recent work on
this topic, see Banerjee (2007). Seminal works on endogenous information include Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) and Hellwig
(1980). More recent work on investor-initiated information acquisition includes Barlevy and Veronesi (2000), Bullard, Evans
and Honkapohja (2005) and Peress (2004).
8 Seminal contributions in this literature include Grossman (1981) and Milgrom (1981). Benabou and Laroque (1992),
Morgan and Stocken (2003) and, more recently, Bolton, Freixas and Shapiro (2007) analyze the conflict of interest between the
buyer and seller in this environment.

4

are most desirable when information is asymmetric or dispersed? This paper asks the reverse question:
What information do agents choose to observe or disclose in a given institution and market structure? As
the recent crisis highlights, understanding the information provision is as important as understanding the
institutions. When information production runs amok, large economic fluctuations can result.

1

A Model of a Market for Ratings

This is a static model of an asset issuer, who has many units of an asset to sell and a continuum of investors
who want to buy those assets. The asset’s value is unknown to investors. Credit rating agencies produce and
sell information. The total supply of the asset is fixed and determined by the issuer. The market-clearing
price is determined though a uniform-price auction in which the sum of the bidders’ bidding schedules
determines the aggregate demand.9 Investors choose their bidding functions so as to maximize their utility,
subject to the information that they have. What information they have depends on whether the rating is
purchased by the issuer (in which case, the issuer makes it public) or by the investors. Below, we investigate
how each of these different arrangements about who purchases the information affects the quality and amount
of information available to market participants.
We now describe a model in which issuers pay for ratings. Later in the paper, we analyze a version of
this model in which investors pay for ratings.
Assets

There are two assets: The ‘safe’ asset offers riskless return r, and the risky asset pays u, which is

normally distributed u ∼ N (ū, σu2 ). The price of the riskless asset is 1. The price of the risky asset is p,
which is endogenous.
Investors A continuum of ex-ante identical investors has utility
U = −e−ρ(mi r+qu) ,

(1)

where ρ is the coefficient of absolute risk aversion and qi and mi are the number of risky and riskless asset
shares investor i ends up with. Each agent is endowed with m0i units of the riskless asset, but can borrow
and lend that asset freely at the riskless rate r. Hence, each investor’s budget constraint is
mi + pqi = m0i .

(2)

9 This auction is similar to the limit economy in Reny and Perry (2006), but we incorporate investor risk-aversion and budget
constraints.

5

The Auction

The price of the risky asset is determined in an auction. Each investor submits a bidding

function that specifies the maximum amount that he is willing to pay for q units of the risky asset as a
function of his information. These bid functions determine the aggregate demand. The auctioneer specifies
a market-clearing price p that equates aggregate demand and supply, and each trader pays this price for
each unit purchased (uniform-price auction).
We now state the bid function and verify that it constitutes an equilibrium. Bids depend on each investor’s
information set Ii , which includes information inferred from b being the price paid per unit.
b(q|Ii ) =

E(u|Ii ) − qρV (u|Ii )
,
r

(3)

where E(u|Ii ) and V (u|Ii ) are the mean and variance of the risky asset’s return, conditional on the investor’s
information. The price paid per unit is exogenous from each investor’s perspective because he is infinitesimal
compared to the rest of the market, implying that the price he faces is determined by other investor’s bid
functions, together with the aggregate supply. Therefore, a realized price b reveals information about others’
bids, which, in turn, is partially informative about what they know.
Each bidder is infinitesimal, which implies that he takes the market-clearing price as given. Thus, the
bidding function (3) is the inverse demand function of a trader who seeks to maximize (1) subject to (2),
taking p as given. It can be easily verified that the objective function of this constrained maximization
problem is concave in q, so that the first-order condition describes the optimal portfolio:
qi =

1
V [u|Ii ]−1 (E[u|Ii ] − pr).
ρ

(4)

Because (3) is an inverse of (4), it is a best response given everyone else’s bid function.
When issuers solicit a rating, they either disclose the rating to all investors or keep it private so that no
investor observes it. Either way, investors have symmetric information I. Integrating over the asset demand
(4) and equating aggregate demand with the asset supply, delivers the equilibrium price
p=
Rating Agencies

1
(E[u|I] − ρV ar[u|I]x).
r

(5)

Credit-rating agencies produce ratings, which are noisy, unbiased signals about the

risky asset payoff u. We consider two rating agencies, because this is the simplest setting in which we can
illustrate our results.
We assume that a shadow rating θ is an unbiased signal about the payoff- that is, θ ∼ N (u, σθ2 ),- produced
at marginal cost χ̃. The issuer can choose to keep the rating private or to make it public information.10 All
10 If an issuer does not publish the shadow rating, rating agencies are not withholding the rating because the exact structured
product they rated is rarely issued. Rather, the rating and the asset structure are negotiated. Another agency may tell the

6

rating agencies produce the same service. Since there is no quantity choice, firms compete in a Bertrand
way and set price equal to marginal cost: χ̃ for shadow ratings and χ + χ̃ for publicly-issued ratings.
Assets vary with respect to the degree that they can be reliably rated, an attribute we call asset complexity.
Definition 1 A more complex asset is one with more noise in its ratings: It has a higher σθ2 .
Asset Issuer

The issuer knows the true payoff of the risky asset and is endowed with x shares of it. His

objective is to maximize expected profit. We first consider the case in which the issuer initiates the rating.
In this model, the issuer’s expected profit is the price times quantity of the asset sold, minus the cost of
observed and disclosed ratings:
Π = px − s̃χ̃ − sχ,

(6)

where s̃ is the number of shadow ratings observed, including the ones eventually disclosed, and s is the
number of publicly disclosed ratings.
Model Timing

Stage 1: The issuer’s ratings-acquisition decision. The issuer decides whether or not to

acquire a shadow rating. If he decides to do so, he visits one of the two rating agencies. Upon acquiring and
observing the first shadow rating, he decides whether or not to acquire another shadow rating.
Stage 2: The issuer’s ratings-disclosure decision. Depending on the number of acquired shadow ratings, the
issuer decides whether to disclose (publish) no, one, or both ratings.
Stage 3: Price Determination. An auction determines the market-clearing price.
The asset issuer’s decisions with voluntary disclosure are summarized in Figure 1. After these stage-1
decisions are made, the asset auction takes place.

2

The Benchmark: Mandatory Disclosure of Shadow Ratings

With mandatory disclosure, the issuer must only decide is whether to acquire zero, one or two ratings. He
does so sequentially: First, he decides whether to acquire one rating, and then, upon observing the realization
of the first rating, he decides whether it is worthwhile to obtain a second.
The expected price of an unrated asset is11
p0 ≡

1
(ū − ρσu2 x).
r

(7)

issuer that structuring the security with slightly more low-risk assets will earn it the sought-after rating. Then, this slightly
modified security would be issued. See Mason and Rosner (2007) for a detailed description of this process.
11 Some fixed-income securities are issued without ratings. Such unrated bonds are classified as junk bonds. Typically, these
are small-net-worth assets.

7

Figure 1: An asset issuer’s decision tree.
If the issuer initiates a rating, Bayes’ law dictates that the expected value of the asset is E[u|θ] = (σu−2 ū +
σθ−2 θ)/(σu−2 + σθ−2 ), and the conditional variance of the asset will be V [u|θ] = 1/(σu−2 + σθ−2 ). Since the
issuer decides to acquire the rating before he knows its outcome, he considers the expected price
1
1
p̄1 ≡ (ū − ρV [u|θ]x) =
r
r

µ
ū −

ρx
−2
σu + σθ−2

¶
.

(8)

Thus, the difference in issuer profits from buying information is
M
Π̄M
s=1 − Π̄s=0 =

ρx2
1
− χ − χ̃,
−4
2
r σθ σu + σu−2

(9)

M
where Π̄M
s=0 (Π̄s=1 ) stands for the issuer’s expected profits from acquiring no (respectively, one) rating under

mandatory disclosure. The issuer chooses to purchase a rating if (9) is non-negative.
The asset’s expected price with two ratings is
1
p̄2 =
r

µ

ρx
ū − −2
σu + 2σθ−2

¶
.

(10)

The issuer chooses to obtain two shadow ratings instead of one if
M
Π̄M
s=2 − Π̄s=1 =

ρx2
1
− χ − χ̃ > 0.
r σθ2 σu−4 + 3σu−2 + 2σθ−2

(11)

Note, that if (9) is positive, (11) will be, too. Hence, if the issuer profits from acquiring one shadow rating,
he also profits from a second.
Comparative Statics with Mandatory Disclosure Information resolves risk. Therefore, the more
8

risk-averse investors are, the more they value information. The value of a rating is also increasing in the
quantity of the asset offered because the benefit of information can be applied to every share. Finally, the
value of a rating is non-monotonic in asset complexity (σθ ). The value of the first rating is always decreasing
in complexity because a more-complex asset is harder to rate, and the resulting rating is less precise and,
thus, less valuable ((9) is decreasing in σθ2 ). The value of the second rating could also be lower for the same
reason, or it could be higher because having less information from the first rating increases the marginal
value of additional information: (9) is increasing in asset complexity if the variance of the asset’s returns is
high, relative to the complexity of the asset (2σu4 > σθ2 ), and is decreasing otherwise.12
Ultimately, a model with mandatory disclosure of ratings by asset issuers and truthful reporting by
rating agencies cannot explain the bias in ratings. We introduced it because it illustrates the mechanics of
the solution. We now explore the more realistic voluntary-disclosure case to understand where ratings bias
might come from.

3

Solving the Voluntary Disclosure Model

The key trade-off an asset issuer faces is the following: Withholding the most negative ratings makes the
asset appear more valuable to investors, while publicizing more ratings makes the asset less risky. In other
words, disclosure lowers the conditional variance of the risky-asset payoff u, while ratings shopping increases
its conditional mean. Both effects increase the price investors are willing to pay and, thus, the issuer’s profit.
We investigate which circumstances favor ratings shopping, as well as the resulting bias in the asset price.
For this discussion to be meaningful, we need to ensure that ratings bias is not irrelevant. In particular,
sophisticated investors should not be able to infer the expected bias, subtract that expected bias from the
announced rating, and neutralize its effects through their actions.
Assumption 2 Investors do not correct for ratings selection bias: For every announced rating, they believe
that θ ∼ N (u, σθ2 ). For unrated assets, they believe that u ∼ N (ū, σu2 ).
This assumption implies that investors cannot make correct inferences from the rating agencies’ actions
(the number of ratings they choose to disclose). Players being unable to form the correct mapping about
the informativeness of other people’s actions is an important feature of the equilibrium notion of Eyster and
Rabin (2005), and of Esponda (2008) and is also present in the analysis of DeMarzo, Vayanos and Zwiebel
(2003), among others.
The assumption that investors believed ratings to be unbiased is consistent with our main argument that
much of the bias was a recent phenomenon. Suppose that the situation we model were repeated, and asset
M

M

12 ∂(Πs=2 −Πs=1 )
∂σθ

=−

−1
−4
2σθ σu
−4σθ

2 σ −4 +3σ −2 +2σ −2 )2
(σθ
u
u
θ

, is positive if

4
σθ

−4
−4
> 2σθ σu
or 2 > σθ2 σu
or 2 >

9

2
σθ
4
σu

2 )2 > σ 2 .
or 2(σu
θ

complexity suddenly changed. If investors did not observe the change, but knew that regime changes in
complexity were possible, they would infer asset complexity and, thus, ratings bias from the past history
of ratings and asset outcomes. Since the historical data came mainly from simple assets, investors would
initially believe that assets are simple, that no ratings shopping is taking place, and that ratings are unbiased.
Even after assets became more complex, this belief would persist until they observed a sufficiently long series
of ratings and payoffs from the complex assets. Thus, with an unexpected change in asset characteristics,
even rational investors would not have initially detected ratings bias.13

3.1

The disclosure decision

To solve the model, we start with the last decision and work backwards. We begin by considering an issuer
who has already chosen how many ratings to acquire and is deciding how many to disclose. If the asset
issuer chooses not to solicit any ratings, then the asset price is the same whether disclosure is voluntary
or mandatory because there is no rating to disclose. But when the asset issuer solicits one or two shadow
ratings, he faces the following choices.
Disclosure with two shadow ratings

We first investigate the disclosure decision of an issuer who has

acquired two shadow ratings. We call the higher rating θ̄, and the lower θ, so that θ̄ > θ. We want to
identify under which conditions the issuer will disclose none, one or both ratings. Since the asset issuer is
always more inclined to announce a higher rating, disclosing one rating means disclosing θ̄.
We first compare the alternatives of disclosing one versus no ratings. If the issuer announces no ratings,
the conditional mean and variance of the asset payoff are the unconditional mean and variance, ū and σu2 .
Therefore, the price of the asset is the same as in (7).
If the issuer announces rating θ̄, the price will be
p1 (θ̄) =

1
r

µ

σu−2 ū + σθ−2 θ̄ − ρx
σu−2 + σθ−2

¶
.

(12)

Let ΠD=d stand for the issuer’s profit from disclosing d ratings. Then, the additional profit gained from
disclosing information is
£
¤
x θ̄ − ū + ρxσu2
ΠD=1 (θ̄) − ΠD=0 = p1 (θ̄) − p0 x − χ, =
− χ.
r 1 + σu−2 σθ2

(13)

Having purchased at least one shadow rating, the asset issuer discloses that rating if (13) is positive. Let a
13 If

investors are sophisticated and can perfectly account for how the issuers’ disclosure rules vary with asset complexity, we
anticipate that unraveling would occur similar to that in Shavell (1994), where all undisclosed information is treated as if it is
bad news. Thus, all ratings would be disclosed.

10

be the value of θ̄ that causes (13) to be zero:
a=

r(1 + σu−2 σθ2 )
χ + ū − ρxσu2 .
x

(14)

Since (13) is monotonically increasing in θ̄, the asset issuer discloses at least one rating if θ̄ ≥ a. In summary,
when disclosure of ratings is voluntary, the issuer discloses one versus no ratings when the rating obtained
is high enough.
Consider, next, the choice between disclosing one or two ratings. If the issuer discloses both θ̄ and θ, the
asset price will be
p2 (θ̄, θ) =

1 σu−2 ū + σθ−2 (θ̄ + θ) − ρx
.
r
σu−2 + 2σθ−2

(15)

The issuer prefers to disclose both ratings if
ΠD=2 (θ̄, θ) − ΠD=1 (θ̄) =
=

£
¤
p2 (θ̄, θ) − p1 (θ̄) x − χ,
¡
¢
x σθ−2 σu−2 (θ − ū) + σθ−4 (θ − θ̄) + ρxσθ−2
¢¡
¢
¡ −2
− χ > 0.
r
σu + 2σθ−2 σu−2 + σθ−2

(16)

Since (16) is monotonically increasing in θ, the issuer discloses both ratings if θ ≥ b(θ̄), where b(θ̄) is the
value of θ that equates (16) to zero when the highest rating is θ̄:

b(θ̄) =

Ã

1
(σθ−2 σu−2 + σθ−4 )

!
¢
¢¡
¡
r σu−2 + 2σθ−2 σu−2 + σθ−2
−4
−2
−2 −2
χ
.
+ σθ σu ū + σθ θ̄ − ρxσθ
x

(17)

In other words, the issuer prefers to shop- that is, disclose only the highest of the two ratings- when θ is
sufficiently lower than θ̄, (θ < b(θ̄)).
Finally, the issuer will disclose no ratings if no ratings are preferable to one rating and to two ratings.
Both these conditions are satisfied if θ̄ < a.14
In summary, the disclosure decision for an issuer that has acquired two shadow ratings is,

14 Zero

θ̄ ≥ a and θ ≥ b(θ̄).

Disclose highest rating if

θ̄ ≥ a and θ < b(θ̄).

Disclose no ratings if

θ̄ < a.

preferred ¸to two ratings when ΠD=0 − ΠD=2 (θ̄, θ)
>
0, which happens if
x + 2χ > 0.
When θ̄ ≤ a, the highest possible sum for θ̄ + θ =
µ
¶θ
−2 2
r(1+σu
σθ )
2
χ
+
ū
−
ρxσ
2
(this is because, by definition, θ ≤ θ̄). Substituting this sum in the above inequality, one
u
x
·

1
(ū
r

ratings

Disclose both ratings if

2 x) −
− ρσu

are

−2
−2
1 σu ū+σθ (θ̄+θ)−ρx
−2
r
σu
+2σ −2

can see that it is always satisfied. The details can be found in Technical Appendix: Computation Details for the Disclosure
Decision 2 versus 0. This observation allows us to conclude that the issuer will disclose no ratings when θ̄ < a.

11

Disclosure with one shadow rating

Suppose that the asset issuer has acquired only one shadow rating.

With a slight abuse of notation, we call that rating θ̄. The issuer prefers to disclose if (13) is positive (when
θ̄ ≥ a) and does not disclose otherwise.

3.2

The acquisition decision

Now that we understand the issuer’s disclosure decisions, we move back one node in the decision tree to
study ratings’ acquisition. The issuer makes two decisions sequentially. First, he decides whether to acquire
the first shadow rating, and then he decides whether to acquire the second one. Again, we work backwards:
We start with the decision of the issuer who already has one shadow rating and considers whether to obtain
a second. We call θ1 the first shadow rating observed and θ2 the second.
The decision to acquire the second rating

The decision depends on whether the first rating is high

enough to disclose (θ1 ≥ a).
Case 1: The first rating was high (θ1 > a). If the second draw is low relative to the first draw (θ2 < b(θ1 )),
then the issuer discloses only the first rating θ1 . If the second draw is sufficiently high to disclose and not so
high that it makes the first rating no longer worthwhile to disclose (b(θ1 ) < θ2 < θ∗ ), the issuer discloses both
ratings. If the second rating is sufficiently higher than the first rating, the issuer discloses only the second
rating. Thus, if the first rating is such that θ1 > a, the expected price contains three terms corresponding
to these three possibilities:
Z
(2)

p̄

Z

θ∗

(θ1 ) = F (b(θ1 ))p1 (θ1 ) +

p2 (θ1 , θ2 )f (θ2 )dθ2 +
b(θ1 )

∞
θ∗

p1 (θ2 )f (θ2 )dθ2 ,

(18)

where p1 (θ1 ) and p2 (θ1 , θ2 ) are defined in (12) and (15), and where θ∗ is the value of θ2 such that θ1 = b(θ2 ),
implying that θ∗ = b−1 (θ1 ). Because the asset issuer knows the true value of the asset, the probability density
f (θ2 ) is conditional on u and is independent of the realization of θ1 .
Then, whenever θ1 > a and the issuer sticks with one rating, his profit is
Π(1) (θ1 ) = p1 (θ1 )x − χ − χ̃,
whereas if he acquires a second rating, his expected profit conditional on θ1 is
Π(2) (θ1 ) = p̄(2) (θ1 )x − 2(χ̃ + χ),

(19)

where p̄(2) (θ1 ) is given by (18). The expected benefit from acquiring the second rating depends on the
difference in the asset price between disclosing two ratings versus disclosing one, and on the difference in

12

the price between disclosing θ2 alone and disclosing θ1 alone. Each difference is weighted by the probability
that θ2 takes on a value that makes the associated disclosure optimal. Hence, when θ1 > a, we have

Z

θ c−1 (θ1 )

Π(2) (θ1 ) − Π(1) (θ1 ) =

[x (p2 (θ1 , θ2 ) − p1 (θ1 )) − χ] f (θ2 )dθ2
b(θ1 )
Z ∞

+
b−1 (θ1 )

x (p1 (θ2 ) − p1 (θ1 )) f (θ2 )dθ2 − χ̃,

" ¡
#
¢
x σθ−2 σu−2 (θ2 − ū) + σθ−4 (θ2 − θ1 ) + ρxσθ−2
¡ −2
¢¡
¢
=
− χ f (θ2 )dθ2
r
σu + 2σθ−2 σu−2 + σθ−2
b(θ1 )
µ µ −2
¶¶
Z ∞
x σu ū + σθ−2 (θ2 − θ1 ) − ρx
+
f (θ2 )dθ2 − χ̃.
(20)
r
σu−2 + σθ−2
b−1 (θ1 )
Z

θ c−1 (θ1 )

where the second line uses (12) and (15) to substitute out p1 and p2 .
Case 2: The first rating was low (θ1 < a). If the second rating is also low (θ2 < a), then the issuer
will disclose no ratings. If the second rating is moderately high, it is possible that the issuer discloses both
ratings, even though the first was too low to disclose on its own. If the second rating is high (θ2 > b−1 (θ1 )),
the issuer discloses only the second rating. If θ1 < a, the expected price contains three terms that correspond
to these three possibilities,
Z

Z

b−1 (θ1 )

p̄(2) (θ1 ) = F (a)p0 +

p2 (θ1 , θ2 )f (θ2 )dθ2 +
a

∞

b−1 (θ1 )

p1 (θ2 )f (θ2 )dθ2 ,

(21)

where p0 is given by (7).
If θ1 < a and the issuer does not obtain a second rating, then he discloses no rating and earns profit
Π(1) (θ1 ) = p0 x. If he acquires a second rating, his expected profit conditional on θ1 is
Π(2) (θ1 ) = p̄(2) (θ1 |θ1 < a)x − 2(χ̃ + χ).

(22)

Thus, if θ1 < a, the expected benefit from acquiring the second rating is
Π(2) (θ1 ) − Π(1) (θ1 )
Z
=

Z

b−1 (θ1 )

[(p2 (θ1 , θ2 ) − p0 ) x − 2χ] f (θ2 )dθ2 +
a

Z
=
a

b−1 (θ1 )

Ã ¡
¢
x (θ1 + θ2 ) − 2ū + 2ρxσu2
r(2 + σθ2 σu−2 )

∞
b−1 (θ1 )

!

Z

− 2χ f (θ2 )dθ2 +

[(p1 (θ2 ) − p0 ) x − χ] f (θ2 )dθ2 − χ̃

∞

b−1 (θ1 )

µ

¶
x(θ2 − ū + ρxσu2 )
− χ f (θ2 )dθ2 − χ̃.
r(1 + σu−2 σθ2 )
(23)

Let Θ2 denote the region of realizations of the first rating where the differences in (20) and in (23) are
13

positive. For this region, the issuer will choose to obtain a second draw.
The decision to acquire the first rating When the issuer makes this decision, he has only his prior
information about the possible realizations of the ratings. He compares the expected profit from acquiring
no rating, Π(0) = xr (ū − ρσu2 x), with the expected profit from acquiring the first rating, Π(1) . This profit is
calculated anticipating four possible future acquisition and disclosure decisions: The first rating may be too
low to disclose but may prompt the investor to acquire a second rating; the first rating may be high enough
to disclose and still prompt the acquisition of a second rating; the first rating may be too low to disclose,
and may still deter the acquisition of a second rating; and, finally, the first rating may be high enough to
disclose and may deter the acquisition of a second rating:
Z
(1)

Π̄

Z

=

Π
[−∞,a]∩Θ2

Z

+
[−∞,a]∩Θc2

(2)

(θ1 )dF (θ1 ) +
Z
p0 xdF (θ1 ) +

Π(2) (θ1 )dF (θ1 )
[a,∞]∩Θ2

[a,∞]∩Θc2

(p1 (θ1 )x − χ − χ̃)dF (θ1 ),

(24)

where p0 is given by (7), p1 is given by (12), and the formula for expected profits with two ratings Π(2) (·) is
in (19) when θ1 > a and in (22) when θ1 < a.

4

Main Results: Asset Complexity and Ratings Bias

So far, we have analyzed the issuer’s incentives to acquire shadow ratings under two regimes: the mandatoryand voluntary- disclosure regimes. For each of these regimes, we identified cases in which the issuer prefers
to obtain none, one, or two shadow ratings. In each case, choices depend on the characteristics of the asset
to be rated. One of those characteristics is the asset’s complexity.
This section considers the interaction between greater asset complexity and the ratings shopping that
creates ratings bias. There are two pieces to this interaction. First, we consider how an exogenous change in
asset complexity affects the incentive to shop for ratings. Second, we show that ratings shopping can create
an incentive to structure more-complex securities.

4.1

How complexity affects the incentive to shop for ratings

Our argument is that ratings shopping arose as the nature of credit products and their market changed. For
this to be a plausible explanation, we need to show that the benefit of ratings shopping in (16) is increasing
in some parameter that was trending up at the time. This leads us to ask the following comparative statics
question: Given two shadow ratings, what happens to the incentive to publicly disclose these ratings as an
asset becomes more complex?

14

The effect of complexity turns out to be non-monotonic. For either very low or very high asset complexity
(σθ2 → 0 or σθ2 → ∞), ratings shopping always takes place. When σθ2 → ∞ in (16), ΠD=1 (θ̄) − ΠD=2 (θ̄, θ)
clearly converges to the cost of disclosure χ. When σθ2 → 0, the same result follows from the fact that θ̄ − θ
tends to zero. Since χ is positive, disclosing one rating is preferred to disclosing both. The intuition is that
when asset complexity is small, ratings are precise. The extent to which publicizing a second rating reduces
the risk of investing in the asset is too small to be worth the cost. When asset complexity is high, ratings
become uninformative. Since investors know this, issuing multiple ratings has little price impact and is,
again, not worth the cost.
Numerical example

We consider an asset issuer who has observed two shadow ratings and is deciding

how many of these to disclose. The net benefit of disclosing a second rating is given by (16). Since this
depends on the realized ratings, we first take an expectation over these realizations. For a normal variable
with mean ū and variance σθ2 , the expected highest- and lowest-order statistics out of a sample of two are
σθ
π

+ ū and − σπθ + ū (Kotz, Balakrishnan and Johnson 2000).15
Figure 2 shows a case in which the expected profit of disclosing the second rating is lower, higher and

then lower again compared to the expected profit from disclosing one rating. The vertical lines represent
the two roots – levels of σθ that make the issuer indifferent between disclosing one or two ratings. Ratings
bias would arise in the first or third regions, where the issuer chooses to disclose only the higher of the two
observed ratings.
Not every set of parameters will generate this pattern. If both roots are not positive real numbers, then
disclosing one or no ratings could be optimal. But in that case, it would never be optimal to disclose two
ratings, for any level of asset complexity.

No disclosure
One signal disclosed
Two signals disclosed

Expected profit Π

24
23.5

Disclose
one signal

23
22.5

Disclose
both signals

Disclose one signal

22
21.5
21

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

Asset complexity (σθ)

Figure 2: The average asset issuer’s expected value of disclosing zero, one or two ratings, for various levels
of asset complexity (σθ2 ). Parameter values: x = 2.5, r = 1.03, σu2 = .5, ū = u = 10, χ = 0.3 and ρ = 1.
15 The expectation of θ̄, is the expectation of the highest order statistic out of a sample of two. From Kotz et al., we know
that this expectation for a standard normal distribution is given by π1 . Since, here, ratings are distributed by N (ū, σθ2 ), this
expectation is given by σπθ + ū. This follows from the fact that the expectation is linear in the mean and standard deviation.

15

This example was constructed for the average signal realizations, in order to keep it simple. As asset
complexity increases, there will be a distribution of signal outcomes. Some will prompt asset issuers to
disclose them as ratings, others not. Thus, for a given set of parameter values, we can calculate the probability
of ratings shopping. Then, instead of a discrete change from no bias to bias, there is a continuous change
from a low to a high probability of ratings shopping. The next set of results takes into account the random
nature of the realized ratings.

4.2

How complexity affects the demand for shadow ratings

Just as complexity has a non-monotonic effect on disclosure, it also has a non-monotonic effect on ratings
acquisition. The reason that its effect is non-monotonic can be seen by considering its limiting cases again.
When complexity approaches zero, each rating is perfectly precise. Therefore, there is no benefit and only a
cost to acquiring a second rating. When complexity approaches infinity, ratings are uninformative. Again,
there is no benefit and only a cost to acquiring either a first or second rating. In between these two extremes,
there can be a value to acquiring more than one rating in order to shop for the best one. But if that is the
case, then rising complexity must cause the net benefit of a second rating to rise and then fall.
A key effect of changing complexity is that it changes the distribution of θ̄ and θ. To incorporate this
effect, we do a change of variables and express the expected benefit of acquiring a second rating ((20) and
(23)) in terms of standard normal random variables. The partial derivative with respect to σθ2 reveals that

Expected profit E[Π]

the effect of complexity on ratings acquisition is non-monotonic.16

no shadow rating
acquire 1 shadow rating
acquire 2 shadow ratings

23.9
23.85
23.8
23.75
23.7
23.65
23.6
23.55

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

Asset complexity (σ )
θ

Figure 3: The asset issuer’s expected value of obtaining zero, one or two shadow ratings for various levels of
asset complexity (σθ2 ). Parameter values are identical to those in Figure 1, except that we take expectations
over θ1 and θ2 , instead of fixing their values. In addition, χ̃ = 0.1.
To see what effects arise for non-extreme parameter values, we return to our numerical example. Using
the same parameters as in Figure 2, Figure 3 plots the asset issuer’s expected profit from obtaining zero,
16 Details

available upon request.

16

one or two shadow ratings. As asset complexity rises, the number of shadow ratings acquired starts at one,
rises to two, falls back to one, and eventually becomes zero.

4.3

How complexity affects ratings bias

The average percentage bias in ratings appears in Figure 4. The concurrent increase in asset complexity
and ratings bias is the amalgamation of many different effects. First, it incorporates the disclosure decision
in Figure 3. As complexity rises, a firm with two average ratings discloses one, then two, and then one
rating again. But Figure 3 obscures the fact that the issuer will not always draw average ratings. Therefore,
there will always be some probability of ratings shopping whenever ratings are acquired. The second effect
is that as complexity rises, two ratings become farther apart, on average. Thus, the ratings bias generated
by ratings shopping grows. The third effect is the change in ratings acquisition. As complexity grows from

Average Ratings Bias (%)

a low level, more issuers get a second rating, enabling them to choose the highest one to disclose.
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

Asset complexity (σ )
θ

Figure 4: The percentage bias in ratings for various levels of asset complexity (σθ2 ). Parameter values are
identical to those in Figure 2. Ratings bias is the average of all disclosed ratings, minus the true mean of
the distribution from which the ratings are drawn. It is expressed as a percentage deviation from the true
mean.
When complexity becomes very large, bias plummets. This corresponds to the level of complexity where
issuers no longer want to acquire any shadow rating because ratings contain too little information to be
worth their cost. One might wonder why bias does not drop at σθ = 1.4, where the the value of acquiring no
ratings surpasses the value of one rating in Figure 3. This is because the solid line is the value of acquiring
one, and only one, rating. But choosing to acquire a first rating also gives the issuer the option value to
acquire a second rating. This total value of acquiring a first shadow rating is surpassed by the value of
observing no ratings at σθ = 2. When no ratings are observed, ratings bias disappears.

17

4.4

When do asset issuers prefer complex assets?

Consider an asset issuer who can choose whether to structure his asset as a simple or as a complex security.
Both the simple and the complex security have the same payoff distribution, but the variance of the ratings
σθ2 is higher for the more complex asset. The issuer chooses his asset’s complexity before observing its shadow
ratings.
Mandatory disclosure

The price of the asset with no, one or two ratings is given by (7), (8) or (10). All

three prices are either constant or decreasing in the complexity of the asset. Hence, given the opportunity to
design the asset, the issuer who is required to reveal every shadow rating he acquires prefers a less complex
asset.
Voluntary disclosure

The drawback that complex assets are riskier to investors and are, therefore, less

profitable for asset issuers is still present with voluntary disclosure. But that drawback may now be offset
by the following benefit. If ratings are drawn from a higher-variance distribution, their maximum will be
higher, on average; that makes ratings shopping more profitable. Complex assets offer a broader menu of
ratings for the issuer to pick from. When this advantage is large, the asset issuer will prefer to make his
asset more complex.
Whether higher asset complexity is desirable depends on parameter values. Figure 3 illustrates a case
where, for small levels of asset complexity, profits rise with added complexity. In this region with average
ratings realizations, the issuer acquires only one shadow rating. But an issuer with a lower-than-average first
rating acquires a second rating; if the two ratings are sufficiently far apart, he discloses the larger of the two.
The fact that profit increases in σθ indicates a motive to design more-complex assets, which exacerbates the
bias in disclosed ratings.

5

Evaluating Policy Recommendations

This section uses the model framework to explore the pros and cons of three proposed reforms: switching to
investor-initiated ratings, increasing competition in the market for ratings, and reforming risk-management
regulation.

5.1

Investor-initiated ratings

One possible solution to the problem of ratings bias is to replace issuer-initiated ratings with investorinitiated ratings. We show that even though some investors – those subject to the investment-grade securities
regulations – would prefer biased ratings, they cannot shop for ratings. However, an investor-initiated market

18

for ratings may provide too little or even no information. To make this argument, we use the well-known
model of information acquisition formulated by Grossman and Stiglitz (1980). We then add to that framework
a requirement that some investors buy “investment grade” assets with sufficiently high ratings, as well as a
market price, rather than a fixed cost, for information. Since the Grossman-Stiglitz framework is not our
innovation, we describe its setup and main results briefly and refer the reader to Appendix A.2 and the
original paper for more details.
5.1.1

A model of investor information acquisition

Investors choose whether or not to buy a single rating. In order to ensure that prices are not perfectly
revealing, we will modify the assumption that the supply is known and fixed. We will instead assume that
R
the issuer of the asset is endowed with x + x̄ = i qi0 di shares of the asset. It is partly random: x ∼ N (0, σx ).
This randomness keeps investors from being able to free-ride on other investors’ information.
We also change the specification of prior beliefs slightly to make the expressions simpler: The asset payoff
u is the sum of its rating θ, and the noise in the rating ²: u = θ + ². Prior beliefs are that θ ∼ N (u, σθ2 )
and ² ∼ N (0, σ²2 ), where θ and ² are independent. Thus, we can write the prior belief about the payoff as
u ∼ (ū, σθ2 + σ²2 ).
Let λ denote the fraction of investors that decide to buy a rating. A rating costs χ. Since investors are
ex-ante identical, all investors buy information (λ = 1), all investors do not buy information (λ = 0) or all
are indifferent. An indifference condition pins down equilibria where λ ∈ (0, 1).
Model solution

Since investors have the same utility function as in the previous section, their equilibrium

asset demands satisfy the same first-order condition (equation 4). However, the information structure has
changed. An informed investor, one who has observed the asset’s rating θ, has posterior beliefs that the
asset payoff is distributed u ∼ N (θ, σ²2 ). Substituting this posterior mean and variance into the first-order
condition yields informed investors’ asset demand:
qI =

1 −2
σ (θ − pr).
ρ ²

(25)

For uninformed investors, asset demand depends on information inferred from the asset price p. At the same
time, the price depends on investors’ demand. This is a fixed-point problem.
Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) show that the uninformed investors’ optimal portfolio is
qU =

1 µ̂ − pr
2 + σ2 .
ρ σθ|p
²

19

(26)

where

"
2
σθ|p

≡ V [θ|ū, p] =

µ
σθ−2

+

λσ²−2
ρ

#−1

¶2
σx−2

(27)

and the posterior mean µ̂ is given by equation (33) in appendix A.2.
Finally, the ratio of informed investors’ expected utility to uninformed investors’ expected utility, before
accounting for information cost, is
E[U I ]
=
E[U U ]

Ã

σ²2
2
2
σ² + σθ|p

!1/2
.

This ratio is less than one because utility is negative. Informed investors’ utility is higher when it is less
negative and, therefore, smaller in absolute value. In equilibrium, either there must be a corner solution
λ = {0, 1} or the expected net benefit of information (E[U I ] − E[U U ]) must equal the expected utility cost
2
−eρχ E[U I ]. Thus, the condition for an interior equilibrium is (σ²2 + σθ|p
)1/2 /σ² = eρχ .

5.1.2

Can investors acquire biased ratings?

Suppose that some subset of investors can buy only assets that are “investment grade.” That means that
the asset’s rating surpasses a threshold (θ > θIN V ). This group of investors then achieves higher expected
utility if they obtain an upward-biased rating: Let Φ be the cumulative probability density function for the
unbiased rating θ. Suppose that, instead of θ, the rating agency, with the knowledge of the investor, issues a
rating θ + ². Then, with probability Φ(θIN V − ²), the investor gets a rating that is too low; he cannot invest,
and gets no income from the risky security. With probability 1 − Φ(θIN V − ²), the investor can invest and
chooses the optimal portfolio in equation (25). This informed investor’s expected utility is proportional to
¸¸
·
·
1
E exp − (θ − pr)2 σ²−2 dθ.
2
θ IN V −²

Z
U bias ∝ −

∞

(28)

Since the bias ² enters only in the bounds of integration and expands them, and since this is a negative
number times an integrand that is strictly positive, ratings bias unambiguously increases expected utility.
Investor-initiated ratings bias has limited price impact

If the investors shop for ratings, it is in

order to find a rating agency that gives the asset an investment-grade rating. But once the investor finds that
the asset is in his feasible investment set, he should use all available information to determine the optimal
bidding strategy for the asset. Since investors use all available information in forming their asset demands,
the only price effect of ratings bias is to raise the price of some assets that are not truly investment-grade
to their price in the absence of regulation.

20

5.1.3

Downsides to investor-initiated ratings

Investor-initiated ratings can create two other problems due to information-market externalities: information
leakage and market collapse due to demand complementarity. Since information requires a fixed cost to
discover and is free (or, at least, quite cheap) to replicate, efficiency dictates that a discovered piece of
information should be distributed to every asset investor so that all investors benefit from lower asset payoff
risk. Yet, when investors have to pay for ratings themselves, either no investors or too few investors may
end up being informed.
Information leakage One reason why asset investors may decide not to buy information is that they can
partially free-ride on others’ information. The price of the asset will depend on what informed investors
know. While an uninformed investor cannot literally observe the price before bidding, he can condition on
the price when submitting his menu of bids. When deciding on the quantity he associates with each realized
price, the investor asks himself, “If that is the realized price, what would it tell me about what the informed
investors have learned?” In this way, the uninformed investor can use information contained in prices to
free-ride on what others have learned.
This information-leakage effect shows up in the model’s solution. An increase in the number of informed
investors λ reduces the posterior uncertainty of uninformed investors, conditional on the price level σθ|p
(equation (27)). Therefore, it reduces the benefit of acquiring information (equation 28). As Grossman and
Stiglitz (1980) point out, this is a form of strategic substitutability that makes it unlikely that investors will
ever all choose to be informed.
Complementarity in information demand and market collapse

Endogenizing the price of ratings

so that what each investor pays χ(λ) depends on how many purchase the information introduces a complementarity that can collapse the market for information. Market collapse results when no investor buys a
rating because no other investors are buying them. Such a collapse can arise in situations where the asset
issuer would be willing to provide information to all investors.
Instead of assuming that ratings are provided at a fixed cost, we consider a profit-maximizing informationproduction sector. The sector has three crucial features: First, information can be produced with a fixed-cost
technology. A rating θ can be discovered by any agent for a fixed cost c, which is the cost to the rating agency
of collecting information to construct the rating (measured per capita). Once the rating is determined, it is
costless to replicate it and sell it to multiple investors. Each investor pays the rating agency a price χ to
observe its rating. Second, reselling purchased information is forbidden. The realistic counterpart to this
assumption is intellectual property law that prohibits copying a publication and re-distributing it for profit.
Third, there is free entry. Any agent can discover information at any time, even after other information
producers have announced their prices χ. That information markets are competitive is crucial. The exact
21

market structure is not.17
Lemma 3 The equilibrium price for information χ(λ) is decreasing in the quantity of information sold λ.
Specifically, χ(λ) = c/λ.
With an exogenous cost c, there is a unique equilibrium. But with the endogenous price for information in
¡
¢1/2
an information market, there can be three equilibria. If σ²2 + σθ2 )/σ²2
< eρc , then λ = 0 is an equilibrium.
An investor who wants to acquire information must pay the entire fixed cost c for that information. This
cost (in utility terms) exceeds the benefit of information. But it may also be the case that there are an
´1/2
³
2
)/σ²2
= eρc/λ . The lower of the two solutions will
additional two values of λ ∈ (0, 1] such that (σ²2 + σθ|p
be an unstable equilibrium, but the higher one will be stable. As λ increases, the cost of information drops
2
precipitously. At the same time, the information content of the asset’s price 1/σθ|p
rises gradually, which

reduces the benefit of information.
The problem arises when the equilibrium is the no-information (λ = 0) one. No investors buy information
because no other investors are buying information, and if a given investor buys information by himself, he
would have to bear the entire fixed cost c of discovering that information. In such a situation, the biased
information provided by the asset-issuer-initiated ratings could result in more-accurate asset prices than
could no information at all.

5.2

Increasing competition among rating agencies

Because market failures are often associated with a lack of free competition, policy makers have taken
measures to increase competition. While this might cure some problems with ratings provision, it does not
remedy ratings shopping. In fact, it worsens the problem.
When the issuer shops for ratings, the more draws the issuer can observe before choosing a rating – i.e.,
the larger the number of rating agencies – the higher this bias will be.
Proposition 4 If the asset issuer will disclose only the most favorable rating, then increasing the number
of ratings agencies will (weakly) increase the bias of the disclosed rating.
This result follows from the simple observation that the more rating agencies available, the greater the
possibilities of ratings shopping. Of course, having more rating agencies does not ensure that an asset issuer
will observe more shadow ratings. If not, then the bias will stay constant. However, if some issuers prefer to
obtain more shadow ratings than what were previously available to them, increasing the number of agencies
will increase the number of observed ratings and the bias from shopping for the best one. It is also possible
that the price of shadow ratings falls due to higher competition, encouraging asset issuers to sample more
ratings, which would increase ratings bias even more.
17 Veldkamp (2006) analyzes Cournot and monopolistic competition markets for information. All three markets produce
information prices that decrease in demand.

22

5.3

The effect of risk-management legislation

Another target for criticism in the ratings scandal has been the role of risk-management rules. Many banks
and pension funds are required to hold only investment-grade securities. These are assets that earn sufficiently
high ratings from one of the nationally-recognized statistical ratings organizations (NRSRO’s) (this group
includes Moody’s, S&P and Fitch). This rule puts an enormous amount of pressure on asset issuers to ensure
that their assets achieve this rating. Without it, the pool of potential investors is considerably smaller, and
the asset’s prices will be considerably lower.
Repealing the investment-grade securities regulations, alone, will not solve the problem of ratings shopping. With investor-initiated ratings, the bias arose without the regulation. However, it is likely that this
regulation further encouraged ratings shopping by increasing the payoff from acquiring a high rating, for a
given level of ratings uncertainty.

5.4

Mandatory disclosure laws

Perhaps an obvious suggestion is to mandate disclosure of all ratings. While, in theory, that is a cure, in
practice, it is difficult to directly regulate the transmission of information. For example, the line between
informal advice and a rating can be easily blurred. Prohibiting a discussion of how various assets might be
rated if they were issued could easily be ruled an infringement on free speech. An additional problem is that
when undesirable ratings are proposed, the asset in question is frequently restructured. A tiny change in
asset structure would make the previous rating no longer applicable and could effectively hide that rating.

6

Conclusions

Examining common arguments about how ratings may have distorted credit-derivative prices exposed logical
gaps. But it also suggested a coherent story about why ratings bias might have emerged and why investors
could not use past data to detect it. Developing a model of the market for ratings in which asset issuers
can shop for ratings revealed that, under some circumstances, an increase in asset complexity could generate
ratings bias. Solving the model also delivered additional insights. It revealed a feedback effect whereby an
increase in asset complexity prompted ratings shopping, which gave issuers an incentive to structure assets
that are even more complex. It also illustrated how more competition in ratings markets could make the
distortions in ratings even more severe. An extension of the model in which investors purchase ratings,
uncovered multiple equilibria. This taught us that a move to investor-initiated ratings could collapse the
market for ratings, leaving investors with information that is even less reliable.
None of the policy options we examined were without their drawbacks. Yet, the model points to two
possible solutions to the ratings-bias problem. Investor-initiated ratings are a cure for bias. The problem

23

of market collapse is mitigated when the investors are large players in their markets who find it valuable to
purchase information, even if other investors do not. Since most complex credit products are purchased by
institutional investors, rather than by households, the large-investor assumption might not be a bad one. The
second possible solution is to have one rating agency, a regulated monopoly, that rates every bond. If every
asset has one, and only one, rating, shopping is not possible. Of course, regulated monopolies have little
incentive to provide reliable information. The choice between these two options is a quantity-versus-quality
choice. An investor-initiated system will produce less information, but it will be more reliable. Finally, it
could be that policy reform is not needed. A key assumption of the model is that investors are unaware of
the increase in asset complexity and the resulting ratings bias. But the crisis has drawn attention to ratings
practices. If investors who observe a small number of ratings infer that some ratings are being withheld,
then ratings shopping will no longer be profitable, and additional regulation to cure the problem would be
unnecessary.
Many markets supply information or certification services: Academic testing services, appraisals, or job
head-hunters are just a few examples. (See Bar-Isaac, Caruana and Cunat (2008).) Our paper raises the
question: What determines the quality of the information produced? We point out that not only does the
nature of the good being sold affect the information available about it, but also that the nature of the
evaluated products may change to game the ratings system, possibly to disastrous effect.

24

References
Banerjee, Snehal, “Learning from Prices and Dispersion in Beliefs,” 2007. Northwestern University working
paper.
Bar-Isaac, Heski, Guillermo Caruana, and Vicente Cunat, “Information Gathering Externalities in
Product Markets,” 2008. Working Paper.
Barlevy, Gadi and Pietro Veronesi, “Information Acquisition in Financial Markets,” Review of Economic
Studies, 2000, 67, 79–90.
Becker, Bo and Todd Milbourn, “Reputation and Competition: Evidence from the Credit Rating
Industry,” 2008. HBS finance working paper 09-051.
Benabou, Roland and Guy Laroque, “Using Privileged Information to Manipulate Markets: Insiders,
Gurus, and Credibility,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,, 1992.
Bolton, Patrick, Xavier Freixas, and Joel Shapiro, “Conflicts of interest, information provision, and
competition in the financial services industry,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2007.
,

, and

, “The Credit Ratings Game,” 2008. Working paper.

Brunnermeier, Markus, Asset Pricing under Asymmetric Information: Bubbles, Crashes, Technical Analysis and Herding, first ed., Oxford University Press, 2001.
Bullard, James, George Evans, and Seppo Honkapohja, “Near-Rational Exuberance,” 2005. Working
Paper.
Damiano, E, H Li, and W Suen, “Credible Ratings,” Theoretical Economics, 2008, 3, 325–365.
DeMarzo, Peter, Dimitri Vayanos, and Jeff Zwiebel, “Persuasion Bias, Social Influence, and UniDimensional Opinions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118, 909–968.
Esponda, Ignacio, “Behavioral Equilibrium in Economies with Adverse Selection,” American Economic
Review, 2008, 98(4), 1269–91.
Eyster, E and M Rabin, “Cursed Equilibrium,” Econometrica, 2005, 73(5).
Farhi, Emmanuel, Josh Lerner, and Jean Tirole, “Fear of Rejection? Tiered Certification and Transparency,” 2008. Harvard University working paper.
Faure-Grimaud, A, E Peyrache, and L Quesada, “The Ownership of Ratings,” 2007. FMG Discussion
Papers dp590, Financial Markets Group.
Grossman, Sanford, “The Informational Role of Warranties and Private Disclosure About Product Quality,” Journal of Law and Economics, 1981, 24, 461–489.
and Joeseph Stiglitz, “On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient Markets,” American Economic Review, 1980, 70(3), 393–408.
Hellwig, Martin, “On the Aggregation of Information in Competitive Markets,” Journal of Economic
Theory, 1980, 22, 477–498.
Hu, Jian, “Assessing the Credit Risk of CDOs Backed by Structured Finance Securities: Rating Analysts’
Challenges and Solutions,” 2007. Working Paper, Moody’s Investors’ Service.
Jovanovic, Boyan, “Truthful Disclosure ofInformation,” Bell Journal of Economics, 1982, 13, 36–44.

25

Kotz, S., N. Balakrishnan, and N.L. Johnson, Continuous Multivariate Distributions, Volume 1,
Models and Applications, second ed., Oxford University Press, 2000.
Mason, Joseph R. and Josh Rosner, “Where Did the Risk Go? How Misapplied Bond Ratings Cause
Mortgage Backed Securities and Collateralized Debt Obligation Market Disruptions,” 2007. SSRN
Working Paper #1027475.
Milgrom, Paul, “Good news and Bad news: Representation Theorems and Applications,,” The Bell Journal
of Economics, 1981, 12, 380–391.
Morgan, J and P Stocken, “An analysis of stock recommendations,” The Rand Journal of Economics,,
2003.
Peress, Joel, “Wealth, Information Acquisition and Portfolio Choice,” The Review of Financial Studies,
2004, 17(3), 879–914.
Reny, P and M Perry, “Toward a Strategic Foundation of Rational Expectations Equilibrium,” Econometrica, 2006, 74 (5), 1231–1269.
Sangiorgi, Francesco, Jonathan Sokobin, and Chester Spatt, “Credit-Rating Shopping, Selection
and the Equilibrium Structure of Ratings,” 2008. Carnegie Mellon working paper.
Shavell, S, “Acquisition and Disclosure of Information Prior to Sale,” Rand Journal of Economics, 1994,
25, 20–36.
Veldkamp, Laura, “Media Frenzies in Markets for Financial Information,” American Economic Review,
2006, 96(3), 577–601.
White, Lawrence, “A New Law for the Bond Rating Industry,” Regulation, 2007, 30(1), 48–52.

26

A

Technical Appendix: Proofs and Derivations

A.1

Computation Details for the Disclosure Decision 2 versus 0

The question is the following: Is it possible to have ΠD=2 (θ̄, θ) − ΠD=0 > 0 when θ̄ ≤ a ≡
−2 2
r(1+σu
σθ )
χ
x

the maximum of the two draws, θ̄, is below a =
−2 2
r(1+σu
σθ )
χ
x

−2 2
r(1+σu
σθ )
χ
x

2 ? When
+ ū − ρxσu

2 then the second highest draw, θ, will also be
+ ū − ρxσu

2 . Then, when θ̄ ≤ a, the highest possible sum for θ̄ + θ is 2a. We now show that
necessarily below
+ ū − ρxσu
ΠD=2 (θ̄, θ) − ΠD=0 > 0 cannot be satisfied even when θ̄ + θ is 2a.
To see this, note that
µ
¶


−2 2
r(1+σu
σθ )
−2
2
σu
ū + σθ−2 2 ·
χ + ū − ρxσu
− ρx
x
1

1
2

x)
− (ū − ρσu
−2
r
 x − 2χ
r
σu
+ 2σθ−2


=

1

r


=

1

r

µ
−2
σu
ū +

−2
−2 2
σθ
2r(1+σu
σθ )
χ
x

¶
2
+ σθ−2 2ū − σθ−2 2ρxσu


− ρx
−

−2
σu
+ 2σθ−2

µ
−2
σu
ū +

−2
−2 2
σθ
2r(1+σu
σθ )
χ
x

−2
σu


1
2
(ū − ρσu
x)
 x − 2χ
r

¶
2
+ σθ−2 2ū − σθ−2 2ρxσu

+

2σθ−2


− ρx
−


1
2
(ū − ρσu
x)
 x − 2χ
r

#
−2
−2
−2
−2 2
2 − ρx
σθ−2 2r(1 + σu
σθ )
1 σu ū + σθ 2ū − σθ 2ρxσu
1
2
+
χ − (ū − ρσu x) x − 2χ
−2
−2
r
r
σu
+ 2σθ−2
x(σu
+ 2σθ−2 )
"
#
Ã
!
−2
−2
−2
−2
2 − ρx
2(σθ−2 + σu
)
1 σu ū + σθ 2ū − σθ 2ρxσu
1
2
− (ū − ρσu x) x +
−2 χ
−2
−2
r
r
σu
+ 2σθ−2
(σu
+ 2σθ−2 )
#
#
Ã
" " −2
!
−2
−2
2 (σ −2 2 + σ −2 )
2(σθ−2 + σu
)
1
1 −ρxσu
1 σu ū + σθ 2ū
u
2
θ
− (ū − ρσu x) x +
+
−2 χ
−2
−2
−2
r
r
r
σu
+ 2σθ−2
σu
+ 2σθ−2
(σu
+ 2σθ−2 )
Ã
!
·
¸
−2
¤ 1
2(σθ−2 + σu
)
1£
2
2
ū − ρσu
x − (ū − ρσu
x) x +
−2 χ
−2
r
r
(σu
+ 2σθ−2 )
Ã
!
−2
2(σθ−2 + σu
)
− 2 χ < 0.
−2
(σu
+ 2σθ−2 )

"
=
=
=
=
=

A.2

Solution to the investor-initiated ratings model

The price of the risky asset is determined by the market-clearing condition
λq I + (1 − λ)q U = x + x̄.

(29)

N (ū, σθ2 )

Uninformed investors combine their prior belief that θ ∼
and their signal from the price (p−A)/B ∼ N (θ, (C/B)2 σx2 )
2 ) where the posterior variance is given by equation (27).
to form their posterior belief: θ ∼ N (µ̂, σθ|p
Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) conjecture that prices take the linear form p = A + Bθ + Cx, determine what this price
implies for risky-asset demands, substitute those demand functions into the market-clearing conditions, and match coefficients
to verify the hypothesis. Substituting asset demands (25) and (26) in to the market-clearing condition (29), yields
λσ²−2 (θ − pr) + (1 − λ)

µ̂ − pr
= ρ(x̄ + x).
2 + σ2
σθ|p
²

2 from (27) and µ̂ from (33) and collecting price terms reveals that the equilibrium price formula is linear
Substituting in for σθ|p
in x and θ:
!#
"
Ã
2
σ̂θ|p
ABσx−2
−2
A = −ψ ρx̄ + (1 − λ) 2
− σθ µ
(30)
σ̂θ|p + σ²2
C2

B = ψλσ²−2

(31)

C = −ψρ

(32)

27

2
σ̂θ|p

where ψ = [λσ²2 r + (1 − λ) σ̂2

θ|p

+σ²2

2
λσ²−2 σx
]−1 .
ρC

Using the fact that (p − A)/B is an unbiased signal about θ, with variance

(C/B)2 σx2 , we can then use Bayes’ law to compute the posterior expectation of uninformed investors:

"

µ

2
µ̂ = σθ|p
σθ−2 ū +

B
C

¶2

µ
σx−2

p−A
B

¶#
.

(33)

Expected Utility for Uninformed Investors To compute the value of information, we proceed in three steps, using the
law of iterated expectations: E[e−ρW ] = E[E[E[e−ρW |E[u], p] |p]]. First, take the first expectation, over u. Using the formula
for the mean of a log-normal, we get
1 (µ̂ − pr)2
E[uU |pr] = − exp[−
].
2
2 σe2 + σθ|p
There is a second expectation over pr that we haven’t taken. It turns out that we won’t need to. So, we leave this line of
argument for now.
Expected Utility for Informed Investors

For informed investors, following the same steps yields:
1

= E[e− 2 (θ−pr)

0

−2
σe
(θ−pr)

],

σe2

where θ replaced µ̂ as the conditional mean and
is now the conditional variance. The next step is to take an expectation
over θ, but not pr.
Applying the formula for a moment-generating-function of a quadratic normal:
1
1
1
2
2
2
σe−2 )−1 σθ|p
− (µ̂ − pr)2 σe−2 ].
E[U I |rp] = −|I − 2σθ|p
(− )σe−2 |−1/2 exp[ (µ̂ − pr)2 σe−4 (I + σθ|p
2
2
2
Algebraic manipulation yields
E[U I |rp]

=

(

=

(

σe2

σe2
1 (µ̂ − pr)2
)1/2 exp[−
]
2
2
+ σθ|p
2 σe2 + σθ|p

(34)

σe2

σe2
)1/2 E[U U |rp].
2
+ σθ|p

(35)

This ratio of variances is a known quantity when information is acquired. All agents can infer the equilibrium strategies of
other agents and deduce how much information will be revealed through the price level. Since the two expected utilities are
related by a known constant, their unconditional expectations E[U I ] and E[U U ] must be proportional, as well.

A.3

Proof of Lemma 3

Let dit = 1 if agent i decides to discover information in period t, and dit = 0 otherwise. Let per-capita demand for information
with price χit , given all other posted prices χ−it , be I(·, ·). Then, the objective of the information producer is to maximize
profit:
max dit (χit I(χit , χ−it ) − c).
(36)
dit ,χit

Suppose that the equilibrium information price was above average cost χ > c/λ. Then, an alternate supplier could enter
the market with a slightly lower price, and make a profit. If a supplier set price below marginal cost, it would make a loss.
This strategy would be dominated by no information provision. If there are two or more suppliers, then either price is above
marginal cost, which can’t be an equilibrium by the first argument, or both firms price at (or below) marginal cost, split the
market, and make a loss, which is dominated by exit.

B

Rating Agencies’ Incentive to Bias Ratings

Here, we sketch a model in which a rating agency can choose to bias ratings if it finds it profitable to do so. The agency’s utility
depends on its profits and a reputation cost that is a quadratic function of the distance between its forecast and the true asset
payoff.
Suppose that once a rating is ordered, it is paid for. Then, the rating agency’s payoff is given by:
U r = χ + χ̃ − c − α(θi − u)2 ,
where c stands for the cost of producing a rating. Suppose that the investor of a rating can observe the rating before purchasing
it. Then, in this case, the profit of the rating agency depends on the probability that the asset issuer purchases its rating π(θi )
and the ratings price χ
U r = π(θ̃i )(χ + χ̃) − α(θ̃i − u)2 − c.
(37)

28

When the issuer buys the highest of all ratings, then
πi (θ̃i ) = prob(θ̃i = max θ̃j ).
j∈I

There are two equivalent ways to model ratings inflation: One way is to assume that rating agencies draw a rating θi from an
unbiased distribution, but they report a different rating θ̃i = r(θi ). The other is to model rating agencies that draw from biased
distributions. We sketch the first approach.
Assuming that all rating agencies use the same technology to produce ratings (draw ratings from the same distribution),
and that all I rating agencies use the same monotonic (strictly increasing in θi ) reporting strategy, then
π(θi ) = F I−1 (r−1 (θ̃i )),
and the payoff of the rating agency is given by
U r = F I−1 (r−1 (θ̃i ))(χ + χ̃) − α(θ̃i − u)2 − c.
Heuristic derivation of the equilibrium reporting strategy:
First, let G denote the distribution of the highest-order statistic, namely G = F I−1 . We also use g to denote its density.
Then, U r can be rewritten as:
U r = G(r−1 (θ̃i ))(χ + χ̃) − α(θ̃i − u)2 − c.
Maximizing this expression with respect to θ̃i we get the following first-order condition:
g(r−1 (θ̃i ))(χ + χ̃)
r0 (r−1 (θ̃i ))

− 2α(θ̃i − u) = 0.

Now, recalling that θ̃i = r(θi ), the above first-order condition can be rewritten as:
g(θi )(χ + χ̃)
− 2α(r(θi ) − u) = 0,
r0 (θi )
which, in turn, can be rewritten as:

g(θi )(χ + χ̃) = r0 (θi ) · 2α(r(θi ) − u).

This is a first-order differential equation. To make things more transparent for its solution, let t = θi and r = y; then, it can
be rewritten as
g(t)(χ + χ̃) = y 0 (t) · 2α(y(t) − u),
or
y 0 (t)

=

dy(t)
dt

=

dy(t) · 2α(y(t) − u)

=

g(t)(χ + χ̃)
2α(y(t) − u)
g(t)(χ + χ̃)
2α(y(t) − u)
g(t)(χ + χ̃) · dt.

Integrating the left side with respect to y and the right side with respect to t, we find that:
Z
Z
2α(y(t) − u)dy(t) = g(t)(χ + χ̃) · dt + c,
y

t

where c is a constant. The solution to this differential equation characterizes the optimal bias of the rating agencies.

29

