                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   OTTOMAN DE-INDUSTRIALIZATION 1800-1913:
               ASSESSING THE SHOCK, ITS IMPACT AND THE RESPONSE

                                            Sevket Pamuk
                                        Jeffrey G. Williamson

                                        Working Paper 14763
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14763


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2009




We are grateful for the excellent research assistance supplied by Kyle Nasser and Miray Topay. We
have also benefited from the useful advice and criticism offered by Bob Allen, Greg Clark, Metin
Cosgel, David Clingingsmith, Rafa Dobado, Aurora Gómez Galvarriato, Patrick O'Brien, Kevin O'Rourke,
Roger Owen, Michael Palairet, Leandro Prados de la Escosura, Ananth Seshadri, Tony Venables and
Tarik Yousef. Williamson acknowledges with pleasure financial support from the Harvard Faculty
of Arts and Sciences. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Sevket Pamuk and Jeffrey G. Williamson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Ottoman De-Industrialization 1800-1913: Assessing the Shock, Its Impact and the Response
Sevket Pamuk and Jeffrey G. Williamson
NBER Working Paper No. 14763
March 2009
JEL No. F1,N7,O2

                                               ABSTRACT

India and Britain were much bigger players in the 18th century world market for textiles than was
Egypt, the Levant and the core of the Ottoman Empire, but these eastern Mediterranean regions did
export carpets, silks and other textiles to Europe and the East. By the middle of the 19th century, they
had lost most of their export market and much of their domestic market to globalization forces and
rapid productivity growth in European manufacturing. Other local industries also suffered decline,
and these regions underwent de-industrialization as a consequence. How different was Ottoman experience
from the rest of the poor periphery? Was de-industrialization more or less pronounced? Was the terms
of trade shock bigger or smaller? How much of Ottoman de-industrialization was due to falling world
trade barriers -- ocean transport revolutions and European liberal trade policy, how much due to factory-based
productivity advance in Europe, how much to declining Ottoman competitiveness in manufacturing,
how much to Ottoman railroads penetrating the interior, and how much to Ottoman policy? The paper
uses a price-dual approach to seek the answers. It documents trends in export and import prices, relative
to each other and to non-tradables, as well as to the unskilled wage. The impact of globalization, European
productivity advance, Ottoman wage costs and policy are assessed by using a simple neo-Ricardian
three sector model, and by comparison with what was taking place in the rest of the poor periphery.


Sevket Pamuk
Bogazii University
and London School of Economics
pamuk@boun.edu.tr

Jeffrey G. Williamson
The University of Wisconsin
350 South Hamilton Street #1002
Madison, WI 53703
and Harvard University and CEPR
and also NBER
jwilliam@fas.harvard.edu
                                                   1. The Issues



         What do we mean by the term de-industrialization? To simplify, define our country as producing

only two commodities – agricultural goods which are exported and manufacturing goods which are

imported, with three factors of production – labor which is mobile between the two sectors, land which is

used only in agriculture, and capital which is used only in manufacturing. Assume further that our country

satisfies what trade economists call the “small country” assumption, and thus that it takes its terms of

trade as exogenous, dictated by world markets. De-industrialization can be defined under those

simplifying assumptions most easily as the movement of labor out of manufacturing and in to agriculture.

         If a country de-industrializes because its comparative advantage in agriculture has been

strengthened either by productivity advance on the land (or more land), or by increasing openness in the

world economy, or both, then GDP increases in the short-run. In the case of more land or more productive

land, and if the country is still assumed to be “small” – a condition we think applies to the Ottoman

Empire -- then the country faces no change in its terms of trade.1 In the case of increasing openness, the

country enjoys an unambiguous terms of trade improvement as declining world trade barriers raise export

prices and lower import prices in the home market. Whether real wages in towns and living standards in

villages also increase depends on the direction of the terms of trade change, whether the export

commodities include foodstuffs, and whether foodstuffs dominate the budgets of poor families. That is, it

depends on whether the export commodities are wheat, barley and tobacco (a big share of the worker’s

budget) or silk and opium (a small share). Whether GDP growth rates rise in the long run depends on

whether industry generates accumulation and productivity externalities that agriculture does not. If



1
  Alternatively, if the country is “large” and has an influence on world prices, then it will suffer a terms of trade
deterioration, in that it has to share part of the labor productivity gains in the agricultural export sector with its
trading partners. The “large” country conditions probably began to apply to Egypt and its cotton exports after the
1860s, but Egypt is not included in our Ottoman Empire definition. We define the Empire to exclude Egypt since it
had different endowments, commodity specialization and significant autonomy in the 19th century. The Empire
includes present day Turkey, greater Syria, Iraq and the Balkans. The following Balkan regions were under Ottoman
rule during some part of the 19th century: Macedonia 1800-1913; Albania 1800-1912; Bosnia and Herzegovina
1800-1878; and Romania-Walachia, Romania-Moldavia and Serbia 1800-1829. See Brown (1996).


                                                          3
industrialization is a carrier of growth – as most growth theories imply (e.g. Matsuyama 1992; Helpman

2004), then de-industrialization could lead to a growth slowdown and a low-income equilibrium that

gives the notion of de-industrialization its power in the historical literature.

        This paper documents Ottoman experience with its terms of trade over the century 1800-1913,

explores the connection between de-industrialization and those external price shocks, and then compares

this experience with that of the rest of the eastern Mediterranean, as well as with Asia, Latin America and

the European periphery. The next section sets the stage by reviewing Ottoman experience with trade

policy, world transport costs, Ottoman railroads, and thus with world market integration. Section 3

reviews the de-industrialization debate as it applies to the Ottoman Empire and the rest of the eastern

Mediterranean while section 4 assesses the de-industrialization evidence. Section 5 reports the external

terms of trade estimates for the Ottoman Turkish and Balkan core, for Levant in the Empire’s eastern

wing, and for more autonomous Egypt. Section 6 presents a neo-Ricardian model of de-industrialization,

and Section 7 uses the model to answer the following questions: How much of Ottoman de-

industrialization was due to falling world trade barriers – transport revolutions and European liberal trade

policy, how much due to factory-based productivity advance in Europe, how much to changing Ottoman

competitiveness in manufacturing, and how much to Ottoman policy?



        2. Falling and Rising Trade Barriers in the Eastern Mediterranean: Setting the Stage



        In response to the influx of cheaper manufactured goods from Britain and the rest of western

Europe, de-industrialization was the norm for most periphery countries during the 19th century. The great

Middle East scholar Charles Issawi placed the Ottoman case in this general context:

        “The Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars gave the region a respite, but in the 1820’s and 30’s it

        was hit by the full blast of European competition. Factories were pouring out cheap goods, and

        peace and increased security in the Mediterranean and improvement in shipping made it possible




                                                        4
         to land them at low costs. To this should be added the effects of the various commercial treaties,

         which froze import duties at low levels and opened up the region’s markets” (Issawi 1982: 151).

Thus, the 1838 Treaty is one of the most widely discussed events pertaining to the “collapse” of Ottoman

industry in the 19th century, although liberal Ottoman reforms began to appear earlier in 1826. Most

European industrial countries were still protectionist before they went liberal in the 1860s (Bairoch 1989;

O’Rourke and Williamson 1999), so Britain’s agenda was to sign free trade agreements with as many

periphery countries as possible in order to gain foreign markets for their manufactures.2 The 1838 Anglo-

Turkish Commercial Convention was one such commercial agreement. The original treaty was signed in

Balta Liman in August of 1838 and went into effect in March of 1839. The “Anglo-Turkish convention

eventually became the basis of practically all foreign trade in Turkey” (Puryear 1969: 83) as the Ottoman

Empire signed similar treaties with several other European countries in the following three years. This

Convention was viewed as the next step in the Empire’s transition to economic liberalism after the sultan

eliminated the Janissary corps in 1826, urban guildsman on the military payroll that were the strongest

advocates of protectionism (Quataert 1994: 764).

         The 1838 Treaty eliminated all local monopolies, allowed British merchants to buy goods

anywhere in the Empire, and exempted foreign (but not domestic) merchants from an 8 percent internal

customs duty that had been levied previously on goods transported within the empire.3 Export duties were

raised from 3 to 12 percent and import duties from 3 to 5 percent (Issawi 1966: 38).4 One of the present

authors had argued previously that the importance of these treaties has been overstated (Pamuk 1987: 20)

since they did not represent a drastic revision from the liberal course already set in 1826. It appears that

Donald Quataert agrees: “Commerce between [Britain and the Ottoman Empire] already was increasing

dramatically: British exports to the empire had doubled in value during the late 1820’s and doubled again

before 1837” (Quataert 1994: 825). However, by locking the government into fixed import duties these



2
  In Asia, gunboats were often used as a powerful arm of that policy, by Britain and the United States.
3
  This must have placed local industry at a significant disadvantage relative to foreign products. Yet, the literature
offers no explicit assessment of its impact, nor of the political economy which produced it.


                                                           5
treaties did prevent the Ottomans from providing any subsequent protection to domestic industry. Indeed,

between 1865 and 1905, average tariff rates were fairly stable at 7.5 percent in the Empire. These low

‘revenue-producing’ tariffs were consistent with free trade policy, and they were equivalent to those

prevailing in Asia. In contrast, average tariff rates in protectionist Latin America and the United States

were about 30 percent in the middle of the period,5 or four times that of the Ottoman Empire (Williamson

2006a, 2006b).

         It may seem odd that the literature never mentions political pressure exerted by export interest

groups who, after all, stood to gain significantly from the treaties, and how they came to overwhelm

import-competing interest groups, when the opposite was true of Latin America and the United States.

This can be attributed to two factors. First, the export oriented agricultural producers were not well

organized. Second, the Ottoman government signed the Free Trade Treaties in order to obtain the political

support of Britain against the threats from Russia and Mohammed Ali of Egypt, not because of pressure

from export interests. The elimination of monopolies also had a powerful short run impact on de-

industrialization, as we shall see below.

         The move to free trade and the dramatic decline in transportation costs (Harlaftis and Kardasis

2000) contributed to a boom in Ottoman trade during the 19th century, especially with western Europe.

Imports increased from £5.2 million in 1840 to £39.4 million in 1913, at about 3.3 percent per annum, and

since “the prices of the traded commodities were considerably lower on the eve of World War I than in

1840, the increases in trade volumes were actually greater” (Pamuk 1987: 23). Between 1840 and 1873,

trade grew even faster with the volume doubling every 11 to 13 years (Pamuk 1987: 30). Placed in a

comparative framework with other periphery countries, the

         “Ottoman-center trade grew faster than the periphery-center trade (from the 1820s) until the early

         1870’s, but the rate of growth of Ottoman exports lagged behind the rate of growth of total

         exports from the periphery after the 1870’s … for the period 1840-1913 as a whole, per capita


4
   Export duties are a tax on trade and thus offer partial relief to import-competing industries. It appears that the
literature has failed to appreciate this fact, since it offers no explicit assessment of its impact.


                                                            6
           exports from the Ottoman Empire expanded at rates close to but lower than those of per capita

           world trade and per capita center-periphery trade” (Pamuk 1987: 37).

We note, therefore, that trade grew faster before 1870 than after.

           Steamships and railroads constitute the two major transport innovations that contributed to the

booming Ottoman trade during the period. Steamships could be built much larger than their sail

counterparts and their rise to dominance lowered freight costs and stimulated trade for the region.

Steamers were introduced into the eastern Mediterranean in the late 1820s, and they became a real

presence after the 1840s. Indeed, all sea-going countries established “steamship companies between the

1830s and the 1850s, which competed for cargo … transportation in the Mediterranean” (Harlaftis and

Kardasis 2000: 246). More to the point, the freight factor on wheat fell by nearly 80 percent on London

imports from the Black Sea and the Mediterranean (Harlaftis and Kostelenos 2007). The decline in freight

rates between 1870 and 1914 was just as dramatic on routes involving Black Sea and Egyptian ports as it

was in the Atlantic, perhaps even more so (Harlaftis and Kardasis 2000; Shah Mohammed and

Williamson 2004). Shipping and trade boomed in the Mediterranean. For example, shipping tonnage

entering Beirut went from 40,000 in 1830, to 600,000 in 1890, and to 1,700,000 in 1913. Other cities in

the eastern Mediterranean show similar shipping tonnage increases (Issawi 1982: 48).

           Over the 19th century as a whole, the Ottoman Empire was more active in world trade than either

Asia or Africa, but less so than Latin America. Why? Did the Ottoman Empire enjoy more favorable

terms of trade shocks than Asia and Africa, but less favorable than Latin America? Thus, did it undergo

greater de-industrialization shocks than Asia and Africa, but less than Latin America?



                      3. The De-Industrialization Debate for the Eastern Mediterranean



           De-industrialization is defined as curbing production and factor employment in manufacturing,

either in factories or in cottage industry. In the simple two-sector model set out in the introduction, de-

5
    The figure is for average tariff rates, but they were even higher on imported manufactures.

                                                            7
industrialization can be gauged as the movement of labor out of manufacturing and in to agriculture,

either measured as a fall in the total employment share, or as a fall in absolute numbers. Either measure

could, in theory, also be constructed for value added, but such evidence is almost impossible to find for

the 19th century periphery. Alternatively, absolute de-industrialization can be supported by information on

the capital stock in manufacturing, like the number of spindles and handlooms. In any case, de-

industrialization is easy enough to define. It is debate over the magnitude of de-industrialization, its

causes, and its impact on living standards and GDP growth that is more important and contentious.6

         The literature dealing with Ottoman and Middle Eastern 19th century de-industrialization exhibits

an amazing solidarity. Charles Issawi, Roger Owen, Donald Quataert, Socrates Petmezas, Michael

Palairet and others all promote similar, or at least reconcilable, views. Yet, the de-industrialization

narrative is usually supported only by qualitative accounts, anecdotal evidence or spotty time series,

making long period quantitative analysis difficult. As if to provoke more and better work, twenty-five

years ago Orhan Kurmuş (1983: 411-12) commented that anecdotal evidence was being “accepted as

constituting some part of the historical truth” which would serve “to substitute antiquarianism for

scientific work.” The Kurmuş challenge produced a response by one of the current authors whose

previous book The Ottoman Empire and European Capitalism, 1820-1913 will be used extensively in this

survey (Pamuk 1987). Still, Issawi and Pamuk appear to be the only Ottoman economic historians that

base their claims on hard evidence. Even in those exceptions, previous debate has rarely been engaged in

comparative terms. How did the Ottomans do relative to the rest of the 19th century periphery? Where the

performance was different, why was it different?

         As is true with the de-industrialization literature in other parts of the 19th century periphery,

Ottoman industry has too often been considered solely as capital-intensive, large scale, urban, factory


6
 Quataert cites the Indian de-industrialization literature in pointing out terminological problems: “Some India
scholars suggest that the term [de-industrialization] be abandoned altogether because its meaning is not clear. They
argue that there are too many holes in the data to support the level of generalization that use of the term implies”
(Quataert 1994: 898). We disagree. Labels are useful for narratives, but theory and measurement are the keys to
understanding the de-industrialization experience, regardless of descriptive labels.



                                                          8
production since those were the modes of production in Britain and the rest of Europe by mid-century.

This is a mistake when analyzing the Ottoman Empire and the rest of the periphery during the 19th century

(or even Britain before 1780), where most manufacturing was labor-intensive, small scale, household

based and rural. Indeed, “Mechanized factory output was and remained relatively insignificant in the 19th

century when compared with domestic and handicraft production” (Quataert 1994: 898). Since cotton

spinning and hand weaving were performed part-time by family members using extremely simple

technology, it may seem implausible to argue that the demise of local textile production destroyed a 19th

century Ottoman platform for modern industrialization. Yet, economic historians assign the same

importance to home-based cotton spinning and weaving in Britain: “proto-industrial” cottage industries

are said to have supplied the platform for the factory-based British industrial revolution that followed in

the late 18th century (Mendels 1972; Mokyr 1993: chps. 1-3; Weisdorf 2006; and see Petmezas 1990).

Furthermore, employment of women and children was central to the process then too (de Vries 1994).

Hence, this paper will consider both cottage and factory industry in the Ottoman Empire, even though the

data are often sparse for the former.



                                    4. Measuring De-Industrialization



         The traditional view of Ottoman manufacturing is that it steadily collapsed in the wake of the

influx of European manufactured goods. The Napoleonic Wars had disrupted international trade and

shielded the eastern Mediterranean from the impact of the Industrial Revolution. However, local textiles

began to retreat soon after the wars ended in 1815. Western provinces of the Empire, the Balkans and

western Anatolia were first to face the impact of imports. It is clear, for example, that the strong

manufacturing activity in the mountainous region of Thessaly in central-northern Greece reached its peak

in the 1810s (Petmezas 1990). Consular and traveler’s reports are riddled with anecdotal accounts relating

the demise of industry (Quataert 1994: 888). Certainly de-industrialization did occur between about 1815

and 1860, and in response to three forces. First, the end of the Napoleonic Wars opened up the gates for


                                                      9
British exports of manufactures. Britain had already accumulated productivity advantages in

manufacturing, and peacetime conditions made it possible for the leading European economy to exploit

them in world markets. Second, additional rapid productivity advance in British manufacturing increased

its competitive edge in foreign markets still further. Third, the move to liberal policies in the Ottoman

Empire between the 1830s and the 1850s deepened the de-industrialization shock still further. After all,

the terms of trade soared between 1815 and the late 1850s (Figure 1), and it more than doubled over the

two decades after the late 1830s. It increased by 2.6 times between 1800 and 1860 (Table 2).

        The Ottoman Empire was completely self-sufficient in cotton textiles until about 1820, but the

deluge of cheap European industrial goods changed all of that. Pamuk reconstructs the decline of Ottoman

cotton textiles by using an identity to estimate the domestic consumption and production of textiles for

the areas within the 1911 borders of the empire -- Macedonia, present day Turkey, greater Syria and Iraq.7

He identifies the period from the 1820s to the mid 1870s as the crucial one for the decline of cotton

handicrafts, a result consistent with the fact that the biggest terms of trade improvement took place in this

period, as we shall see below. Weavers suffered, but domestic spinning also declined dramatically in the

face of import competition: spinning output “fell from 11,550 tons per year in 1820-2, to 8,250 tons in

1840-2, to 3,000 tons in 1870-2” (Pamuk 1987: 118). Note that the biggest collapse in local spinning

output was between 1840/2 and 1870/2 – 74 percent, not between 1820/2 and 1840/2 – 29 percent, an

observation consistent with the fact that the external price shock was much bigger after the 1830s (Figure

1).8 In Syria, in the eastern wing of the Empire, de-industrialization forces hit hard too (Issawi 1988: 374).

Aleppo was estimated to have had 40,000 handlooms in the 18th century, while the numbers were down to

25,000 in the 1820s – a 37 or 38 percent fall from the 18th century highs, and averaged 5,125 between

1838 and 1850 – for an 80 percent fall from the 1820s. Damascus was estimated to have had 34,000

handlooms in the 18th century, while the numbers were down to 12,000 in the 1820s – a 65 percent fall


7
 Pamuk (1987: 121, and Appendix V for the details of the reconstruction).
8
 Even if we follow Quataert’s (1994) suggestion and raise the local spinning estimates for 1870-72, the decline in
overall production is clear and the half century before the 1870s remains by far the most important period of
declining Ottoman manufacturing activity.


                                                         10
from the 18th century highs, and averaged 2,355 between 1838 and 1850 – an 80 percent fall from the

1820s. One wonders how much of the decline between “the 18th century” and the 1820s can be attributed

to competition from modern British factories after 1815 and the peace, and how much of it can be

attributed to the late 18th century when Britain, before the factories, began to take over the Atlantic and

European market from India, the Middle East and other competitors (Clingingsmith and Williamson

2008). In any case, we note again that de-industrialization was dramatic up to about 1860, and so too was

the terms of trade boom.

        Table 1 offers another de-industrialization indicator for the 19th century Ottoman Empire, where

comparisons with the rest of the Third World are offered. For four Third World regions – Mexico, the

Ottomans, India and Indonesia, we measure the loss of domestic textile manufactures markets to foreign

imports. That is, the figures report the share of domestic consumption supplied by local and foreign

sources. Take India first. It has been estimated (not in Table 1) that Bengal exported about 27 percent of

domestic consumption in 1750 (21 percent of domestic production: Chaudhury 1999). That figure had

fallen, at least for India more generally, to 6 or 7 percent by 1800. Thus, even before the onset of the

factory-led industrial revolution in Britain, India had lost a big chunk of its export market. By 1833, India

had lost all of its (net) export market and 5 percent of its domestic market. By 1877, the de-industrial

damage was done, with domestic producers claiming only 35-42 percent of their own home market.

Although the Ottoman Empire did not have a large foreign market to lose, it underwent a similar dramatic

collapse in its home market share, domestic producers undergoing a fall in their share from 97 to 25-35

percent over the half century between the 1820s and the 1870s. It fell again after the 1870s, but at a much

slower rate, from 25-35 to 20-26 percent. The decline in the Indonesian (or Dutch East Indian) textile

industry was a little less spectacular than in the Ottoman Empire since the local producer share of the

home market fell from 82 to 38 percent of the home market between 1822 and 1870. But in the Dutch

East Indies case de-industrialization persisted much longer, with the local producer share falling still

further to about 11 percent in 1913. Finally, Mexico seems to have resisted these de-industrialization

forces more successfully since domestic producers could still claim 60 percent of its home market in


                                                     11
1879. In short, the Ottoman Empire had one of the more dramatic de-industrialization episodes (Dobado,

Gómez Galvarriato and Williamson 2008).

           The rapid growth in imports from Europe slowed down after 1880, and the volume of weaving

doubled from 1880 to World War I. Although spinning continued to decline, urban weavers used cheaper

imported yarn to expand their output of cotton and mixed cotton cloths to meet local demand.9 Significant

amounts were shipped to long distance markets in Anatolia, Syria and as far as Egypt. This slowdown if

not reversal of de-industrialization is consistent, as we shall see, with the gradual fall in the terms of trade

during the second half of the century. Hence, we would expect the de-industrialization forces to have been

powerful up to the 1860s and weak thereafter. Indeed, the handloom numbers in both Aleppo and

Damascus show no trend at all between 1860 and World War I (Issawi 1988: 374), after a long secular

decline.

           Not all industries were damaged by foreign competition. Due to an increased world demand,

carpet making, copper work, earthenware, inlaid woodworking, lace making, silk reeling, and embroidery

were able to thrive despite foreign competition and trade liberalism (Issawi 1982: 153; Quataert 1994:

890). Indeed, some of the above industries, and even the textile industry itself, persisted until the First

World War and after.

           Some have argued that Pamuk may have overstated the extent to which handicrafts suffered.

Quataert thinks he understated hand-spun yarn production, and thus that his estimates of domestic

production and consumption of cotton textiles must be in error. Hence, Quataert suggests that

handspinning “remained an important source for Ottoman textile producers and accounted for a

considerable proportion of all cotton yarn being used in the empire, at least 25 percent in c.1900”

(Quataert 1993: 14). While he also claims that Pamuk’s reconstruction of the cotton textiles decline does

not account for the fact that imported yarn and cloth may have created new domestic jobs, Quataert fails

to offer any explicit revision of Pamuk’s reconstruction. Nor is Quataert explicit about the size of the

demise of local textile production in the face of foreign competition. Thus, we will stick to Pamuk’s




                                                       12
estimates and the overall decline they suggest with the exception of an upwards revision in the volume of

local spinning.

           Still, although the domestic import-competing industry suffered, why was it able to survive the

foreign competition? There are a number of hypotheses suggested by the literature. First, perhaps foreign

goods were not able to penetrate into regions distant from major trade routes or ports, especially before

the railway boom late in the century. Ottoman geography offered some protection to local industry, just as

it did in the Latin American interior (Coatsworth and Williamson 2004; Bértola and Williamson 2004;

Williamson 2006c). Support for this hypothesis can also be inferred from the price convergence between

Upper and Lower Egypt (Yousef 2000: 354). These results are especially relevant because they speak to

the impact of the transport breakthroughs that occurred in one part of the Middle East very late in the

century. Denser rail networks and more navigable waters and roads lowered transportation costs, and

these created price convergence and internal trade (Yousef 2000: 356). Thus, since European imports

couldn’t be brought cheaply into the more remote areas of the Empire during most of the century,

domestic manufactures could still supply local demand in those parts of the interior.

           Second, domestic tastes afforded Ottoman handicrafts some staying power. Although British

companies attempted to imitate Ottoman styles, often they could not do so satisfactorily, and thus there

was still demand for domestic cloth, including cotton cloth (Pamuk 1987: 124). Their knowledge of local

preferences helped domestic manufactures survive in the short run, and the import of foreign techniques

and foreign managers increased their efficiency and competitiveness in the longer run. For example, local

textile makers eventually became more familiar with synthetic dyestuffs which allowed them to import

plain cloth and take advantage of lower priced Ottoman labor to dye it (Quataert 1994: 889). Third, Issawi

argues that “weavers were able to cut their costs greatly by using imported yarn; thus the Industrial

Revolution, which had wiped out the spinners, gave the weavers a precarious reprieve” (Issawi 1982:

152). We are skeptical of this argument since this advantage was given just as freely to weavers abroad

who were competing with local weavers. A fourth potential explanation seems more promising. Namely,

9
    Quataert (1994) documents this rise in urban weaving but has less to say about what happened in the rural areas.

                                                           13
the late 19th century resistance of Ottoman handicrafts can be explained by the “Great Depression” of

1873-1896 when the terms of trade moved against the Ottomans. This relative price event may have

afforded import-competing sectors, like local handicrafts, some relief. For all of these reasons, domestic

handicrafts and industry, although badly hurt by foreign competition in the first half of the 19th century,

resisted and adapted in the second half of the 19th century and in the early 20th century.

        Large capital-intensive factories were not common in the Ottoman Empire, nor would they have

made much economic sense given the factor endowments of the region (Allen 2007). There were,

however, two waves of Ottoman factory building during this period. The first wave occurred before the

treaties, consisting of state-owned factories like Mohamed Ali’s prototype establishments in Egypt, and to

a lesser extent, like those of Mahmoud II around Istanbul. While they were protected by monopolies from

the beginning, these factories “suffered from great inefficiencies, including lack of fuel and metallic raw

materials and the total absence of skilled labor” (Issawi 1982: 154; Clark 1974). They were also poorly

managed with military elite serving as supervisors, rather than young men that had been technically

trained in Europe. In addition, these factories had dilapidated machinery and inadequate power sources,

both of which would have been very expensive to remedy (Owen 1993: 72 and 76). The liberal treaties

assured these factories a short life, but Owen believes that they would have been forced to shut down

even in the absence of free trade. The second wave ensued after the 1870’s and consisted of factories

funded and operated by private interests, and which received little or no financial support from the state.

Although Quataert states that these factories expanded rapidly in number, both Issawi and Pamuk argue

that this second wave was also modest (Quataert 1994: 901; Issawi 1982: 155-58; Pamuk 1987: 127) and

that their production was still very small compared to handicrafts. Perhaps, but that second wave certainly

looks like a supply response to a much more favorable world price environment. And while Turkish (no

longer Ottoman) industrialization really took hold only in the 1930s (Issawi 1982: 159), it might be

relevant to point out that while tariffs and quotas on imports increased sharply after 1929, the terms of

trade also took a nose dive during that decade, that is, the relative price of manufactures rose.




                                                      14
        Quataert (1992: 6-10) proposes three additional reasons for the lack of capital-intensive

industrialization in the Ottoman Empire -- population density, religion, and wars. Population density may

have fostered industry by creating local demand: the Balkans had the greatest population density in the

Empire and the most pervasive industry, while the Arab provinces were very thinly populated and had the

least industry. Parenthetically, one wonders why this local demand could not be satisfied as well by

foreign manufacturers. Religion may have inhibited technology transfer to the extent that Muslims, who

constituted the majority of the population, may have been reluctant to adopt the ideas of Christians and

Jews, who understood the technology. Wars waged by the Ottomans may also have delayed potential

technology transfer at a time when such assimilation would have been crucial. No hard evidence is

offered in support of these three propositions. In its absence, we will explore more mundane but

promising explanations – factor endowments and the external terms of trade.



                                     5. The External Terms of Trade



        Figure 1 plots the net barter terms of trade for the Ottoman Empire (the ratio of the price of

exports PX to the price of imports PM) covering the century 1800 to 1913. The series has two parts. Pamuk

(1987) has already estimated the terms of trade following 1854, so what follows stresses the extension

backwards to 1800 recently constructed by the other present author (Williamson 2008a), and further

revised in Table 2.10 As it turns out, the first half of the century was the most crucial half. For comparison,

Figure 1 also plots Egypt 1796-1913, the Levant 1839-1913 (present day Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Palestine,

Jordan, Syria), and the Middle East region as a whole.

        Like most of the periphery, the Ottoman Empire specialized in the export of primary products,

while importing manufactures, so between 1800 and 1854 PX refers to an unweighted average of wheat,

wool, raisins plus figs, tobacco, opium and raw silk. As Appendix 1 indicates, prices for the first four are




                                                      15
taken from United States markets, the price of raw silk is from British markets, and the price of opium is

from the (infamous) Calcutta market. To derive PX, these six prices are taken as an unweighted average

since the share of each commodity export in total exports is not available until 1879, and those weights

changed dramatically over the decades before the late 1870s. PM refers to what was primarily

manufactured goods and intermediate inputs, and it is proxied by the British export price index.

        Between 1800 and the late 1860’s, the price of British manufactured exports fell far faster than

did the price of British imported primary products, swinging the terms of trade against Britain and in

favor of the periphery. If PM for the Ottoman Empire moved anything like PX for Britain, then the

Ottoman Empire certainly received a massive positive price shock over the half century before the

Crimean War (Pamuk 1987: 48; based on Imlah 1958). The magnitudes were enormous: over the four

decades between 1815-1819 and 1855-1859, the Ottoman terms of trade rose almost 2.6 times, for an

annual rate of 2.4 percent; even over the longer 1800 to 1860 period, which includes two decades of

Napoleonic conflict and suppressed trade, it still rose by a huge annual rate of 1.6 percent per annum.

While no actual Ottoman PM time series data has been tabulated prior to 1854 to confirm these otherwise

plausible PX/PM trends, qualitative evidence appears to be consistent with the implied terms of trade surge.

Hence, domestic resources were pulled in to agriculture and other primary product sectors, while the glut

of cheap, foreign manufactures flowed into the Empire, pushing domestic resources out of import-

competing industry and perhaps even out of some non-tradable activities.

        Ottoman terms of trade data are of far better quality for the period 1854-1913. Between 1855-

1859 and 1875-1879, the terms of trade fell by 27 percent, while it did not fall across the so-called “Great

Depression,” between 1875-1879 and 1893-1898.11 Indeed, the surprising fact is how stable was the terms

of trade over the four decades between 1875-1879 and 1909-1913 when it drifted up at a modest annual




10
   PX/PM in Table 2 and Figure 1 are exactly the same for 1860-1913. However, Table 2 explores the extent to which
c.i.f. and other adjustments to PM make a difference in trends. They do, documenting an even bigger PX/PM boom up
to 1860. See below.
11
    That is, all of the fall took place in a few years before 1875 (Figure 1).


                                                       16
rate of 0.4 percent. Furthermore, all of the pre-WWI rise took place after 1896 when the Ottomans

enjoyed a 14 percent increase in their terms of trade.

        To summarize, if one is looking for evidence of a big de-industrialization impact on the Ottoman

Empire, we should see plenty of it in the half century before the late 1850s. We should see little or no

evidence of de-industrialization between the late 1850s and the mid-1890s, assuming that the pre-1860

price shock had had enough time to shake out import-competing industries. Finally, we should see only

very modest evidence of de-industrialization in the two decades before World War I.

        Were these terms of trade trends common to all parts of the Empire? Issawi claims that the terms

of trade moved in favor of the Ottomans in both Syria and Iraq between 1836 and 1913. He bases his

claims concerning Syria on the prices of raw silk and cocoons prevailing in Beirut from 1836 to 1913 and

on prices for some other commodities exported from Aleppo between 1891 and 1913. His claims for Iraq

are based on an unweighted five-commodity index covering the period from 1864 to 1913. Issawi

extrapolates both the Syrian and Iraqi terms of trade backwards, concluding that the terms of trade

improved there from 1800 to 1913 (Issawi 1988: 147-51). These estimates are consistent with the de-

industrialization experience in that part of the Empire: “it destroyed a large part of the handicrafts both

directly through competition and indirectly by turning consumers’ taste to western-type goods,” without

causing technology spillovers or import substitution (Issawi 1988: 151).

        According to cotton export price series, Egypt’s terms of trade must also have risen across the

19th century. Issawi estimated that Egypt’s terms of trade (1880=100) rose from 52 in 1820-1822 to 71 in

1850-1852, a rate of 1 percent per annum over the three decades, much smaller than what we have found

for the rest of the Empire (2.4 percent per annum up to 1855-1859). It rises again to 107 in 1870-1872,

reflecting world cotton scarcity induced by the US civil war. Issawi’s index falls to 100 in 1890-1892 and

then rises modestly to 136 in 1908-1912.

        In Figure 1, we offer our own index of the terms of trade for Egypt 1796-1913, the Ottoman

Empire 1800-1913, and Levant 1839-1913. The spectacular rise in the Egyptian terms of trade between

1820-1824 and 1856-1860, 2.7 percent per annum, is even bigger than that of the Ottoman Empire over


                                                      17
the same period, 2.3 percent per annum. Since PM is the same in both cases, it is clear that cotton prices

rose even more in world markets than did the Ottoman export mix of wheat, wool, fruits, silk, tobacco and

opium. In any case, these terms of trade figures imply even bigger de-industrialization impact on Egypt

than on the rest of the Middle East, spelling especially bad luck for Ali’s early experiments with Egyptian

industrialization. Between 1855-1859 and 1875-1879, the Egyptian terms of trade fell by almost 11

percent, less than half the fall experienced by the Empire, 27 percent, and thus, presumably, less

stimulation to import-competing industry. Finally, between 1875-1879 and 1909-1913, the Egyptian

terms of trade drifted upwards at roughly the same modest rate as elsewhere in the Middle East (0.5

versus 0.4 percent per annum).



              6. A Neo-Ricardian Three-Sector Model of Ottoman De-Industrialization



        We know that a booming terms of trade contributed to Ottoman de-industrialization in the 19th

century, and especially up to the late 1850s. That is, as export prices rose, labor and other resources were

pulled out of industry (and non-tradable sectors) and in to the export sector so as to augment its capacity.

The size of these “Dutch Disease” effects were, of course, intensified by the pro-global policies

introduced between 1826 and 1838, but we think there were other domestic supply-side forces that might

have diminished Ottoman competitiveness with foreign manufactures up to mid-century. We also think

these forces might have reversed when the terms of trade ceased to rise after the late 1850s.

        During the century before the 1850s, most foodstuffs eaten by village peasants and the urban

working class (like barley, rye, lentils, chick peas, beans, olive oil, cheap raisins and figs) were not traded

internationally. True, skilled artisans and better off peasants ate wheat bread made from traded wheat, but

most ate cheaper bread made from coarser grains that were not traded. Also, foodstuffs were a very large

share of family budgets, somewhere between 75 and 80 percent in the urban areas and even higher in the

rural areas where 75 percent of the population lived (Pamuk 2001: 28). Under those conditions, labor

productivity in the non-traded part of food production must have influenced manufacturing


                                                      18
competitiveness, as Alexander Gerschenkron (1965) and W. Arthur Lewis (1978), and even Adam Smith

argued long ago. Their reasoning went like this: In a pre-industrial economy with relatively stable

subsistence wages (Lewis 1954), any decline in Ottoman food productivity would have put upward

pressure on food prices and thus on the nominal wage in every non-food sector, eroding competitiveness

with foreign producers. Any rise in Ottoman food productivity or increase in arable land in the interior

would have had the opposite effect.

        But there was another force at work too. As the Ottoman Empire became more integrated into

world commodity markets, increased specialization took the form not only of rising exports of wool, silk

and opium, but also of consumer goods like wheat, figs, raisins, olive oil, tobacco and even barley. Any

rise in the price of traded consumer goods would have put more upward pressure on the prices of local

consumer goods and thus on the nominal wage, eroding competitiveness with foreign producers in

import-competing sectors. This would have been manifested by rising food prices relative to other

products, by falling profitability in manufacturing, and by a decline in industrial output.

        Which of these domestic supply-side forces dominated the Ottoman Empire, especially before the

1860s? Did the global trade boom raise the price of exportable food stuffs at home, augmenting nominal

wages and reducing competitiveness in import-competing textiles and other manufacturing activities? Or,

was this force offset by the increase in arable land in the interior, thus lowering the price of foodstuffs, at

least in the interior, and especially in a pre-railroad era? Did increasing commercial crop land-use

compete with non-tradable foodstuffs, raising their price? What was the net effect of all these complex

forces on the relative price of food and other key consumer goods?

        Concern with the price of foodstuffs was used by Lewis (1978) to help explain de-

industrialization in the tropical periphery. But he did not offer an explicit model or supply comprehensive

empirical support for his thesis. Recently, an explicit and testable Lewis-like model was applied

elsewhere in the poor periphery: the thesis worked well in helping account for the spectacular demise of

Indian manufacturing in the face of British competition after 1750 (Clingingsmith and Williamson 2008);

and it also worked well in helping account for exceptional Mexican success in minimizing the damage


                                                      19
inflicted by foreign imports on its domestic textile industry (Dobado, Gómez Galvarriato and Williamson

2008). But conditions were quite different in the Ottoman Empire since it was a major exporter of

foodstuffs, in contrast with India and Mexico. So, how does the Ricardian economics work when applied

to the Ottoman Empire?

        In order to formalize our intuitions about the relationship between relative prices and de-

industrialization, we use a simple neo-Ricardian model.12 Assume an economy with three sectors: textiles

-- the manufacturing importable13 (T); wheat, fruit, olive oil, opium, silk, tobacco and wool -- the

primary-product commodity exportables (C); and barley, rye, lentils and beans, the non-tradable

foodstuffs (F). We assume that textiles and commodity exports are traded in world markets and sell for

the world prices pT and pC, respectively,14 while pF is determined by local supply and demand. Labor (L)

is mobile between all three sectors, is the only factor of production, and costs a nominal wage w per unit.

As is standard in Ricardian models, we abstract from capital and land for simplicity. Finally, when we

talk about a decrease in LT, we refer to this contraction in textile employment as absolute de-

industrialization, and when we talk about a decrease in LT/L, we refer to this contraction in the textile

employment share as relative de-industrialization.

        To create a link between agricultural food productivity and wages in the textile sector, we follow

Lewis (1954, 1978) in assuming that the real wage in food units was constant (indeed, we set w/pF=1), at

least in the short run and medium term. The Lewis assumption may, of course, have been violated in the

very long run, but all that we require is that it was quite stable over most of the 19th century. The Lewis

assumption implies the possibility of unemployment and underemployment, so L represents employment

rather than the population.

        Suppose output in each sector is produced according to a Cobb-Douglas production function,

where the intercepts F, C, and T are productivity parameters (or include the impact of omitted


12
   The formal details of the model can be found in Clingingsmith and Williamson (2008) and Dobado, Gómez and
Williamson (2008).
13
   Textiles were the canonical import-competing activity in the Ottoman Empire. First, they dominated import
values. Second, they employed by far the largest share of the Ottoman industrial labor force.


                                                      20
endowments, like land and irrigation canals) and diminishing returns holds everywhere. Labor demand is

given by:

LF = (pFF/w)(1/1-α) = F(1/1-α) since w = pF                                                           (1)

LC = (pCC/w)(1/1-β)                                                                                   (2)

LT = (pTT/w)(1/1-γ)                                                                                   (3)

where α, β, and γ are output elasticities. If we assume that there is no productivity change in this pre-

industrial economy, the growth rates (*) of labor demand are

LF* = 0                                                                                               (4)

LC* = -(1/1-β)(w* - pC*)                                                                              (5)

LT* = -(1/1-γ)(w* - pT*)                                                                              (6)

Since the nominal wage is equal to the price of a unit of food, village employment in food production is

fixed. Growth of the own wage in textile production (w/pT) leads to a decline in the absolute number of

workers employed there. Thus, de-industrialization results from an increase in the own wage in textiles.

There are three forces pushing the own-wage upwards (and thus reducing wage competitiveness with

imports), one foreign and two domestic. First, the own wage in textiles would increase if the world price

for its output fell (that is, if the Ottoman external terms of trade rose due to a fall in the price of imports,

as it did up to the late 1850s). Second, it would also increase if the nominal wage rose, induced by a rise

in food prices, induced, in turn, by some negative shock to local food output productivity. One source of

such a negative shock might have been the shift of food production away from high yielding hectares to

accommodate the expansion of export crops like wheat, fruit, olive oil and tobacco, a shift encouraged by

foreign demand. Third, it could be induced by a rise in the price of exported wheat, fruit, olive oil and

even tobacco.

           The growth rate of textile relative to total employment, our measure of relative de-

industrialization, is:



14
     That is, pT and pC are assumed to be exogenous to the Ottoman economy.


                                                         21
                     −1
L∗T − L∗ =
               (1 − β )(1 − γ )
                                (
                                ⎡⎣(1 − β )(1 − θTL )(w∗ − pT ∗ ) ⎤⎦ − ⎡⎣(1 − γ )θCL (w∗ − pC ∗ ) ⎤⎦   )   (7)


The shares of textile and commodity export employment in total employment are given by θTL and θCL,

respectively. Thus, relative de-industrialization will result whenever the own wage in textiles is growing

sufficiently fast compared to the own wage in wheat and other commodity exports. Moreover, de-

industrialization will be most severe when the difference in own wage growth rates between T and C is

largest, and this can only result when the external terns of trade booms (pC* > pT*), since, by assumption,

w* is everywhere the same in the domestic economy. As it turns out, the condition that must be satisfied

for relative de-industrialization is

           ∗         (1 − γ )θ CL               ∗
  w∗ − pT >                           ( w ∗ − pC )                                                        (8)
                  (1 − β )(1 − θ TL )

To the extent that β and γ are similar, and that (1- θTL) > θCL, the ratio on the right-hand side will certainly

be less than one. This implies that own wage growth in wheat and other commodity exports would have

to be even higher to counteract the relative de-industrialization effect of own wage growth in textiles. In

short, we expect to see relative de-industrialization whenever own wage growth in textiles is positive,

unless own wage growth in commodity exports is much greater. Own-wage growth in the commodity

export sector seems less likely to the extent that nominal wages and prices in export sectors like wheat

should have been moving alike, but any own wage growth in the export sector would have dampened the

de-industrialization effect because it would have reduced LC, which is in the denominator of the relative

de-industrialization measure. Relative de-industrialization results when nominal wage growth is

sufficiently bigger than the growth of the terms-of-trade favoring commodity exports, which discourages

production in textiles relative to commodity exports. Thus, relative de-industrialization should have been

most severe when nominal wage growth was strongest and when the terms of trade were shifting most

strongly in favor of wheat and other commodity exports.




                                                             22
                        7. Assessing the Causes of Ottoman De-Industrialization



        It is certainly comforting that the evidence in Table 2 is so consistent with our simple neo-

Ricardian model. First, the model invoked the Lewis assumption of stable real wages, and they were

indeed, especially over the first sixty years of the 19th century: they rose by only 11 percent between 1800

and 1880, and they fell by 8 percent up to 1860. Second, the model predicted that a rapid rise in the own

wage in manufacturing (here proxied by textiles), especially compared with the commodity export sector,

would generate powerful de-industrialization forces. And indeed, the own wage in textiles soared across

the 19th century. Furthermore, the biggest rise took place between 1800 and 1860 – 3.3 percent per annum

– precisely the decades of most dramatic de-industrialization. The own wage in the export sector also rose

up to 1860, but by not nearly as much as textiles (0.8 versus 3.3 percent per annum). Third, the rise in the

own wage in manufacturing between 1800 and 1860 was being pushed partly by a nominal wage boom (1

percent per annum) -- accounting for a third of the own wage increase, but mostly by the collapse in

manufactures prices (-2.2 percent per annum: proxied by imported textiles) – accounting for two-thirds of

the own wage increase. Recall that our model predicted a nominal wage boom. Fourth, the predicted rise

in food prices seems to have taken place, as the consumer price index (dominated by foodstuffs) doubled

between 1800 and 1860. The rising CPI pushed up the nominal wage by almost the same amount --

confirming the predictions of Gerschenkron, Lewis, Smith and our neo-Ricardian model, thereby

diminishing Ottoman wage competitiveness in manufacturing.

        Fifth, the rise in the own wage in manufacturing slowed down considerably between 1860 and

1880 to 1.5 percent per annum -- precisely the decades of a diminished rate of de-industrialization and

some signs of re-industrialization. Consistent with that experience, the own wage in the export sector

actually grew a little faster than it did in textiles (2.3 versus 1.5 percent per annum). Furthermore, during

these two decades the modest rise in the nominal wage (0.1 percent per annum) accounts for only 7

percent increase in the own wage in manufacturing, while the fall in manufacturing prices (-1.4 percent

per annum) accounts for 93 percent. This small rise in the nominal wage is consistent with the 14 percent


                                                      23
fall in the CPI, the latter induced, presumably, by the 11 percent fall in the food export price. Sixth, and

finally, the neo-Ricardian model loses its relevance after 1880 when the real wage rises quite impressively

– 0.8 percent per annum – presumably because the rate of productivity advance in both the export and

import competing sectors rose.

        Table 3 reports our effort to identify the domestic sources of Ottoman de-industrialization which

supported the external terms of trade shock. The table focuses on changes in Ottoman policy and the

appearance of the railroads penetrating the interior in the late 19th century.15 These two changing domestic

forces must be assessed against the dramatic 260 percent increase in the external terms of trade between

1800 and 1860 (Table 2).

       Consider first the policy impact of the Ottoman free trade treaties of 1838-1841. We estimate that

the initial move towards free trade raised Px/Pm in the Ottoman ports and coastal cities by only 2 percent,

a trivial impact compared with the 260 percent rise in Px/Pm coming from world market forces. True, the

policy impact was bigger in the interior (a 6 percent rise in Px/Pm there), but still very small. It should be

added, of course, that the treaties severely reduced the ability of the Ottoman government to raise tariffs

later in the century, making it impossible to protect domestic industry from the full force of foreign

competition when the free trade damage became clearer. Still, Ottoman policies in the 1860s had the

opposite effect, reducing the terms of trade by 14 percent in the coastal areas but raising it by 8 percent in

the interior. Since Ottoman Px/Pm in world markets fell by 17 percent between 1860 and 1880 (Table 2),

the added impact of policy change was to diminish Px/Pm and increase the relative price of manufactures

(Pm) by 31 percent, which must have greatly eased the de-industrialization pressures on local

manufacturing. These forces also begin to reveal a differential impact of policy-cum-transport on coast

versus interior since they served to raise Px/Pm in the interior by 8 percent (diminishing the total effect on

Px/Pm from the coastal 31 percent fall to an interior 23 percent fall). After the 1860s, neither the external

terms of trade nor Ottoman policy changed much, so de-industrialization forces lost their destructive




                                                      24
impact on coastal industry. Things were different in the interior, however, as the railroads opened up

those markets to import penetration and exports to world markets. Table 3 estimates that the terms of

trade in the interior rose by 30 percent, as declining transport costs and the removal of the interior trade

tax served to push exportable (e.g. wheat) prices up to world levels and to push importable (e.g. textiles)

prices down to world levels.16 So, while de-industrialization forces were quiet on the Ottoman coast after

1860, they certainly were still present in the Ottoman interior.



      8. A Comparative Assessment: The Eastern Mediterranean versus the Rest of the Periphery17



           The economic impact of the core on the periphery had its source in two forces which arose during

the first global century. The first was the world-wide transport revolution that served to integrate world

commodity markets (O’Rourke and Williamson 1999: Ch. 3; Shah Mohammed and Williamson 2004). It

caused a boom in trade between core and periphery, created commodity price convergence for tradable

goods between all world markets, and contributed to a rise in every country’s external terms of trade,

including the periphery. The second force came from the derived demand for industrial intermediates, like

Ottoman raw silk and wool, which soared as manufacturing production led the way in the core. Thus, as


15
   The literature often fails to appreciate that it is changes in policy, transport costs and world prices that matter, not
levels. After all, de-industrialization implies a change, e.g. a decline in the relative or even absolute importance of
manufacturing.
16
   The share of transportation costs in the price of a good moved to and from the Ottoman interior varied
substantially according to the good (low-value, high-bulk primary products versus high-value, low-bulk textiles, but
also wheat versus other primary goods) and the distance from port. Hence, the estimates underlying Table 3 are
rough. Quataert (1977: 143-54) offers an excellent discussion of this issue and some international comparisons with
wheat transport on the Anatolian Railway after 1890. The cereal growing areas in Anatolia could not send any wheat
to Istanbul or Izmir, the leading ports in western Anatolia, before the railroad, but they did send some to the southern
port of Mersin on the Mediterranean via camel caravans. Quataert indicates that per ton-kilometer costs in
transporting Anatolian wheat to these ports by railroad were initially significantly higher than on the routes between
Chicago and New York. However, he estimates that ton-kilometer charges for wheat and barley dropped across the
late 19th century, so that they accounted for 22 percent of the final price in Istanbul at the end of the period. Most
other export commodities produced in the interior, like fruits, nuts and tobacco, benefited to a smaller extent from
the arrival of the railroads (Kurmuş 1974). Table 3 summarizes this evidence by assuming that between the 1860s
and 1913 the railroads by themselves lowered textile prices in the interior by about 7 percent and raised primary
product prices in the interior by about 15 percent, all relative to coastal prices.
17
     This section draws extensively on Williamson (2008a).


                                                            25
core economies raised their industrial output shares, manufacturing output growth raced ahead of GDP

growth. Rapid productivity growth lowered the cost and price of manufactures, and by so doing generated

a soaring derived demand for raw materials in the core. This event was reinforced by accelerating income

per capita growth and a high income elasticity of demand for luxury consumption goods, like Ottoman

wheat, raisins, figs and even opium. Since industrialization was driven by unbalanced productivity

advance favoring manufacturing relative to agriculture and other natural-resource based activities, the

relative price of manufactures fell everywhere, especially in the periphery where they were imported. The

world transport revolution made it possible for the distant periphery to supply this booming demand for

primary products. Both forces produced positive, powerful and sustained terms of trade shocks in the

periphery, raising the relative price of primary products, and through an epoch which stretched over as

much as seventy or eighty years.

        Eventually these two forces abated. The rate of decline in real transport costs along sea lanes

slowed down, approaching a late 20th century steady state (Shah Mohammed and Williamson 2004). The

rate of growth of manufacturing slowed down in the core as the transition to industrial maturity was

completed. As these two forces abated, the resulting slow down in primary product demand growth was

reinforced by resource-saving innovations in the industrial core, induced, in large part, by those high and

rising primary product prices during the 19th century terms of trade upswing. Thus, the secular boom

faded, eventually turning into a secular bust. Exactly when and where the boom turned to bust depended

on the export commodities in which a periphery region specialized, but the periphery peak ranged

between the 1850s and the 1890s.

        This 130-year cycle in the periphery terms of trade is illustrated in Figure 2 by Latin American

experience up to 1939. The region’s terms of trade underwent a steady increase from the 1810s to the

early 1890s, and, like the Ottoman Empire, the improvement was especially dramatic during the first four

decades: the annual rate of increase was 1.3 percent per annum between the starting the half-decade 1815-

19 and concluding the half-decade 1890-94, equivalent to almost a tripling over the 75 years; and the rate

between 1815-19 and 1855-59 was even larger, 2.05 percent per annum. Furthermore, that increase is


                                                    26
probably understated since it fails to take account of the likely increase in the quality of traded

manufactures relative to primary products, estimated in Figure 2 by the dashed line. Based on the

estimates underlying Figure 2, the quality-adjusted terms of trade may have grown at a little more than

2.2 percent per annum between 1815-19 and 1855-59, and at a little more than 1.4 percent per annum

between 1815-19 and 1890-94. There is no reason to expect these quality adjustments to have been any

different for the rest of the poor periphery, including the Ottoman Empire.

        How does the terms of trade boom for the Ottoman Empire and the rest of the eastern

Mediterranean compare with Latin America, Asia and the European periphery? Figure 3 documents terms

of trade performance for the five major regions in the poor periphery, between 1796 and 1913. Each

region is a population-weighted average of the following components: European Periphery (Italy,

Portugal, Spain, Russia); Middle East (Egypt, the Ottoman Empire and Levant); Latin America

(Argentina, Chile, Mexico, Venezuela); South Asia (India, Ceylon); and Southeast Asia (Indonesia, the

Philippines, Siam, Malaya). Figure 3 does not break out the country experience of which the five regions

are aggregates, but the original source does (Williamson 2008a).

        First and most important, the secular terms of trade boom was even bigger in Egypt and the

Ottoman Empire than the rest. If we ignore the few years around 1820 when the terms of trade spikes, it

appears that South Asia (and India, which dominates the regional series) underwent relatively modest

improvements in its terms of trade from 1800 to the mid-1820s, and in fact it fell thereafter up to 1850.

Over the half century between 1800-1804 and 1855-1859, India’s terms of trade rose less than 0.5 percent

per annum. No doubt this was a significant secular price shock, but it was far smaller than what happened

in Egypt, the Ottoman Empire and the Middle East as a whole. The Latin American terms of trade

increased by 1.7 percent per annum between 1820-1824 and 1855-1859. The Ottoman terms of trade

increased by 2.4 percent per annum between 1815-1819 and 1855-1859 while the Indonesian terms of

trade (which dominates the Southeast Asia regional experience) increased by 2.5 percent per annum

between 1825-1829 and 1865-1869. The Egyptian terms of trade rose by 2.7 percent per annum between

1820-1824 and 1855-1859. In short, on the secular upswing in the terms of trade shared by all regions in


                                                      27
the poor periphery, Egypt and the Ottoman Empire underwent about the biggest increase. Did the region

therefore also undergo the biggest de-industrialization shock and the most pronounced “Dutch disease”

experience?

        What went up then came down with a crash, as the terms of trade fell everywhere in the periphery

from the 1870s or 1890s to World War II. But note that Egypt and the Ottoman Empire reached a

relatively early peak in their terms of trade, the series leveling off and even falling after the 1850s and

1860s. Does this imply that “Dutch disease” de-industrialization forces lost their power much earlier in

the region than in Latin America and other parts of the poor periphery where their terms of trade

continued to rise during the late 19th century?




                                                      28
                                               References



Allen, R. C. (2007), “The Industrial Revolution in Miniature: The Spinning Jenny in Britain, France, and

        India,” Oxford University, Department of Economics Working Paper 375.

Bairoch, P. (1989), "European Trade Policy, 1815-1914," in P. Mathias and S. Pollard (eds.), The

        Cambridge Economic History of Europe, vol. III (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

Bértola, L. and J. G. Williamson (2006), ”Globalization in Latin America Before 1940,” in V. Bulmer-

        Thomas, J. Coatsworth and R. Cortes Conde (eds.), Cambridge Economic History of Latin

        America (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

Brown, L. C. (ed.) (1996), Imperial Legacy: The Ottoman Imprint on the Balkans and the Middle East

        (New York: Columbia University Press).

Chaudhury, S. (1999), From Prosperity to Decline: Eighteenth Century Bengal (New Delhi: Manohar

        Publishers).

Clark, E. C. (1974), “Ottoman Industrial Revolution”, International Journal of Middle East Studies 5

        (January): 65-76.

Clingingsmith, D. and J. G. Williamson (2008), ”De-Industrialization in 18th and 19th Century India:

        Mughal Decline, Climate Shocks and British Industrial Ascent,” Explorations in Economic

        History 45 (July): 209-34.

Coatsworth, J. H. and J. G. Williamson (2004), “Always Protectionist? Latin American Tariffs from

        Independence to Great Depression,” Journal of Latin American Studies 36, pt. 2 (May): 205-32.

De Vries, J. (1994), “The Industrial Revolution and the Industrious Revolution,” Journal of Economic

        History 54 (June): 249-70.

Dobado, R., A. Gómez Galvarriato, and J. G. Williamson (2008), “Mexican Exceptionalism:

        Globalization and De-Industrialization 1750-1877,” Journal of Economic History 68

        (September): 1-53.




                                                   29
Gerschenkron, A. (1962), Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard

        University Press).

Harlaftis, G. and V. Kardasis (2000), “International Shipping in the Eastern Mediterranean and the Black

        Sea: Istanbul as a Maritime Center,” in Ş. Pamuk and J. G. Williamson, Globalization Challenge

        and Economic Response in the Mediterranean Before 1950 (London: Routledge).

Harlaftis, G. and G. Kostelenos (2007), “Services and national economic growth: calculating the shipping

        income in the Greek economy,” mimeo.

Helpman, E. (2004), The Mystery of Economic Growth (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press).

Hummels, D. (2007), “Transportation Costs and International Trade in the Second Era of Globalization,”

        Journal of Economic Perspectives 21 (Summer): 131-54.

Imlah, A. H. (1958), Economic Elements in the Pax Britannica; Studies in British Foreign Trade in the

        Nineteenth Century (Cambridge: Harvard University Press).

Issawi, C. (1966), The Economic History of the Middle East, 1800-1914 (Chicago: Chicago University

        Press).

--- (1982), An Economic History of the Middle East and North Africa (New York: Columbia University

        Press).

--- (1988), The Fertile Crescent 1800-1914. A Documentary Economic History (New York: Oxford

        University Press).

Korthal Altes, W. L. (1994), Changing Economy in Indonesia: Volume 15:Prices (Non-Rice) 1814-1940

        (The Hague: Netherlands Royal Tropical Institute).

Kurmuş, O. (1974), The Role of British Capital in the Economic Development of Western Anatolia 1850-

        1913, PhD thesis, University of London.

--- (1983), “The 1838 Treaty of Commerce Re-examined,” in J.-L. B. Grammont and Paul Dumont (eds.),

        Economie et Societies dans l’Empire Ottoman (Paris: Centre National de la Recherche

        Scientifique).




                                                   30
Lewis, W. A. (1954), “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labour,” Manchester School

        of Economics and Social Studies 22: 139-91.

Lewis, W. A. (1978), The Evolution of the International Economic Order (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton

        University Press).

Matsuyama, K. (1992), “Agricultural Productivity, Comparative Advantage, and Economic Growth,”

        Journal of Economic Theory 58 (December): 317-34.

Mendels, F. F. (1972), “Proto-industrialization: the first phase of the industrialization process,” Journal of

        Economic History 32 (March): 241-61.

Mokyr, J. (1993), The British Industrial Revolution: An Economic Perspective (Boulder, Col.: Westview

        Press).

O’Rourke, K. H. and J. G. Williamson (1999), Globalization and History (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).

Owen, R. (1993), Middle East in the World Economy 1800-1914 (London: I.B Tauris & Co. Ltd., original

        ed. 1983).

Palairet, M. (1997), The Balkan Economies c. 1800-1914, Cambridge University Press.

Pamuk, Ş. (1986), “The Decline and Resistance of Ottoman Cotton Textiles 1820-1913,” Explorations in

        Economic History 23: 205-25.

--- (1987), The Ottoman Empire and European Capitalism, 1820-1913: Trade, Investment and

        Production (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

---- (2001), 500 Years of Prices and Wages in Istanbul and Other Cities (Ankara: State Institute of

        Statistics).

Petmezas, S. D. (1990), “Patterns of Protoindustrialization in the Ottoman Empire: The Case of Eastern

        Thessaly, ca. 1750-1860,” Journal of European Economic History 19 (Winter): 575-603.

Puryear, V. J. (1969), International Economics and Diplomacy in the Near East (Archon Books: first

        published 1935, Stanford).

Quataert, D. (1977), “Limited Revolution: The Impact of the Anatolian Railway on Turkish Transporation

        and the Provisioning of Istanbul, 1890-1908,” Business History Review LI (Summer): 139-60.


                                                     31
--- (1992), Manufacturing and Technology Transfer in the Ottoman Empire, 1800-1914 (Istanbul: The

       Isis Press).

--- (1993), Ottoman Manufacturing in the Age of the Industrial Revolution (Cambridge: Cambridge

       University Press).

--- (1994), “The Age of Reforms, 1812-1914,” in H. Inalcyk and D. Quataert (eds.) An Economic

       and Social History of the Ottoman Empire, 1300-1914 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press):

       759-946.

Shah Mohammed, S. and J. G. Williamson (2004), “Freight Rates and Productivity Gains in British

       Tramp Shipping 1869-1950,” Explorations in Economic History 41 (April):172-203.

Weisdorf, J. L. (2006), “From domestic manufacturing to Industrial Revolution: long-run

      growth and agricultural development,” Oxford Economic Papers 58 (April): 264-87.

Williamson, J. G. (2006a), “Globalization, De-Industrialization and Underdevelopment in the Third

       World Before the Modern Era,” Journal of Iberian and Latin American History (Revista de

       Historia Económica), 24, 9-36.

--- (2006b), Globalization in the Poor Periphery Before 1950 (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).

--- (2006c), “Explaining World Tariffs 1870-1938: Stolper-Samuelson, Strategic Tariffs and

       State Revenues,” in R. Findlay, R. Henriksson, H. Lindgren and M. Lundahl (eds.), Eli F.

       Heckscher, 1879-1952: A Celebratory Symposium (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).

--- (2008a), “Globalization and the Great Divergence: Terms of Trade Booms and Volatility in the Poor

       Periphery 1782-1913,” European Review of Economic History 12 (December): 355-91.

--- (2008b), Trade and Poverty: When the Third World Fell Behind (ongoing).

Yousef, T. M. (2000), “Egyptian Commodity Markets in the Age of Economic Liberalism,” in Ş.

       Pamuk and J.G. Williamson (eds.) The Mediterranean Response to Globalization Before 1950

       (London: Routledge).




                                                  32
               Appendix 1: Ottoman 1800-1913 and Levant 1839-1913 Terms of Trade



        In order to extend the Ottoman net barter terms of trade back before 1854 and to link it to the

beginning of Pamuk’s (1987) 1854-1913 series, we constructed price indices that made use of price series

for six of the leading Ottoman exports taken from the following sources; wheat in Istanbul from

Pamuk (2001); opium in India from Clingingsmith and Williamson (2008); tobacco and raisins in

Philadelphia from Bezanson et al. (1936); silk and wool from microfilmed supplement to Gayer et

al. (1953). All current prices were converted to British pounds using the nominal Ottoman kuruş / British

pound (Pamuk, 2001) and US dollar/British pound exchange rates (Taylor 2003: $ to £). The prices of

raisins, silk and wool cited in these sources are c.i.f., so transportation and insurance costs needed to be

subtracted from them in order to reach f.o.b. prices in Ottoman ports. For this purpose, we relied on the

methodology and calculations undertaken in Pamuk (1978: Appendix I, pp. 187-99). Those calculations

used North (1958) for freight rates indices and Simon (1960) for insurance rates. We extended Simon’s

1861-1900 insurance rate trends back to 1800 assuming that insurance rates moved similar to North’s

freight rates but did not decline as fast in the period before 1860. We remained on the conservative side

and assumed that the difference between the c.i.f. and f.o.b prices did not fall as fast as the North freight

rate indices suggest. Trends in the f.o.b. series for raisins, silk and wool obtained through these

calculations were not very different from trends in the f.o.b. series for wheat, opium and tobacco as can be

seen in Table 2. The price indices for Ottoman exports were then calculated both with and without

weights, where the trade weights were guesstimates since these do not exist for this period. Since

Ottoman exports were quite diversified throughout the 19th century -- the share of any one commodity in

the total value of exports rarely exceeding 10 percent -- the two alternatives gave very similar results.

(Pamuk 1987: 150).

        British export price indices were used as a proxy for Ottoman import prices, thus yielding a terms

of trade series extending from 1800 to 1860 (Mitchell and Deane 1962: 331, based on Imlah). This series




                                                      33
was then linked to Pamuk’s 1987 Fisher index 1854-1913 series, using an arithmetic average of the seven

overlapping years.

Additional Appendix 1 References:

Bezanson, A., R. D. Gray, and M. Hussey (1936), Wholesale Prices in Philadelphia 1784-1861
        (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press).

Gayer, A.D., W.W. Rostow, and A.J. Schwartz (1953), Microfilmed Supplement to Volumes I and

        II of The Growth and Fluctuation of the British Economy 1790-1850 (Oxford: Clarendon

        Press).

Mitchell, B.R. and P. Deane (1962), Abstract of British Historical Statistics (Cambridge: Cambridge

        University Press).

North, D. C. (1958), “Ocean Freight Rates and Economic Development, 1750-1913,” The Journal of

        Economic History 18 (December): 537-55.

Pamuk, Ş. (1978), “Foreign Trade and Foreign Capital in the Ottoman Empire, 1830-1913,” Ph.D.

        dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.

Simon, M. (1960), The United States Balance of Payments, 1861-1900 (Princeton, N. J.: NBER Studies in

        Income and Wealth, XXIV).

Taylor, B. (2003), Global Financial Data: Encyclopedia of Global Financial Markets. Commercial

        database accessed via http://lib.harvard.edu under “E Resources” (August).




                                                    34
                            Appendix 2: Egyptian Terms of Trade 1796-1913



        Egypt’s terms of trade 1820-1913 has been constructed using only cotton prices to estimate

export price trends, a reasonable assumption since cotton was Egypt’s dominant 19th century export

commodity accounting for “one-third of exports in the 1840’s-50’s, over 80 percent in the 1880’s and

over 90 percent in 1910-14” (Issawi 1982: 31). For the years 1820-1899, Alexandrian cotton prices were

used (Issawi 1966: 447-8). For the remaining 14 years, American cotton prices were taken as a proxy for

Egyptian prices (US Department of Commerce 1975: 208). This US cotton price proxy was chosen

because Egyptian cotton followed closely “world, and more particularly American, prices” (Issawi 1982:

41).

        The series reported by Issawi gives the cotton price in dollars per qantar, so his was converted to

dollars per pound in order to make it consistent with the US series. In Egypt, the qantar was equal to

120.6135 pounds until 1835. Thus, for the period 1820-1935, the reported figures were divided by

120.6135 in order to obtain $/lb. After 1835, Egyptian qantars were equal to 99 pounds, so the reported

figures were divided by that number to get $/lb (Issawi 1966: 518).

        To get the real export price series, the resulting nominal price series was divided by the US

consumer price index for each of the years 1820-1913 (McCusker 1992: 327-30) and then indexed at

1880=100. In order to derive the terms of trade series, the nominal cotton price series was divided by the

price of British exports (a proxy for the price of Egyptian imports) for each year of the period (Mitchell

and Deane 1962: 331-32).

        Although cotton was always Egypt’s dominant export commodity, it increased in importance

throughout the century. Egypt’s other important exportable, wheat, held substantial export shares earlier

in the century (Issawi 1982: 31). In order to see if the cotton series accurately captures a more

comprehensive export price index, the price of wheat (US Department of Commerce 1975: 208-9) was

correlated against the price of Egyptian cotton. The correlation is very high, indicating that Egypt’s cotton

terms of trade series is likely to be a good indicator of its terms of trade as a whole. However, this


                                                      35
correlation is weaker for the earlier years of the series, when wheat occupied a greater share of export

trade.

          The prices used here differ from those reported in Issawi’s 1982 book, in spite of the fact that

cotton price data from Issawi’s 1966 book was used for both. Judging from the numbers presented by

Issawi (1982: 39), he may have failed to account for the change in the measurement of the Egyptian

qantar. Nonetheless, both series show an unambiguous improvement in Egyptian terms of trade during the

period.

          This terms of trade series, the Middle East regional aggregate (including Ottoman Empire and

Levant: Appendix 1) and all other series from the poor periphery are reported in Williamson (2008a).

Additional Appendix 2 References:

McCusker, J. J. (1992), How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator

          of Money Values in the Economy of the United States (Worcester: American Antiquarian

          Society).

Mitchell, B. R. and P. Deane (1962), Abstract of British Historical Statistics (Cambridge: Cambridge

          University Press).

US Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census (1975), Historical Statistics of the United States:

          Colonial Times to 1970 (Washington D.C.: US Government Printing Office).




                                                      36
                                   Appendix 3: Sources and Notes to Table 2



        Wages (unskilled construction workers) and consumer prices are for Istanbul, and are taken from

Pamuk (2001: Table 4.1, pp. 72-4). Prices of Ottoman imports and exports in and after 1860 are taken

from Pamuk (1987: Appendix 2).

        For the period before 1860, prices of imported textiles are taken from Imlah (1958:

Appendices). The import price estimates assume that, in this early period, the costs of transportation

and insurance declined at least as fast as the prices of f.o.b. textiles so that the decline in the c.i.f.

prices of imported textiles in Ottoman ports was at least as rapid as the f.o.b. prices in England.

Freight rates actually declined faster than prices of manufactures during this period, based on the North

indices cited below.

        Prices of Ottoman commodity exports for the period before 1860 are based on the indices

and sources discussed in Appendix 1. The price indices for various categories of Ottoman exports were

then calculated both with and without weights, where the trade weights were guesstimates since these do

not exist for this period. Since Ottoman exports were quite diversified throughout the 19th century, the

two alternatives gave very similar results. British export price indices were then used as a proxy for

Ottoman import prices, thus yielding a terms of trade series extending from 1800 to 1860 (Mitchell and

Deane 1962: 331, based on Imlah). This series was then linked to Pamuk’s 1987 Fisher index 1854-1913

series, using an arithmetic average of the seven overlapping years.




                                                     37
                                     Table 1

 Comparative De-Industrialization: Textile Import Penetration 1800s-1880s,
                        Around the Third World

                      Percent of Home Textile Market Supplied by
                              Foreign                   Domestic
                              Imports                   Industry

India 1800                           -6 to -7                  106 to 107
India 1833                              5                          95
India 1877                          58 to 65                    35 to 42

Ottoman 1820s                          3                           97
Ottoman 1870s                        65-75                        25-35
Ottoman 1910s                        74-80                        20-26

Indonesia 1822                        18.1                         81.9
Indonesia 1870                         62                           38
Indonesia 1913                        88.6                         11.4

Mexico 1800s                           25                           75
Mexico 1879                            40                           60

Source: Williamson (2008b: Table 5.3) for all but Ottoman observations, which are calculated
from Pamuk (1987: 115).




                                                 38
                                      Table 2

   Wage and Price Trends for the Ottoman Empire 1800-1913 (1860 = 100)

                                                 1800     1860      1880      1913

Nominal Wages                                      54      100       103       156
Consumer Prices                                    50      100         86      106
Real Wages                                       108       100       120       147


Imported Textile Prices, c.i.f.                  380       100         76           63
Imported Cotton Textile Prices, c.i.f.           440       100         76           63
Wheat Export Prices, f.o.b.                      103       100         86           90
Other Export Foodstuff Prices, f.o.b.              86      100         92           84
All Export Foodstuff Prices, f.o.b.                93      100         89           87
Raw Material Export Prices, f.o.b.                 80      100         63           54
All Export Prices, f.o.b.                          86      100         65           55


Own Wage in Textiles                               14       100       136      248
Own Wage in Exports                                63       100       158      284


Price All Exports/Price All Imports                39       100         83      89

Source: See Appendix 3.
Notes: All prices and wages are given in both silver (and gold after 1844) and in
British pounds as the exchange rate between the Ottoman kuruş (piaster) and the
British pound was consistent in all the benchmark years with the silver and gold
content of the two currencies. The own wage is the nominal wage divided by the
price of output in the given sector, e.g. textiles or exports.




                                         39
 Table 3 The Impact of Ottoman Policy and Railroads on Px/Pm 1800-1913:
                       Percentage Impact on Price

                                      Coastal               Interior
                                 Imports  Exports      Imports    Exports

 Policy and Transport Cost Conditions before Free Trade Treaties 1838-1841
Import tariff or export tax             5         10          5      10
Tax on interior trade                   0          0          8       8
Transport cost                          0          0         25      43
   Policy and Transport Cost Conditions from Free Trade Treaties to 1860
Import tariff or export tax             5         12          5      12
Tax on interior trade                   0          0          0       8
Transport cost                          0          0         25      43
                  Policy and Transport Cost Conditions 1861-1869
Import tariff or export tax             8          1          8       1
Tax on interior trade                   0          0          0       8
Transport cost                          0          0         25      43
                  Policy and Transport Cost Conditions 1870-1906
Import tariff or export tax             8          1          8       1
Tax on interior trade                   0          0          0       0
Transport cost                          0          0         18      28
                  Policy and Transport Cost Conditions 1907-1913
Import tariff or export tax            11          1         11       1
Tax on interior trade                   0          0          0       0
Transport cost                          0          0         18      28

   Changes in 1838-1841: assuming no change in transport cost (pre-rails)
Total Pm or Px                       0         +2          -8          -2
Px/Pm                                    +2                      +6
      Changes in 1860: assuming no change in transport cost (pre-rails)
Total Pm or Px                      +3         -11         +3         +11
Px/Pm                                    -14                     +8
          Changes in 1870: including change in transport cost (rails)
Transport cost                       0          0          -7         +15
Total Pm or Px                       0          0          -7         +23
Px/Pm                                     0                      +30
      Changes in 1907: assuming no change in transport cost (post-rails)
Total Pm or Px                      +3          0          +3           0
Px/Pm                                     -3                      -3

Notes: See text.




                                    40
                                Figure 1 Net Barter Terms of Trade 1796-1913 in the Middle East

                 300




                 250

                                    Egypt
                                    Ottoman Empire
                                    Middle East
                 200
                                    Levant
Terms of Trade




                 150




                 100




                 50




                  0
                   1796 1802 1808 1814 1820 1826 1832 1838 1844 1850 1856 1862 1868 1874 1880 1886 1892 1898 1904 1910




                                                                         41
                                                                                             Figure 2
                                                                             Latin American Terms of Trade 1811-1939

        160


        140



        120


        100
Px/Pm




        80



        60


        40
                                                                                                                                                                                Average LA TOT Unadjusted
                                                                                                                                                                                Average LA TOT Adjusted
        20



         0
              1811

                     1815

                            1819

                                   1823

                                          1827

                                                 1831

                                                        1835

                                                               1839

                                                                      1843

                                                                             1847

                                                                                    1851

                                                                                           1855

                                                                                                  1859

                                                                                                         1863

                                                                                                                1867

                                                                                                                       1871

                                                                                                                               1875

                                                                                                                                      1879

                                                                                                                                             1883

                                                                                                                                                    1887

                                                                                                                                                           1891

                                                                                                                                                                  1895

                                                                                                                                                                         1899

                                                                                                                                                                                 1903

                                                                                                                                                                                        1907

                                                                                                                                                                                               1911

                                                                                                                                                                                                      1915

                                                                                                                                                                                                             1919

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1923

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1927

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1931

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1935

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1939
                                                                                                                              Year
               Source: Unadjusted--C lingingsmith and Williamson (2004), Figure 9, based on data in C oatsworth and Williamson (2004a); Adjusted--
               see Appendix 1.




                                                                                                   42
                                Figure 3 The Poor Periphery: Net Barter Terms of Trade 1796-1913

                 250




                 200




                 150
Terms of Trade




                 100




                                                                                         Middle East

                 50                                                                      Latin America
                                                                                         Southeast Asia
                                                                                         European Periphery
                                                                                         South Asia


                  0
                   1796 1802 1808 1814 1820 1826 1832 1838 1844 1850 1856 1862 1868 1874 1880 1886 1892 1898 1904 1910




                                                                         43
