NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MARRIAGE MEETS THE JONESES:
RELATIVE INCOME, IDENTITY, AND MARITAL STATUS
Tara Watson
Sara McLanahan
Working Paper 14773
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14773

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2009

The authors thank Martha Bailey, Betsy Brainerd, Erika Franklin Fowler, Dave Frisvold, Claudia Goldin,
Leslie Hinkson, Erzo Luttmer, Edward Norton, Lucie Schmidt, Lara Shore-Sheppard, participants
in the MacArthur Network on Inequality, participants in the Fragile Families workshop, participants
in the Population Association of America meetings, participants in the Williams College Economics
Brown Bag, and participants in the University of Michigan Labor Lunch for valuable comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Tara Watson and Sara McLanahan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Marriage Meets the Joneses: Relative Income, Identity, and Marital Status
Tara Watson and Sara McLanahan
NBER Working Paper No. 14773
March 2009
JEL No. J12
ABSTRACT
In this paper we investigate the effect of relative income on marital status. We develop an identity
model based on Akerlof and Kranton (2000) and apply it to the marriage decision. The empirical evidence
is consistent with the idea that people are more likely to marry when their incomes approach a financial
level associated with idealized norms of marriage. We hypothesize that the "marriage ideal" is determined
by the median income in an individual's local reference group. After controlling flexibly for the absolute
level of income and a number of other factors, the ratio between a man's income and the marriage
ideal is a strong predictor of marital status – but only if he is below the ideal. For white men, relative
income considerations jointly drive co-residence, marriage, and fatherhood decisions. For black men,
relative income affects the marriage decision only, and relative income is tied to marital status even
for those living with a partner and children. Relative income concerns explain 10-15 percent of the
decline in marriage since 1970 for low income white men, and account for more than half of the persistent
marriage gap between high- and low-income men.

Tara Watson
Williams College
Department of Economics
Williamstown, MA 01267
and NBER
tara.watson@williams.edu
Sara McLanahan
Princeton University
265 Wallace Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
mclanaha@Princeton.EDU

Marriage Meets the Joneses:
Relative Income, Identity, and Marital Status
It is well known that low-income men are less likely to marry. Among 25-34-year-old
white men in the 2000 Census, for example, 34 percent of those in the bottom quarter of
the income distribution are married, compared with 67 percent of those in the top quarter
of the income distribution. For blacks, the numbers are 16 percent and 50 percent
respectively.1 A number of social and economic explanations for this phenomenon have
been proposed, many focusing on the role of economic security in determining whether a
man is “marriageable.” Here, we explore the possibility that relative income is an
important determinant of the marriage decision.

We build on Easterlin’s (1980)

suggestion that income relative to aspirations affects marriage and childbearing.
Our theoretical framework borrows heavily from Akerlof and Kranton’s (2000) model of
identity. We hypothesize that people marry in part to gain utility from thinking of
themselves in the category of “married people.”

This category entails certain

prescriptions for behavior and characteristics, including a particular standard of living
associated with marriage. When couples are far from achieving this norm, they benefit
less from marrying, and therefore are less likely to do so.

We hypothesize that the

income associated with an ideal marriage is not absolute, but differs depending on a
couple’s reference group.

Empirically, we explore reference groups determined by

metropolitan area, race, and education.
This paper contributes to a growing literature which attempts to isolate the causal
influence of relative income on a diverse set of behaviors and outcomes. Recent and
historic work has explored the link between relative income and subjective well-being
(Clark et al (2008), Luttmer (2005), and others), health outcomes and health behaviors
(Miller and Paxson (2006), Eibner and Evans (2005), and others), female labor supply

1

These figures exclude men living in group quarters. Married refers to currently married and living with a
spouse. White men are native-born non-Hispanic white men; black men are native-born non-Hispanic
black men. The analysis to follow is restricted to those residing in sample metropolitan areas; marriage
rates for the sample exhibit similar disparities between high- and low-income men.

2

(Neumark and Postlewaite, 1998)), consumption and savings (Denizer et al, 2000,
Kosicki, 1987, Duesenberry, 1949), homeownership (Withers, 1998), suicide (Daly,
Wilson, and Johnson, 2007), social capital (Fischer and Torgler, 2006), and even soccer
performance (Torgler and Schmidt, 2007).
The paper proceeds as follows.

Section I discusses the link between income and

marriage. In Section II, we develop a simple theoretical framework which incorporates
the notion of identity to the marriage decision. We then offer a descriptive analysis of
marriage patterns across metropolitan areas in Section III. Section IV describes the data
and empirical strategy, and section V reports results. Section VI presents the results of
simulations that assess the importance of relative income in explaining declining rates of
marriage over time and the marriage gap between high- and low-income men. Section
VII concludes.

I. Income and Marriage
Figures 1a, 1b and 1c illustrate two stylized facts. First, there is a strong positive
relationship between a man’s income and marital status in the U.S. in each Census year
between 1950 and 2000.

The correlation is strongest at the bottom of the income

distribution but weakens for men at the top of the distribution. Second, at each level of
income, marriage rates have fallen in every decade since 1960.2

Declines in the

probability of being married are particularly evident between 1970 and 1990 for all three
groups of young men studied – native non-Hispanic white, native non-Hispanic black,
and native Hispanic men.
Our main analysis focuses on the years 1980-2000. During that period, there was a
roughly 15 percentage point decline in marriage for young white men across the income
distribution (see Table 1). Declines for black men were 11 to 18 percentage points and
greatest in the second quartile of the income distribution. Table 1 indicates that these
2

The probability of being married at any given income level is similar in 1950 and 1960. However, as is
evident from Table 1, there was a rise in the overall likelihood of being married between 1950 and 1960
associated with rising incomes.

3

changes represent a larger percentage change in marriage at the bottom of the income
distribution for all groups.

In the bottom quartile of 25-to-34 year old white men, for

example, about 49 percent of men were married in 1980 and only 34 percent were
married in 2000.3 The decline was from 27 to 16 percent for black men and from 48 to
24 percent for Hispanic men.
Why do declines in marriage matter? Although it is difficult to separate the selection into
marriage from its causal influence, marriage is associated with a wide range of beneficial
outcomes for the married individuals, their children, and society more broadly. Marriage
promotion is also a key underpinning of recent anti-poverty efforts. The 1996 welfare
reform (PWRORA) controversially emphasized marriage as a means to ending welfare
dependency, and policy efforts to strengthen marriage have continued since that time
(Lerman, 2002).

Understanding why couples, and particularly low-income couples,

choose to marry or not marry is therefore of heightened policy interest.
As noted in a recent review article by Burstein (2007), economic models suggest reasons
why the poor might be either more or less likely to marry. The classic economic model
of marriage posited by Becker (1981) hinges on specialization in home production. The
gains from specialization and public goods (Lam, 1988) might be particularly important
to a disadvantaged couple. On the other hand, if men’s earnings are low relative to
women’s at the bottom of the distribution, the gains from specialization are muted and
marriage becomes less likely among disadvantaged couples. Furthermore, tax policy and
means-tested social insurance programs may discourage marriage, and the disincentives
might be particularly pronounced at the bottom of the income distribution.4
The structure of marriage markets also plays a potentially important role in discouraging
marriage at the bottom of the income distribution. Loughran (2002) and Gould and
Paserman (2003) document the negative effect of rising male income inequality on
3

Figures exclude men living in group quarters. Numbers are similar in our sample of metropolitan men.
Burstein (2007) includes a review of the empirical literature on the relationship between marriage and tax
and transfer policy. While the tax code and transfer policy generate significant marriage penalties and
subsidies for some couples, the evidence generally indicates small effects of these incentives on marriage
decisions.
4

4

marriage rates, arguing that income dispersion extends the female search process. Willis
(1999) posits that uneven sex ratios and adequate support for single mothers can lead to
an equilibrium in which low-income men remain unmarried and father children with
multiple partners.
The economic models of specialization and marriage markets suggest that low-income
men may be less likely to form stable co-residential partnerships. However, economic
theory is largely silent on how income affects the decision to marry once such
partnerships are formed.5 Unmarried cohabitation is an increasingly common status; in
the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth 50 percent of women aged 15 to 44 had
cohabited at some point and 59 percent of marriages were preceded by cohabitation
(Stevenson and Wolfers, 2007). A large majority of cohabiters expect or hope to marry
(Lichter, 2006). Still, a majority of cohabiting unions do not transition to marriage in five
years, either because of dissolution or inertia. More than a fifth of cohabiting couples in
2002 had been living together at least five years (Stevenson and Wolfers, 2007). These
facts imply that barriers to marriage exist among co-residing couples.
Qualitative work by Gibson-Davis, Edin, and McLanahan (2005) suggests that financial
status affects the marriage decision even among co-residing couples with children.6
Although all of the couples in the Gibson-Davis et al. study have young children together
and a majority co-reside, many opt to postpone marriage for financial reasons.
Respondents repeatedly point to markers of a middle class lifestyle as pre-requisites for
marriage, though the perceived necessities vary across individuals.7 In many cases,
because the stated financial goals are unlikely to be attainable, the high financial
expectations associated with marriage are likely to preclude marriage for the foreseeable
future. The notion that couples perceive financial security as a pre-requisite to marriage,
5

Because tax and transfer policy are sensitive to marital status per se, such policy might influence whether
co-residential partners marry. In the analysis, we control for state AFDC generosity and include year fixed
effects to account for national changes in tax policy.
6
We describe couples sharing a household as co-residing whether married or unmarried; we refer to
unmarried co-residing couples as cohabiting.
7
Examples include a washer-dryer, a single-family house with a garage, a couples “own place”, a car, and a
big wedding. We suspect that the financial level viewed as necessary for marriage depends on an
individual’s reference group.

5

even after choosing to live and bear children together, suggests that existing economic
models offer an incomplete picture of the marriage decision.
Here we invoke the concept of identity developed by Akerlof and Kranton (2000) to
explain the puzzle. The decision of a couple to marry once a co-residential partnership
has been formed is largely the decision to identify publicly and privately as a married
couple. The Gibson-Davis et al. study suggests that marriage is associated with a set of
prescriptions (norms) for behavior and financial status. Without the financial wherewithal
to meet these expectations, cohabitation is preferable to marriage. One couple in the
study, for example, is embarrassed to publicly acknowledge their marriage because they
lack financial independence and still live at home. Translated into the Akerlof and
Kranton (2000) identity framework, a couple failing to achieve the financial prescriptions
associated with marriage suffers a utility loss if they choose to enter the category of
married people.
The notion that marriage is associated with the realization of financial norms is not new.
Easterlin (1980) posits that couples aspire to a certain standard of living before marrying.
Wilson (1987), Oppenheimer, Kalmjin, and Lim (1997), and Brown and Kesselring
(2003) argue that male “marriageability” is contingent on steady employment or a
minimum level of earnings. Qualitative work by Edin (2000) and Gibson-Davis, Edin,
and McLanahan (2005) also points to the importance of financial stability as a precursor
to marriage.
Less clear is how such financial prescriptions are determined. Easterlin (1980) suggests
that financial aspirations stem from the standard of living one experienced as a young
adult. But the Gibson-Davis et al. respondents appear to reference a set of norms
extending beyond their own life experiences. Here we analyze local reference groups for example, those comprised of others in one’s own metropolitan area, race/ethnicity,
and/or education category. We are guided by the theme of a “middle class lifestyle” that
runs throughout the Gibson-Davis et al study; we assume that the ideal income targeted
by men is that of the median fully employed man in his reference group. However, we

6

also explore how the theoretical middle class marriage ideal compares to empirically
“estimated ideals” which are generated based on marriage patterns in the data.
Our theoretical framework abstracts from marriage market considerations and the search
process. Empirically, we address the marriage market issue in two ways. First, in the
main analysis, we control for race/ethnicity-specific sex ratios in the metropolitan area
and a man’s rank in the local race/ethnicity-specific income distribution. Second, we
replicate the main analysis restricting the sample to those men already living with a
partner. We expect marriage market search considerations to be considerably dampened
for co-residing men.

II. A Model of Income, Identity, and Marriage
Suppose a locality has an equal number of men and women in the marriage market. Each
person is endowed with income drawn from the same distribution. Suppose further that
the desirability of men and women is represented by their income Yi . We abstract from
the matching process and assume men and women are matched by the level of income
such that within each couple the man and the woman have equal levels of income. The
couples may decide to cohabit or marry.

The value of marrying is determined by

background characteristics (such as age, education, race, income, characteristics of peers)
which in turn affect the financial returns and personal returns to marriage. For example,
married couples might receive financial benefits or incur costs because of tax and welfare
policies that interact with their level of income. The personal returns include social
rewards for marriage from family and friends as well as the effect of marrying on one’s
self-image.
Following the model of identity outlined in Akerlof and Kranton (2000), we describe
“married people” as one group c in a set of social categories C with which men and
women may choose to identify. Prescriptions P describe the ideal characteristics and
behavior for each category. For example, married people might be expected to have a
high level of income, to live in their own residence apart from extended family, to stay

7

home instead of going to the bar, and to exhibit high levels of paternal involvement in
childrearing.
We assume the category “cohabiting people” has no set of prescriptions. While this is a
simplification, the financial hurdle for cohabitation is likely to be much lower than that
for marriage.

In a study of the relationship between education, marriage and

cohabitiation, Thorton, Axinn, and Teachman (1995) posit that schooling and the
associated earning power may be less important for cohabitation than for marriage. The
qualitative evidence from Gibson-Davis, Edin, and McLanahan (2005) also suggests that
cohabitation involves weaker financial prescriptions; many respondents already lived
together but viewed their economic situation as inadequate for marriage.
An individual’s self-image I i depends on the match between his or her behavior and
characteristics with the ideals prescribed for his or her category. In our simple model, we
focus on the prescription that married people have a certain level of income. We also
allow a random error term ε i with mean zero to affect an individual’s self image
associated with any given category. Thus, an individual’s utility can be described by:
U i = U i (Yi , I i )
where Ii=Ii (Yi, ci, P, εic) ,
∂U i / ∂Yi ; 0 , and
∂U i / ∂I i ; 0
That is, in general an individual’s utility depends on his income and self-image. Selfimage, in turn, is a function of interactions between an individual’s income, the category
with which he identifies, the prescriptions for that category, and a random error term.
Suppose that the financial prescription for a married person is at least Yideal , where Yideal is
the median income of a given reference group. The identity payoff for a married person
is then:

I i = I m ar − t (max(0,1 −

8

Yi
)) + ε imar ,
Yideal

where t is a positive scalar describing the identity loss associated with falling below the
“marriage ideal”. The identity payoff for cohabiting is:
I i = Icohab + ε icohab
and we assume I m ar ; Icohab . In other words, on average a married person meeting the
ideal has a higher self-image than a cohabiting person.
In making the decision whether to marry, an individual compares the utility from
cohabiting and marriage.

The self-image gained through marriage (relative to

cohabitation) is
I i = (I m ar − I cohab ) − t (max(0,1 −

Yi
)) + (ε imar − ε icohab )
Yideal

The gains to self-image through marriage tend to increase with the average gain in selfimage from marriage and an individual’s income.

The gains decrease with a higher

“marriage ideal” and a higher penalty t for deviating from the norm.
This framework provides some simple comparative statics. The gain to marriage is
increasing in Yi for Yi < Yideal (

∂I
∂I
= t / Yideal ) and constant in Yi for Yi ; Yideal (
= 0) .
∂Yi
∂Yi

Similarly, an increase in the marriage ideal Yideal is associated with a decrease in the gain
to marriage for low values of Yi but no change in the gain for high values of Yi. A higher
level of t strengthens the relationship between Yi and marriage below the marriage ideal,
and reduces the overall marriage rate holding other factors constant.
The model assumes that Yideal is the median income of a relevant reference group. We
follow this approach in the empirical work, defining reference groups to consist of fully
employed working age men in the same metropolitan area, race/ethnicity group, and/or
education group as the individual. In the next section, we examine marriage patterns in
the data. We also generate “estimated ideals” from the data and compare them to the
theoretical “middle class” ideal of the reference group median.

9

III. Estimated and Theoretical Marriage Ideals

Figures 1a, 1b, and 1c demonstrate a positive relationship between marriage and income
at the national level for men ages 25 to 34. The relationship is strongest at the bottom of
the income distribution and weaker at the top of the income distribution. These pictures,
however, combine men in many metropolitan areas who are likely to have different
reference groups and, according to our theoretical framework, different perceptions of the
level income required for marriage. If reference groups are formed at the metropolitan
area level, the model predicts a significant flattening in the relationship between income
and marriage within each metropolitan area.
We visually examine the income-marriage relationship within each metropolitan area,
year and race/ethnicity group. Examples of these relationships for white men in selected
metropolitan areas are shown in Figure 2. The graphs suggest that, in the white sample,
the flattening of the income-marriage relationship is evident within most metropolitan
areas and that the apparent point of flattening differs across metropolitan areas.8
To describe the income-marriage relationship in each metropolitan area, we consider the
following equation:
Pr(mari ) = α 0 + α1 * Yi + α 2 *(Yi * highinc) + α 3 * highinc + ε i ,
where Yi is an individual i’s income, highinc is an indicator that Yi exceeds some value j.
In estimating this descriptive model, a significant negative value for α 2 indicates a
flattening of the income-marriage relationship around point j.

We run this regression

multiple times for each metropolitan area and year and race/ethnicity group in our sample
using a linear probability model, searching across potential values of j.9 Among values of
j which yield statistically significant negative values of α 2 , we choose the one generating
the regression model with the highest R-squared. The selected value of j represents the

8

The pattern of flattening is less evident in the black sample, as discussed below.
Potential values of j are restricted to those between the 20th and 80th percentile of income of fully
employed men in the metropolitan area, year, and race group, and searched over $500 increments.

9

10

point at which the relationship between income and marriage flattens in the data; we refer
to it as the “estimated ideal.”10
There is a positive relationship between income and marriage for low-income men within
all metropolitan areas.

For the white male sample, there is at least one significant

negative slope change in the relevant range for 319 of 330 metropolitan area-year cells –
that is, there is a point of flattening of the income-marriage relationship. The “estimated
ideal” is shown as a dashed line for five large metropolitan areas in Figure 2. Figure 2
also includes solid lines representing theoretical “middle class” ideals – the median
income of fully employed men in the reference group for each metropolitan area and
year.
Means of the estimated ideals for men in the sample are shown in Table 2. The values of
the ideals vary substantially across metropolitan areas. For about half of men in the white
sample, the estimated ideal falls between the 40th and the 60th percentile of the earnings
distribution of fully employed working aged men.11 Figure 3 illustrates the correlation
between the estimated ideal and the theoretical middle class ideal (median earnings of
fully employed men) across metropolitan areas in the white male sample. The estimated
marriage ideal is higher in high-income areas.
Table 3 presents regression analysis exploring the link between the estimated ideal and
the theoretical middle class ideal. Results indicate that the estimated ideal is closely tied
to the theoretical ideal, both across metropolitan areas in any given year and within
metropolitan areas over time. A 1 percent increase in median earnings of fully employed
men is associated with a 1 to 1.7 percent increase in the estimated ideal, after controlling
for metropolitan area fixed effects and other metropolitan area characteristics.

10

This procedure is similar to one used in Card, Mas, and Rothstein (2008) to identify neighborhood
tipping points in metropolitan areas.
11
By construction, the estimated ideal falls between the 20th and 80th percentile of the income of fully
employed men in the metropolitan area and race/ethnicity group. For black men, the estimated ideal varies
widely; it falls between the 40th and 60th percentiles less than a third of the time.

11

The pattern of flattening in the income-marriage relationship is less evident in the black
sample. Unlike in the white sample, marital status and income are positively related
throughout the income distribution for black men in many metropolitan areas. In 57 out
of 255 metropolitan area-year cells, there is no statistically significant flattening of the
relationship in the relevant range.12

Estimated ideals vary widely and are not

significantly related to median earnings except in the 1980 cross-section (see Table 3).13
The analysis that follows also indicates that models using the race/ethnicity specific
reference group do not perform well for the black male sample. Rather, educationspecific reference groups generate results that are consistent with the theoretical
framework for black men.
Although there is a point at which the income-marriage relationship flattens in almost all
metropolitan areas for white men (and in many metropolitan areas for black and Hispanic
men), there are limitations to using the “estimated ideal” in the formal analysis to follow.
First, these ideals are chosen to fit the predictions of the model.

It is therefore

inappropriate to use them to test the validity of the model. Second, the “estimated ideals”
are sensitive to outliers in the data.
Instead, we rely on a different proxy for the marriage ideal.

The level of income

perceived to be required for marriage is unobservable and presumably differs across
individuals. In the analysis that follows, we use the median income in a local reference
group (which we refer to as the theoretical middle class ideal) as a proxy for the marriage
ideal. The qualitative evidence described by Gibson-Davis et al. suggests that lowincome men aspire to a middle class lifestyle prior to marriage, which we define as the
median earnings of a fully employed (full-time full-year) man in the relevant reference
group. We consider the median income of (1) full employed (full-time full-year) male
workers in one’s metropolitan area and race/ethnicity group, and (2) fully employed male

12

The relevant range is the 20th through 80th income percentile of fully employed black men in the
metropolitan area and year.
13
For the Hispanic sample, there is no significant flattening in 37 of 121 metropolitan area-year cells,
particularly in those cells with small sample sizes. Estimated ideals are noisy for the Hispanic sample.

12

workers in one’s metropolitan area and education group, and (3) fully employed male
workers in one’s metropolitan area, education group and race/ethnicity group.
The mean values of the theoretical middle class ideals are reported in Table 2. Because
the ideal is determined by fully employed adult men of all ages, the income associated
with the marriage ideal is higher than that of the median man in the sample; 66-93
percent of men fall below the ideal depending on the sample, year, and reference group.
The values of the ideals stay fairly constant over time for the white and black samples
and fall for the Hispanic samples.14 Due to rising inequality, the ratio of income to the
ideal is declining for those below the ideal but increasing for those above the ideal.
Couples below the ideal are farther from it, and couples above the ideal increasingly
exceed it. For both the white and Hispanic samples, this pattern is evident using all three
reference groups with both the one-earner and two-earner methodologies. For the black
sample, relative incomes for those below the ideal fell in the 1980s but recovered in the
1990s.
We focus on how male income compares to a male earnings in the reference group.
Although couples presumably consider their joint potential income when making the
marriage decision, female income is unobservable for many men in our sample.
Furthermore, female labor supply is endogenous to the marriage decision. Nevertheless,
we also experiment with allowing the “marriage ideal” to be a function of estimated
potential earnings of two earners. The two-earner analysis is discussed in the appendix.
Results are fairly similar using the one-earner and two-earner approaches.

IV. Data and Empirical Strategy

We use the 5% IPUMS sample of the 1980-2000 U.S. Censuses to investigate the
determinants of marriage. We limit our analysis to residents of 110 metropolitan areas
for which we have housing price data; the metropolitan areas are matched to be as

14

As discussed in the appendix, the two-earner estimated ideals generally increase over time, consistent
with increased earnings power for women over the time period.

13

geographically consistent as possible across three sample years.15 We use samples for
three demographic groups: native born non-Hispanic white men ages 25-34, native born
non-Hispanic black men, and native born Hispanic men ages 25-34.16 We choose ages
25-34 so that respondents are likely to have completed school and are observed at a point
likely to be close to the timing of their marriage decision. We exclude the foreign born
population because some of these individuals may derive norms and expectations about
marriage from their home countries.
A limitation of the Census sample is that it is a repeated cross-section rather than a panel.
Therefore, we cannot evaluate how the exact timing of the marriage decision relates to
the income trajectory for an individual. However, we believe that this disadvantage is
outweighed by the very large sample sizes; there are over one million 25-34-year-old
men in the non-Hispanic white sample. The large samples allow us to precisely estimate
the effects of relative income on marital status while controlling very flexibly for
absolute income and a number of other potential confounders.
We use reported total real income last year for each man in the Census sample as a proxy
for his earnings at the time of the marriage decision. Income is top-coded and bottomcoded in the public use data. To minimize the effect of top- and bottom-coding, and to
exclude non-positive reported incomes, we drop men in the top and bottom 5 percent of
each metropolitan area’s income distribution in each year. In the samples of black and
Hispanic men, we exclude the top and bottom 10 percent.
As noted above, our main analysis assumes that the male in the relationship aspires to the
median income of a fully employed (full-time full-year) man within a particular reference
group.

Models incorporating the potential earnings of women are discussed in the

appendix. Throughout the analysis, reference groups are assumed to operate within
metropolitan areas. Norms that are perpetuated at a national level (for example, through
15

Thanks to Lara Shore-Sheppard for sharing the metropolitan area match.
To be included in the sample, a metropolitan area must have at least 100 18-to-64 year-old men in the
race/ethnicity group in the PUMS for all three Census years. This ensures that the values of the marriage
ideal are reliably estimated. The restriction results in 85 metropolitan areas for the native non-Hispanic
black sample and 47 metropolitan areas for the native Hispanic sample.

16

14

television) are not identified here. Within metropolitan areas, we explore reference
groups determined by race and/or education.
According to the theoretical model, the ratio of one’s own income to the marriage ideal
should affect the marriage decision, but only for those below the ideal. The preferred
specification is as follows:
Pr(mari ) = β1 * underi *

Yi
Y
+ β 2 *(1 − underi ) * i + β3 * underi
Yideal
Yideal

β 4 * X i + γ ycat + α yrank + σ age + ∂ educyr + θ metro + ε i
where Pr(mari ) is the probability individual i is married, Underi is an indicator
suggesting i is below the marriage ideal,

Yi
is the ratio of i's income to the ideal, X i is
Yideal

a vector of individual characteristics, γ ycat is a vector of dummies indicating income
categories adjusted for cost-of-living (corresponding to the year-specific percentile rank
in the national housing-price adjusted income distribution), α yrank is a vector of dummies
indicating the individual’s decile income rank in his metropolitan area (withinrace/ethnicity group), σ age represents individual age dummies,

∂ educyr represents

education group-year dummies, θ metro indicates metropolitan area fixed effects and εi is an
error term.17 The key coefficients are β1 , the effect of the ratio for those under the ideal,
and β 2 , the effect of the ratio for those above the ideal. The theoretical framework
predicts that β1 is positive and β 2 is zero.
In the preferred specification, we control for income quite flexibly. A dummy for each
percentile group of the national cost-of-living adjusted income distribution in each year is
included in the model, for a total of 300 categories.18 Our models include a number of
other individual level control variables. Four education categories are included – less
17

The equations are estimated using the linear probability model for ease of interpretation. The main
results are qualitatively similar if one uses probit models instead.
18
The cost-of-living adjustment is calculated using the formula suggested by Albouy (2008), which
weights housing-related prices using a 0.36 share of expenditures. Alternative adjustments are used in the
sensitivity analysis.

15

than high school, high school exactly, some college, and college graduate or more – and
interacted with year dummies so that the effect of education is allowed to vary over time.
Individual age dummies and indicators for the man’s employment status and whether he
is employed full-time full-year are also included.

The preferred specifications

incorporate dummies for the individual’s decile rank in the metropolitan area.
We incorporate a rich set of metropolitan area control variables as well. All models
include metropolitan area fixed effects to account for unobserved characteristics of cities
that do not change over time. We also control for demographic and socioeconomic
characteristics of the metropolitan residents – fraction native black, fraction native
Hispanic, fraction foreign-born, fraction with a high school degree, fraction with some
college, fraction with a college degree or more, fraction under 18, and fraction under 65.
We control for the male employment-to-population ratio and predicted male and female
employment levels based on 1980 industrial mix. We include additional controls for the
race/ethnicity specific sex ratios in the metropolitan area, the ACCRA housing price
index, the log of real housing-price-adjusted AFDC/TANF benefits for a family of three
in the state, and the log of the metropolitan area population.19
Because we control very flexibly for individual income and metropolitan area fixed
effects, the key source of variation stems from a man’s relative income – how his income
relates to the marriage ideal determined by his reference group. We hypothesize that a
low-income man is less likely to marry if he lives in a metropolitan area with highincome men, holding his own income and income rank constant. A sufficiently highincome man, on the other hand, is unaffected by others being rich in his reference group.
Table 4 shows means for each of the three samples. After excluding the top and bottom 5
percent of the national income distribution, those living in group quarters, and those in
excluded metropolitan areas, the final sample of native non-Hispanic white men is 1.16
million observations. For black men, the final sample size is roughly 143,000 and for

19

The welfare benefits data are from the University of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research state-level
transfer program information, available at www.ukcpr.org.

16

Hispanic men the sample is about 67,000.20

The marriage rate fell by about 15

percentage points between 1980 and 2000 for both the white sample and the black
sample; the Hispanic sample experienced larger declines in marriage. Rates of marriage
are lowest and rates of cohabitation are highest for the black sample. For all three
samples, the average income of sample men remained stable or declined.21

V. Results
A. Analysis of Native Born Non-Hispanic White Men

The model suggests that relative income matters to the marriage decision. In particular, a
man is more likely to marry when his income approaches a marriage ideal. The ratio of
income to the ideal is expected to predict marital status below the ideal, but not above the
ideal.
Our results are foreshadowed by Figure 4.

Here we divide the white sample into

categories based on the ratio of each man’s income to the theoretical marriage ideal. In
each Census year, the probability of marriage is sharply increasing with the ratio to the
ideal until a ratio of 1.0 to 1.3. Above 1.3, the relationship between the ratio and
marriage is flat. This pattern is consistent with the predictions of the model. Of course,
there are many other factors that could be contributing to the observed relationship
between the ratio to the ideal and marriage, including non-linearities in the incomemarriage relationship. We turn to regression analysis to isolate the effect of relative
income.
In Table 5, we examine the relative income hypothesis in a linear probability model.
Column I indicates that a man’s absolute income is strongly related to his marital status.
An additional log point of income raises the probability of being married by 17
percentage points, holding many individual and metropolitan area characteristics
constant.

This result is consistent with the large literature suggesting that absolute

income is an important predictor of marriage. Column II of Table 5 indicates that,
20

The previous section describes sample restrictions for the black and Hispanic samples. The samples
include fewer metropolitan areas and exclude the top and bottom ten percent of the income distributions.
21
As discussed in the appendix, estimated potential earnings of women increased substantially.

17

controlling log-linearly for his own income, a man is 4.4 percentage points less likely to
be married if his income falls below the marriage ideal.
The theoretical framework implies that is the ratio of income to the ideal that affects
marital status. As shown in column III, the ratio of a man’s own income to the ideal has
a highly significant relationship to marriage below the ideal. The ratio between income
and the ideal is also statistically significant for men above the ideal, but the coefficient is
much smaller.
The evidence in the first three columns is consistent with the idea that relative income is
important, but could also reflect an underlying non-linear relationship between income
and marriage. We prefer a more flexible specification. We create 100 dummy variables
for each year corresponding to income percentile groups of the national income
distribution.22 Incorporating the nearly 300 income dummy variables into the model, we
find results that are highly consistent with the theoretical predictions. Column IV of
Table 5 shows that the ratio to the ideal significantly affects the probability of marriage
below the ideal, but not above ideal. In column V, we add 9 dummies indicating the
decile rank category in the metropolitan area and the results hold.
We prefer the model in column V of Table 5 because it is conservative. We flexibly
account for both absolute income and metropolitan area rank. The magnitude of the
coefficient suggests that moving one’s income from the 70 to 80 percent of the marriage
ideal, for example, increases the probability of marriage by 2.4 percentage points. In
contrast, moving from 120 to 130 percent of the ideal increases marriage by less than 0.1
percentage point, and the effect is statistically indistinguishable from zero. We refer to
the model in column V as our baseline model.
We next allow the effect of the ratio to vary by income decile rank in the metropolitan
area (controlling for the direct effect of decile rank and controlling flexibly for absolute
income). The results of this analysis are presented in Figure 5. The effect of the ratio to
22

The distribution accounts for cost-of-living differences across metropolitan areas.

18

the marriage ideal is statistically significant in the second through seventh deciles and
peaks in the third decile. As noted above, roughly 70 percent of the sample lies below
the marriage ideal, so these results are highly consistent with the model. The absence of
an effect for the bottom decile may reflect measurement error and the smaller sample
size, or may indicate that the behavior of the bottom decile individuals is not affected by
a middle class reference group.23
The baseline model is consistent with the theory outlined above, in which we expect the
effect of relative income to depend on where an individual stands relative to an ideal. In
the appendix, we consider an alternative specification, which considers the relationship
between the level of the ideal and marital status, conditional on own income.24 Results
using this alternative approach are shown in Appendix Table 1. A higher middle class
ideal is indeed associated with a lower probability of marriage. After controlling for
absolute income (column IV), a 10 percent higher marriage ideal is associated with a 1.1
percentage point lower probability of marriage for those below the ideal (conditional on
own income). There is no relationship between the level of the ideal and marital status for
those above the ideal. A decile-by-decile analysis shows that the significant effects of a
rise in the marriage ideal occur in the fourth and fifth deciles (Appendix Figure 1).
Although the results using the alternative specification are largely consistent with those
from our baseline model, the baseline specification is more robust and more closely
aligned with our theoretical framework. We therefore proceed using the baseline model.
In sum, for young white men, relative income is linked to marital status for those below
the middle class marriage ideal, but not for those above the ideal. The association is
robust to the inclusion of flexible controls for absolute income and rank. We now
consider education-group-specific reference groups.

23

Recall that the bottom five percent of the distribution is dropped from the analysis.
This approach is analogous to that used in Luttmer (2005), in which a reference group’s average income
determines happiness, conditional on own income.

24

19

B. Education-Based Reference Groups

In the baseline model, we define reference groups based on race and ethnicity because
these groups appear to be highly relevant for marriage markets. However, marriage
norms may be derived based on different reference groups - for example, within
education groups or within race/ethnicity and education groups.
In Appendix Table 2, we consider three possible reference groups for the analysis of
white men:

within race/ethnicity group, within education group, and within

race/ethnicity and education group. All reference groups are defined within metropolitan
areas. We use the preferred specification which controls flexibly for income and rank.
Overall, the race/ethnicity based reference group yields results that most closely align
with the predictions of the theoretical framework.
We also examine the reference groups separately for men of different education levels.
The baseline reference group (defined by metropolitan area and race/ethnicity) performs
well for three of four education groups. The results are consistent with the model for
men with less than high school, high school exactly, and some college. The non-collegegraduates appear to base marriage decisions, in part, on how their earnings compare to
those of other white workers in the metropolitan area.

Using education and

race/ethnicity-specific reference groups also generate results that are consistent with the
theoretical framework.
For college graduates, the baseline specification offers results that are only marginally
consistent with the model. The within-race within-education group specification is an
improvement.

It appears that white college graduates refer to other white college

graduates to define the marriage ideal.

C. Results for Black and Hispanic Men

Of particular policy concern is the low rate of marriage among disadvantaged minorities.
The first columns of Table 6 repeat the baseline analyses for native non-Hispanic black
men. As shown in column I, the ratio of income to the ideal does increase the odds of

20

marriage for black men below the ideal. However, to a lesser extent, it also increases the
odds of marriage for those above the ideal. Thus, the results are less consistent with the
theoretical framework than for the white sample. This is true using both the one-earner
and two-earner methodologies (see Appendix Table 4).
It may be the case that black men or couples look beyond the black community as they
derive norms about the level of income required for marriage.25

We explore three

potential reference groups: within race/ethnicity group, within education group, and
within race/ethnicity and education group. All three reference groups appear to have
some relevance – the slope is higher under the ideal than over the ideal in all three cases.
Using the education group as the reference group offers results which have the most
significant difference between the under and over coefficients, and is the only
specification which has an insignificant effect of the ratio above the ideal as predicted by
the model. For black men, the education-based reference group generates results which
are most consistent with the theoretical framework, and it is the preferred specification
for this sample.
Table 6 also reports results for Hispanic men. For the Hispanic sample, the race/ethnicity
specific reference group performs well. Hispanic men exhibit a link between relative
income and marriage, but only when their earnings lie below a middle class ideal defined
by the earnings of other Hispanic men.

D. Cohabitation and Fatherhood

Our theoretical framework is motivated by qualitative work suggesting that some couples
defer marriage even when already living together with children.

Here we explore

whether the relative income effects are evident among cohabiting couples and cohabiting
couples with children. Because search considerations are likely to be dampened for
25

Alternatively, it is possible that the 50th percentile is an inappropriate benchmark. Empirical analysis
suggests that other benchmarks do not perform significantly better (analysis not shown). We also examine
whether the race/ethnicity-based reference group has more salience in more highly segregated metropolitan
areas. While we do find some suggestion that this is the case, the results are fragile and we do not present
them here.

21

cohabiting couples, this exercise helps us to isolate the effect of relative income on the
marriage decision, conditional on a partnership.26 It also allows us examine whether the
effect of relative income on marriage appears to stem from declines in cohabitation or
declines in men living alone (not co-residing with a partner), and whether relative income
drives co-residential fatherhood.
There are several limitations to this analysis. First, for unmarried men, a cohabiting
relationship can only be observed in the Census if the man or his partner is the household
head. We limit the analysis in this section to men who are household heads or have
partners or spouses who are household heads (the household head sample).

This

introduces selection bias to the extent that the decision to form a separate household is
linked to the decision to co-reside with a partner. In addition, the 1980 Census does not
distinguish between unmarried partners and roommates. For consistency, we define an
unmarried man as cohabiting if he has either a female roommate or an unmarried partner
in all three Census years.27
Further complications arise in evaluating the decision to have children. A man is listed as
having children in the household if he lives with his own children or his step-children; the
latter label is endogenous to the marriage decision. Also, it is not possible to observe
fatherhood if the man does not live in the same household as is children. Our solution is
to describe the man as living with children if he lives with a female partner who has
children (regardless of whether they are described as his own). Because non-residential
fatherhood is unobservable, the outcome observed is co-residential fatherhood.
Table 7 presents the results of the cohabitation and fatherhood analysis. All regressions
use the one-earner methodology and the preferred baseline specification which includes
dummy variables for absolute income and decile rank. The reference group is defined by
race/ethnicity for the white sample and defined by education for the black sample.

26

Of course, partner search may continue within the context of cohabitation and marriage.
In the 1990 and 2000 Censuses, roughly three quarters of cohabiting men are living with unmarried
partners rather than female roommates.

27

22

The results for the white household head sample are shown in the first four columns of
Panel A of Table 7. Restricting to household heads reduces the white male sample size by
about 15 percent. As seen in the first column, the baseline effect of relative income on
marriage is substantially weaker than when using the full sample (column V of Table 5),
though still significant at the 10 percent level.28 The second and third columns of Table 7
suggest that the increase in marriage due to relative income is associated with a
commensurate decline in living alone. There is no effect of relative income on unmarried
cohabitation in the white sample.
Columns V and VI of Table 7 further restrict the sample to a subsample of couples who
live together. Within couples that co-reside (either in cohabitation or marriage), there is
no strong effect of relative income on marriage, as shown in column V. Furthermore,
there is no effect of relative income on marriage among couples that already co-reside
with children (column VII). Taken together, the results for the white sample suggest that
relative income affects marital status for couples who would otherwise be living
separately.29
We also examine the effect of relative income on the fatherhood decision (or, more
accurately, the decision to co-reside with children). In columns IV and VI it is evident
that the decision to co-reside with kids follows a similar pattern to the pattern for
marriage; this is the case whether one considers all men or just those who live with a
partner. The ratio of income to the marriage ideal is a strong predictor of co-residential
fatherhood below the ideal and much less so above the ideal. In sum, the evidence
suggests that reaching the “marriage ideal” jointly spurs co-residence, marriage, and
children among white men. This is the case even among less educated white men (results
not shown).

28

This decline in effect size may indicate that some of the effect of relative income on marriage arises
along with formation of independent households.
29
These models include controls for race/ethnicity-specific sex ratios in the metropolitan area and dummies
indicating decile rank in the local race/ethnicity-specific income distribution. Nevertheless, because nonco-residential partnerships are unobserved, we cannot rule out the possibility that search or marriage market
considerations are driving the relationship between relative income and marriage for this group.

23

The pattern is substantially different for black men, as shown in Panel B of Table 7.
About 40 percent of the sample is lost when we restrict to household heads, but the
results are qualitatively similar to the preferred specification (reported in column II of
Table 6). Panel B of Table 7 indicates that, in contrast to the white sample, the effect of
relative income on marriage is associated with a large decline in cohabitation for black
men (see column II). Higher relative income is associated with marriage among lowincome black men who would otherwise be cohabiting. Furthermore, among co-residing
couples, higher relative income is associated with a higher likelihood of marriage for
those below the marriage ideal (see column V). Marriage is linked to relative income
considerations even among co-residing couples with children, as shown in column VII.
As is evident in columns IV and VI, the decision to co-reside with children or to have
children within the context of a co-residential relationship is not related to the ratio
variables for black men. For black men, the decision to live with a partner (in marriage
or cohabitation) and to be a co-residential father appears to be largely independent of
relative income considerations. However, the decision to marry depends on the ratio of
income to the ideal for those below the ideal, even among those already co-residing with
a partner and children. The results suggest that relative income affects the decision to
marry, conditional on choosing a particular partner.
We perform a similar analysis for Hispanic men (not shown). These men appear to
exhibit patterns that fall somewhat in between white and black men. However, the
standard errors are large and we cannot say anything definitive.
In sum, relative income is linked to the decision to marry among white and black men.
Among white men, the decisions to live with a partner and to have children are also
affected by relative income, perhaps because co-residence, marriage, and childbearing are
fairly tightly linked. For black men, this is not the case. Relative income does not appear
to affect the decision to co-reside or to be a co-resident father. Relative income does,
however, affect the decision to marry, even among those living with their partner and
children.

24

E. Robustness

In this sub-section we assess the robustness of our results to a variety of specifications.
The analysis is presented in Table 8, with the baseline analysis in column I. For the black
sample, we present the sensitivity analysis using the education-based reference group.
However, results are also consistent with the baseline when using the race/ethnicity-based
reference group for the black sample (not shown).
First, we consider the dependent variable. In the main specification individuals are
defined as married if they are currently married and living with their spouse. In column
II, we use the category “ever married” as the dependent variable. Our model speaks to
the decision to marry rather than to the decision to remain married, so it is unsurprising
that the results are not substantially changed.30 We also see in column III that the divorce
decision is unaffected by relative income considerations of the type explored here.31
Next, we examine the role of housing prices. In the baseline, we adjust for cost-of-living
differences by assuming 0.36 of expenditures are affected by housing prices, as suggested
by Albouy (2008). However, it is possible that the adjustment does not accurately reflect
differences in cost-of-living, implying that the identified effect could result from absolute
rather than relative income. In column IV we try an unadjusted measure of income and
in column V we use an expenditure share of 0.5. In column VI, we drop the control for
the housing price index. None of these alternative approaches to accounting for housing
price differentials across metropolitan areas make a substantive difference to the results.
In column VII, we run the regressions without excluding the tails of the income
distribution.

When the top and bottom five percent of the income distribution are

included, the white sample results are muted but retain their significance. We suspect the

30

An exception is that the results for the Hispanic sample are sensitive to the ever-married and married
distinction. This might stem from men who live apart from their spouses, who are considered ever married
but not married now according to our definitions.
31
Given that the sample is comprised of young men, divorce is an uncommon outcome. Relative income
considerations could affect the divorce decision more generally.

25

weaker results stem from measurement error and top- and bottom-coding. The results for
the black and Hispanic samples are largely unchanged when the tails are included.
The next columns address the issue that rising male wage inequality may induce a longer
search period for women in the marriage market, as posited by Loughran (2002) and
Gould and Paserman (2003). Following Gould and Paserman (2003), we use the standard
deviation of log real weekly male wages as an index of inequality. Controlling for
inequality in column VIII does not change our results. We also try interacting the
inequality measure with an indicator for being below the marriage ideal and our results
are unchanged, as shown in column IX.
In column X we include a more extensive set of rank dummies – one for each percentile
of the within-race/ethnicity within-metropolitan area income distribution.

This does

weaken the results for the white sample. The results for the black sample and Hispanic
samples retain their significance.
As a final robustness check presented in the table, column XI uses a probit model.
Marginal effects are displayed and are quite similar to the baseline coefficients.
We also try additional robustness checks not presented here. We allow the effects of
individual age dummies to vary by year.

We control for income linearly in a

specification which also includes income categories. We randomly split the sample into
two sets of metropolitan areas.

The results are consistent with the preferred

specifications in all cases.

F. Extensions

In the appendix, we discuss two extensions. First, we incorporate women’s earnings into
the model. The alternative marriage bars using this approach are shown in Appendix
Table 3. The results of the analysis incorporating potential female earnings are similar to
the baseline analysis (see Appendix Table 4). Income is a strong predictor of marriage

26

when a couple’s potential earnings lies below a middle class ideal, and income is less
closely tied to marriage above the ideal.
In the appendix we also extend the length of the analysis by incorporating data from the
1% Public Use Microdata Sample of the 1970 Census. Incorporating the 1970 data
requires changing the analysis slightly: the number of metropolitan areas is reduced,
income is not adjusted for housing price differences across metropolitan areas, and some
control variables are unavailable. Nevertheless, the results are highly consistent with
those from the main analysis. The results of the 1970-2000 analysis are reported in
Appendix Table 5.

VI.

Simulations

The relationship between relative income and marriage is quite robust. However, it is
difficult to gauge the importance of the effects by looking at the coefficients. To what
extent do relative income considerations explain the steep decline in marriage rates in
recent decades or the roughly 30 percentage point marriage gap between high- and lowincome men? Here we use the models generated using 1970-2000 data to assess the
magnitude of relative income effects.32
The first simulation uses the 1970-2000 analyses (shown in Appendix Table 5) to predict
what would have happened if the ratios of income to ideal income maintained their 1970
values (allowing absolute income to change as it actually did). Within each sample, we
calculate the average position above/below the bar and ratio variables for each decile
rank in each metropolitan area in 1970. We then predict the probability of marriage
assuming those variables maintained their 1970 levels throughout the sample for men in a
given decile rank and metropolitan area. The resulting values are reported by income
quartile in Table 9.

32

Results are similar if we use the baseline 1980-2000 model from Table 5. However, using the 1970-2000
analysis allows us to examine the importance of relative income in marriage declines since 1970. Note that
the 1970 analysis includes fewer metropolitan areas and excludes some controls and adjustments for
housing prices. We perform the simulations for the native white and native black samples only.

27

The simulations suggest that about 3 percentage points of the 30-point decline in white
marriage rates since 1970 can be attributed to relative income considerations. The effect
is largest in the bottom quartiles, where 12 to 14 percent of the decline in marriage can be
explained. The simulations suggest that marriage rates would be about four percentage
points higher for low-income white men if relative income maintained its 1970 levels,
holding absolute income constant.
For the native non-Hispanic black sample, the simulation uses education-specific
reference groups to determine the relevant marriage ideal. Within education groups,
relative income did not change much between 1970 and 2000 for black men. Therefore,
the holding relative income constant at 1970 levels does little to explain falling marriage
rates among blacks.33
The second simulation examines the hypothetical impact of eliminating relative income
considerations altogether.34

In the second simulation, we allow each individual to

maintain their position over or under the ideal, but set the relevant ratio variable to a
value of one. This thought exercise is equivalent to imagining that each individual sets
his ideal income at his actual income, holding his actual income constant.
The simulated marriage rates imply that relative income considerations are an important
determinant of marriage.

Aggregate rates would be 9-10 percentage points higher for

both white and black men in the year 2000 if relative income did not affect the marriage
decision; rates for the bottom quartile of men would be 20 percentage points higher.
Furthermore, relative income considerations explain more than half of the marriage gap
between high- and low- income men in every Census year.
In conclusion, relative income appears to be strongly related to marriage rates.
Simulations based on regression models imply that marriage rates would be 20
33

The model using race/ethnicity-specific reference groups implies that black marriage rates would be
about 8 percent (3 percentage points) higher if relative income was held at 1970 levels.
34
To calculate a “marriage gap” between high- and low-income men, we subtract the marriage rate of
bottom quartile men from the rate of top quartile men, where quartiles are defined within metropolitan
areas.

28

percentage points higher for white and black low-income men if marriage ideals were
aligned with actual incomes, holding actual incomes fixed.

Declining relative incomes

for low-income white men explain 10-15 percent of the decline in marriage since 1970.

VII. Conclusions

Based on the analysis presented here, we conclude that relative income is an important
determinant of the marriage decision. A man’s “marriageability” appears to be related
not only to his absolute level of income, but to income relative to an ideal level
determined by a local reference group. Relative income concerns drive 10-15 percent of
the decline in marriage for low income white men, and account for half of the persistent
gap in marriage between high- and low-income men.
There are multiple potential explanations for the robust association between relative
income and marriage. Here we present one theoretical framework - a model of identity that generates predictions consistent with the empirical patterns.

Among black men,

relative income predicts marital status even among those who live with partners and
children.

This result is hard to reconcile with traditional economic models of the

marriage decision. The identity model is also corroborated by previous qualitative work.
One possibility we have not explored is that the financial ideal associated with marriage
may be endogenous to marriage rates. As marriage becomes more rarefied and the
financial gap between married and unmarried couples widens, the marriage ideal may
increase. The resulting cycle is difficult to identify empirically, but suggests the role of
relative income may be understated here.
Finally, we note that while marriage has been proposed as an anti-poverty measure, our
results imply that anti-poverty (or, more precisely, anti-inequality) measures may
increase marriage rates. On the other hand, as long as it remains difficult for low-income
couples to “keep up with the Joneses,” the evidence suggests that these couples are likely
to defer marriage until their high financial expectations are reached.

29

VIII. Appendix
A. An Alternative Model

The baseline model is consistent with the theory outlined above, in which we expect the
effect of relative income to depend on where an individual stands relative to an ideal.
However, it is also possible to examine the effect of the ideal on marriage directly,
analogous to the approach used in Luttmer (2005). The alternative model is:
Pr(mari ) = β1 * underi * Yideal + β 2 *(1 − underi ) * Yideal +

β 4 * X i + γ ycat + α yrank + σ age + ∂ educyr + θ metro + ε i
In Appendix Table 1, we use the alternative specification to examine the effect of the
marriage ideal on the probability of marriage. A higher middle class ideal is indeed
associated with a lower probability of marriage; a 10 percent higher median income is
associated with a 1.5 percentage point lower marriage rate. After controlling flexibly for
absolute income (see column IV), a 10 percent higher marriage ideal is associated with a
1.1 percentage point lower probability of marriage for those below the ideal. There is no
significant effect of the ideal for those above the ideal. Using this alternative model, we
cannot identify any significant effects after controlling for decile rank (column V).
However, a decile-by-decile analysis (Appendix Figure 1) indicates that there are
significant effects of a higher marriage ideal occur in the fourth and fifth deciles. The
effect for the bottom decile is wrong-signed.35

B. Results by Education Group

Appendix Table 2 explores results stratified by education group for the white male
sample. As is evident from the first column, the specification using a race/ethnicityspecific reference group offers the best fit for all men. The remaining columns stratify
results by four education categories – less than high school, high school exactly, some
college, and college graduate or more.

The race/ethnicity-specific reference group

performs well for all categories except college graduates. The marriage decisions of

35

This may be due to measurement error. For example, some of the men in the bottom decile might have
low income because they were in school, starting a business, or unemployed in the previous year. High
median earnings in an area may be correlated with income at the time of the marriage decision.

30

white college graduates appear to be responsive to the incomes of other white college
graduates – that is, a race/ethnicity and education-specific reference group.
Results for the non-white samples using different reference groups are discussed in the
main text. We do not have the statistical power to stratify results by education for the
non-white samples.

C. Incorporating Women’s Earnings

Our theoretical model abstracts from the issue of women’s earnings. However, the
potential earnings of the couple relative to other couples may be important in the
marriage decision. It is challenging to estimate a couple’s combined earnings for two
reasons. First, in the case of an unmarried man, we often do not know the characteristics
of his partner or potential partner.36 Second, labor supply is endogenous to the marriage
decision. To generate estimates of combined earnings, it is necessary to make strong
assumptions about the matching process and about female potential earnings. For the
purposes of this exercise, we assume that male earnings are not determined by marital
status.37
To estimate that potential earnings of men’s mates, we use the Census sample of 23-32
year-old women.38 We discard women who are married with children on the grounds that
their earnings are particularly unlikely to approximate potential earnings. Then, we rank
each woman within metropolitan area and race/ethnicity group on the basis of her total
real income last year.

Finally, we assume positive assortative mating of a particular

form: every man is matched to an average woman of his same decile rank in the
metropolitan area-race/ethnicity income distribution.39

Implicitly, we assume that men

are matched to a partner in their own race/ethnicity group.
36

This is a reasonable

Men’s partners can only be observed if they are living in the same household and one member of the
partnership is the head of the household. Furthermore, in 1980, one cannot distinguish an unmarried
partner from a female roommate in the data.
37
A long literature debates whether married men receive a premium in the labor market. See Antonovics
and Town (2004) for recent evidence of a causal effect of marriage on wages, for example.
38
We use a younger group because on average women are younger than their husbands.
39
Although we control for race/ethnicity specific sex ratios in the empirical analysis, we ignore unbalanced
sex ratios for the purposes of our matching algorithm.

31

approximation for native born whites and native born blacks, though not for native born
Hispanics.40 The incomes of sample “couples” are constructed using the actual male
earnings and the estimated female potential earnings. We drop observations with zero or
negative estimated female earnings.41
We calculate middle class marriage ideals by combining income of male and female fulltime full-year workers in the reference group. The means of these ideals are shown in
Appendix Table 3. They are increasing over time for all three groups, reflecting the rise
in female earnings. There is also rising inequality in couples’ earnings, reflected in the
fact that ratios of income to the ideal are falling for those below the ideal and rising for
those above the ideal.
Appendix Table 4 shows the results of the two-earner analysis.

All regressions control

flexibly for absolute income and metropolitan area rank. Columns I through III display
the two-earner results for the sample of white men. The ratio of (estimated) two-earner
income to the two-earner marriage ideal is a significant determinant of marriage, and the
effect is larger below the ideal. For white men, the race/ethnicity-specific reference
group generates results that are most consistent with the model.

There is a strong

positive relationship between income and marital status below the ideal and a much
weaker (though still significant) relationship above the ideal.
As shown in columns IV to VI, the two-earner model is consistent with the theoretical
framework for black men as well. As is the case with the one-earner analysis, educationspecific marriage ideals perform well.
For white and black men, the two earner model performs similarly to the one-earner
model. However, the two earner model does not perform well for Hispanic men, as seen
in the final three columns of Appendix Table 4. Given the large fraction of native
40

Among married native born white men in the sample, 93 to 96 percent are married to native born white
women, depending on education group. Among married native born black men, 85 to 94 percent are
married to native born black women. Among native born Hispanic men, 36 to 65 percent are married to
native born Hispanic women (with another 15 to 17 percent marrying foreign born women).
41
Dropping these observations makes little difference to the results.

32

Hispanic men who marry outside their race/ethnicity group, it is likely that imputed
female potential earnings are particularly inaccurate for this group.

D. 1970-2000 Analysis

We extend the baseline analysis to incorporate 1970 data. There are several limitations to
the 1970-2000 analysis. First, because local areas are less easily matched in IPUMS
Census data prior to 1980, metropolitan area definitions are less consistent over time.
There are also some metropolitan areas which are not available in 1970. Second, reliable
housing price data are not available in 1970. Therefore income is not adjusted to reflect
differences in the cost of living (except for those arising from general inflation at the
national level). Third, data on AFDC benefits are not readily available. This control
variable is excluded from the 1970 analysis.
Results for white and black men are shown in Appendix Table 5. The coefficients are
similar to those in the baseline 1980-2000 analysis. The ratio of income to the ideal is a
strong predictor of marriage below the ideal, but not above the ideal. The preferred ideal
is determined by within-race reference groups for white men and by within-education
reference groups for black men. Given small sample sizes, we do not perform the 19702000 analysis for the Hispanic sample.

33

IX. References

Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton, 2000. “Economics and Identity,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 115(3), 715-753.
Albouy, David, 2008. “Are Big Cities Really Bad Places to Live? Improving Quality of
Life Estimates Across Cities,” unpublished manuscript.
Antonovics, Kate, and Robert Town, 2004. “Are All the Good Men Married?
Uncovering the Sources of the Marital Wage Premium,” American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings, 94(2), 317-321.
Becker, Gary S., 1981. A Treatise on the Family. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Brown, Christopher and Randall Kesselring, 2003. “Female Headship and the Economic
Status of Young Men in the United States, 1977-2001,” Journal of Economic Issues, 37
(2), 343-351.
Burstein, Nancy R., 2007. “Economic Influences on Marriage and Divorce,” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management, 26(2), 387-429
Card, David, Alexandre Mas, and Jesse Rothstein, 2008. “Tipping and the Dynamics of
Segregation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(1), 177-218.
Clark, Andrew E., Paul Frijters, and Michael A. Shields, 2008. “Relative Income,
Happiness, and Utility: An Explanation for the Easterlin Paradox and Other Puzzles,”
Journal of Economic Literature, 46(1), 95-144.
Daly, Mary C., Daniel J. Wilson, and Norman J. Johnson, 2007. “Relative status and
well-being: evidence from U.S. suicide deaths,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Working Paper Series: 2007-12.
Denizer, Cevdet, C. Holger, and Yvonne Ying, 2000. “Household Savings in Transition
Economies,” The World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series: 2299.
Duesenberry, James S., 1949. Income, Savings, and the Theory of Consumer Behavior,
Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Easterlin, Richard A., 1980. Birth and Fortune: The Impact of Numbers on Personal
Welfare, Basic Books, New York.
Edin, Kathryn, 2000. “What Do Low-Income Single Mothers Say about Marriage?,”
Social Problems, 47(1), 112-133.
Eibner, Christine and William N. Evans, 2005. “Relative Deprivation, Poor Health
Habits, and Mortality,” Journal of Human Resources, 40(3), 591-620.

34

Fischer, Justina A.V and Benno Torgler, 2006. “The Effect of Relative Income Position
on Social Capital,” Economics Bulletin, 26(4), 1-20.
Gibson-Davis, Christina M., Kathryn Edin, and Sara McLanahan, 2005. “High Hopes
But Even Higher Expectations: The Retreat From Marriage Among Low-Income
Couples,” Journal of Marriage and Family, 67(5), 1301-1312.
Gould, Eric D. and M. Daniele Paserman, 2003. “Waiting for Mr. Right: Rising
Inequality and Declining Marriage Rates,” Journal of Urban Economics, 53, 257-281.
Kosicki, George, 1987. “A Test of the Relative Income Hypothesis,” Southern Economic
Journal, 54(2), 422-434.
Lam, David, 1988, “Marriage Markets and Assortative Mating with Household Public
Goods: Theoretical Results and Empirical Implications,” The Journal of Human
Resources, 23(4), 462-487.
Lerman, Robert I., 2002. “Marriage and the Economic Well-being of Children and
Familes: A Review of the Literature,” Urban Institute Research Report, Urban Institute.
Lichter, Daniel T., Zhenchao Qian, Leanna M. Mellott, 2006. “Marriage or
Dissolution?: Union Transitions among Poor Cohabiting,” Demography, 43(2), 223-240.
Loughran, David S., 2002. “The Effect of Male Wage inequality on Female Age at First
Marriage,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(2), 237-250.
Luttmer, Erzo, 2005. “Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), 960-1002.
Miller, Douglas L. and Christina Paxson, 2006. “Relative Income, Race, and Mortality,”
Journal of Health Economics, 25(5), 979-1003.
Neumark, David, and Andrew Postlewaite, 1998. “Relative income concerns and the rise
in women’s employment,” Journal of Public Economics, 70, 157-183.
Oppenheimer, Valarie Kincade, Matthijs Kalmijn, and Nelson Lim, 1997. “Men’s
Career Development and Timing of Marriage in a Period of Rising Inequality,”
Demography, 34(3), 311-330.
Ruggles, Steven, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken,
Patricia Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander, 2008. Integrated Public Use
Microdata Series: Version 4.0 [Machine-readable database], Minnesota Population
Center.
Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers, 2007. “Marriage and Divorce: Changes and
Their Driving Forces,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(2), 27-52.

35

Thorton, Arland, William G. Axinn, and Jay D. Teachman, 1995. “The Influence of
School Enrollment and Accumulation on Cohabitiation in Early Adulthood,” American
Sociological Review, 60(5), 762-774.
Torgler, Benno, and Sascha L. Schmidt, 2007. “What Shapes Player Performance in
Soccer? Empirical Findings from a Panel Analysis,” Applied Economics, 39(16-18),
2355-2369.
Withers, S. Davies, 1998. “Linking household transitions and housing transitions,”
Environment and Planning A, 30, 615-630.
Willis, Robert J., 1999. “A Theory of Out-of-Wedlock Childbearing,” Journal of
Political Economy, 107(6), S33-S64.
Wilson, William Julius, 1987. The Truly Disadvantaged: The City, the Underclass, and
Public Policy, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

36

Figure 1a. Marriage Rates By Income,
Native Non-Hispanic White Men Ages 25-34, 1950-2000
1
0.9
0.8

Fraction Married

0.7
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

85
00
0

80
00
0

75
00
0

70
00
0

65
00
0

60
00
0

55
00
0

50
00
0

45
00
0

40
00
0

35
00
0

30
00
0

25
00
0

20
00
0

15
00
0

10
00
0

50
00

0

0

Real Income Category ($2000)
Note: Authors' calculations from U.S. Census. Excludes men living in group quarters and in the top and bottom 5% of the income distribution.

Figure 1b. Marriage Rates By Income,
Native Non-Hispanic Black Men Ages 25-34, 1950-2000
1
0.9
0.8

Fraction Married

0.7
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0
25
00
50
00
75
00
10
00
0
12
50
0
15
00
0
17
50
0
20
00
0
22
50
0
25
00
0
27
50
0
30
00
0
32
50
0
35
00
0
37
50
0
40
00
0
42
50
0
45
00
0
47
50
0
50
00
0
52
50
0
55
00
0
57
50
0
60
00
0

0

Real Income Category ($2000)
Note: Authors' calculations from U.S. Census. Excludes men living in group quarters and in the top and bottom 5% of the income distribution.

Figure 1c. Marriage Rates By Income,
Native Hispanic Men Ages 25-34, 1960-2000
1
0.9
0.8

Fraction Married

0.7
0.6

1960
1970
1980
1990
2000

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0
25
00
50
00
75
00
10
00
0
12
50
0
15
00
0
17
50
0
20
00
0
22
50
0
25
00
0
27
50
0
30
00
0
32
50
0
35
00
0
37
50
0
40
00
0
42
50
0
45
00
0
47
50
0
50
00
0
52
50
0
55
00
0
57
50
0
60
00
0

0

Real Income Category ($2000)

Note: Authors' calculations from U.S. Census. Excludes men living in group quarters and in the top and bottom 5% of the income distribution. Rates not shown for 1950 due to small sample sizes.

Table 1. Fraction of 25-to-34-Year-Old Men Married by Income Quartile, 1950-2000

Year

Change %Decline Change %Decline
1950-2000 1950-2000 1980-2000 1980-2000

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Native Non-Hispanic White
Quartile
1
2
3
4
All

0.59
0.78
0.85
0.87
0.77

0.67
0.83
0.88
0.90
0.82

0.65
0.82
0.87
0.89
0.81

0.49
0.68
0.75
0.81
0.68

0.39
0.57
0.65
0.72
0.58

0.34
0.51
0.60
0.67
0.53

-0.25
-0.27
-0.25
-0.20
-0.24

0.42
0.34
0.30
0.23
0.31

-0.15
-0.16
-0.16
-0.14
-0.15

0.31
0.24
0.21
0.17
0.22

Native Non-Hispanic Black
Quartile
1
2
3
4
All

0.53
0.63
0.73
0.74
0.66

0.51
0.71
0.76
0.81
0.70

0.50
0.70
0.77
0.81
0.69

0.27
0.47
0.59
0.67
0.50

0.14
0.25
0.44
0.54
0.34

0.16
0.29
0.43
0.50
0.35

-0.36
-0.34
-0.30
-0.24
-0.31

0.69
0.54
0.41
0.32
0.47

-0.11
-0.18
-0.16
-0.17
-0.15

0.39
0.38
0.27
0.25
0.31

0.60
0.78
0.80
0.85
0.76

0.58
0.83
0.87
0.91
0.80

0.60
0.85
0.87
0.92
0.81

0.48
0.64
0.72
0.77
0.65

0.29
0.48
0.56
0.68
0.50

0.24
0.42
0.52
0.60
0.45

-0.36
-0.36
-0.28
-0.25
-0.31

0.59
0.46
0.35
0.30
0.41

-0.24
-0.22
-0.20
-0.18
-0.21

0.49
0.34
0.28
0.23
0.32

Native Hispanic
Quartile
1
2
3
4
All

Note: Statistics exclude men living in group quarters. Income quartile refers to standing in national race/ethnicity-specific income distribution in any given year.

Los Angeles MSA - 1980

0

20000
40000
60000
Real Income $2000

80000

Chicago MSA - 1980

0

20000
40000
60000
Real Income $2000

80000

Dallas MSA - 1980

0

20000
40000
60000
Real Income $2000

80000

Philadelphia MSA - 1980

0

20000
40000
60000
Real Income $2000

80000

Fraction Married
.2 .4 .6 .8 1

80000

Fraction Married
.2 .4 .6 .8 1

20000
40000
60000
Real Income $2000

Fraction Married
.2 .4 .6 .8 1

0

Fraction Married
.2 .4 .6 .8 1

New York MSA - 1980

Fraction Married
.2 .4 .6 .8 1

Fraction Married
.2 .4 .6 .8 1

Fraction Married
.2 .4 .6 .8 1

Fraction Married
.2 .4 .6 .8 1

Fraction Married
.2 .4 .6 .8 1

Fraction Married
.2 .4 .6 .8 1

Figure 2. Estimated and Theoretical Ideals
for Selected Metropolitan Areas
White Male Sample
New York MSA - 2000

0

20000
40000
60000
Real Income $2000

80000

Los Angeles MSA - 2000

0

20000
40000
60000
Real Income $2000

80000

Chicago MSA - 2000

0

20000
40000
60000
Real Income $2000

80000

Dallas MSA - 2000

0

20000
40000
60000
Real Income $2000

80000

Philadelphia MSA - 2000

0

Note: Dashed lines indicate estimated ideals.
Solid lines indicate theoretical middle class ideals.

20000
40000
60000
Real Income $2000

80000

Table 2. Marriage Ideals Using Different Reference Groups

White Sample (N=1,159,431)
1980
1990
2000

Black Sample (N=142,737)
1980
1990
2000

Hispanic Sample (N=67,480)
1980
1990
2000

Estimated Ideal (Metro-Year Break in Income-Marriage Relationship Within Race/Ethnicity)
Estimated Ideal Available
0.99
1.00
0.98
0.75
Estimated Ideal if Available ($2000)
41,972
43,044
43,898
34,633

0.75
32,361

0.69
34,703

0.83
35,825

0.82
37,480

0.82
33,317

Baseline Marriage Ideal, (Metro-Year Median FT Male Tot Income Within Race/Ethnicity)
Theoretical Middle Class Ideal ($2000)
45,282
45,723
46,476
32,117
Under Ideal
0.69
0.72
0.72
0.71
Ratio of Income to Ideal if Under
0.63
0.60
0.60
0.54
Ratio of Income to Ideal if Over
1.25
1.28
1.34
1.24

32,153
0.80
0.51
1.17

32,784
0.77
0.54
1.19

35,115
0.66
0.61
1.23

34,821
0.71
0.56
1.22

32,884
0.69
0.58
1.25

Within-Education Group Marriage Ideal, (Metro-Year Median FT Male Tot Income Within Education)
Theoretical Middle Class Ideal ($2000)
45,937
44,447
45,671
41,438
39,261
Under Ideal
0.69
0.69
0.69
0.90
0.93
Ratio of Income to Ideal if Under
0.62
0.61
0.61
0.52
0.48
Ratio of Income to Ideal if Over
1.26
1.31
1.35
1.12
1.13

39,239
0.89
0.52
1.17

40,920
0.79
0.60
1.19

38,308
0.78
0.56
1.24

37,980
0.78
0.57
1.26

Within-Education-Race Group Marriage Ideal, (Metro-Year Median FT Male Tot Income Within Education and Race/Ethnicity)
Theoretical Middle Class Ideal ($2000)
47,567
46,554
48,825
33,077
32,027
32,662
35,999
Under Ideal
0.73
0.73
0.74
0.74
0.82
0.78
0.69
Ratio of Income to Ideal if Under
0.62
0.61
0.60
0.55
0.52
0.55
0.62
Ratio of Income to Ideal if Over
1.24
1.28
1.31
1.23
1.20
1.21
1.23

34,487
0.72
0.58
1.26

33,306
0.70
0.60
1.28

Note: Estimated ideal is the point of greatest flattening in income-marriage relationship within metropolitan area-year-race/ethnicity cell. Theoretical ideal is median earnings of fully employed working
age men in reference group. See text for details.

Estimated Ideal $2000
30000 60000

Figure 3.
Estimated and Theoretical Ideals
Across Metropolitan Areas
White Male Sample

Estimated Ideal $2000
30000 60000

30000

Estimated Ideal $2000
30000 60000

30000

30000

1980

40000
50000
Theoretical Ideal $2000

60000

1990

40000
50000
Theoretical Ideal $2000

60000

2000

40000
50000
Theoretical Ideal $2000

Note: Marker size indicates metropolitan area population.

60000

Table 3. Determinants of Estimated Marriage Ideals Across Metropolitan Areas

Dependent Variable: Log(Estimated Ideal)
1980

White Male Sample
Fixed
1990
2000
Effects

Fixed
Effects

Log (Theoretical Ideal)

1.4264** 1.6934** 1.1826** 1.0664** 1.6757**
(0.2467) (0.1925) (0.3027) (0.3290) (0.4822)
Log (Metropolitan Area Population)
0.0187
(0.2269)
Race/Ethnicity Specific Sex Ratio
0.6142
(1.4569)
Fraction High School
0.0614
(1.0379)
Fraction Some College
2.0350
(1.6609)
Fraction College Grad
-2.1062
(1.6332)
Year is 1990
0.0068 -0.0772
(0.0333) (0.1607)
Year is 2000
0.0052 -0.0334
(0.0374) (0.2329)
Metropolitan Area Dummies
yes
yes

Number of Observations
R-squared

107
0.38

108
0.57

104
0.34

319
0.73

319
0.74

1980

Black Male Sample
Fixed
1990
2000
Effects

Fixed
Effects

1.0255** 0.2474 0.3847 1.0964 0.6091
(0.2210) (0.3241) (0.5093) (0.7263) (0.5846)
0.0765
(0.3817)
-2.4970**
(0.8520)
2.8705
(3.4264)
-3.0985
(5.0343)
0.9770
(3.6206)
-0.0006 0.1756
(0.1362) (0.5698)
0.0026 0.2530
(0.1134) (0.7310)
yes
yes

59
0.33

59
0.02

50
0.02

168
0.60

168
0.71

Note: Unit of observation is the metropolitan area-year. Estimated ideal is the point of greatest flattening in income-marriage relationship within metropolitan area-yearrace/ethnicity cell. Theoretical ideal is median earnings of fully employed working age men in reference group. Observations with no estimated ideal are excluded.

Table 4. Sample Means

White Sample (N=1,159,431)
1980
1990
2000

Black Sample (N=142,737)
1980
1990
2000

Hispanic Sample (N=67,480)
1980
1990
2000

Individual Characteristics
Married (and living with spouse)
Married Ever
Cohabiting (household head sample)
Residential Father (household head sample)
Male Total Income, $2000
Log(Estimated Female Potential Income), $2000
Age
Employed
Employed Full-Time Full-Year
High School Exactly
Some College
College Graduate or More

0.65
0.76
0.05
0.54
36,943
22,817
29.30
0.92
0.72
0.33
0.26
0.32

0.56
0.66
0.10
0.48
36,071
26,137
29.54
0.93
0.74
0.32
0.32
0.29

0.50
0.59
0.14
0.43
37,119
27,462
29.68
0.92
0.77
0.27
0.32
0.35

0.49
0.67
0.09
0.56
23,621
17,645
29.11
0.80
0.54
0.41
0.25
0.11

0.34
0.48
0.17
0.51
20,380
17,529
29.37
0.80
0.56
0.44
0.32
0.10

0.33
0.46
0.21
0.48
22,559
19,648
29.55
0.78
0.60
0.42
0.35
0.14

0.63
0.77
0.06
0.64
28,686
18,819
28.95
0.88
0.61
0.35
0.26
0.12

MSA Characteristics
MSA-Year Race/Ethnicity-Specific Sex Ratio
MSA-Year Fraction Black
MSA-Year Fraction Native Hispanic
MSA-Year Fraction Native Other
MSA-Year Fraction Immigrant
MSA-Year Fraction Under 18
MSA-Year Fraction Under 65
MSA-Year Fraction High School Exactly
MSA-Year Fraction Some College
MSA-Year Fraction College Grad
MSA-Year Male Emp.-to-Pop. Ratio (ages 18-64)
Male Predicted Employment Demand
Female Predicted Employment Demand
Housing Price Index
Real Housing-Price-Adjusted AFDC Benefit, $2000
Population

1.03
0.12
0.04
0.01
0.08
0.28
0.89
0.34
0.17
0.18
0.82
0.66
0.38
70.74
782.11
773,233

1.01
0.12
0.05
0.02
0.10
0.25
0.88
0.32
0.26
0.23
0.82
0.60
0.41
122.85
597.83
885,234

1.01
0.12
0.06
0.03
0.13
0.26
0.88
0.31
0.28
0.27
0.78
0.60
0.43
176.18
424.68
901,754

1.20
0.18
0.04
0.01
0.09
0.28
0.90
0.33
0.16
0.18
0.82
0.66
0.38
70.25
700.99
875,741

1.18
0.18
0.04
0.01
0.11
0.25
0.89
0.32
0.25
0.23
0.81
0.61
0.42
122.27
540.03
981,934

1.19
0.18
0.06
0.03
0.14
0.26
0.89
0.30
0.27
0.28
0.78
0.60
0.43
171.96
383.12
1,009,868

0.48
0.62
0.13
0.56
26,166
20,827
29.08
0.88
0.62
0.39
0.32
0.11

0.43
0.54
0.18
0.52
25,923
20,496
29.10
0.83
0.64
0.37
0.34
0.14

1.04
1.03
1.04
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.13
0.14
0.16
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.13
0.18
0.23
0.28
0.26
0.27
0.90
0.89
0.89
0.32
0.29
0.27
0.20
0.28
0.28
0.19
0.23
0.27
0.82
0.81
0.76
0.65
0.61
0.61
0.38
0.42
0.43
71.74
129.70
172.85
821.84
658.04
476.16
1,065,204 1,355,325 1,493,160

Notes: White Sample refers to native non-Hispanic white men ages 25-34; Black sample refers to native non-Hispanic black men; Hispanic sample refers to native Hispanic men. Means are for final samples which
are restricted to 110, 85, and 47 metropolitan areas, for the white, black and Hispanic samples respectively. White sample excludes top and bottom five percent of the income distribution in each area; Black sample
and Hispanic samples exclude top and bottom ten percent. Married Now refers to men married and living with a spouse. Cohabition and residential fatherhood are based on subsamples of household heads and their
partners; see text for details.

Figure 4. Ratio of Income to Ideal and Marriage,
Native Non-Hispanic White Men Ages 25-34
0.9

0.8

0.7

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

Ratio Category
Note: Ratios above 2.00 are excluded from figure.

1980

1990

2000

90
1.

80
1.

70
1.

60
1.

50
1.

40
1.

30
1.

20
1.

10
1.

00
1.

90
0.

80
0.

70
0.

60
0.

50
0.

40
0.

30
0.

20
0.

10
0.

00

0
0.

Fraction Married

0.6

Table 5. Effect of Ratio to Male Marriage Ideal on Marital Status,
Native Born Non-Hispanic White Men Ages 25-34
Dependent Variable: Married
(mean=0.572)

I

II

III

IV

V

-0.0439**
(0.0055)
0.1522**
(0.0062)
0.0725**
(0.0026)
0.0502**
(0.0033)
0.4100**
(0.0940)
-0.0003**
(0.0001)
-0.0233+
(0.0118)

0.4620**
(0.0191)
0.1120**
(0.0071)
-0.3380**
(0.0160)
-0.0291**
(0.0091)
0.0794**
(0.0027)
0.0444**
(0.0028)
0.4200**
(0.0768)
-0.0002*
(0.0001)
-0.0248*
(0.0125)

0.3464**
(0.0476)
0.0302
(0.0263)
-0.3041**
(0.0374)

0.2407**
(0.0564)
0.0069
(0.0300)
-0.2229**
(0.0445)

0.0788**
(0.0027)
0.0427**
(0.0029)
0.4273**
(0.0821)
-0.0001
(0.0001)
-0.0288*
(0.0121)

0.0787**
(0.0027)
0.0426**
(0.0029)
0.4022**
(0.0807)
-0.0001
(0.0001)
-0.0257*
(0.0120)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

1159431
330
0.13

Ratio Income/Ideal if Under Marriage Ideal
Ratio Income/Ideal if Over Marriage Ideal
Under Marriage Ideal
Log (Real Total Income)
Employed
Employed Full Time Full Year
CMSA Sex Ratio (within race/ethnicity group)
CMSA Housing Price Index
Log (Real Adjusted AFDC Benefits)

Decile Rank in CMSA-Race/Eth Group Dummies
Year-Specific Adjusted Income Dummies
Age Dummies
Year*Ed Group Dummies
Additional CMSA controls
CMSA Dummies

Number of Observations
Number of CMSA-Year Cells
R-squared

0.1727**
(0.0048)
0.0683**
(0.0026)
0.0473**
(0.0032)
0.4037**
(0.0973)
-0.0003**
(0.0001)
-0.0236+
(0.0120)

yes
yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

1159431
330
0.13

1159431
330
0.13

1159431
330
0.13

1159431
330
0.13

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are clustered on CMSA. +, *,** indicate staistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level respectively. Regression
sample excludes top and bottom 5 percent of income distribution in each metro area-year and those not living in households under the 1980 definition. Additional
CMSA controls include race/ethnicity distribution in CMSA (fraction native non-Hispanic black, fraction native Hispanic, fraction native non-Hispanic non-white
non-black, fraction foreign born) , age distribution in CMSA (fraction under 18, fraction under 65), education distribution in CMSA (fraction high school exactly,
fraction some college exactly, fraction college graduate or more), predicted employment demand for men, predicted employment demand for women, and log of
population. Education Groups include less than high school, high school exactly, some college, and college graduate or more. Marriage Ideal defined as median
income of full-time full-year male workers ages 18-64 in the CMSA-year-race/ethincity group. Adjusted income dummies reflect adjustment for cost of living as
described in text.

Figure 5. Effect of Ratio of Income to Ideal on Marriage By Decile,
Native Non-Hispanic White Men
0.60
0.50
0.40

Coefficient

0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

-0.10
-0.20
-0.30
Decile
Coefficient

CI Bound

CI Bound

8

9

10

Table 6. Effect of Ratio to Male Marriage Ideal on Marital Status, Black and Hispanic Men, Ages 25-34
Dependent Variable: Married Now
Native Non-Hispanic Black Men (mean=0.381)

Ratio Income/Ideal if Under Marriage Ideal
Ratio Income/Ideal if Over Marriage Ideal
Under Marriage Ideal

Decile Rank in CMSA-Race/Eth Group Dummies
Year-Specific Adjusted Income Dummies
Age Dummies
Year*Ed Group Dummies
Additional CMSA controls
CMSA Dummies

Number of Observations
Number of CMSA-Year Cells
R-squared

Native Hispanic Men (mean=0.490)

Race/Ethnicity
Ref Group
I

Education Ref
Group
II

Race/Ethnicity
and Education
Ref Group
III

Race/Ethnicity
Ref Group
IV

Education Ref
Group
V

Race/Ethnicity
and Education
Ref Group
VI

0.2988**
(0.0640)
0.1596**
(0.0360)
-0.1319*
(0.0526)

0.2128**
(0.0469)
-0.0171
(0.0423)
-0.2310**
(0.0468)

0.1864**
(0.0302)
0.0565*
(0.0218)
-0.1378**
(0.0311)

0.2325*
(0.0874)
-0.0026
(0.0765)
-0.2198**
(0.0731)

0.3595**
(0.0518)
0.1726**
(0.0256)
-0.1632**
(0.0386)

0.2790**
(0.0442)
0.1282**
(0.0277)
-0.1584**
(0.0470)

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

142737
255
0.12

142737
255
0.12

142737
255
0.12

67480
123
0.12

67480
123
0.12

67480
123
0.12

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are clustered on CMSA. +, *,** indicate staistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level respectively. Regression sample excludes top and bottom 10 percent of
income distribution in each metro area-year and those not living in households under the 1980 definition. Marriage Ideal defined as median earnings of full-time full-year male workers ages 18-64 in the CMSAreference group. See Table 5 and text for more details.

Table 7. Effect of Ratio to Male Marriage Ideal on Cohabitation and Family Structure

I

II

III

IV

V

VI

Panel A. Native Non-Hispanic White Men
(Metro area and race/ethnicity define reference group.)
Full Household Head Sample (N=977,732)
Dependent Variable:
Ratio Income/Ideal if Under Marriage Ideal
Ratio Income/Ideal if Over Marriage Ideal
Under Marriage Ideal

Married
(mean=0.679)
0.0929+
(0.0498)
-0.0132
(0.0322)
-0.0954**
(0.0349)

Cohabiting
(mean=0.091)
0.0051
(0.0319)
0.0397*
(0.0195)
0.0302
(0.0235)

Non-Co-residing
(mean=0.229)
-0.0996*
(0.0414)
-0.0272
(0.0233)
0.0658*
(0.0272)

Co-residing
With Kids
(mean=0.488)
0.1770**
(0.0511)
0.0721*
(0.0304)
-0.0996**
(0.0378)

Coresiding Sample (N=762,905)
Co-residing
Married
With Kids
(mean=0.882)
(mean=0.663)
-0.0360
0.1090*
(0.0455)
(0.0548)
-0.0841*
0.0237
(0.0329)
(0.0268)
-0.0404
-0.0809+
(0.0306)
(0.0411)

Co-residing
With Kids
(mean=0.516)
0.0240
(0.0398)
-0.0137
(0.0289)
-0.0354
(0.0450)

Coresiding Sample (N=70,741)
Co-residing
Married
With Kids
(mean=0.779)
(mean=0.721)
0.1094**
0.0066
(0.0366)
(0.0384)
-0.0098
-0.0275
(0.0295)
(0.0314)
-0.1141**
-0.0225
(0.0307)
(0.0442)

Panel B. Native Non-Hispanic Black Men
(Metro area and education define reference group.)
Full Household Head Sample (N=97,695)
Dependent Variable:
Ratio Income/Ideal if Under Marriage Ideal
Ratio Income/Ideal if Over Marriage Ideal
Under Marriage Ideal

Married
(mean=0.558)
0.1083*
(0.0422)
-0.0009
(0.0319)
-0.1116**
(0.0399)

Cohabiting
(mean=0.158)
-0.1309**
(0.0277)
-0.0298
(0.0212)
0.0983**
(0.0251)

Non-Coresiding
(mean=0.285)
0.0217
(0.0444)
0.0289
(0.0329)
0.0123
(0.0423)

VI

Coresiding With Kids
Sample (N=490,265)
Married
(mean=0.963)
-0.0117
(0.0312)
-0.0284
(0.0197)
-0.0142
(0.0164)

Coresiding With Kids
Sample (N=51,561)
Married
(mean=0.871)
0.0802*
(0.0351)
-0.0114
(0.0325)
-0.0991**
(0.0316)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are clustered on CMSA. +, *,** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level respectively. Household head sample includes men reported as household heads or
partners/roomates of female household heads. Coresiding sample includes members of household head sample who are married or living with a partner or female roommate. Coresiding with kids sample includes members
of coresiding sample who have a partner with children living in the household. Each column of a given panel represents a separate regression. Regressions based on preferred specifications and include adjusted income
category dummies, declie rank dummies, and all other controls.

Table 8. Sensitivity Analysis

Dependent Variable

I (Baseline)

II

III

IV

V

VI

VII

VIII

IX

X

XI

Married

Ever Married

Divorced

Married

Married

Married

Married

Married

Married

Married

Married

Housing Price Share of COL Adjustment

0.36

0.36

0.36

0

0.5

0.36

0.36

0.36

0.36

0.36

0.36

Housing Price Control

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Tails Excluded

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Controlling for Inequality

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Controlling for Inequality*Under Ideal

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Number of Rank Dummies
Econometric Model

10

10

10

10

10

10

10

10

10

100

10

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

Probit

0.2407**
(0.0564)
0.0069
(0.0300)
-0.2229**
(0.0445)

0.1991**
(0.0495)
-0.0440+
(0.0249)
-0.2338**
(0.0450)

-0.0067
(0.0109)
-0.0048
(0.0062)
0.0032
(0.0070)

0.2305**
(0.0601)
0.0123
(0.0354)
-0.2109**
(0.0416)

0.2657**
(0.0561)
0.0150
(0.0282)
-0.2399**
(0.0446)

0.2228**
(0.0520)
-0.0001
(0.0282)
-0.2121**
(0.0431)

0.1358*
(0.0539)
-0.0149**
(0.0045)
-0.1422**
(0.0497)

0.2418**
(0.0559)
0.0079
(0.0298)
-0.2230**
(0.0445)

0.2317**
(0.0551)
0.0055
(0.0299)
-0.2529**
(0.0454)

0.0814
(0.0647)
-0.0670
(0.0544)
-0.1324*
(0.0515)

0.1933**
(0.0518)
0.0160
(0.0360)
-0.1641**
(0.0398)

0.2128**
(0.0469)
-0.0171
(0.0423)
-0.2310**
(0.0468)

0.2205**
(0.0408)
0.0190
(0.0412)
-0.2039**
(0.0434)

0.0005
(0.0183)
0.0096
(0.0140)
0.0092
(0.0214)

0.2067**
(0.0438)
-0.0169
(0.0403)
-0.2246**
(0.0454)

0.2120**
(0.0493)
-0.0197
(0.0441)
-0.2320**
(0.0472)

0.2132**
(0.0465)
-0.0170
(0.0422)
-0.2312**
(0.0467)

0.2505**
(0.0375)
-0.0114+
(0.0064)
-0.2670**
(0.0331)

0.2143**
(0.0467)
-0.0164
(0.0423)
-0.2316**
(0.0468)

0.2123**
(0.0469)
-0.0177
(0.0421)
-0.2399**
(0.0474)

0.1968**
(0.0412)
-0.0340
(0.0424)
-0.2313**
(0.0477)

0.2173**
(0.0462)
-0.0056
(0.0422)
-0.2319**
(0.0482)

0.2325*
(0.0874)
-0.0026
(0.0765)
-0.2198**
(0.0731)

0.0979
(0.1054)
-0.0339
(0.0637)
-0.1146
(0.0803)

0.0068
(0.0497)
0.0257
(0.0388)
0.0181
(0.0403)

0.2600**
(0.0757)
0.0203
(0.0695)
-0.2206**
(0.0572)

0.2810**
(0.0966)
0.0210
(0.0789)
-0.2444**
(0.0744)

0.2394**
(0.0764)
0.0005
(0.0706)
-0.2235**
(0.0734)

0.2365**
(0.0844)
-0.0031
(0.0078)
-0.2279**
(0.0821)

0.2273*
(0.0921)
-0.0048
(0.0773)
-0.2170**
(0.0759)

0.2333*
(0.0871)
-0.0011
(0.0753)
-0.2290**
(0.0839)

0.1722+
(0.0956)
-0.0584
(0.0882)
-0.2090*
(0.0832)

0.2102*
(0.1004)
-0.0059
(0.0879)
-0.1989*
(0.0792)

Panel A. Native Non-Hispanic White Men
(Metro area and race/ethnicity define reference group.)

Ratio Income/Ideal if Under Marriage Ideal
Ratio Income/Ideal if Over Marriage Ideal
Under Marriage Ideal

Panel B. Native Non-Hispanic Black Men
(Metro area and education define reference group.)

Ratio Income/Ideal if Under Marriage Ideal
Ratio Income/Ideal if Over Marriage Ideal
Under Marriage Ideal

Panel C. Native Hispanic Men
(Metro area and race/ethnicity define reference group.)

Ratio Income/Ideal if Under Marriage Ideal
Ratio Income/Ideal if Over Marriage Ideal
Under Marriage Ideal

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are clustered on CMSA. +, *,** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level respectively. Each column within a panel represents a separate regression. Regressions based on preferred
specifications and include adjusted income category dummies, declie rank dummies, and all other controls.

Table 9. Simulation Results

Native Non-Hispanic White Sample
Q1
Actual
1970 0.64
1980 0.44
1990 0.34
2000 0.31
Change

-0.34

Q2
Q3
Q4
All
Actual Actual Actual Actual
0.79
0.86
0.89
0.80
0.61
0.73
0.79
0.65
0.51
0.63
0.73
0.55
0.46
0.58
0.66
0.50
-0.34

-0.29

Simulation 1: Relative Income Fixed at 1970 Levels
Native Non-Hispanic White Sample
Q1
Q2
Q3
Sim1
Sim1
Sim1
1970 0.64
0.79
0.86
1980 0.47
0.64
0.74
1990 0.38
0.56
0.65
2000 0.35
0.50
0.60
Fraction Change Explained

0.12

Simulation 2: Relative Income=1
Native Non-Hispanic White Sample
Q1
Sim 2
1970 0.80
1980 0.65
1990 0.55
2000 0.52

0.14

Q2
Sim 2
0.86
0.71
0.63
0.57

0.07

Q3
Sim 2
0.87
0.75
0.66
0.61

-0.23

-0.30

Q4
Sim1
0.89
0.79
0.73
0.66

All
Sim1
0.80
0.66
0.58
0.53

0.01

0.09

Q4
Sim 2
0.89
0.79
0.72
0.66

Gap
0.25
0.35
0.38
0.35

Fraction
All
Gap
Sim 2 Explained
0.86
0.64
0.73
0.58
0.64
0.56
0.59
0.61

Native Non-Hispanic Black Sample
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
All
Actual Actual Actual Actual Actual
1970 0.54
0.69
0.77
0.82
0.70
1980 0.29
0.42
0.56
0.64
0.48
1990 0.18
0.24
0.40
0.50
0.34
2000 0.19
0.26
0.38
0.47
0.33
Change

-0.39

-0.35

-0.37

Simulation 1: Relative Income Fixed at 1970 Levels
Native Non-Hispanic Black Sample
Q1
Q2
Q3
Sim1
Sim1
Sim1
1970 0.54
0.69
0.77
1980 0.29
0.42
0.56
1990 0.18
0.24
0.40
2000 0.19
0.26
0.38

Q4
Sim1
0.82
0.64
0.50
0.47

All
Sim1
0.70
0.48
0.34
0.33

0.00

0.00

0.00

Q3
Sim 2
0.83
0.63
0.49
0.46

Q4
Sim 2
0.84
0.66
0.53
0.50

All
Sim 2
0.79
0.59
0.45
0.43

Fraction Change Explained

-0.35

0.00

-0.43

0.00

Simulation 2: Relative Income=1
Native Non-Hispanic Black Sample
Q1
Q2
Sim 2 Sim 2
1970 0.70
0.78
1980 0.50
0.55
1990 0.39
0.40
2000 0.39
0.40

Note: Simulations use preferred specification for 1970-2000 analysis. Q1-Q4 refer to income quartile in race/ethnicity-specific metropolitan area income ditribution. See text for additional details.

Gap
0.29
0.35
0.32
0.28

Fraction
Gap
Explained
0.49
0.55
0.55
0.62

Appendix Table 1. Effect of Marriage Ideal on Marital Status, Native Born Non-Hispanic White Men Ages 25-34
Dependent Variable: Married
(mean=0.572)

I

Log (Marriage Ideal)

II

Log (Marriage Ideal) if Over Ideal
Under Marriage Ideal

Decile Rank in CMSA-Race/Eth Group Dummies
Year-Specific Adjusted Income Dummies
Age Dummies
Year*Ed Group Dummies
Additional CMSA controls
CMSA Dummies

Number of Observations
Number of CMSA-Year Cells
R-squared

IV

V

-0.1424**
(0.0325)
-0.0932*
(0.0424)
0.4838+
(0.2899)
0.1525**
(0.0063)

-0.1117**
(0.0308)
-0.0158
(0.0388)
1.0297**
(0.3069)

-0.0217
(0.0338)
0.0123
(0.0355)
0.3714
(0.2810)

-0.1492**
(0.0331)

Log (Marriage Ideal) if Under Ideal

Log (Total Real Income)

III

0.1727**
(0.0048)

0.1730**
(0.0048)

yes
yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

1159431
330
0.13

1159431
330
0.13

1159431
330
0.13

1159431
330
0.13

1159431
330
0.13

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are clustered on CMSA. +, *,** indicate staistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level respectively. Marriage Ideal defined as median
earnings of full-time full-year male workers ages 18-64 in the CMSA-year-race/ethincity group. See Table 5 notes and text for additional details.

Appendix Figure 1. Effect of Ratio of Marriage Ideal on Marriage By Decile,
Native Non-Hispanic White Men
0.25
0.20
0.15

Coefficient

0.10
0.05
0.00
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

-0.05
-0.10
-0.15
-0.20
Decile
Coefficient

CI Bound

CI Bound

8

9

10

Appendix Table 2. Alternative Bars, By Education Group
Native Born Non-Hispanic White Men

Dependent Variable: Married

Panel A. Reference Group - Same Race/Ethnicity
Ratio Income/Ideal if Under Marriage Ideal
Ratio Income/Ideal if Over Marriage Ideal
Under Marriage Ideal
Panel B. Reference Group - Same Education
Ratio Income/Ideal if Under Marriage Ideal
Ratio Income/Ideal if Over Marriage Ideal
Under Marriage Ideal
Panel C. Reference Group - Same Race/Ethnicity and Education
Ratio Income/Ideal if Under Marriage Ideal
Ratio Income/Ideal if Over Marriage Ideal
Under Marriage Ideal

All

Less Than HS

HS Exactly

Some College

College Grad

0.2407**
(0.0564)
0.0069
(0.0300)
-0.2229**
(0.0445)

0.2172*
(0.1095)
-0.0881
(0.0665)
-0.3023**
(0.0885)

0.2027**
(0.0708)
-0.0698*
(0.0342)
-0.2551**
(0.0550)

0.2187**
(0.0658)
-0.0695+
(0.0397)
-0.2824**
(0.0607)

0.1047+
(0.0614)
0.0128
(0.0296)
-0.0807
(0.0508)

0.3247**
(0.0204)
0.1082**
(0.0097)
-0.2152**
(0.0133)

0.0716
(0.0559)
0.0024
(0.0236)
-0.0540
(0.0387)

0.1862**
(0.0598)
-0.0405+
(0.0236)
-0.2057**
(0.0503)

0.1185+
(0.0644)
-0.1134**
(0.0280)
-0.2188**
(0.0620)

0.0537
(0.0606)
-0.0946+
(0.0484)
-0.1436**
(0.0467)

0.3723**
(0.0171)
0.1215**
(0.0113)
-0.2463**
(0.0135)

0.1679*
(0.0671)
-0.0459
(0.0430)
-0.1793**
(0.0565)

0.2537**
(0.0645)
-0.0654*
(0.0292)
-0.2977**
(0.0622)

0.1690*
(0.0664)
-0.1259**
(0.0305)
-0.2899**
(0.0670)

0.1192*
(0.0542)
-0.0561
(0.0504)
-0.1686**
(0.0395)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are clustered on CMSA. +, *,** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level respectively. Each column of a given panel represents a separate
regression. Regressions based on preferred specifications and include adjusted income category dummies, declie rank dummies, and all other controls.

Appendix Table 3. Two-Earner Marriage Ideals Using Different Reference Groups

White Sample (N=1,159,431)
1980
1990
2000

Black Sample (N=142,737)
1980
1990
2000

Hispanic Sample (N=67,480)
1980
1990
2000

Baseline Two-Earner Marriage Ideal, (Metro-Year Median FT Combined Tot Income Within Race/Ethnicity)
Marriage Ideal ($2000)
70,849 75,713 79,469
55,306 58,370 60,897
Under Ideal
0.66
0.70
0.72
0.70
0.81
0.79
Ratio of Income to Ideal if Under
0.63
0.61
0.61
0.56
0.54
0.57
Ratio of Income to Ideal if Over
1.27
1.30
1.34
1.22
1.17
1.18

57,546
0.65
0.62
1.22

60,997
0.71
0.60
1.22

60,036
0.73
0.60
1.24

Within-Education Group Two-Earner Marriage Ideal, (Metro-Year Median FT CombinedTot Income Within Education)
Marriage Ideal ($2000)
73,307 74,681 78,466
66,321 66,277 67,888
Under Ideal
0.68
0.68
0.69
0.86
0.90
0.86
Ratio of Income to Ideal if Under
0.63
0.63
0.62
0.54
0.52
0.55
Ratio of Income to Ideal if Over
1.27
1.32
1.35
1.14
1.15
1.17

65,983
0.79
0.61
1.19

65,902
0.77
0.59
1.24

66,815
0.79
0.59
1.26

Within-Education-Race Group Two-Earner Marriage Ideal, (Metro-Year Median FT CombinedTot Income Within Education and Race/Ethnicity)
Marriage Ideal ($2000)
75,327 77,685 83,078
56,932 57,412 59,717
59,499 60,742 59,902
Under Ideal
0.71
0.71
0.74
0.74
0.81
0.79
0.69
0.72
0.72
Ratio of Income to Ideal if Under
0.63
0.62
0.61
0.57
0.55
0.58
0.63
0.61
0.61
Ratio of Income to Ideal if Over
1.25
1.29
1.31
1.23
1.20
1.22
1.22
1.25
1.27

Note: Marriage ideal refers to income of fully employed 18-64 men plus income of fully employed 18-64 women in relevant reference group. See appendix text for additional details.

Appendix Table 4. Two Earner Model
Dependent Variable: Married
White Men

Black Men
Race/Ethnicity
and Education Race/Ethnicity
Based
Based
Reference
Reference
Groups
Groups
III
IV

Race/Ethnicity
and Education Race/Ethnicity
Based
Based
Reference
Reference
Groups
Groups
VI
VII

Race/Ethnicity
Based
Reference
Groups
I

Education
Based
Reference
Groups
II

Decile Rank in CMSA-Race/Eth Group Dummies
Year-Specific Adjusted Income Dummies
Age Dummies
Year*Ed Group Dummies
Additional CMSA controls
CMSA Dummies

0.3645**
(0.0637)
0.0670*
(0.0338)
-0.2948**
(0.0483)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

0.3475**
(0.0233)
0.1254**
(0.0116)
-0.2256**
(0.0141)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

0.4074**
(0.0179)
0.1491**
(0.0106)
-0.2579**
(0.0130)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

0.2270**
(0.0470)
0.1646**
(0.0392)
-0.0733
(0.0474)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

0.1808**
(0.0371)
-0.0060
(0.0296)
-0.1846**
(0.0424)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

0.1418**
(0.0318)
0.0363+
(0.0216)
-0.1196**
(0.0284)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

Number of Observations
Number of CMSA-Year Cells
R-squared

1156094
330
0.13

1156094
330
0.13

1156094
330
0.13

142405
255
0.12

142405
255
0.12

142405
255
0.12

Ratio Income/Ideal if Under Marriage Ideal
Ratio Income/Ideal if Over Marriage Ideal
Under Marriage Ideal

Education
Based
Reference
Groups
V

Hispanic Men

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are clustered on CMSA. +, *,** indicate staistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level respectively. See appendix text for additional details.

Education
Based
Reference
Groups
VIII

Race/Ethnicity
and Education
Based
Reference
Groups
IX

0.0653
(0.0867)
-0.0717
(0.0980)
-0.1574
(0.1008)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

0.2940**
(0.0487)
0.1569**
(0.0289)
-0.1313**
(0.0326)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

0.2531**
(0.0534)
0.1399**
(0.0319)
-0.1260*
(0.0478)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

66929
123
0.12

66929
123
0.12

66929
123
0.12

Appendix Table 5. 1970-2000 Analysis
Dependent Variable: Married
White Men (mean=0.611)

Black Men (mean=0.432)

Race/Ethnicity
Based
Reference
Groups
I

Education
Based
Reference
Groups
II

Race/Ethnicity
and Education
Based
Reference
Groups
III

Race/Ethnicity
Based
Reference
Groups
IV

Education
Based
Reference
Groups
V

Race/Ethnicity
and Education
Based
Reference
Groups
VI

Decile Rank in CMSA-Race/Eth Group Dummies
Year-Specific Adjusted Income Dummies
Age Dummies
Year*Ed Group Dummies
Additional CMSA controls
CMSA Dummies

0.2523**
(0.0603)
0.0211
(0.0350)
-0.2231**
(0.0420)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

0.3457**
(0.0245)
0.1117**
(0.0124)
-0.2355**
(0.0143)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

0.3912**
(0.0240)
0.1258**
(0.0135)
-0.2623**
(0.0158)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

0.1699**
(0.0495)
0.0747*
(0.0367)
-0.0953*
(0.0435)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

0.2048**
(0.0408)
0.0172
(0.0379)
-0.1839**
(0.0428)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

0.1596**
(0.0321)
0.0595*
(0.0235)
-0.1095**
(0.0318)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

Number of Observations
Number of CMSA-Year Cells
R-squared

1173124
376
0.16

1173124
376
0.16

1173124
376
0.16

145736
304
0.16

145736
304
0.16

145730
304
0.16

Ratio Income/Ideal if Under Marriage Ideal
Ratio Income/Ideal if Over Marriage Ideal
Under Marriage Ideal

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses are clustered on CMSA. +, *,** indicate staistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level respectively. See appendix text for additional details.

