NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPTIMAL ENDOWMENT DESTRUCTION UNDER CAMPBELL-COCHRANE
HABIT FORMATION
Lars Ljungqvist
Harald Uhlig
Working Paper 14772
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14772

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2009

We thank Fernando Alvarez and John Cochrane for criticisms and suggestions on our earlier exploration
of the properties of the Campbell-Cochrane preference specification. Ljungqvist's research was supported
by a grant from the Jan Wallander and Tom Hedelius Foundation. Uhlig's research was supported
by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk". The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Lars Ljungqvist and Harald Uhlig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Optimal Endowment Destruction under Campbell-Cochrane Habit Formation
Lars Ljungqvist and Harald Uhlig
NBER Working Paper No. 14772
March 2009
JEL No. C61,E21,E44,G12
ABSTRACT
Campbell and Cochrane (1999) formulate a model that successfully explains a wide variety of asset
pricing puzzles, by augmenting the standard power utility function with a time-varying subsistence
level, or "external habit", that adapts nonlinearly to current and past average consumption in the economy.
This paper demonstrates, that this comes at the "price" of several unusual implications. For example,
we calculate that a society of agents with the preferences and endowment process of Campbell and
Cochrane (1999) would experience a welfare gain equivalent to a permanent increase of nearly 16%
in consumption, if the government enforced one month of fasting per year, reducing consumption
by 10 percent then. We examine and explain these features of the preferences in detail. We numerically
characterize the solution to the social planning problem. We conclude that Campbell-Cochrance preferences
will provide for interesting macroeconomic modeling challenges, when endogenizing aggregate consumption
choices and government policy.

Lars Ljungqvist
Stockholm School of Economics
Sveavagen 65
SE-113 83 Stockholm
SWEDEN
Lars.Ljungqvist@hhs.se
Harald Uhlig
University of Chicago
5454 S. Hyde Park Blvd.
Chicago, IL 60615
and NBER
huhlig@uchicago.edu

Campbell and Cochrane (1999, hereafter denoted C-C) formulate
a model that successfully explains a wide variety of asset pricing puzzles, including the high equity premium, the procyclical variation of
stock prices, and the countercyclical variation of stock market volatility. These remarkable results are achieved by augmenting the standard power utility function with a time-varying subsistence level, or
“external habit”, that adapts nonlinearly to current and past average
consumption in the economy. These preferences have been shown to
be useful in a number of additional applications. For example Moore
and Roche (2002), and Verdelhan (2008) extend the C-C framework
to explain anomalies in foreign exchange markets, and Wachter (2006)
addresses the term structure. Wachter (2005) provides efficient ways
to calculate asset prices, using these preferences and exogenously given
consumption and dividends. Bansal et al. (2007) provide an estimation of the C-C model. A continuous-time version and embedding it
into a larger context of long run risk evaluation is in Hansen (2008).
Guvenen (2008) has re-interpreted these preferences as arising from
agent heterogeneity. Given the achieved breakthrough in matching
key asset pricing facts by Campbell and Cochrane and other studies using their preference specification, it is all the more important
to fully understand the implications of these modeling choices. This
paper demonstrates several unusual implications.
We show that the assertions by Campbell and Cochrane that “more
consumption is always socially desirable,” and that “habit moves nonnegatively with consumption everywhere” are incorrect. As a consequence, government interventions that occasionally destroy part of
the endowment can be welfare improving. Figures 1 and 2 illustrate
such an outcome for a one-time endowment destruction that lowers
the habit level and compares it to a conventional linear habit formulation, calibrated so that the two models share the same steady state.
(Detailed explanations follow in section 2.1.) Figure 1 shows that
the decline in habit is much larger under the C-C formulation due to

1

strong nonlinearities away from the steady state. As a result, the welfare loss in the first period is more than compensated for by the welfare
gains in future periods when consumption is so much higher than the
reduced habit level, in contrast to the conventional linear habit formulation, see Figure 2. Figure 3 depicts the effect on overall welfare
depending on the size of the initial endowment destruction. Under
the C-C formulation, welfare decreases for miniscule and large endowment destructions, but it increases for moderately sized destructions.1
Under the conventional linear habit formulation, welfare always falls
in response to an endowment destruction at the steady state.
The purpose of this paper is to study these surprising welfare implications of the C-C preferences and assess their quantitative importance.
We use the original discrete-time specification of Campbell and
Cochrane rather than moving to a continuous-time specification as in
e.g. Hansen (2008). Exploiting the potential for large movements of
the surplus consumption ratio are key to the analysis here, but may
conceivably disappear in a continuous-time formulation or in other
alterations of the original Campbell-Cochrane framework. One way
of reading the results in this paper therefore is that the differences
between a continuous-time framework and discrete-time framework
may be substantial, in this case.

1

The model

The utility function of the representative agent is
E0

∞
X
t=0

δ

t (Ct

− Xt )1−γ − 1
,
1−γ

(1)

where δ is the subjective time discount factor and Xt is the level
of external habit. A conventional linear external habit formulation
1

To detect welfare losses for miniscule endowment destructions under the C-C habit
model, see Figure 4 that magnifies the lower range of destructions in Figure 3.

2

specifies that
Xt+1 = µXt + αCta ,

(2)

where C a denotes average consumption by all agents in the economy,
and µ and α are parameters.
Campbell and Cochrane (1999) proceed differently. They postulate
a process for the economy’s surplus consumption ratio, Sta ≡ (Cta −
Xt )/Cta . Using lowercase letters to indicate logs, they assume that
the log surplus consumption ratio evolves as a heteroscedastic AR(1)
process,
sat+1 = (1 − φ)s̄ + φsat + λ(sat ) cat+1 − cat − g ,


(3)

where φ ∈ [0, 1), g and s̄ are parameters, and the function λ(sa ) is
given by
a

λ(s ) =

(

S̄ −1 1 − 2(sa − s̄) − 1, sa ≤ smax ;
0,
sa ≥ smax ;
p

(4)

with smax = s̄ + 1 − S̄ 2 /2. The parameter s̄ is the logarithm
of the steady-state surplus consumption ratio S̄, and Campbell and
Cochrane set g equal to the logarithm of the mean consumption gross
growth rate G. It can be shown that the C-C formulation and the
conventional linear habit formulation in equation (2) share the same
steady state if µ = Gφ and α = G(1 − φ)(1 − S̄).
Campbell and Cochrane consider a pure endowment economy. Let
Yt be the per capita endowment in period t. Endowment growth is
modeled as an i.i.d. lognormal process,


νt+1 ∼ i.i.d. N (0, σ 2 ).

∆yt+1 = g + νt+1 ,

(5)

The equilibrium outcome in a market economy is that consumption
equals endowment, cat = yt . We shall now investigate what a social
planner would like to do under free disposal, i.e., cat ≤ yt .

3

2

The social planning problem

A social planner or benevolent government, facing a population with
C-C preferences given above, maximizes the expected discounted utility, subject to choosing consumption between zero and current endowment. That is, the only option available to the social planner is
to let agents consume a fraction of the endowment in any given period. Let the social planner’s choice variable at time t be denoted
ψt ≡ ct − yt ≤ 0, i.e., the logarithm of the fraction of the endowment
that is consumed. The objective function can then be rewritten as
E0

∞
X
t=0

δt

∞
X
(Sta Cta )1−γ − 1
exp ((1 − γ)(sat + ψt + yt )) − 1
δt
= E0
, (6)
1−γ
1−γ
t=0

and the law of motion for the log surplus consumption ratio can be
expressed as
sat+1 = (1 − φ)s̄ + φsat + λ(sat ) (ψt+1 − ψt + νt+1 ) ,

(7)

where we have used equation (5) to substitute out for g. From now
on, we will leave out the superscript a since outcomes for the representative agent and economy-wide averages are the same to the social
planner.
Campbell and Cochrane (1999, p. 246) report that the social marginal
utility is always positive in their model which would seem to imply
that the social planner should set ψt = 0 in all periods. However,
Campbell and Cochrane only prove that an infinitesimal destruction
of the endowment leads to a welfare loss. To illustrate our surprising
finding that noninfinitesimal destructions can increase welfare under
the C-C habit formulation, it is instructive to consider a one-time
perturbation from a steady state.

2.1

One-time perturbation from a steady state

Consider an economy in a non-stochastic steady state with endowment
and consumption growing at a constant growth rate G ≥ 1. The

4

parameter restriction that ensures a bounded objective function is
δG1−γ < 1 .

(8)

Suppose now that the social planner destroys part of the endowment
in one single period, denoted period 0. Thus, we have log(C0 /Y0 ) =
ψ < 0, and the sequences of the logarithms of consumption and the
surplus consumption ratio evolve as follows
c0 (ψ) = y0 + ψ < y0 ,
for all t ≥ 1;

ct (ψ) = yt ,
s0 (ψ) = s̄ + λ̄ψ < s̄ ,
st (ψ) = s̄ − φt−1 ψ λ(s̄ + λ̄ψ) − φλ̄ > s̄ ,




for all t ≥ 1;

where λ̄ ≡ λ(s̄). Evidently, the representative agent’s utility falls
in period 0 because both his consumption level and the surplus consumption ratio decline relative to the steady state. But the utilities in
all future periods increase due to a higher surplus consumption ratio
that asymptotically returns to its steady-state value. The question
is whether the discounted sum of these changes in utilities produce a
welfare gain or a welfare loss.
After eliminating the constant terms involving −1/(1 − γ) in the
preference specification and dividing through by exp ((1 − γ)y0 ), the
discounted life-time utility of the described perturbation can be expressed as
∞
X
exp ((1 − γ)(s0 (ψ) + ψ))
exp ((1 − γ)(st (ψ) + tg))
W (ψ) ≡
+
δt
(9)
1−γ
1−γ
t=1

with the derivative
W ′ (ψ) = (1 + λ̄) exp ((1 − γ)(s0 (ψ) + ψ))

+

∞
X
t=1

h

i

δt φt−1 s′1 (ψ) exp ((1 − γ)(st (ψ) + tg)) , (10)

5

where
s′1 (ψ) = − λ(s̄ + ψ λ̄) − φλ̄ − ψ λ̄ λ′ (s̄ + ψ λ̄) < 0.




(11)

The derivative s′1 is negative since ψ < 0 and λ is a decreasing function.
Thus, whether welfare marginally increases or decreases at negative
values of ψ depends on whether the first or the second term in equation (10) dominates numerically. Appendix A shows that welfare is
globally increasing with a conventional linear habit formulation: there,
endowment destruction in a steady state always leads to a welfare loss.
Appendix B shows that this is also true locally along the steady-state
path for the C-C preferences. This should come as no surprise since
Campbell and Cochrane (1999, p. 246) prove that the social marginal
utility is positive in their model. More specifically, they show that the
social marginal utility is positive for infinitesimal perturbations when
the endowment follows a random walk. When setting growth equal
to zero in our calculations, we have a constant endowment level or a
degenerate random walk.
However, the local result for the C-C preferences fails to hold globally. Given Campbell and Cochrane’s (1999, Table 1) parameter values as reported in our Table 1, we compute the representative agent’s
welfare associated with one-time endowment destructions between 0
and 25 percent.2 Figure 3 shows clearly that there exist endowment
destructions that do raise welfare.3 To understand the mechanisms at
work, consider as an example the five-percent endowment destruction
in Figures 1 and 2. Under the conventional linear habit formulation in
equation (2), habit responds with a one-period lag to the endowment
destruction in period 0 and, as can be seen in Figure 1, the resulting
2

Following Campbell and Cochrane (1999), all numerical analyses in our paper are
performed at a monthly frequency.
3
As noted in footnote 1, one cannot discern in Figure 3 that endowment destructions
lead to welfare losses locally around the steady state under the C-C habit model, as proven
in Appendix B. But after magnifying the scale in Figure 4, we see that welfare does indeed
decrease for endowment destructions less than 0.07 percent.

6

decline in habit is much less than under the C-C habit model. In addition, under the C-C habit formulation in equation (3), habit moves
contemporaneously with consumption changes and according to the
solid curve in Figure 1, the habit level now falls in response both to
the endowment destruction (period 0) and to the subsequent increase
in consumption (period 1). Hence, the loss of utility in the period with
endowment destruction is mitigated under the C-C habit formulation
because of the contemporaneous drop in habit, and future utility gains
are magnified by the additional habit decline that is triggered by the
consumption hike after the endowment destruction.
The effects upon agents’ welfare depend on how the distance between consumption and habit change in different periods as illustrated
in Figure 5 where
C0 (ψ) − X0 (ψ) = exp (y0 + ψ + s0 (ψ)) ;
Ct (ψ) − Xt (ψ) = exp (yt + st (ψ)) ,

for all t ≥ 1.

For a given ψ ≤ 0, it is informative to study the marginal change in
(Ct − Xt ) when perturbing ψ,
d [C0 (ψ) − X0 (ψ)]
dψ
d [Ct (ψ) − Xt (ψ)]
dψ

= (1 + λ̄) exp (y0 + ψ + s0 (ψ)) ;
= φt−1 s′1 (ψ) exp (yt + st (ψ)) ,

for all t ≥ 1.

We can see that the derivative in period 0 gets muted at low values of
ψ, i.e., at higher levels of endowment destruction, while the opposite
is true for the corresponding derivatives in future periods. In fact, the
multiplicative term s′1 as given in equation (11) becomes arbitrarily
large and negative when ψ is driven to ever lower values and therefore,
the associated loss in (Ct − Xt ) for t ≥ 1, becomes arbitrarily large
when reducing the amount of endowment destruction in period 0. This
in turn implies that (Ct − Xt ) for t ≥ 1, must take on arbitrarily large
values when computed at ever lower values of ψ. Figure 5 depicts
the exploding outcome for (C1 − X1 ) when increasing the amount of

7

endowment destruction in period 0. Behind the exploding outcome
for (C1 − X1 ) in Figure 5 lies a critical property of the C-C preference
specifiation: habit can move negatively with consumption. In our example, the subsequent consumption hike in period 1 does not increase
but rather decreases the habit level. We will examine this property
further below in section 4.
To calculate the effect on welfare from the higher (C1 − X1 ) and
the correlated but slowly decaying future values of (Ct − Xt ) for t ≥ 2,
one needs to take into account the curvature of the utility function and
compare it to the utility loss in period 0 from the fall in (C0 − X0 ).
Thus, while (C1 − X1 ) is ever increasing, welfare takes the humpshaped form depicted in Figure 3.
The feature in Figure 3, that the log of the optimal endowment destruction is finite, can be shown more generally. Let ω = (ψ0 , ψ1 , . . . , s0 , s1 , . . .)
be some (stochastic) path for the decisions and consequently surpluses.
Rewrite the objective function (6) as
exp ((1 − γ)(sa0 + ψ0 + y0 )) − 1
+ V (ω, (yt ))
1−γ

(12)

where
V (ω, (yt )) = E0

∞
X
t=1

δt

exp ((1 − γ)(sat + ψt + yt )) − 1
1−γ

(13)

Assume that V (ω, (yt )) > −∞. For example, this is the case for a
never-destruct-endowment policy of ψt ≡ 0, t ≥ 1. So an agent aiming
at maximizing welfare will have no problem satisfying this assumption.
Consider now an alternative path, ω̃ = (ψ̃0 , ψ̃1 , . . . , s̃0 , s̃1 , . . .) and
suppose that it improves welfare compared to the original path. There
are two cases to consider, depending on γ.
First, assume that γ > 1. Consider the two parts of welfare in
(12). The possible gain in the second part V (ω̃, (yt )) − V (ω, (yt )) is
bounded above by δ/((1 − δ)(γ − 1)) − V (ω, (yt )). However, the loss
stemming from current utility will be unbounded as ψ̃0 → −∞. Thus,

8

for any ω̃ improving welfare compared to the current path, the initial
endowment destruction must not drop below some treshold ψ, which
generally depends on the current strategy ω and the current state.
Next, assume that γ < 1. In that case, the loss from driving ψ̃0 →
−∞ is finite and given by (exp ((1 − γ)(sa0 + ψ0 + y0 )) − 1)/(1 − γ).
However, the first term in the continuation value of V (ω̃, (yt )) will
now rise without bounds in ψ0 . It is easy to see that welfare can be
improved upon without bounds, since all subsequent terms for t ≥ 2
are in expected sum bounded below by −δ2 /((1−δ)(1−γ)) . Therefore,
for the problem of welfare maximization to be well-posed, we must
have γ > 1.

2.2

Solution to the social planning problem

So far, we have considered only a one-time deviation from a steady
state benchmark, and shown that the latter is not optimal for the
numerical cases shown. What then is the optimal solution? Let us
thus turn to calculating the solution of the social planner’s problem
and a quantitative assessment of how much welfare can be improved
by destroying endowments.
To solve for the optimal allocation, we formulate a dynamic programming problem for the social planner. Let s and ψ be the logarithms of last period’s surplus consumption ratio and the fraction of
last period’s endowment that was consumed. The current value of
the endowment shock is denoted ν. The optimum value of the social
planner’s problem is then4
v(s, ψ, ν) = max
ψ̃≤0, s̃

(

h
i
exp((1 − γ)(s̃ + ψ̃))
+ δE exp((1 − γ)(g + ν̃))v(s̃, ψ̃, ν̃)
1−γ

4

As in equation (9), we have rescaled the value function by leaving out the constant
terms involving −1/(1 − γ) in the preference specification, and normalized by dividing
through by exp ((1 − γ)y) where y is the current endowment.

9

)

where the maximization is subject to




s̃ = (1 − φ)s̄ + φs + λ(s) ψ̃ − ψ + ν ,

(14)

ν̃ ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) .

(15)

Since γ > 1, and if a solution to the planning problem exists, then the
value function is nonpositive, v(s, ψ, ν) ≤ 0. Note that λ(s) ≥ 0.
Proposition 1 Let γ > 1. Assume that
δ exp((1 − γ)g + (1 − γ)σ 2 /2) < 1

(16)

There is a solution to the social planner’s problem. The solution for
the decision on the endowment destruction is finite, ψ̃ > −∞.
Proof: To show that there is a solution, first consider the auxilliary problem, restricting the domain to s ≥ s for some lower bound
s > −∞, and truncate the normal distribution | ν̃ |< ν̄. For this
problem, we claim that the optimal solution ψ̃ is bounded from below,
ψ ≥ ψ ∗ , where ψ ∗ may depend on the current state (s, ψ, ν). To see
this, note that the first term of the objective function diverges to −∞
as ψ̃ → −∞. On the other hand, the second term, i.e. the expected
future value is bounded by zero from above. Hence, the objective
function is bounded. Furthermore, Bellman’s sufficient conditions for
a contraction mapping apply, due to condition (16). Thus, there is a
unique solution to the social planner’s problem with a restricted domain. As the domain is expanded, standard arguments show that the
solution converges locally uniformly to a solution of the social planner’s problem stated above. •

We will now provide a numerical solution to this problem using
Campbell and Cochrane’s monthly time scale of their parameterization
in Table 1 but without any uncertainty, ν = ν̃ = 0. The endowment

10

growth shocks will be reintroduced in the next section when we assess
the quantitative importance of policy interventions.
In delivering a numerical solution, we had to solve a challenging
problem. Consider equation (14) without random shocks, and suppose
that ψ̃ = 0, while driving ψ → −∞. Note that then s̃ → ∞. While
we have shown, that the optimum (in the previous period) occurs for
some finite value of ψ, it still may be the case, that very low ψ’s
are desirable, and, in fact, they are (in a sense to be made precise
below). Low ψ’s result in high s̃. It then takes a long time per the
autoregression in (14) to return to a range below smax . We found that
a typical optimal solution path will occasionally increase s̃ to values
just below 16, or, put differently to values S̃ = exp s̃ = 9000000. It
should be clear that value function iterations on a grid of S-values,
using e.g. a constant step size, which also is reasonably exact for the
“standard range” of S ∈ [0, Smax ], where Smax ≈ 0.09, is numerically
infeasible (and this is the sense in which ψ is “very low”). A different
numerical strategy is required.
We solve this problem by noting that optimal consumption is equal
to endowment for all s ≥ s∗ , where s∗ is “one step” above smax according to equation (14), i.e., where s∗ satisfies
s∗ =

1
(smax − (1 − φ)s̄) .
φ

Indeed, for s ≥ s∗ , one can easily calculate the number of steps it
takes to return to the region s < s∗ , where destruction of the endowment might be optimal, and calculate the utility generated during the
transition path to this region.
We impose a grid on destruction choices (1 − exp(ψ)) at stepsize ∆ exp(ψ) = 0.02 and use interpolation for s, but “storing” all
functions, using a grid for S with step size 0.0002 for S < S ∗ =
exp(s∗ ). Above S ∗ , we use a grid on log(S), using 10 grid points
between each “step” of the AR-process (14).
The resulting decision rule is shown in figure 6. Note the unusual
shape of the decision rule that prescribes destruction of the endow-

11

ment in a triangular-shaped region, with a very steep “canyon” of
destruction for S near Smax .
Simulations, starting at Smax and no consumption destruction quickly
settle down on a regular cycle of consumption destructions, where each
cycle typically takes somewhere around 300 periods or months, i.e. approximately 25 years. By inspecting the simulations, we find that a
cycle is typically launched as follows. Coming from a high value of s,
the surplus consumption ratio eventually drops below s∗ , per iteration
on (14). Then, there is soon a first period of endowment destruction,
and after at most two additional periods, the social planner reverts to
full consumption and “launches” s to a high range again, starting the
cycle of gradual return to the below-s∗ -region.
Besides these typical cycles with brief phases of endowment destruction, there are instances of cycles with more periods of destruction and time spent in the below-s∗ -region, before launching s to a
higher range. Though, we suspect that this “slow maneuvering” into
launch position is just an artifact of our numerical approximation of
calculating a value function on a grid, rather than being a feature
of the solution to the exact dynamic programming problem. Our
conjecture is supported by the following exercise. Given an initial
s ∈ [smax , s∗ ), we let the social planner make T consecutive decisions on endowment destruction, while setting consumption exogenously equal to the endowment forever afterwards. Thus, conditional
on a launch of s to a higher range, the payoff is approximately the
same as in the dynamic program except that we have replaced the
future continuation value when drifting below s∗ by the value of no
more endowment destruction. Since optimal cycles are on average 25
years long, this difference in distant future behavior is heavily discounted and hence, should not matter much for the optimal choice of
endowment destruction during the initial launch. The computational
advantage of this T-dimensional maximization problem is that it can
be solved with standard numerical maximization routines rather than

12

calculations on a grid. When solving this problem for large values of
T , we found that the optimal length of the launch phase, i.e., the time
spent in the below-s∗ -region, never exceeded three periods.

3

Quantitative importance

The findings of the previous section indicate that the recurrent destruction of the endowment is optimal. We now allow for random
shocks to consumption growth, using the exact monthly parameterization of Campbell and Cochrane in Table 1. Rather than solve for
the optimal policy response, we examine the welfare gains of policies
parameterized by (ψ, p), which destroy a fixed fraction (1 − exp(ψ)) ∈
[0, 1] of the endowment every p:th period, p ∈ {2, 3, . . .}. The policy
experiment starts off with an immediate destruction in the first period
and continues in perpetuity. No upper bound on the logarithm of the
surplus consumption ratio st was imposed in the calculations.
Concerning the initial condition S−1 , we pursue two alternatives.
First, we use the steady state S−1 = S̄. Second, we draw S−1 from
the unconditional distribution depicted in Campbell and Cochrane’s
Figure 2, derived there for the continuous-time version of the model.
We simulate 100 time series of monthly endowments, where the length
of each series is 200 years. We compare the average welfare obtained
under the policy experiments of periodic destruction to the benchmark “laissez-faire” average welfare measure obtained from the same
simulations, when no endowment destruction takes place. The welfare comparison is measured in terms of the percentage increase in
consumption needed to make the agents in the laissez-faire economy
as well as off as under the policy (ψ, p).
Table 2 contains the results where we find large welfare gains
(rather than welfare losses) associated with the policies of periodic
destructions. Put differently, a society of agents with CampbellCochrane preferences would experience a welfare gain equivalent to a

13

permanent increase of nearly 16% in consumption, if the government
enforced one month of fasting per year, reducing consumption by 10
percent then. Note that the government should neither be too timid
nor too audacious in its demands of consumption reduction while fasting: the welfare gains at 15 as well as 5 percent reductions are smaller
than at 10 percent. Either way, these welfare gains are dramatic.

4

Habit moves negatively with consump-

tion
The economic intuition for the surprising finding that the agents are
better off with a cyclical destruction of endowments is to be found
in the implied law of motion for the external habit. Campbell and
Cochrane (1999, p. 212) claim that habit moves nonnegatively with
consumption everywhere. Unfortunately, this is not so. Instead, habit
can fall contemporaneously with a rise in consumption even locally
around the steady state. After differentiating the law of motion for
the surplus consumption ratio in equation (3), we obtain
dxt+1
λ(st )
.
=1−
dct+1
exp(−st+1 ) − 1
In the steady state, st = st+1 = s̄, so the parameterization of the
function λ(s) in equation (4) guarantees that dx/dc = 0 at the steady
state. Next, we calculate the second derivative,
d2 xt+1
λ(st )2
=
−
exp(−st+1 ) ≤ 0,
[exp(−st+1 ) − 1]2
dc2t+1
and the expression is strictly negative at the steady state. This establishes that there is a region around the steady state in which habit
moves negatively with consumption.5
Based on Campbell and Cochrane’s monthly frequency of their parameterization in Table 1, Figure 7 maps out the relationship between
5

We are thankful to John Cochrane for suggesting this exposition of our argument.

14

consumption changes and movements in the habit level. In particular,
for a given value of last period’s surplus consumption ratio, the figure
depicts how contemporaneous habit responds to percentage changes in
consumption relative to last period’s levels. As a numerical reference,
the steady-state surplus consumption ratio is 0.057. It can be seen
that the habit level moves negatively with consumption for a wide
range of consumption increases. Hence, our finding of large welfare
improvements associated with the cyclical destruction of endowments
can be understood as “investments” in a lower habit level. That is,
a period of endowment destruction is most likely to be followed by a
rebounce in consumption next period and this consumption growth
will often be associated with the strange effect of lowering the habit
level.6

5

Conclusions

We have shown that the habit formulation by Campbell and Cochrane
imply, that a social planner could reap large welfare gains by destroying 10 percent of the endowment every 12:th month. To be indifferent
to such a policy, the representative agent would have to be compensated by almost 16 percentage points higher consumption for the indefinite future under laissez-faire. These welfare results are most likely
connected with a surprising property of the C-C preference specification which is that habit can move negatively with consumption.
6

To gauge how common this unorthodox habit dynamics is in the laissez-faire economy, we use our stochastic simulations of Campbell and Cochrane’s environment in the
preceding section to construct an indicator as follows. For any period with consumption
growth in excess of the steady-state growth rate, we compute the habit level and compare it to the counterfactual habit level that would have arisen if consumption had only
grown from last period at the steady-state rate. Half of all simulated periods experience
consumption growth higher than the steady-state rate; of that 50%, roughly one quarter
exhibits unorthodox habit dynamics in the sense that the habit level is reduced relative to
if consumption had only grown at the steady-state rate.

15

Our findings imply that Campbell and Cochrane’s (1999, pp. 245–
247) attempt to map their results into a version of the model with
internal habit formation must be reconsidered. Households faced with
such an internal habit would themselves choose to periodically destroy
endowments. Thus, the optimally chosen consumption process would
not be the same as the exogenous endowment process.
If the C-C preferences were embedded in an economy with storage
or production, it would rationalize outcomes of consumption bunching either chosen by households themselves under internal habit formation or through destabilizing policies by a benevolent government
under external habit formation.7 In calculations not reported here, we
follow Campbell and Cochrane’s (1999, p. 210) suggestion that their
endowment economy can alternatively be closed with a linear production technology. Using the randomly generated endowment sequences
in the present paper, we then find large welfare gains from storing
roughly 10 percent of the endowment and consuming the savings in
a consumption binge every other month. To make the households in
a laissez-faire economy that consumes the endowment indifferent to
such a policy, consumption would have to be raised by more than 30
percentage points for the indefinite future.
In sum, given the progress made in understanding asset pricing
puzzles with the help of Campbell-Cochrane preferences, the next natural step will be to understand the macroeconomic implications, when
endogenizing consumption at the aggregate level and when investigating the scope for government intervention. Our analysis has convinced
us, that this exercise will provide interesting challenges.
7

By contrast, Ljungqvist and Uhlig (2000) report on how welfare can be improved
through policies of consumption stabilization under catching-up-with-the-Joneses preferences, i.e., the conventional linear external habit formulation. In a productivity-shock
driven economy, it is shown that such a consumption externality calls for an optimal tax
policy that affects the economy countercyclically via procyclical taxes, i.e., “cooling” down
the economy with higher taxes in booms and lowering taxes in recessions to stimulate the
economy.

16

Appendix A
We show that welfare cannot increase by destroying part of the
endowment along a steady-state growth path, given that the external
habit level is governed by a conventional linear law of motion;
t−1
X

a
= αC0a
Xt = µXt−1 + αCt−1

µj Gt−1−j + µt X0 ,

j=0

where the second equality would hold along the constant growth path.
In a steady state, habit is ensured to be less than consumption if the
parameters satisfy
G > µ + α,

(17)

and habit would then grow at the rate G and result in a steady-state
ratio Xt /Ct = α/(G − µ).
Let {Ct , Xt } denote the sequence of consumption and habit levels
in the steady state, and consider a one-time perturbation where a
fraction △ ∈ [0, 1 − α/(G − µ)) ≡ Γ of the endowment is destroyed
in period 0: C̃0 = (1 − △)C0 , C̃t = Ct for all t ≥ 1; X̃0 = X0 , X̃t =
Xt − µt−1 α△C0 for all t ≥ 1. Let Ω(△) denote the welfare associated
with a perturbation △, i.e., the preferences in (1) are evaluated at the
allocation {C̃t , X̃t }. Since Ω′′ (△) < 0 for all △ ∈ Γ, it suffices to show
that Ω′ (0) < 0 in order to establish that Ω′ (△) < 0 for all △ ∈ Γ. We
can compute
Ω′ (0) = −(C0 − X0 )−γ C0 +

∞
X

δt (Ct − Xt )−γ µt−1 αC0 .

t=1

After substituting in for the steady-state allocation, a condition for
Ω′ (0) < 0 is
−1 +

∞
X

δt G−tγ µt−1 α < 0

=⇒

Gγ δ−1 > µ + α ,

t=1

which is guaranteed to hold under our parameter restrictions (8) and
(17).

17

Appendix B
We verify that an infinitesimal endowment destruction must also
decrease welfare under the C-C preference specification;
W ′ (0) = (1 + λ̄)S̄ 1−γ −

∞
X
t=1

=

h

δt φt−1 (1 − φ)λ̄ S̄Gt

i1−γ

1 − φδG1−γ + (1 − δG1−γ )λ̄ 1−γ
S̄
> 0,
1 − φδG1−γ

where the convergence of the infinite sum and the strict inequality
follow from φ ∈ [0, 1) and parameter restriction (8). Thus, in the
neighborhood around the steady-state growth path, welfare is strictly
increasing in the fraction of the endowment that is consumed.

18

References
[1] Bansal, Ravi, A. Ronald Gallant and George Tauchen (2007),
“Rational Pessimism, Rational Exuberance, and Asset Pricing
Models,” Review of Economic Studies 74 (4), 1005-1033.
[2] Campbell, John Y. and John H. Cochrane (1999), “By Force of
Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock
Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy 107 (2), 205251.
[3] Guvenen, Fatih (2008), “A parsimonious macroeconomic model
for asset pricing: habit formation or cross-sectional heterogeneity?”, revised draft, University of Minnesota.
[4] Hansen, Lars Peter, “Modeling the Long Run: Valuation in Dynamic Stochastic Economies,” Fisher-Schultz Lecture 2006, draft,
University of Chicago.
[5] Ljungqvist, Lars and Harald Uhlig (2000), “Tax Policy and Aggregate Demand Management Under Catching Up with the Joneses”, American Economic Review 90, 356-366.
[6] Moore, Michael J. and Maurice J. Roche (2002), “Less of a
Puzzle: A New Look at the Forward Forex Market,” Journal
of International Economics 58, 387-411.
[7] Verdelhan, Adrian (2008), “A Habit-Based Explanation of the
Exchange Rate Risk Premium,” forthcoming in Journal of Finance.
[8] Wachter, Jessica A. (2005), “Solving Models with External
Habit,” Finance Research Letters 2, 210-226.
[9] Wachter Jessica A. (2006), “A Consumption-Based Model of the
Term Structure of Interest Rates,” Journal of Financial Economics 79, 365-399.

19

P arameter

Variable

Annual

Monthly

g
σ
φ
γ
δ
S̄

1.89
1.50
0.87
2.00
0.89
0.057

0.1575
0.4330
0.9885
2.0000
0.9909
0.0571

Mean endowment growth (%)
Standard deviation of endowment growth (%)
Persistence coefficient
Utility curvature
Subjective discount factor
Steady-state surplus consumptio ratio

Table 1: Parameters from Campbell and Cochrane (1999, Table 1) who report
annualized values but, as in our study, perform all numerical analyses at a
monthly frequency.

p
2
6
12
24
120

0.01
4.89
2.48
1.37
0.72
0.24

(4.19)
(2.08)
(1.16)
(0.62)
(0.21)

Endowment destruction, 1 − exp(ψ)
0.05
0.10
0.15
8.36
9.08
9.03
8.52
4.95

(7.00)
(7.60)
(7.60)
(7.28)
(4.27)

13.66
15.45
15.91
15.89
13.40

(11.76)
(13.09)
(13.40)
(13.40)
(11.12)

8.68
9.65
9.86
9.89
8.51

(13.77)
(15.03)
(15.26)
(15.28)
(14.06)

0.20
-8.18
-8.13
-8.12
-8.12
-8.15

(5.56)
(5.96)
(6.04)
(6.06)
(5.97)

Table 2: Expected welfare gain when switching from the laissez-faire outcome to a government policy indexed by (ψ, p), measured by the percentage
increase in consumption needed to attain the same expected utility under
no government intervention. A government policy (ψ, p) stipulates that a
fraction 1 − exp(ψ) of the endowment is destroyed every p:th month. The
numbers without parentheses refer to unconditional welfare gains where the
initial surplus consumption ratio is drawn from its unconditional distribution, and the numbers within parentheses are welfare gains conditional upon
the initial surplus consumption ratio equal to its steady-state value.

20

Detrended habit level and consumption

Consumption

1

1

0.98

0.96
0
Standard habit model
0.94
0
0.92

C−C habit model

0.9
1
−1

0

1

2

3

4
5
Time in years

6

7

8

9

10

Figure 1: Detrended consumption and habit level associated with a fivepercent endowment destruction in period 0. The dash-dotted curve depicts
the consumption time series that bounces back in period 1. The solid and
dashed curve show the habit time series for the C-C habit model and the
standard habit model, respectively. (Parameter values from Table 1 at a
monthly frequency but without any uncertainty, σ = 0.)

21

C−C habit model

0.1
0.09

Consumption minus habit

0.08
0.07
0.06
Standard habit model
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
−1

0

1

2

3

4
5
Time in years

6

7

8

9

10

Figure 2: Difference between consumption and habit level associated with a
five-percent endowment destruction in period 0. The solid and dashed curve
refer to the C-C habit model and the standard habit model, respectively.
Detrended time series of consumption and habit levels are taken from Figure 1. (Parameter values from Table 1 at a monthly frequency but without
any uncertainty, σ = 0.)

22

Welfare gain in consumption equivalents (%)

12

10

8

C−C habit model

6

4

2

0
Standard habit model
−2
0

5

10
15
Endowment destruction (%)

20

25

Figure 3: Welfare gain associated with a one-time endowment destruction,
measured by the permanent percentage increase in consumption needed to
attain the same utility without any destruction. Along a non-stochastic
steady-state growth path, a fraction between 0 and 25 percent of the endowment is destroyed in one single period. The solid and dashed curve depict the
welfare gain associated with such a destructive policy including the utility
loss of the initial endowment destruction under the C-C habit model and the
standard habit model, respectively. Note that utility is not defined in the
standard habit model for endowment destructions that exceed the surplus
consumption ratio in the steady state, S̄ = 0.057. (Parameter values from
Table 1 at a monthly frequency but without any uncertainty, σ = 0.)

23

−4

Welfare gain in consumption equivalents (%)

x 10

2

C−C habit model

1

0

−1

−2
Standard habit model
0

0.01

0.02

0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Endowment destruction (%)

0.07

0.08

0.09

Figure 4: Welfare gain associated with a one-time endowment destruction,
measured by the permanent percentage increase in consumption needed to
attain the same utility without any destruction. The figure is a magnification
of the lower range of endowment destructions in Figure 3. Along a nonstochastic steady-state growth path, a fraction between 0 and 0.09 percent of
the endowment is destroyed in one single period. The solid and dashed curve
depict the welfare gain associated with such a destructive policy including
the utility loss of the initial endowment destruction under the C-C habit
model and the standard habit model, respectively. (Parameter values from
Table 1 at a monthly frequency but without any uncertainty, σ = 0.)

24

Consumption minus habit

0.5

0.4

0.3
C1−X1
0.2

0.1
C0−X0
0
0

1

2

3

4
5
6
7
Endowment destruction (%)

8

9

10

11

Figure 5: Difference between consumption and habit level under the C-C
habit formulation in response to the described one-time endowment destructions of Figure 3. The solid curve depicts the difference between consumption
and habit level in the period of the endowment destruction, C0 − X0 , and the
dashed curve depicts the detrended difference in the next period, C1 − X1 .
(Parameter values from Table 1 at a monthly frequency but without any
uncertainty, σ = 0.)

25

1

C(t) / Y(t)

0.8
0.6
0.4
0
0.2
0
0

0.5
0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

1

C(t−1) / Y(t−1)

Surplus consumption ratio S(t−1)

Figure 6: Optimal consumption as a fraction of the endowment, given last
period’s values of the consumption fraction Ct−1 /Yt−1 and the surplus consumption ratio. We only show the decision rule for 0 ≤ S ≤ exp s∗ . (Parameter values from Table 1 at a monthly frequency but without any uncertainty,
σ = 0.)

26

4

Change in habit (%)

3
2
1
0
−1
−2
−3
−4
0.1

−2

0.08

0

0.06
2

0.04
4

0.02
0

Consumption change (%)

Surplus consumption ratio

Figure 7: How contemporaneous habit is affected by a consumption change
relative to last period’s levels, for different values of last period’s surplus
consumption ratio. (Parameter values from Table 1 at a monthly frequency.)

27

