NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE MYTH OF THE FRONTIER
Camilo García-Jimeno
James A. Robinson
Working Paper 14774
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14774

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2009

This paper was written for the conference "Understanding Long-Run Economic Growth: A Conference
Honoring the Contribution of Kenneth Sokoloff". Our biggest debt is to Ken for all his encouragement,
friendship and inspiration over the years. We miss him. We thank Ron Rogowski for his discussion
and suggestions. We also thank Giovanni Zambotti at the Center for Geographic Analysis at Harvard
for his enormous help with the maps. We thank the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research for
financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Camilo García-Jimeno and James A. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Myth of the Frontier
Camilo García-Jimeno and James A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 14774
March 2009
JEL No. N0
ABSTRACT
One of the most salient explanations for the distinctive path of economic and political development
of the United States is captured by the 'Frontier (or Turner) thesis'. Turner argued that it was the presence
of the open frontier which explained why the United States became democratic and, at least implicitly,
prosperous. In this paper we provide a simple test of this idea. We begin with the contradictory observation
that almost every Latin American country had a frontier in the 19th century as well. We show that
while the data does not support the Frontier thesis, it is consistent with a more complex 'conditional
Frontier thesis.' In this view, the effect of the frontier is conditional on the way that the frontier was
allocated and this in turn depends on political institutions at the time of frontier expansion. We show
that for countries with the worst political institutions, there is a negative correlation between the historical
extent of the frontier and contemporary income per-capita. For countries with better political institutions
this correlation is positive. Though the effect of the frontier on democracy is positive irrespective of
initial political institutions, it is larger the better were these institutions. In essence, Turner saw the
frontier as having positive effects on development because he already lived in a country with good
institutions.

Camilo García-Jimeno
MIT
Department of Economics, E52-380
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge MA 02142
cgarcia@mit.edu
James A. Robinson
Harvard University
Department of Government
N309, 1737 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jrobinson@gov.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

One of the great economic puzzles of the modern world is why, amongst a group of colonies
founded at more or less the same time in the early modern period, by more or less rapacious
Europeans, with more or less the same intentions, North America became such an economic
and democratic success, while Latin America did not. There is no shortage of candidates, of
course, but one of the most prominent is the notion of the ‘Frontier’.1 Many scholars have
claimed that a crucial aspect of the uniqueness of the United States was the vastness of the open
spaces (at least after the indigenous peoples had died, Mann, 2005) which heavily in‡uenced
the way society, economy and polity evolved.
The most famous exposition of this view, …rst developed in 1893, was due to Frederick
Jackson Turner. Turner, postulating what has become known as the ‘Frontier (or Turner)
thesis’ argued that the availability of the frontier had led to a particular type of person and
had crucially determined the path of US society.
“The existence of an area of free land, its continuous recession, and the advance of
American settlement westward, explain American Development.
Behind institutions, behind constitutional forms and modi…cations, lie the vital
forces that call these organs into life and shape them to meet changing conditions.”
Turner (1920, pp. 1-2)
Turner emphasized that the frontier created strong individualism and social mobility and
his most forthright claim is that it was critical to the development of democracy. He noted
“the most important e¤ect of the frontier has been to promote democracy”Turner
(1920, p. 30)
and
“These free lands promoted individualism, economic equality, freedom to rise,
democracy ... American democracy is fundamentally the outcome of the experiences of the American people in dealing with the West.” Turner (1920, pp. 259,
266)
1

For other ideas on this topic of the exceptionalism of the United States see Hartz (1955, 1964), Lipset
(1996), Engerman and Sokolo¤ (1997).

1

Moreover, the things that went along with democracy and helped to promote it, such as
social mobility, most likely also stimulated economic performance.
Since Turner wrote, the ‘Frontier Thesis’ has become part of the conventional wisdom
amongst historians and scholars of the United States.2 Though the speci…c mechanisms that
Turner favored, such as individualism, have become less prominent, arguments about the
frontier have appeared in many places, particularly the literature on the democratization of
the United States (Keyssar, 2000, Engerman and Sokolo¤, 2005). Keyssar (2000, p. xxi) argues
“The expansion of su¤rage in the United States was generated by a number of
key forces and factors ... These include the dynamics of frontier settlement (as
Frederick Jackson Turner pointed out a century ago).”
Those who have contested this view (Walsh, 2005, for an excellent discussion) have tended
to focus on the extent to which the Frontier did or did not have the postulated e¤ects within
the United States.
At some level the acceptance of the Frontier thesis and the nature of the debate is quite
surprising. This is because the existence of a frontier clearly did not distinguish the United
States from the other colonies of the Americas or indeed other societies such as Russia, South
Africa or Australia in the 19th century. Every independent South American and Caribbean
country, with the exception of Haiti, had a frontier in the 19th century. As in the United
States, these frontiers were usually inhabited by indigenous peoples and they went through the
same pattern of expansion into this zone which, as in the United States, coincided with the
expropriation and oftentimes annihilation of indigenous communities. In these cases, however,
there seems to be much less reason to associate frontier expansion with democracy or economic
development. Indeed, one could conjecture that if the Frontier thesis had been developed by
Latin American academics in the late 19th century it would have been formulated with a minus
sign in front!3
A small literature has examined the frontier hypothesis in comparative perspective, but
it has come to inconclusive results. Turner did engage in some comparative observations but
refers only to Europe, noting
“The American frontier is sharply distinguished from the European frontier - a
forti…ed boundary line running through dense populations.” (Turner, 1920, p. 3)
2

For some of the debate about the applicability of this thesis to the United States see Taylor (1956), Billington
(1962, 1966, 2001), Hofstadter and Lipset ed. (1968) and Walsh (2005).
3
Though the issue of the role of the frontier has been considered in Latin America studies, see Hennessy
(1978) and Weber and Rausch (1994), it appears that nobody has made these comparative observations before.

2

Hennessy (1978) speci…cally addresses the applicability of the Frontier thesis to Latin America (see also the papers in Weber and Rausch, 1994).4 Noting the absence of a literature on
the Frontier thesis in Latin America Hennessy (1978, p. 13) reasons
“If the importance of the Turner thesis lies in its ... ability to provide a legitimating
and fructifying nationalist ideology, then the absence of a Latin American frontier
myth is easy to explain. Without democracy, there was no compulsion to elaborate
a supportive ideology based on frontier experiences.”
Hennessy’s general conclusion is that the thesis is irrelevant because
“Latin American frontiers have not provided fertile ground for democracy. The
concentration of wealth and the absence of capital and of highly motivated pioneers
e¤ectively blocked the growth of independent smallholders and a rural middle class”
(Hennessy, 1978, p. 129)
The correlation between good outcomes and the frontier in the United States and Canada
but the lack of such a correlation in Latin America raises the question of whether or not in
general there is any connection between the frontier and economic and political development.
Maybe the frontier was irrelevant? A myth?
We believe the answer to this is no. Some of the mechanisms described in the case of the
United States certainly seem plausible, it is just that they don’t seem to have operated in
Latin America. The key to understanding why comes from examining how frontier land was
allocated.5 In the United States it was the 1862 Homestead Act which played a major role in
governing who and on what terms had access to the frontier. In Latin America, on the other
hand, only Costa Rica and Colombia passed and enforced legislation which resembled measures
such as these. In a few other countries where some legislation was passed, it seems to have
never been put into practice. Je¤erson (1926, p. 167), for example, points out the di¤erence
between the “elevated aims and philanthropic language”of the Argentine legislation regarding
landowning in frontier areas and “the actuality of events”. More generally, frontier land was
allocated in a relatively inegalitarian pattern by existing elites, and property rights over frontier
lands of settlers were in many cases weak for non-elites. Though Turner continually talks about
4
Other work looking, usually critically, at the Frontier thesis is comparative perspective include Winks (1971),
Miller (1977), and Powell (1981). For more general discussions of frontier expansions in the modern world not
focused on the Turner thesis see Richards (2003) and Belich (2009).
5
Di¤erences in labor institutions developed in frontier areas may also have played an important role, and
were no doubt related to how land was allocated.

3

the frontier and ‘free land’as if they were the same thing, as Adelman (1994, p. 101) points
out
“Turner ... overlooked two hard facts: land was not free, and workers had to be
brought in from outside the region.”
Outside of Costa Rica and Colombia, frontier land was not free in Latin America and indeed
was allocated oligarchically by those with political power.6 Hennessy (1978, p. 19) observed
“Another contrast lies in the availability of ‘free land’. Whereas free land was the
magnet attracting pioneers into the North American wilderness, in Latin America
most available land had been preempted by landowning patterns set in the sixteenth
century.”
The historical experience of Argentina is again revealing. Je¤erson (1926 pp. 175-178)
describes several episodes in the Paraná basin, the Nequén region to the South or even in La
Pampa, where settlers found di¢ culties in maintaining their property rights over the lands
they opened, both because state o¢ cials reneged on past promises or because of abuses from
local elites. Interestingly, when Turner does discuss the issue of land laws with respect to the
frontier, he seems to see these as an endogenous response to the existence of the frontier, for
example arguing that
“The disposition of the public lands was a third important subject of national
legislation in‡uenced by the frontier” Turner (1920, p. 25)
and
“It is safe to say that the legislation with regard to land ... was conditioned on
frontier ideas and needs.” Turner (1920, p. 27)
The Latin American experience suggests to us not that the frontier is irrelevant, but rather
that a more nuanced version of the Frontier thesis is required. We refer to this as the ‘conditional Frontier thesis’. This takes into account the fact that the consequences of the frontier
6

There is a large historical literature on the oligarchic allocation of frontier lands in 19th century Latin
America. For overviews of the Central American experience see Williams (1994), Gudmundson (1997) and
Mahoney (2001); McCreery (1976, 1994) for the important Guatemalan experience; Parsons (1949) is the classic
work on frontier expansion in Colombia, see also Christie (1978) and LeGrand (1986); Dean (1971) and Butland
(1966) analyze the Brazilian case; Solberg (1969) presents the evidence for Chile; Coatsworth (1974, 1981) for
Mexico. Solberg (1987) and Adelman (1994) discuss Argentina and both books make interesting comparisons
to the di¤erential evolution of Canada.

4

are conditional on the initial political equilibrium when frontier expansion occurred. Although
the opening up of a frontier might bring new opportunities for the establishment of equitable
societies in ways that could promote democracy and economic growth, as Turner suggested,
in relatively oligarchic countries the existence of an open frontier gave the ruling elite a new
valuable instrument which they could manipulate to remain in power. They did this through
the structure of land and laws, policies towards immigrants and clientelistic access to frontier
lands. When initial political institutions were di¤erent, as they were in the United States,
Canada, Costa Rica and Colombia, elites were less able to manipulate this resource and a
more open society evolved. As Turner argued, it is quite likely in these circumstances that
the existence of a frontier helped to induce further improvements in political institutions. In
countries like Argentina or Mexico, it is possible that an oligarchically allocated frontier was
worse than having no frontier at all.
In this paper we propose what we believe is the …rst empirical test of the Frontier thesis
and also our extended ‘conditional Frontier thesis’. To do this we construct an estimate of the
proportion of land which was frontier in each independent country in the Americas in 1850. We
combine this with data on current income per-capita, democracy and inequality. Our …rst main
…nding is that our estimates of the relative size of the frontier are positively correlated with
long-run economic growth and the extent to which countries were democratic over the 20th
century. The relative size of the frontier is also negatively correlated with income inequality.
These initial results are quite consistent with the simple Frontier thesis.
Nevertheless, we then test the ‘conditional Frontier thesis’ by interacting the proportion
of frontier land in 1850 with measures of initial institutions, speci…cally constraints on the
executive from the Polity dataset which is available for every independent country in the
Americas in 1850.7 When GDP per-capita in 2007 is the dependent variable we …nd that neither
frontier land in 1850 nor constraints on the executive are themselves statistically signi…cant,
but their interaction is. Indeed, the results imply that for countries with the lowest level
of constraints on the executive (which is almost half our sample in 1850) long-run economic
growth is lower the larger is the frontier. For higher levels of constraints, however, long-run
growth is higher. These simple regressions are very consistent with the conditional Frontier
thesis. With respect to democracy, when we look at the average Polity Score from 1900-2007
we again …nd that once we add the interaction term, neither frontier nor constraints themselves
are signi…cant. In this case we do not …nd that the frontier is ever bad for democracy, but
rather its’impact on democracy is greater the greater are constraints on the executive in 1850.
7

Except for Canada, for which data is available starting in 1867.

5

These results suggest, again consistent with the ‘conditional Frontier thesis,’that the frontier
on its own had no impact on democracy. When we turn to the democracy score averaged over
the post World War II period (1950-2007) we …nd di¤erent results. Here frontier on its own
tends to be positively correlated with democracy while the interaction term is not statistically
signi…cant. Finally, when we examine contemporary inequality as the dependent variable we
do not …nd robust results. Though frontier and constraints on the executive in 1850 are both
negatively correlated with inequality, when we add the interaction term none of the variables
is statistically signi…cant.
Taken seriously, our results provide quite strong support to the conditional Frontier thesis
and suggest that the reason that Turner himself and so many subsequent scholars based in
the United States may have accepted the simple Frontier thesis, is that they were living in a
country which had relatively good institutions. Nevertheless, the size of our sample is small
and we are limited to using cross-national variation, so our …ndings ought to be regarded as
tentative.
Our argument about the conditional e¤ect of the frontier is related to several important
historical debates. For example, one interpretation of the arguments of Brenner (1976) is that
large shocks in the middle ages, such as trade expansion or the Black Death had conditional
e¤ects which depended on initial institutions. In Britain where the serfs were relatively organized and where Lords did not have large estates, the Black Death empowered the lower orders
and led to the collapse of feudal institutions. In eastern Europe, however, where the initial
conditions were di¤erent, the Black Death ultimately led to the ‘Second Serfdom’. A related
argument is presented in Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2005) who argue that the impact
on Western Europe of trade and colonial expansion after 1492 depended on initial political
institutions. In places where there were relatively strong political institutions, such as Britain
and the Netherlands, trade expansion led to improvements of institutions and stimulated economic growth and further political change. In places which were more absolutist, such as Spain
and France, trade expansion had opposite e¤ects.8
The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section we discuss how we measure the extent of
the frontier and present some basic data about its extent and nature. In section 3 we examine
the correlation between the frontier and long run economic and political outcomes. Second 4
investigates whether or not there is a conditional e¤ect of the frontier and section 5 concludes.
8

This type of interaction also comes up in the literature of the impact of the resource curse, see Moene,
Mehlum and Torvik (2006).

6

2

Measuring the Frontier

The literature on the frontier has been quite vague on how exactly to determine what was or
what was not frontier. Turner himself noted (1920, p. 3)
“In the census reports it is treated as the margin of that settlement which has a
density of two or more to the square mile. The term is an elastic one, and for our
purposes does not need a sharp de…nition. We shall consider the whole frontier
belt, including the Indian country and the other outer margin of the “settled area”
of the census reports.”
It was the de…nition of the frontier as areas with a population density of less than two
people per square mile that led the census bureau to declare in 1890 that the US frontier had
closed.
Any attempt to measure the extent of the frontier across the Americas must confront
several methodological issues. In the …rst place, frontiers in each country, and even within
each country, looked very di¤erent around the mid-nineteenth century. Coming up with a
measure of the frontier for each country therefore requires a compromise to select some basic
simplifying but consistent criteria which will necessarily overlook many possibly important
dimensions. Following the historical literature the natural candidates for such a classi…cation
are the presence or absence of native American communities not subject to state control and
authority, overall population density (including any non-native American settlers), and the
presence or absence of state institutions. All of these conditions were important determinants of
the potential availability of free land and of the possibilities for successful settlement. Obviously
problematic is that we would like to think of the frontier as a dichotomous condition, whereas
its de…ning variables are in most cases inherently continuous, and its boundaries usually not
clear-cut.
When dealing with the frontier experience of South America another issue arises; settlement
of frontier lands was not an absorbing state in some regions. Several areas in Paraguay, for
example, were signi…cantly settled and run by Jesuit missionaries during the colonial period.
After the expulsion of Jesuits from the Spanish Empire in 1767, the Crown reassigned the
control of these regions to other religious communities who failed to maintain the economic
viability of the missions and the political control of the indigenous communities inhabiting
the areas. As a result, in a matter of decades the missionary regions degenerated to a virtual
absence of state control and became frontiers once again. They remained as such until late in
7

the 19th century (Eidt, 1971, Bandeira, 2006). The case of Brazilian bandeirantes in the 17th
and 18th centuries is similar. Brazil expanded its boundaries as these settlers moved west into
the Amazon and its south-western basin. Nonetheless, many of these areas were subsequently
unsettled and remained like that until late in the republican period. As a result, Brazilian
historiography refers to them as “hollow” frontiers (Katzman, 1977). For our purposes we
tried to include in our measure these regions, which around 1850 were in fact not controlled
by republican states even if they had been so earlier in colonial times.
Once such decisions have been made, the second issue is related to the availability of information about location of frontier and non-frontier lands. Not only is detailed information
scarce by the very nature of the subject, but the comparability of the data across countries
might also be problematic. We collected three types of information, based on which we constructed three alternative measures of the frontier; (a) historical cartographic data depicting
directly information on frontier territories or on population density for several of the countries
in our sample of independent republics, at di¤erent dates starting in the mid 19th century, b)
geographic (and georeferenced) information on current-day administrative divisions (provinces,
departments or states), and c) direct country or regional historical accounts on the settlement
of frontier areas during the 19th century. The appendix contains a detailed description of the
sources used for each country. The reason that making use of current administrative divisions
is helpful is that in fact the formation of administrative units in many regions across the Americas was precisely driven by signi…cant settlement and State presence. The best examples of
this might be the straight lines marking the boundaries of the western states of the United
States, put in place as a …rst e¤ort to regulate and control the newly occupied territories as
the westward expansion moved on, or the Amazon rainforest frontier provinces of countries
like Colombia, Brazil or Peru, which were designed precisely to delimit such frontier areas.

2.1

The Frontier in the United States and Canada

For these two countries we were able to …nd detailed cartographic information which allowed
us to calculate the share of unsettled and settled land in 1850. More speci…cally, for the United
States the United States Census O¢ ce (1898) and Gerlach (1970) contain detailed maps of
population density. Both sources use the 19th century United States Census data, and following
the Census Bureau, classify as frontier land the territory with less than 2 people per square mile
(0.7725 people per square kilometer). For Canada, the Dominion Bureau of Statistics (n.d.)
contains maps for several years in the second half of the 19th century, depicting population
density by points on the map. We directly georeferenced these maps using GIS software, and
8

computed the share of total land area of each country with population density below 0.7725
people per square kilometer, in 1850 for the United States and in 1851 for Canada. Since these
maps were based on detailed census data, we believe these frontier measures have the smallest
possible measurement error, and are the only ones we consider for these two countries.
For the rest of countries in the Americas the information is not as detailed and is more
scattered throughout di¤erent sources. As a result, we decided to create a set of alternative
measures of the frontier, taking into account the di¤erences we found when comparing the
available information.

2.2

The Frontier in Central America

To measure the Frontier in Central America we relied heavily in Hall and Perez-Brignoli (2003),
which contains rich historical maps for Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa
Rica and Panama, of settlement during the 19th century, and also has a thorough historical
discussion of the frontier expansion throughout the region. We merged the information of these
maps, which depict the frontier regions in each country, with a georeferenced sub-national level
map of Central America, and coded each province/department/state as frontier or non-frontier
depending on whether or not it fell into the regions considered as unsettled in the Hall and
Perez-Brignoli (2003) maps. Of course, with this procedure a considerable number of subnational units appeared as partially frontier areas. We thus created two di¤erent measures of
the frontier, which we call narrow and wide. The narrow measure classi…es as non-frontier the
sub-national units for which an ambiguous coverage of the Hall and Perez-Brignoli (2003) maps
had been obtained, while the wide measure classi…es them a frontier. We further re…ned the
classi…cation of provinces using United States Bureau of the Census (1956a), which contains
very detailed population density maps for all the Central American republics in 1950 at the
province/department level. The comparison with these maps allowed us to reclassify provinces
that might have been ambiguous, but which by 1950 clearly had a population density below
0.7725 people per square kilometer, and necessarily must have been frontier areas 100 years
before. The Appendix presents the coding of each sub-national unit in its narrow and wide
versions.
For the Mexican frontier we relied on the Bureau of Business Research (1975) population
density map for 1900, a state-level map based on the 1900 Censo General de Población, together
with Bernstein (1964) and Hennessy (1978). Since population density in 1900 was considerably
higher than in 1850 everywhere in Mexico, we coded as frontier states not only those with less
than 0.7725 people per square kilometer in 1900, but also any State with at most a population
9

density of 5 people per square kilometer in 1900, which were at the same time mentioned in
the complementary references as frontier areas. This resulted in a relatively straightforward
classi…cation except for the state of Chiapas, which we coded as non-frontier in the narrow
measure and as frontier in the wide measure.

2.3

The Frontier in the Caribbean Republics

Only Haiti and the Dominican Republic were independent by 1850, and as such are the only two
Caribbean countries in our sample. Coding the frontier for them was a pretty straightforward
job based on Anglade (1982) and Lora (2002). Anglade presents population density maps for
the late 18th century, and mid 19th century, where it is clear that since the colonial period Haiti
had population densities well above 0.7725 people per square kilometer, and almost everywhere
signi…cantly higher. Haiti therefore did not have a frontier. For the Dominican Republic the
picture is very similar, except possibly for the provinces of Barahona and Pedernales in the
south-western tip of the country. The United States Bureau of the Census (1956b) also contains
detailed province-level maps of these two countries in 1950, which show a low population
density in the southwest of the Dominican Republic. As a result, the narrow measure considers
Barahona and Pedernales as non-frontier, while the wide measure codes them as frontier. All
the rest of the country is coded as non-frontier.

2.4

The Frontier in South America

To measure the frontier in the South American countries we followed a procedure very similar to
the one we used for the Central American republics, merging the information in usually countryspeci…c historical maps and accounts with current-day sub-national units. The Appendix
contains the historical references used for each country. When a sub-national unit was partially
covered by settlement we again made the distinction by coding it as non-frontier in the narrow
measure and as frontier in the wide version. This is the case, for example, of the north-eastern
Brazilian province of Piaui or the Paci…c coast province of Esmeraldas in Ecuador.
For South America we found an alternative source for the frontier. Butland (1966), which
discusses in detail the frontier expansion in southern Brazil, presents a South American map
depicting the frontier areas in mid 19th century. Unfortunately he does not explain how this
map was drawn, but actually it coincides to a quite large extent with our own province-level
codings. We used GIS software to georeference the frontier map in Butland (1966) and directly
computed the share of each country which was frontier in the mid-19th century. As a result
we have three di¤erent frontier measures for South America: narrow, wide and Butland.
10

Table 1 sums up the data from these calculations. For the United States and Canada we
only have one number each, with 72.5% of the territory of the United States being frontier
in 1850, while the corresponding number for Canada is 85.3%. Map 1 shows exactly where
the frontier and non-frontier areas were. This is a pretty familiar picture with, for example,
the United States being settled on the eastern seaboard and all the way west to the western
boundaries of Arkansas and Missouri. Far to the west parts of coastal California and the
central valley north of San Francisco were also settled. For the countries in South America
we have three di¤erent estimates of the extent of the frontier. For example, Table 1 shows
that for Colombia the narrow de…nition of the frontier suggests that 62.9% of the territory
was frontier in 1850 and this exactly coincides with the wide de…nition. Butland’s map gives
a fairly similar estimate of 58.1%. For other countries, however, the di¤erences between these
estimates are much larger. For example, for Argentina the narrow de…nition is 49.3% while
the wide one is 74.2%. The reason for this large di¤erence is easy to see from Map 2. Here the
settled areas intersect with many departments. For instance the narrow de…nition treats the
departments of San Luis, Córdoba, Neuquén, Santiago del Estero and Salta as settled, while
the wide de…nition treats them as frontier. For Argentina, Butland’s estimate is close to our
wide de…nition. Finally, Map 3 looks at Central America and the Caribbean.
These calculations clearly illustrate our conjecture from the introduction which is that
simply in terms of the size of the frontier, the United States is not distinct. Uruguay had a
frontier which was quite a bit larger relative to the size of the country and Brazil’s frontier was
also larger. Other countries such as Costa Rica, Nicaragua or Venezuela had frontier’s which
were only about 15% or so less.

3

Other Data

Apart from the data we constructed on the extent of the frontier in 1850, we use some other
readily obtainable data. For our measure of historical political institutions we use constraints
on the executive in 1850 from the Polity IV Project.9 This variable is de…ned as the extent of
institutional restrictions on decision making powers of the chief executive, whether individual
or collective. In a democracy constraints would come from the legislative or judicial branches
of government. In a dictatorship constraints may come from the ruling party in a one-party
system, a council of nobles or powerful advisors in monarchies, or maybe the military in polities
which are subject to the threat of military coups. The extent of constraints on the executive are
9

http://www.systemicpeace.org/polity/polity4.htm

11

coded as being between 1, meaning “unlimited executive authority”and 7, implying “executive
parity or subordination.”A country would be in the …rst category if “constitutional restrictions
on executive action are ignored” or “there is no legislative assembly or there is one but it is
called or dismissed at the executive’s pleasure.”A country would be in the latter category if “a
legislature, ruling party or council of nobles initiates much or most important legislation” or
“the executive is chosen by the accountability group and is dependent on its continued support
to remain in o¢ ce.”
Figure 1 shows the distribution of constraints on the executive in 1850 for the 21 countries
in our dataset. One can see that 9 countries are assigned the minimum score of 1, while the
United States and Canada have the maximum score of 7.10 Interestingly for our hypothesis,
Costa Rica and Colombia both have scores of 3 in 1850. The country with constraints of 5 in
1850 is Honduras.
We also use the Polity IV Project’s measure of how democratic a country is, which they
refer to as the Polity IV score, which is the di¤erence between the Polity’s Democracy and
Autocracy indices.11 The democracy index ranges from 0 to 10 and is derived from coding
the competitiveness of political participation, the openness and competitiveness of executive
recruitment and constraints on the chief executive. The Polity Autocracy Index also ranges
from 0 to 10 and is constructed in a similar way to the democracy score based on scoring countries according to competitiveness of political participation, the regulation of participation, the
openness and competitiveness of executive recruitment and constraints on the chief executive.
This implies that the Polity IV score ranges from -10 to 10.
The other data we use is GDP per-capita in 2007 PPP adjusted from the World Bank’s
World Development Indicators CD Rom and from the same source we also take information of
the Gini coe¢ cient for income distribution which we average over the period 1996-2005.
Table 2 shows some basic descriptive statistics of the data. The rows correspond to our
di¤erent dependent and key explanatory variables and we divide the sample according to the
median extent of frontier land in 1850 according to our narrow de…nition. The …rst set of
columns show the average data for countries with greater than median frontier land, while
the last set of columns in the table show the data for less than median frontier land. The
median country here is Mexico, 57% of whose land was frontier in 1850 according to our
narrow de…nition. Note that for countries below the median the average amount of land which
10

As previously noted, Polity data for Canada only starts in 1867, at which point it has a 7, which we used
as the its 1850 number.
11
This measure is a very standard one in empirical work on democracy, and other de…nitions typically give
very similar results (see Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson and Yared, 2008).

12

was frontier was 32% (with a standard deviation of 0.22), while for countries above the median
the average proportion of frontier land was 70% (with standard deviation of 0.12).
The comparison of low and high frontier countries is quite revealing. For instance looking
at the third row of Table 2 we see that GDP per-capita in 2007 on average was $11,466 for
above median frontier societies, while it was only $3,744 for below median. The data shows
that those countries which had a relatively large frontier in 1850 now have substantially higher
income per-capita. In row 4 we show the average Polity IV score over the period 1900-2007.
This is 2.43 for above median countries and -0.35 for below median. In the next row we instead
look at the average Polity IV score for the period 1950-2007. Though there is a clear upward
trend in the extent of democracy, the comparison looks quite similar with above median frontier
countries which have an average polity score of 3.96 while below median countries have a score
of 1.05. As with income per-capita, there seems to be a clear pattern with countries which had
relatively large frontiers in 1850 being today more democratic than those which had relatively
small frontiers in 1850.
Finally, the last row examines average inequality over the period 1996-2005. The average
Gini coe¢ cient for high frontier countries is 49.1 while for low frontier countries it is 53.4.
Just as countries with relatively large frontiers are more prosperous and democratic, they also
appear to be more equal.
These raw numbers are quite consistent with the basic Frontier thesis. It is interesting
to examine them in …gures. Figure 2 plots the share of frontier (narrow de…nition) against
GDP per-capita in 2007. There is a pronounced positively sloped relationship which remains
even if the United States and Canada are dropped. Figure 3 examines the raw relationship
between the share of frontier land against the Polity score over the period 1900-2007. The
picture is rather similar with a distinct positive correlation and with North America and Costa
Rica far o¤ the regression line. Figure 4 shows the same picture but now with the Polity IV
score averaged over the post World War II period, 1950-2007. This is very similar to Figure 4.
Finally, Figure 5 examines inequality and the extent of the frontier. This Figure suggests that
there is a negative correlation between the extent of the frontier and contemporary inequality.
All of the above give support to the Turner Thesis. We now turn to regression analysis
to investigate how robust they are and whether these numbers may also be consistent with
our conditional Frontier thesis. As we shall see, the image which emerges from the descriptive
statistics and simple scatterplots is not general.

13

4

Empirical Results

We now examine some simple regression models to examine the long-run consequences for
economic and political development of having a frontier. In all cases we estimate Ordinary
Least Squares regressions of the form
yi =

+ Fi;1850 + Ci;1850 + (Fi;1850

Ci;1850 ) + "i

(1)

where yi is the dependent variable of interest for country i. This is respectively GDP per-capita
in 2007, the democracy score of Polity averaged over di¤erent periods, or the Gini coe¢ cient
of inequality averaged over some period. Fi;1850 is the proportion of the country which was
frontier land around 1850, Ci;1850 is constraints on the executive from Polity in 1850, and "i is a
disturbance term which we assume to have the usual properties. Here, following the discussion
above, we also allow for the interaction between constraints on the executive and frontier land
in 1850.

4.1

Income per-Capita

We …rst look at regressions where yi is GDP per-capita for country i in 2007. These are
recorded in Table 3. The table is split into three sets of columns where each set uses a di¤erent
de…nition of the frontier. The …rst three columns use our narrow de…nition of the frontier, the
second three our wide de…nition and the …nal three columns use the Butland de…nition12 .
The …rst column shows the most parsimonious OLS regression of GDP per-capita on the
proportion of land that was frontier in 1850. The coe¢ cient

= 18324:1 (with a standard error

of 9953.3) is statistically signi…cant. To see what this coe¢ cient implies, consider Mexico, which
is the median frontier country, with 57% of its territory comprised of frontier. This coe¢ cient
implies a GDP per-capita for Mexico of -1738 +18324 0.57 = $8706, which is pretty close to the
actual value for Mexico which is $8340. The coe¢ cient on the frontier share implies that if one
changed the frontier from the median level to the level of the United States, which is 0.72, GDP
per-capita would increase by (0.72-0.57) 18324=$2748, which is a 31% (=2748/8706) increase
of the predicted income for the median country. Alternatively, if Mexico’s frontier increased
by 10%, from 57% to 62.7%, income would increase by (0.627-0.57) 18324=$1,044.5.
It is important to note, however, that one should be very cautious about proposing any type
of causal interpretation of the data. For example, we have treated the extent of the frontier in
1850 as econometrically exogenous, while in fact it may be the endogenous outcome of other
12
Since the Butland data are only available for the South American countries, the Butland frontier de…nition
uses the narrow frontier measure for the rest of the sample.

14

factors that in‡uence economic or political development. Perhaps countries that had good
fundamentals had expanded more, for instance by attracting greater numbers of migrants, and
thus tended to have relatively small frontiers in 1850. Of course if this form of omitted variable
bias were important, it actually suggests that we might be underestimating the e¤ect of the
frontier because it suggests that relatively small frontiers ought to be associated with factors
that also lead to good long-run development. We are also treating constraints on the executive
as exogenous, which is again unlikely to be the case.
In column 2 we add constraints on the executive in 1850. This greatly increases the extent of
variation explained by the model and both constraints and frontier are signi…cant, though the
estimated coe¢ cient on frontier falls. The coe¢ cient on constraints,

= 4405:86 (s.e.=1346.5)

is statistically signi…cant.
Column 3 then adds the interaction term. This term is highly signi…cant,
(s.e.=3015.5) and the estimated coe¢ cient on frontier now changes sign so that

= 11843:7
=

13489:29

(s.e.=7835.69). One can see here that when constraints on the executive are equal to 1 (which
is the case in 9 out of our 21 countries in 1850) the total e¤ect of frontier is
13489:29 + 11843:7 =

+

1 =

1; 645:59 < 0. In other words for countries with the lowest value

of constraints on the executive, representing “unlimited executive authority” the greater is
the relative size of the frontier in 1850, the poorer is the country today. However, as long as
constraints are 2 or above, frontier land is positively correlated with long-run growth.
It is also interesting to examine the quantitative impact of these results. For example, if
we held the extent of frontier …xed and increased the level of constraints on the executive in a
country from 1 to 7, then this would imply a change in income of
( 13849

F1850 ) + (11843

F1850

= ( 13849

F1850 ) + (71058

F1850 )

6)

(3657

6)

21942 = (57209

F1850 )

21942

Hence, a country with median frontier would increase its current income by 0.57 5720921942=$10667 which would eliminate about one third of the income gap between Mexico
and the United States.
Columns 4-6 then re-estimate the same 3 models using our wide de…nition of the frontier.
The results are very similar to those in the …rst three columns with the narrow de…nition
except that now neither frontier nor constraints on the executive are signi…cant when they are
entered with the interaction. The …nal three columns use the Butland de…nition of the frontier
with similar results.
In all speci…cations when we enter the interaction term it is robustly estimated and very
15

signi…cant and in all cases suggests that when constraints are at their minimum, the presence
of the frontier was bad for economic development, while at higher levels of constraints, the
frontier was good for long-run economic growth. The results in this section are not consistent
with the Frontier thesis but they are consisted with the conditional Frontier thesis.

4.2

Democracy

We now turn to regressions where yi is the Polity score for country i averaged over di¤erent
periods. We look at two such periods, one is 1900-2007 and the other is 1950-2007. These
regressions are in Tables 4 and 5 respectively. As with Table 3, each table is split into three
sets of columns where each set uses a di¤erent de…nition of the frontier.
Table 4 column 1 shows the simplest regression of the Polity score 1900-2007 on frontier
in 1850. There is a signi…cant positive correlation with

= 8:189 (s.e.=2.458). The second

column adds constraints on the executive in 1850. Constraints are also signi…cantly positively correlated with democracy in the 20th century with an estimated coe¢ cient of 1.474
(s.e.=0.195).
The third column then adds our interaction term. The interaction term is marginally
signi…cant with a t-statistic of 1.78 and has a positive coe¢ cient of

= 1:263. However, unlike

in the regressions where income per-capita was the dependent variable, the frontier share on
its own remains positive and signi…cant, even if the magnitude of the coe¢ cient falls by 50%.
The rest of Table 4 shows that these results are not completely robust. The interaction
terms remains positive and basically signi…cant, but when we use the wide de…nition of the
frontier, frontier entered on its own is not statistically signi…cant in column 6, or using the
Butland de…nition in column 9. Nevertheless, there is no evidence here of any negative e¤ect
of the frontier, unlike in the income regressions. The results in Table 4 suggest that even for
the lowest level of constraints on the executive, the greater was the frontier in 1850, the more
democratic the country was in the 20th century. Nevertheless, the quantitative e¤ect is larger,
the greater are constraints in 1850.
In Table 5 we re-estimate the same models as in Table 4 except that now we average the
dependent variable only over the post World War II period. As is quickly seen this gives some
quite di¤erent results. When we just control for frontier and constraints on the executive, the
results in terms of the size and signi…cance of the coe¢ cients are very similar to those in Table
4. However, once we control for the interaction we …nd that the interaction term is never close
to signi…cant while the estimated coe¢ cient on frontier on its own remains more or less the
same quantitatively and mostly signi…cant (only marginally so in column 6). This table shows
16

that the conditional e¤ect on democracy is actually a phenomenon of the …rst half of the 20th
century. In the second half the simpler version of the Frontier thesis captures the patterns in
the data quite nicely.

4.3

Inequality

Finally, we let yi in (1) be the average Gini coe¢ cient for country i over the period 19902007. The results of estimating this model are reported in Table 6. A quite robust pattern
emerges in all three sets of columns, irrespective of how we measure the extent of the frontier.
When entered on its own, frontier is negatively and signi…cantly correlated with contemporary
income inequality, as are constraints on the executive. These results suggest that either having
a bigger frontier in 1850 or better political institutions is associated with lower inequality
today. However, as columns 3, 6 and 9 indicate, once the interaction term is included none of
the coe¢ cients are statistically signi…cant.

5

Conclusions

In this paper we have developed what to our knowledge is the …rst test of the ‘Frontier (or
Turner) thesis.’ Turner argued that it was the existence of the frontier that generated the
particular path of development that the United States followed in the 19th century. Though
his work on the United States has been criticized, it still appears to heavily in‡uence the ways
scholars think about these issues. The starting point of our assessment of this thesis is the
observation that every country in the Americas, with the possible exception of El Salvador and
Haiti, had a frontier in the 19th century. The United States was certainly not exceptional in
either this or the relative extent of the frontier. In consequence, seen in comparative context,
the existence of a frontier does not seem to be obviously correlated with long run economic
and political development.
We hypothesized, however, that there may be a conditional relationship between the extent
of the frontier and political institutions at the time of the allocation of frontier land. Historical
evidence suggests that even if most countries in the Americas had an open frontier, how that
frontier land was allocated di¤ered a lot. For example, while the United States, Costa Rica and
Colombia passed Homestead Acts or something approximating them, in places like Argentina,
Chile or Guatemala, political elites allocated frontier lands to themselves or associates in a very
oligarchic manner. This indicates that the impact of the frontier might be conditional on the
existing political institutions which in‡uenced how the land was allocated - a notion we dubbed

17

the ‘conditional Frontier thesis’. Our hypothesis suggests that if political institutions were bad
at the time of frontier settlement, the existence of such frontier land might actually lead to
worse development outcomes, probably because it provides a resource which non-democratic
political elites can use to cement themselves in power.
To investigate more systematically the relationship between the frontier and long-run development we constructed measures of the extent of frontier land for 21 independent countries
in the Americas in 1850. Using some simple regressions we showed that the data does indeed
support our conditional hypothesis. With respect to both income per-capita today and democracy over the 20th century, it is the interaction between the extent of the frontier in 1850 and
constraints on the executive in 1850 that plays the primary explanatory role. For example,
for a country with the lowest level of constraints on the executive, the larger is the relative
size of the frontier, the lower is GDP per-capita today. For countries with higher constraints,
however, a larger frontier is positively correlated with current GDP per-capita. With respect
to democracy we found that for a given level of constraints in 1850, greater size of the frontier
is correlated with greater democracy in the 20th century, though this e¤ect comes primarily
from the …rst half of the century.
There are many caveats with these …ndings. For example, we did not control for variation
in the ‘quality’of the frontier. For instance there may be a big di¤erence between Oklahoma
in the United States and the Atacama Desert in northern Chile, both of which were frontiers
in 1850. Still, the United States also had large areas of the Rocky Mountains which were not
high quality lands. Trying to control or adjust for this explicitly is an important area for future
research. Moreover, while 1850 seemed to us to be an interesting year to focus on because it
marked the beginning of the period of the rapid expansion of world trade which created such
huge frontier movements in the Americas, one could argue it is too late. An important area
for future research is a more intensive sensitivity analysis than is presented here.
Nevertheless, results suggest that the role of the frontier is much more complex than the
original Turner thesis suggests. The consequences of the existence of a frontier for di¤erent
countries in the Americas depended a lot on the nature of political institutions which formed in
the early independence period. If these institutions featured few constraints on the executive,
having a frontier was actually bad for economic development. If El Salvador and Haiti had had
frontiers in the 19th century, this would have made them poorer today, not richer. Though we
found no such negative e¤ect for democracy, we did …nd that the impact of the frontier on the
democratization of a society was conditional on initial political institutions. If Turner thought
that the United States frontier had a strong democratizing e¤ect, this was only because it was
18

in a country which already had good political institutions. This e¤ect was severely muted in
Latin America.
Though our results are not consistent with a large part of the Turner thesis, they are consistent with the research of Brenner (1976) and Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2005) which
emphasized that the implications of large shocks or new economic opportunities depends on
the initial institutional equilibrium. More speci…cally in the Americas, they are also consistent
with the work of Engerman and Sokolo¤ (1997) and Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001,
2002) who emphasized the critical importance of the creation of institutions in the colonial period and their path dependent consequences. In a sense, our results on income per-capita show
how di¤erent paths were reinforced by the availability of frontier lands in the 19th century.

19

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2001) “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review,
91, 1369-1401.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2002) “Reversal of
Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 1231-1294.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2005) “The Rise of
Europe: Atlantic Trade, Institutional Change and Growth, American Economic Review , 95,
546-579.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson and Pierre Yared (2008)
“Income and Democracy,” American Economic Review, 98, 808-842.
Adelman, Jeremy (1994) Frontier Development: Land, Labour and Capital on the
Wheatlands of Argentina and Canada, 1890-1914, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Aguirre, Francisco Xavier (2002) Un Atlas Histórico de Nicaragua, Managua: Fundación Vida.
Anglade, Georges (1982) Atlas critique d’Haiti, Montréal: Université du Québec à
Montréal.
Bandeira, Moniz (2006) La formación de los estados en la Cuenca del Plata: Argentina,
Brasil, Uruguay, Paraguay, Buenos Aires: Grupo Editorial Norma.
Bureau of Business Research (1975) Atlas of Mexico, Austin: University of Texas
Press, at http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/atlas_mexico/index.html
Belich, James (2009) ““Exploding Wests: boom and bust in 19th century settler societies,” forthcoming in Jared Diamond and James A. Robinson eds. Natural Experiments in
History, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Bernstein, Marvin D. (1964) The Mexican Mining Industry, 1890-1950, Albany: State
University of New York Press.
Billington, Ray Allen (1962) The Far Western Frontier, 1830-1860, New York: Harper
and Row.
Billington, Ray Allen (1966) The frontier thesis: valid interpretation of American
history? New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Billington, Ray Allen (2001) Westward Expansion: A History of the American Frontier,
Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.

20

Bollo, Luis Cincinato (1896) Atlas geográ…co y descripción geográ…ca y estadística de
la República Oriental del Uruguay, Montevideo: A Barreiro y Ramos.
Brenner, Robert (1976) “Agrarian Class Structure and Economic Development in Preindustrial Europe” Past and Present, 70, 30-75.
Butland, G.J. (1966) “Frontiers of Settlement in South America,” Revista Geogra…ca,
65, 93-108.
Christie, Keith H. (1978) “Antioqeño Colonization in Western Colombia: A Reappraisal,” Hispanic American Historical Review, 58, 260-283.
Coatsworth, John H. (1974) “Railroads, Landholding and Agrarian Protest in the Early
Por…riato,” Hispanic American Historical Review, 54, 48-71.
Coatsworth, John H. (1981) Growth against development: the economic impact of
railroads in Por…rian Mexico, DeKalb: Northern Illinois University Press.
Davidson, William (2006) Atlas de Mapas Históricos de Honduras, Managua: Fundación
Uno.
Dean, Warren (1971) “Latifundia and Land Policy in Nineteenth Century Brazil,”Hispanic American Historical Review, 51, 606-625.
Dominion Bureau of Statistics (n.d). Distribution of Population, 1851-1941, at
http://atlas.nrcan.gc.ca/site/english/maps/archives/3rdedition/peopleandsociety/population/046.
Dueñas, Carmen (1986) Historia Económica y Social del Norte de Manabí, Quito: Abya
Yala.
Eidt, Robert C. (1971) Pioneer Settlement in Northeast Argentina, Madison: University
of Wisconsin Press.
Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokolo¤ (1997) “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and Di¤erential Growth Paths among New World Economies,” in Stephen H. Haber
ed. How Latin America Fell Behind, Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokolo¤ (2005) “The Evolution of Su¤rage
Institutions in the New World,” Journal of Economic History, 65, 891-921.
Fifer, J. Valerie (1982) “The Search for a Series of Small Successes: Frontier Settlement
in Eastern Bolivia,” Journal of Latin American Studies, 14, 407-432.
Gerlach, Arch C. (1970) The National Atlas of the United States of America, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of the Interior.
Gill, Lesley (1987) “Frontier Expansion and Settlement in Lowland Bolivia,”Journal of
Peasant Studies, 14, 380 -398.
Gudmundson, Lowell (1997) “Lord and Peasant in the Making of Modern Central
21

America,”in A. Evelyn Huber and Frank Sa¤ord eds. Agrarian Structures and Political Power
in Latin America, Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburg Press.
Hall, Caroline and Héctor Pérez Brignoli (2003) Historical Atlas of Central America,
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press
Hartz, Louis (1955) The Liberal Tradition in America: An Interpretation of American
Political Thought since the Revolution, New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Hartz, Louis ed. (1964) The Founding of New Societies: Studies in the History of the
United States, Latin America, South Africa, Canada, and Australia, New York: Harcourt,
Brace & World.
Hennessy, C. Alistair M. (1978) The frontier in Latin American history, London:
Edward Arnold.
Hofstadter, Richard and Seymour Martin Lipset ed. (1968) Turner and the sociology of the frontier, New York: Basic Books.
http://www.geohive.com
James, Preston E. (1941) “Expanding Frontiers of Settlement in Latin America,” Hispanic American Historical Review, 21, 183-195.
Je¤erson, Mark (1926) Peopling the Argentine Pampa, New York: American Geographical Society.
Katzman, Martin (1975) The Brazilian Frontier in Comparative Perspective, New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Katzman, Martin (1977) Cities and Frontiers in Brazil: Regional Dimensions of Economic Development, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Keyssar, Alexander (2000) The right to vote: the contested history of democracy in the
United States, New York: Basic Books.
Landon, Fred (1967) Western Ontario and the American Frontier, Toronto: McClelland.
LeGrand, Catherine (1986) Frontier Expansion and Peasant Protest in Colombia, 18501936, Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Lipset, Seymour Martin (1959) “Some Social Requisites of Democracy: Economic
Development and Political Legitimacy,” American Political Science Review, 53, 69-105.
Lipset, Seymour Martin (1996) American exceptionalism: a double-edged sword, New
York: W.W. Norton.
Lora, Quisqueya (2002) Atlas Histórico de la República Dominicana, Santo Domingo:
Editorial Santillana.

22

Mann, Charles C. (2005) 1491: new revelations of the Americas before Columbus, New
York: Knopf.
Mahoney, James L. (2001) The Legacies of Liberalism: Path Dependence and Political
Regimes in Central America, Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
McCreery, David J. (1976) “Co¤ee and Class: The Structure of Development in Liberal
Guatemala,” Hispanic American Historical Review, 56, 438-460.
McCreery, David J. (1994) Rural Guatemala, 1760-1940, Stanford University Press,
Stanford CA.
Milla, Carlos (1995) Atlas Histórico y Geográ…co del Peru, 4 Volumes, Lima: Editorial
Milla Batres.
Miller, David H. ed (1977) The Frontier: comparative studies, Norman: University of
Oklahoma Press.
Moene, Karl Ove, Halvor Mehlum and Ragnar Torvik (2006) “Institutions and
the Resource Curse”, Economic Journal, 2006, 1-20.
Moniz, Luis Alberto (2006) La Formación de los Estados en la Cuenca del Plata,
Buenos Aires: Norma.
Turner, Frederick Jackson (1920) The frontier in American history, New York: H.
Holt and Co..
Parsons, James J. (1949) Antioqueño colonization in western Colombia, Berkeley: University of California Press.
Powell, Philip W. (1981) Essays on frontiers in world history, Austin: University of
Texas Press.
Rausch, Jane M. (1993) The Llanos Frontier in Colombian History, 1830-1930, Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Richards, John F. (2003) The Unending Frontier, Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Sampedro, Francisco (1990) Atlas Histórico-geográ…co del Ecuador, Quito: P Bustos.
Silver, A. I. (1969) “French Canada and the Prairies Frontier, 1870-1890,” Canadian
Historical Review, 50, 11-36.
Solberg, Carl E. (1969) “A Discriminatory Frontier Land Policy, Chile 1870-1914,”The
Americas, 26, 115-133.
Solberg, Carl E. (1987) The Prairies and the Pampas: Agrarian Policy in Canada and
Argentina, 1880-1930, Stanford: Stanford University Press.

23

Taylor, George R. (1956) The Turner thesis concerning the role of the frontier in American history, Rev. ed. Boston: Heath.
Turner, Frederick Jackson (1920) The frontier in American history, New York: H.
Holt and Co..
United States Census O¢ ce (1898) Statistical Atlas of the United States: Based Upon
the Results of the Eleventh Census, Washington.
Villalobos, Sergio (1992) La vida fronteriza en Chile, Madrid: Mapfre.
Walsh, Margaret (2005) The American West: Visions and Revisions, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Weber, David J. and Jane M. Rausch, editors. (1994) Where cultures meet: frontiers in Latin American history, Wilmington: SR Books.
Williams, Robert G. (1994) States and Social Evolution: Co¤ ee and the Rise of National Governments in Central America, Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Winks, Robin W. (1971) The myth of the American frontier: Its relevance to America,
Canada and Australia, the Sir George Watson lecture.
Wyman, W. D. and C. B. Kroeber (eds.)
Madison: The University of Wisconsin Press.

24

(1965) The Frontier in Perspective,

Table 1
The Frontier in the Americas

Country

Number of
Total Number of
Total Land Area Narrow Frontier
Subnational
(square Kms.)
Subnational
Units
Units

Total Narrow
Frontier Land
Area (square
Kms.)

Number of Wide
Narrow Frontier
Frontier
Share
Subnational
Units

Total Wide
Frontier Land
Area (square
Kms.)

Wide Frontier
Share

Total Frontier
from Butland
(1966) and
Historical
cartography

Frontier
Share from
Butland
(1966) and
Historical
cartography
69.1%
78.4%
89.5%
74.4%
58.1%
64.3%

Argentina
24
2,780,403
11
1,370,454
49.3%
15
2,063,942
74.2%
1,922,371
Bolivia
9
1,098,581
4
685,635
62.4%
4
803,853
73.2%
861,507
Brazil
27
8,498,331
15
6,354,737
74.8%
17
7,192,601
84.6%
7,606,006
Chile
13
756,095
5
398,745
52.7%
5
398,745
52.7%
562,762
Colombia
33
1,141,748
15
718,130
62.9%
15
718,130
62.9%
663,584
Costa Rica
7
51,102
4
32,870
64.3%
5
43,011
84.2%
32,870
Dominican Republic
32
46,891
0
0.0%
2
3,665
7.8%
Ecuador
23
256,370
7
116,519
45.4%
9
151,309
59.0%
120,827
47.1%
El Salvador
14
21,040
0
0.0%
0
0.0%
Guatemala
22
108,889
2
44,892
41.2%
7
69,692
64.0%
Honduras
18
112,492
3
45,262
40.2%
6
64,904
57.7%
Haiti
9
27,700
0
0.0%
0
0.0%
Mexico
32
1,970,774
11
1,131,990
57.4%
12
1,207,619
61.3%
Nicaragua
17
120,339
4
77,129
64.1%
7
91,601
76.1%
Panama
12
75,071
6
35,102
46.8%
7
46,773
62.3%
Peru
25
1,285,199
4
595,813
46.4%
7
709,235
55.2%
786,028
61.2%
Paraguay
18
406,752
3
246,925
60.7%
13
378,370
93.0%
365,955
90.0%
Uruguay
19
175,016
19
175,016
100.0%
19
175,016
100.0%
175,016
100.0%
Venezuela
25
916,445
6
598,945
65.4%
8
707,231
77.2%
655,533
71.5%
United States
51
9,372,587
6,792,227
72.5%
Canada
13
9,017,699
7,819,625
85.3%
Source: w w w .geohive.com for land areas of subnational administrative units, Butland (1966), Dominion Bureau of Statistics (n.d), Gerlach, (1970), Bureau of Business Research (1975). Frontier coding calculated
by the authors.

Map 1

Map 2

Map 3

Figure 1
Constraints on the Executive in 1850
10
9
8

Frequency

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1

3

5

Constraints on the Executive in 1850

7

Table 2

Variable
Share of Frontier Land circa 1850

Descriptive Statistics
Countries with Frontier Share >= Sample Median Frontier Share Countries with Frontier Share < Sample Median Frontier Share
Obs
Mean
Std. Dev.
Min
Max
Obs
Mean
Std. Dev.
Min
Max
11
0.700
0.127
0.574
1
10
0.322
0.225
0
0.527

Constraints on the Executive 1850

11

2.636

2.335

1

7

10

2.600

1.265

1

5

Per Capita Income 2007

11

11466.36

15725.61

980

46040

10

3744

2296.15

560

8350

Polity Score average 1900-2007

11

2.427

5.325

-3.537

10

10

-0.350

1.935

-3.107

2.333

Polity Score average 1950-2007

11

3.964

5.008

-3.293

10

10

1.052

2.482

-5.339

3.828

Income Gini average 1996-2005

11

49.113

8.389

32.560

58.770

10

53.435

2.614

50.630

59.2

Note: The sample median country for Frontier Share is Mexico, w ith a frontier share of 0.574 (based on our prefered measure of frontier). For the years in w hich the Polity score records a political transition w e asign
the average score of the years before and after the transition, and years in w hich the Polity score assigns Interruption or Interregnum periods are excluded from the averages.

Figure 2
Share of Frontier Land circa 1850 vs. GDP Per Capita in 2007
50000

USA

45000
40000

CAN

US PPP Dollars

35000
30000
25000
20000
15000
10000

CHI MEX
VEN
ARG
PAN
CRI
PER
COL
GTMECU
PRY
HND
BOL
NIC

5000

DOM
SLV
0 HTI

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
Frontier

0.6

URY
BRA

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Figure 3
Share of Frontier Land circa 1850 vs. Polity IV Score
(average 1900-2007)
CRI

USA

CAN

Average 1900-2007 Polity IV Score

9

7

5

URY
3

CHI

HND
ECU
PER

1

-1

0

DOM
SLV

0.2

0.4

ARG
PAN

COL

BOL
VEN
BRA

0.6

GTM

-3 HTI

MEX NIC
PRY

-5

Frontier

0.8

1

Figure 4
Share of Frontier Land circa 1850 vs. Polity IV Score (average
1950-2007)
CRI

USA

CAN

Average 1950-2007 Polity Score

9

7

VEN
COL
5

URY
ECU

3

CHI
BRA

HND PER
DOM
SLV

PAN

1

-1

GTM

0

0.2

BOL

ARG

0.4

0.6
MEX

-3

0.8
NIC

PRY

-5

Frontier

1

Figure 5
Share of Frontier Land circa 1850 vs. Income Gini (average
1996-2005)
70

Average 1996-2005 Income Gini

65
60

HTI

BOL
COL
PRY

BRA

PAN CHI
GTM
HND ECU
PER
ARG

55

SLV
DOM
50

MEX

VEN
CRI
URY

45

NIC
USA

40
35

CAN
30
25

0

0.2

0.4

0.6
Frontier

0.8

1

Table 3

Frontier Share

Dependent Variable: Per Capita GDP 2007 (PPP Adjusted)
Narrow Frontier
Wide Frontier
Butland Frontier
18324.10 15777.35 -13849.29 10535.48 10397.26 -12590.71 12611.73 14272.81 -10397.47
(9953.30) (4900.72) (7835.69) (6043.12) (3884.45) (8253.17) (6934.05) (4840.60) (6118.02)

Constraints on the Executive 1850

4405.86 -3657.29
(1346.50) (2228.71)

4579.16 -3029.61
(1526.40) (3360.24)

4708.54 -2663.75
(1371.11) (2332.80)

11843.70
(3015.50)
0.773
21

10391.53
(3765.30)
0.655
21

10341.30
(2880.38)
0.738
21

Constraints 1850 x Frontier Share
R-squared
No. Observations

0.162
21

Note: Robust Standard Errors in parenthesis.
All regressions include a constant (omitted).

0.631
21

0.061
21

0.571
21

0.094
21

0.632
21

Table 4

Frontier Share

Dependent Variable: Polity IV Score, average 1900-2007
Narrow Frontier
Wide Frontier
Butland Frontier
8.189
7.337
4.178
5.886
5.839
0.281
5.608
6.176
3.159
(2.458)
(1.297)
(2.243)
(2.317)
(1.789)
(2.975)
(2.180)
(1.424)
(2.454)

Constraints on the Executive 1850

1.474
(0.195)

0.615
(0.552)

0.672
21

1.263
(0.708)
0.685
21

Constraints 1850 x Frontier Share
R-squared
No. Observations

0.256
21

Note: Robust Standard Errors in parenthesis.
All regressions include a constant (omitted).
The Polity score for Panama is average over the 1903-2007 period.

0.151
21

1.554
(0.240)

-0.285
(0.798)

0.617
21

2.512
(1.074)
0.655
21

0.147
21

1.611
(0.192)

0.710
(0.487)

0.646
21

1.265
(0.706)
0.659
21

Table 5

Frontier Share

Dependent Variable: Polity IV Score, average 1950-2007
Narrow Frontier
Wide Frontier
Butland Frontier
8.213
7.455
9.809
5.822
5.780
6.474
5.304
5.815
7.597
(2.960)
(1.851)
(2.676)
(3.119)
(2.151)
(4.388)
(2.873)
(1.865)
(3.866)

Constraints on the Executive 1850

1.313
(0.254)

1.954
(0.959)

0.599
21

-0.941
(1.120)
0.606
21

Constraints 1850 x Frontier Share
R-squared
No. Observations
Note: Robust Standard Errors in parenthesis.
All regressions include a constant (omitted).

0.262
21

0.150
21

1.394
(0.282)

1.624
(1.197)

0.533
21

-0.314
(1.514)
0.533
21

0.134
21

1.448
(0.252)

1.980
(1.080)

0.545
21

-0.747
(1.354)
0.550
21

Table 6

Frontier Share

Dependent Variable: Income Gini, average 1996-2005
Narrow Frontier
Wide Frontier
Butland Frontier
-10.585
-9.579
-2.755
-7.086
-7.030
-1.901
-5.923
-6.596
1.723
(5.632)
(4.126)
(7.922)
(4.628)
(3.520)
(8.094)
(4.897)
(3.707)
(9.226)

Constraints on the Executive 1850

-1.740
(0.676)

0.117
(1.745)

0.417
21

-2.728
(2.727)
0.442
21

Constraints 1850 x Frontier Share
R-squared
No. Observations
Note: Robust Standard Errors in parenthesis.
All regressions include a constant (omitted).

0.177
21

0.091
21

-1.845
(0.767)

-0.147
(2.347)

0.362
21

-2.319
(3.523)
0.376
21

0.068
21

-1.906
(0.745)

0.580
(2.220)

0.358
21

-3.487
(3.207)
0.397
21

Appendix

Country
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica

Sources for Frontier
Cartographic Source
Historical References
Butland (1966)
Eidt (1971), Bandeira, (2006), Jefferson, (1926), Moniz (2006)
Butland (1966)
Gill (1987), Fifer (1982)
Butland (1966)
Bandeira (2006), Katzman (1977), Katzman (1975), James (1941)
Dominion Bureau of Statistics (n.d).
Silver (1969), Landon (1967)
Butland (1966)
James (1941), Villalobos (1992)
Butland (1966)
James (1941), LeGrand (1986), Rausch (1993)
Hall and Perez Brignoli (2003), United States
Hall and Perez Brignoli (2003), James (1941),
Bureau of the Census (1956a)

Dominican Rep. United States Bureau of the Census (1956b) Lora (2002)
Ecuador
El Salvador
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela

Butland (1966)
Dueñas (1986), Sampedro (1990)
Hall and Perez Brignoli (2003), United States
Hall and Perez Brignoli (2003)
Bureau of the Census (1956a)
Hall and Perez Brignoli (2003), United States
Hall and Perez Brignoli (2003), McCreery (1976)
Bureau of the Census (1956a)
United States Bureau of the Census (1956b) Anglade (1982)
Hall and Perez Brignoli (2003), United States
Bureau of the Census (1956a)
Bureau of Business Research (1975)
Hall and Perez Brignoli (2003), United States
Bureau of the Census (1956a)
Hall and Perez Brignoli (2003), United States
Bureau of the Census (1956a)
Butland (1966)
Butland (1966)
United States Census Office (1898),
Gerlach, (1970)
Butland (1966)
Butland (1966)

Hall and Perez Brignoli (2003), Davidson (2006)
Bernstein (1964)
Hall and Perez Brignoli (2003), Aguirre (2002)
Hall and Perez Brignoli (2003)
Moniz (2006)
Milla (1995)
Billington (2001), Billington (1962), Wyman and Kroeber (1965)
Moniz (2006), Bollo (1896)

Fr ontie r clas s ification by Subnational Adm inis tr ative Units

Countr y

ARGENTINA

BOLIVIA

BRAZIL

CHILE

COLOMBIA

Pr ovince /State /De par tm e nt

BUENOS AIRES
CATAMARCA
CHACO
CHUBUT
CIUDAD DE BUENOS AIRES
CÓRDOBA
CORRIENTES
ENTRE RÍOS
FORMOSA
JUJUY
LA PAMPA
LA RIOJA
MENDOZA
MISIONES
NEUQUÉN
RÍO NEGRO
SALTA
SAN JUAN
SAN LUIS
SANTA CRUZ
SANTA FE
SANTIA GO DE ESTERO
TIERRA DEL FUEGO
TUCUMÁ N
BENI
CHUQUISACA
COCHA BAMBA
LA PAZ
ORURO
PANDO
POTOSÍ
SANTA CRUZ
TARIJA
ACRE
ALAGOAS
AMAPÁ
AMAZONAS
BAHIA
CEARÁ
DISTRITO FEDERAL
ESPÍRITO SANTO
GOIÁS
MARANHÃO
MATO GROSSO
MATO GROSSO DO SUL
MINAS GERAIS
PARÁ
PARAÍBA
PARANÁ
PERNAMBUCO
PIAUÍ
RIO DE JANEIRO
RIO GRA NDE DO NORTE
RIO GRA NDE DO SUL
RONDÔNIA
RORAIMA
SANTA CATARINA
SÃO PA ULO
SERGIPE
TOCANTINS
ANTOFA GASTA (II)
ATACA MA (III)
AYSÉN (XI)
BÍO-BÍO (VIII)
COQUIMBO (IV)
LA ARA UCANÍA (IX)
LOS LA GOS (X)
MAGALLANES Y ANTÁRTICA CHILENA (XII)
MAULE (VII)
O'HIGGINS (VI)
SANTIA GO
TARAPA CÁ (I)
VALPA RAÍSO (V )
AMAZONAS
ANTIOQUIA
ARAUCA
ATLANTICO
BOGOTA
BOLIVA R
BOYACA
CALDA S
CAQUETA
CASANARE
CAUCA
CESAR
CHOCO
CORDOBA
CUNDINAMARCA
GUAINIA
GUAJIRA
GUAVIA RE
HUILA
MAGDA LENA
META
NARIÑO
NORTE DE SANTANDER
PUTUMA YO
QUINDIO
RISARA LDA
SAN ANDRES
SANTA NDER
SUCRE
TOLIMA
VALLE DEL CAUCA
VAUPES
VICHADA

Land Ar e a
(s quar e Km s .)

Nar r ow Fr ontie r

Wide Fr ontie r

307,571
102,602
99,633
224,686
203
165,321
88,199
78,781
72,066
53,219
143,440
89,680
148,827
29,801
94,078
203,013
155,488
89,651
76,748
243,943
133,007

0
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0

1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
0

136,351
21,571
22,524
213,564
51,524
55,631
133,985
53,588
63,827
118,218
370,621
37,623
152,522
27,819
142,816
1,570,947
564,272
145,712
5,802
46,047
340,119
331,919
903,385
357,140
586,553
1,247,703
56,341
199,282
98,526
251,311
43,797
53,077
268,836
237,565
224,118
95,286
248,177
21,962
277,297
126,049
75,176
108,494
37,063
40,580
31,842
67,013
132,297
30,296
16,387
15,403
59,099
16,396
109,665
63,612
23,818
3,388
1,587
25,978
23,189
7,888
88,965
44,640
29,308
22,905
46,530
25,020
22,623
72,238
20,848
42,327
19,890
23,188
85,635
33,268
21,658
24,885
1,845
4,140
44
30,537
10,917
23,562
22,140
65,268
100,242

0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1

1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1

COSTA RICA

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

ECUADOR

EL SA LVADOR

GUA TEMALA

ALAJUELA
CARTA GO
GUANA CASTE
HEREDIA
LIMÓN
PUNTARENAS
SAN JOSÉ
AZUA
BAHORUCO
BARAHONA
DAJABÓN
DISTRITO NACIONAL
DUARTE
EL SEIBO
ELIAS PIÑA
ESPAILLAT
HATO MAYOR
INDEPENDENCIA
LA ALTAGRACIA
LA ROMANA
LA VEGA
MARÍA TRINIDAD SÁNCHEZ
MONSEÑOR NOUEL
MONTE CRISTI
MONTE PLATA
PEDERNALES
PERAVIA
PUERTO PLATA
SALCEDO
SAMANÁ
SAN CRISTÓBA L
SAN JOSE DE OCOA
SAN JUAN
SAN PEDRO DE MACORÍS
SÁNCHEZ RAMÍREZ
SANTIA GO
SANTIA GO RODRIGUEZ
SANTO DOMINGO
VALVERDE
AZUAY
BOLÍVA R
CAÑAR
CARCHI
CHIMBORAZO
COTOPA XI
EL ORO
ESMERA LDAS
GALÁPAGOS
GUAYA S
IMBABURA
LOJA
LOS RÍOS
MANABÍ
MORONA SANTIAGO
NAPO
ORELLA NA
PASTAZA
PICHINCHA
REGIÓN ZONAS NO DELIMITADAS
SUCUMBÍOS
TUNGURAHUA
ZAMORA CHINCHIPE
AHUACHAPÁN
CABAÑAS
CHALA TENANGO
CUSCA TLÁN
LA LIBERTAD
LA PAZ
LA UNIÓN
MORAZÁN
SAN MIGUEL
SAN SA LVADOR
SAN VICENTE
SANTA ANA
SONSONATE
USULUTÁN
ALTA V ERAPAZ
BAJA V ERAPAZ
CHIMALTENANGO
CHIQUIMULA
EL PETÉN
EL PROGRESO
EL QUICHÉ
ESCUINTLA
GUATEMALA
HUEHUETENANGO
IZABAL
JALAPA
JUTIAPA
QUETZA LTENANGO
RETALHULEU
SACATEPÉQUEZ
SAN MA RCOS
SANTA ROSA
SOLOLÁ
SUCHITEPÉQUEZ
TOTONICAPÁN
ZACAPA

9,758
3,125
10,141
2,657
9,189
11,266
4,966
2,688
1,244
1,647
1,004
91
1,640
1,775
1,397
825
1,324
1,754
3,001
656
2,274
1,212
992
1,886
2,613
2,018
785
819
430
845
1,240
853
3,360
1,255
1,191
2,809
1,152
1,302
809
7,995
3,926
3,142
3,750
6,470
5,985
5,817
15,896
8,010
20,566
4,615
10,995
7,151
18,894
23,797
12,483
21,675
29,325
13,270
775
18,008
3,369
10,456
1,240
1,104
2,017
756
1,653
1,224
2,074
1,447
2,077
886
1,184
2,023
1,225
2,130
8,686
3,124
1,979
2,376
35,854
1,922
8,378
4,384
2,126
7,400
9,038
2,063
3,219
1,951
1,856
465
3,791
2,955
1,061
2,510
1,061
2,690

1
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

HONDURAS

HAITI

MEXICO

NICARAGUA

PANAMA

ATLÁNTIDA
CHOLUTECA
COLÓN
COMAYAGUA
COPÁN
CORTÉS
EL PARAÍSO
FRANCISCO MORAZÁN
GRACIAS A DIOS
INTIBUCÁ
ISLAS DE LA BAHÍA
LA PAZ
LEMPIRA
OCOTEPEQUE
OLANCHO
SANTA BÁRBARA
VALLE
YORO
ARTIBONITE
CENTRE
GRAND' ANSE
NORD
NORD-EST
NORD-OUEST
OUEST
SUD
SUD-EST
AGUASCALIENTES
BAJA CALIFORNIA NORTE
BAJA CALIFORNIA SUR
CAMPECHE
CHIAPAS
CHIHUAHUA
COAHUILA DE ZARAGOZA
COLIMA
DISTRITO FEDERAL
DURANGO
GUANAJUATO
GUERRERO
HIDALGO
JALISCO
MÉXICO, ESTADO DE
MICHOACÁN DE OCAMPO
MORELOS
NAYARIT
NUEVO LÉON
OAXACA
PUEBLA
QUERÉTARO DE ARTEAGA
QUINTANA ROO
SAN LUIS POTOSÍ
SINALOA
SONORA
TABASCO
TAMAULIPAS
TLAXCALA
VERACRUZ-LLAVE
YUCATÁN
ZACATECAS
BOACO
CARAZO
CHINANDEGA
CHONTALES
ESTELÍ
GRANADA
JINOTEGA
LEÓN
MADRIZ
MANAGUA
MASAYA
MATAGALPA
NUEVA SEGOVIA
REGION AUTÓNOMA ATLÁNTICO NORTE
REGION AUTÓNOMA ATLÁNTICO SUR
RÍO SAN JUAN
RIVAS
BOCAS DEL TORO
CHIRIQUÍ
COCLÉ
COLÓN
COMARCA EMBERÁ
COMARCA KUNA YALA
COMARCA NGÖBE BUGLÉ
DARIÉN
HERRERA
LOS SANTOS
PANAMÁ
VERAGUAS

4,372
3,923
4,360
8,249
5,124
3,242
7,489
8,619
16,997
3,123
236
2,525
4,228
1,630
23,905
5,024
1,665
7,781
4,984
3,675
3,310
2,106
1,805
2,176
4,827
2,794
2,023
5,569
70,113
73,677
56,859
75,629
247,087
151,571
5,455
1,499
119,648
30,350
63,749
20,987
80,137
21,461
59,864
4,941
27,336
64,555
94,964
33,919
11,769
50,843
60,547
58,092
184,934
24,661
79,829
4,061
72,815
39,337
74,516
4,177
1,081
4,822
6,481
2,230
1,040
9,222
5,138
1,708
3,465
611
6,804
3,491
33,106
27,260
7,541
2,162
4,644
6,548
4,927
4,868
4,384
2,341
6,968
11,897
2,341
3,805
11,671
10,677

0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0

1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
0

PERU

PARAGUAY

URUGUAY

VENEZUELA

AMAZONAS
ANCASH
AREQUIPA
AYACUCHO
CAJAMARCA
CUSCO
DEPARTAMENTO APURÍMAC
EL CALLAO
HUANCAVELICA
HUÁNUCO
ICA
JUNÍN
LA LIBERTAD
LAMBAYEQUE
LIMA
LORETO
MADRE DE DIOS
MOQUEGUA
PASCO
PIURA
PUNO
SAN MARTÍN
TACNA
TUMBES
UCAYALI
ALTO PARAGUAY
ALTO PARANÁ
AMAMBAY
ASUNCIÓN
BOQUERÓN
CAAGUAZÚ
CAAZAPÁ
CANINDEYÚ
CENTRAL
CONCEPCIÓN
CORDILLERA
GUAIRÁ
ITAPÚA
MISIONES
ÑEEMBUCÚ
PARAGUARÍ
PRESIDENTE HAYES
SAN PEDRO
ARTIGAS
CANELONES
CERRO LARGO
COLONIA
DURAZNO
FLORES
FLORIDA
LAVALLEJA
MALDONADO
MONTEVIDEO
PAYSANDÚ
RÍO NEGRO
RIVERA
ROCHA
SALTO
SAN JOSÉ
SORIANO
TACUAREMBÓ
TREINTA Y TRES
AMAZONAS
ANZOÁTEGUI
APURE
ARAGUA
BARINAS
BOLÍVAR
CARABOBO
COJEDES
DELTA AMACURO
DEPENDENCIAS FEDERALES (DF)
DISTRITO FEDERAL
FALCÓN
GUÁRICO
LARA
MÉRIDA
MIRANDA
MONAGAS
NUEVA ESPARTA
PORTUGUESA
SUCRE
TÁCHIRA
TRUJILLO
VARGAS
YARACUY
ZULIA

39,249
35,915
63,345
43,815
33,318
71,987
20,896
147
22,131
36,849
21,328
44,197
25,500
14,213
34,802
368,852
85,301
15,734
25,320
35,892
71,999
51,253
16,076
4,669
102,411
82,349
14,895
12,933
117
91,669
11,474
9,496
14,667
2,465
18,051
4,948
3,846
16,525
9,556
12,147
8,705
72,907
20,002
11,928
4,536
13,648
6,106
11,643
5,144
10,417
10,016
4,793
530
13,922
9,282
9,370
10,551
14,163
4,992
9,008
15,438
9,529
180,145
43,300
76,500
7,014
35,200
238,000
4,650
14,800
40,200
120
433
24,800
64,986
19,800
11,300
7,950
28,900
1,150
15,200
11,800
11,100
7,400
1,497
7,100
63,100

1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

