                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        PENSION INEQUALITY


                         Edward P. Lazear

                          Sherwin   Rosen



                      Working Paper No, 114TT




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARC[-I
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October i984




The authors thank Sylvester Scheiber for thoughtful comments on an
earlier draft, Beth Asch and Richard Knudsen for expert research
assistance, and the National Science Foundation for financial
support. The research reported here is part of the NBFR's research
program in Labor Studies and project in Pensions, Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research,
                                           NEER Working Paper #1477
                                           October 1984


                          Pension Inequality

                               ABS TRACT




     Pensions may contribute to male/female or black/white inequality to the

extent that white males are more likely to receive pensions than are other

groups. Conditional on receiving pensions, the value of pension benefits

varies because white males have the highest level of expected tenure at

retirement. By using a combination of the Current Population Survey and the

l9SOBnker's Trust Corpprate Pension Plan Study, we find that the existence

of pension plans contributes to black/white inequality but leaves male/female

inequality unchanged among whites, Even though females are less likely to

receive pensions than males, those females who do receive pensions enjoy

generous ones, Among blacks, pensions exacerbate sex differences because

black women are only about 75% as likely to receive pensions as black males.




Edward P. Lazear                             Sherwin Rosen
Graduate School of Business                  Dep:rtment of Economics
University of Chicago                        University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street                        1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637                            Chicago, IL 60637
     Much attention has been given to earnings inequality in recent years.
Although most agree that the variable of interest is lifetime wealth rather
than current earnings,1 there has been relatively little study of differences
in non-wage and salary components of earnings. Pension inequality is
interesting for a number of reasons: First, pensions are a large fraction of
total. non-wage compensation. Second, there have been recent changes in laws
that regulate sex—based differences in pension benefits. Third, private
pensions have grown in importance over time and may become even more important
in the future.
     What follows is an attempt to determine whether pensions exacerbate
compensation inequality across groups•        are two aspects to this issue.
                                          There
The first is that the probability of receiving a pension may not be random
across groups. For example, in Lazeer (1979), Retirement History Survey data
revealed that 49% of the workers in the sample had pension plan coverage, but
blacks were 6.6% less likely to be covered than whites. Similarly, female
coverage was 8.6% less than males. Theee patterns are investigated in more
detail in the CPS data below. The second aspect is how the size of pensions
varies with sex and race of people who are eligible to receive them. This is
more difficult to determine and is the main focus of this study.
    There are two empirical tasks before us. The first is to determine the
characteristics of the average retiree in each sex and race group. Especially
important is the average tenure, age, and salary of the typical retiree
because pension amounts in most plans depend on these variables. The second


     'E.g.,   see are Lillard (1976), Rosen (1977), Lazear   (1979a),   and   Lillard
and Willis    (1978).
task is to estimate the pension that each groups typical retiree receives,
This depends on the plan in which he is enrolled so it is necessary to use
some representative sample of plans.

        The May 1979 Consumer Population Survey is used for the first task, This

was chosen over the Retirement History Survey because of the emphasis in this

study on male/female and black/white comparisons, The coverage of females in

the Retirement History Survey is non—representative, whereas the CPS has a

better cross—section of the relevant population. For the second task, a data

set that was constructed by Lazear (1983) was used, It is based on the

Bankers Trust       rporate Pension Plan         Study (1980), covering about 200 plans,



Age, Tenure and Salary of the Typical Retiree

        The 1979 CPS was used to impute the average age, tenure and salary of the

typical retiree in four race/sex categories, This task was less than

straightforward because the relevant information is not reported in an

appropriate form, Since the CPS is a cross—section, the date of retirement,

and therefore age, tenure, and salary at the date of retirement are not known

f or   the group of individuals who are currently working. For the individuals
who have already retired, neither tenure nor final salary on their career (or

even last) job is reported, Thus, it is necessary to devise a method that

estimates the requisite information from the cross—section,

       The   idea is to examine different        cohorts and to infer from the distribu-

tion of individuals across retirement and employment—tenure classes what the
retirement age and tenure must have been, using a variant of synthetic cohort
analysis,      The following example illustrates the basic ideas,

       Suppose   we are interested in       the average level of tenure at retirement

for    some group and that only three age groups are relevant: No one retires
before age 55, some retire at ages 55 and 56, and all are retired by age 57.

The   cross—section has workers and     retirees at each ages So let us stratify

the sample by age, None age 55 are retired, and their tenure on the current
job is reported. Suppose that half have tenure of 20 years arid half have
tenure   of 30 years. Although we cannot observe what happens to these

individuals over the next year, we can examine the individuals who are

currently 56 years old, In a steady state those individuals are identical to

the   current group of 55—year—olds, except that      they are one year        older,
Suppose that half of the 56—year—olds are retired and of those who               continue   to
work, three fourths have tenure of 21 years, whereas only one fourth have
tenure of 31 years.    That implies that three fourths of those who             retired

before age 56 did so with 30 years of tenure and one fourth did so with 20

years of tenure. Thus, (1/2)(3/4)          3/8 of the population retire at age 55

with 30 years of tenure, Similarly, (1/2)(1/4)              1/8 retire at age 55 with 20

years of tenure, Since all workers are retired by 57, it follows that

(1/2)(3/4)      3/8 of the labor force retire at age 56 with 21 years of tenure

and that (1/2)(1/4) = 1/8 of the labor force retire at age 56 with 31 years of

tenure, Given this information it is easy to calculate the expected level of

tenure   at retirement. In this case, it is

                (3/8)30 + (1/8)20   +   (3/8)21 + (1/8)31   =   25,5 years *

      The   actual procedure is more complicated because there are many            more age

and tenure categories and because some workers take new jobs and oth'rs die.

But   the basic idea is the same. The procedure is applied to four              groups:

white males, white females, black males, and black females. The subset of the

CPS sample analyzed consists of individual who reported themselves either as

retired, or as currently working with valid information on job tenurt, and who
were from 55 to 76 years old,2 The CPS reports whether individuals who                           are
working are enrolled in a pension plan, We restricted the sample to those who
were enrolled because there are large differences in employment status,

tenure, and salary levels by pension enrollment.3

       The next few pages begin with some definitions and describe the method

used   in more detail, The           estimates are based on a counting algorithm and

steadystate        assumptions. Define marginal counts

               N(a,i): number of workers         in    the   cross-seetion   of age a
                            who have i years of tenure,

              N(aR): number age a who are retired,

and transition counts

                       number of age a with tenure i who will have j                     years
                       of   tenure next year.
                    number of       age a    with tenure i who retire
                       during the    year.

Ignoring unemployment, for transitions we have, for i > 1                      either:


       (1) j       I   + 1: if      the person remains on job
       (2)     j =1            if   the person turns over and obtains a new job
       (3)     j               if   the person retires between years.

Finally      define:




     2We ignore those who retire earlier than 55 because it is likely that
only a very small number of workers with pensions retire before age 55,

       3For example, not enrolled black women earn an average                  of $3,471 per
year, whereas enrolled black            women   earn   $10,206.
                                               —6—




        ND(asi): number aged a and tenure i                 who   die   before age a +   1.

The following accounting identities apply in a state state:

               N(a,S) — Ni+iCa,i) + N1Ca,i) + NRCai) + ND(ai)

A   person must go to one of the four mutually exclusive and exhaustive
classifications. Further

                               N(a+1,    i+1) a
                                                    Ni+i(a,i)
Persons   found with one more year of tenure in the following year must be those
who transited to that state between years. And

                          N(a+1, 1) a                   +
                                          i N1(a,i)          N1(a,R)

People with one year of tenure are those who changed jobs or who came out of
retirement. Similarly

                          N(a+1, 1) a E
                                          i NR(ai) +
Those observed retired in the next year either transited to that state during
the year or were retired earlier and remained retired. Therefore

(1)       NR(a,i) a   N(a,i)   —
                                   Ni+i(a,i)   —
                                                   N1(a,i)    —
                                                                  ND(a.i)
                  a N(a,i)     — N(a+1, iii) —
                                                     N1(a,i) — ND(a,i)

We seek   to estimate NR(a,i).        Both N(a,i) and N(a+1, i+1) are observed in
the   cross—section data. However, no data are available fran a cross-section
on transitions N1(.,.) or tj(,4, so some                     assumptions are required to
impute them.
     Let P(a,i) be the probability that a worker aged a with tenure i
takes a new job and transits to state i a 1. Include A in the set U).
Then

                                       N1(a,i)        P(a,i)N(a,i)

so

(2)                     N(a+1, 1)            E N1(a,i)       I P(a,i)N(a,i)


If there are A age groups and T tenure classes (2) represents A —                                              1




equations in (A  UT unknowns P(a,i). The marginal counts N(a,i) are not
sufficient    to estimate P(a,i) (and therefore N1(a,i)) without additional

restrictions on P(a,iU We know from other studies4 that P is decreasing

in i and probably in a as welL Th make things simple and computationally

tractable         assume that P(a,i) takes the form

                                                   2                         2
                  P(a,i) =
                              (a   +
                                       a1a      a2a    +
                                                           131i
                                                                   +
                                                                       82i
                                                                                  +    óia)(1   -   R)

                                              ÷ R(60 +
                                                           61a)

where R =     1    if the    person is retired and                R = 0          if not,

       Define N(a)           I N(a,i) as the working population of age a and
                            i in
N(a,R),,    as before, as those retired. Then, substituting for P(a,i) in (2)
and summing yields


(3)        N(a+1, 1) = c\)N(a) +         a(aN(a))      +   a2(a2N(a))
                       +
                            S1(E iN(a,1)) +                i2N(a,i))

                       +    y(aE iN(a,i)) + 1N(a,R) + ó2aN(a,R)

Treat (3Yis a regression equation, in which the observed counts N(a+1, 1)

are    regressed on observed variables N(a), aN(a),                              ..,   etc.     across   age
groups. There are eight unknown parameters in this regression, so if A > 9,
this regression can he estimated.


         ee Mincer and Jovanovic (1981)
                                            —8-



     In our data A a 21, so there are only 13 degrees of freedom. There-
fore, the individual parameters (a, , 1, 6) are not estimated precisely.
In addition same of the regressors are colinear. Nevertheless, we get
unbiased estimates        (a,i). From these we obtain unbiased estimates of
N1Ca,i), from

                               i1(a,i) a    i(a,ihfla,i)
      A   similar procedure works in general for estimates of            N,0(a,i). However,

we find that the data are too thin to obtain meaningful results for the rela—
tionship between death probabilities conditional on both age and tenure. we
therefore assume

                               (a,i) a P*(a)N(a_1,         i)


where P*(a) is the 1979 age—specific death rate for this race—sex class, we

know that there is a strong negative        association    between work and death      so

j(a,R)     is likely to be biased from this procedure. The biases with             respect
to i are less clear cut,        though it   is probable that %(a,i) for large i

is upward    biased,   since people who are currently working and          with long   tenure

are   likely   to be healthier than average.

      From the identity above, NR(a,i) is estimated from


(4)             N(ari) a    N(a,i)   — N(a+1, i+1) —
                                                       11(a,i)
                                                                  —
                                                                      ND(ali)

Now £ Lja.i)      is the total number of people aged a who retire and
      i
£E N(ai) is the total number who retire in the whole population at any age.
ai
Therefore,

(5)                           n(a) a £ N (a,i)/EE %(ai)
                                       iR
is the probability of retiring at age a, given             that   death does not   occur
prior to retirements and
(6)                     1   an(a)     E(age of retirement) Ea


Similarly,       S N(a,i) is the number of people who retire after i years of
tenure,     so


(7)                            mCi)      L N(ai)/EE N(ai)

is    the conditional probability of retiring at tenure i given that death
occurs after retirement,
       Theref ore

(8)                   Ei =    E(tenure   at retirement) =   S   im(i)
                                                            i
       Before turning to the estimates, some qualifications are in order.
        If ND is biased upward for larger i, then there is a downward
        1



bias in m(i) for large i (and upward bias in m(i) for small i).
Therefore Ei is probably biased down on this account, However, this source
of bias is likely to be small,
     2. Even though the estimates of N(a, i) are no doubt imprecise, the
usual sampling theory suggests that E(a) and E(i) are better measures than
any of their components, through the law of large numbers, Now if the pension
formulas were .linear in a and i, these means are sufficient statistics for
our problem. However, these schemes are not linear, Therefore in predicting
expected pensions and pension wealth from each plan, It would be preferable to
take weighted averages across (a,i) pairs rather than taking the outcone for
the average persona The preferred alternative is simply not feasible with
these data,
        3, The imputation procedure assumes no cohort effects, This is dictated
by a croscsection since it is well known that cohort and age effects cannot
l:o identif ted in a cross secton except through arb trary assumptlons .    The
                                           —10—




formulas above make the strong steady state assumption that for a              a'
people who attain age a' at (a' — a) periods in the future will behave was
if people age a' are behaving today (1979).
        We know that the age of retirement has shown a secular decline for males
in the post—World War XX period. Increasing wealth, changes in tax laws and
in the Social Security system as well as changes in family composition and yet
other factors are all contributory causes. If thess trends continue then
E(a) is likely to be smaller in the future than our estimate: The average age
of retirement for older cohorts in our sample was surely larger than our
estimate. al the other hand, those issues are reversed for females, given the
large increase in female labor force participation in recent decades. Since
our estimates for females are conditioned on working, it is probable that
cohort bias of this sort is far less important for women than for men.
        The influence of cohort effects on expected tenure is less clear-cut.
There are little data on secular changes in tenure on which to base an a
priori Judgment. If retirement continues to occur at younger ages this is
likely to reduce tenure at retirement as well • However, the relation between
age and tenure is noisy, so though there may be cohort bias in E(i)
qualitatively similar to that of E(a), it is likely to be quantitatively
smaller. thanging labor force behavior of women and conditioning on labor
force participants again makes these considerations less important for women;
if anything, the cohort bias for women tends to go in the opposite direction
than for men.
        4. This procedure is based on actual counts in the eps tape for N(a,i).
If   all cohorts were the same   size,   and if   sample data reflected this exactly,
then,   on the usual synthetic cohort assumptions,      everything works out
correctly. However, some adjustments       are necessary if either birth cohorts
                                              —11—



vary in size (which they do), or if sample sizes vary randomly with age. The

following approach, which is incorporated into the calculations, corrects the

problem

           N(a) as the total number of individuals in the sample of age a.
      Define

We normalize everything in terms of N(55), If this were a panel, then the
difference between N(55) and N(56) reflects only deaths during the year.
But in our synthetic panel, N(56) may deviate from N(55) because of real
differences in cohort sizes or random sampling differences across age groups.
However, death rates are known with accuracy, so an estimate of the corrected
age 56 sample can be easily obtained, In fact, P*(a), defined above, does
exactly    that, Thus, as an initial condition set

                                A                              *
                               N(56) = N(55)t1        — P          (55)3

Then the following recursion applies for a >                       56

                           A        A                      *
                           N(a) = N(a        13(1 —    P       (a       1))

The ratio of N(a)/N(a)          1(a) reflects random sampling                 size or cohort size

differences,    Th correct     our estimates for these factors,                it is   necessary only
to   divide all NR(ai) by A(a), Then eqs. (5)—(S) follow as written,

      This discussion points to another possible source of bias that we have

ignored,   nonretirement transitions out of thelabor force, This is likely to
lead to relatively small error for the aged population we study here because
these transitions are relatively minor among older workers,
      5.   In the data actually used we identify 21 age classes, a =                      55,
75, and 54 tenure classes, i =          1,    ..,   54.            Since the sample consists of
some I ,600+   persons, many of: the N(a, i) cells are very small, and many are
empty. Th    deal   with this problem we aggregated across tenure intervals and
                                                        -1 2—




then interpolated tenure—specific totals by regression In particular, define


                                          x(a,I.)               N (a,i)
                                                                 R
                                                        iAi.
                                                           J

After inspection of the raw cells, eleven such sums were defined for each

age: I         (1); 12          (2,6); 13         (7,11), 14          (12,16), 15 =      (17,21),    16

(22,26), 17       (27,31), I (32,36), 19                        (37,41), 110         (42,47), I
(48,54), after inspection of the raw cells. Define I, as the midpoint in

years of the ith i interval.
       We fit the regression


(9)     x(a,I.)          b0 + b1a + b2a2 ÷ b3i +                b4i   +
                                                                          b51a
           +
               b68
                     +
                          b7F
                                +
                                    b8D
                                          +
                                              b9(aB) + b10(aF) +          b(D8)      +
                                                                                         b12(DF)
to the aggregated data for purposes of smoothing and interpolation. The

variables B for black, F for female, and D for i                                     I are dunnües.
Then

                                              +     +            + b3i    ÷ b4i2 +
                         NR(ali)                                                     b5ia

was used to calculate the distributions n(a) and m(i) used for our

estimates of Ei and Ear above. Appendix A reports the regression in (9).
       The estimates are as follows:

                                                    TABLE 1




                                                                                              ES
                                                          FaR               EiR
          White            Male                           62.1              22,0          $17,970
                           Female                         63.2              21.8            11,414

          Black            Male                           63.0              15.3            13,194
                           Female                         65.9              16,8            10,754
                                             —13—




       Expected age of retirement of persons covered by private pensions is

remarkably uniform       across race and   sex groups, Remember that these numbers

are conditioned on labor force participants as well as pension eligibility.

r1iS   explains   the lack of appreciable differences between males and females.

While older females are far less likely to participate in labor market

activity then males, t:hose that do participate show similar average retirement

ages to men, In fact, EaR is slightly larger for women. Since estimated

       is close to the early retirement age under Social Security, the somewhat

larger value for women may reflect known smaller coverage and experience under

Social Security than for men. The somewhat larger difference between black

males and females may be due to these same factors, as well as to the fact

that labor force participation of black men has historically exceeded that

of white women. Whatever factors affect these differences in participation

rates apparently also makes black women retire later in life,

       The most surprising result in table 1 refers to the sex and race differ-

ences in expected tenure at retirement. For whites            we find that expected
tenure on the job held       at retirement is virtually the same between the sexes

and is a remarkably long 22 years in length. As a check, this estimate is

similar to average tenure levels for those still working in the CPS data,

Recent   work on job tenure patterns for males shows a characteristic pattern

that   most job mobility occurs at     younger      ages. By middle age most job
mobility that     will   occur over a lifetime has already taken place, so     it is   not
surprising that for       the o:Lder male workers in our sample    the average tenure at
retirement is     22.0 years, The result for women seems surprising at first

glance, but is less so when it is          recalled that these calculations refer to
working women at age 55 and oider The estimate             reflects the fact that a
significant number of women are not only permanently attached to the labor
                                      —14—



force but also to their place of work, either through their whole careers or

certainly subsequent to re—entry into the labor market after child—bearing

years.

       These similarities between sexes are apparent among blacks as well as

whites in table 1. However, the difference between the races is substantial.

Taken at face value, these differences must reflect much greater job mobility

among older blacks than among older whites, While there is some evidence that

job and labor market instability is larger for blacks than for whites at

younger ages,      are unaware of confirming evidence on these differences

between races among older workers. It should be noted in this connection that

our sample is much smaller for blacks than for whites, and the individual

N(a,i) cells are correspondingly thinner. Hence, the smoothness procedures

used and described above may ultimately account for these differences:

Certainly any confidence interval on these estimates would be much larger for

blacks than for whites, based on sampling variation alone, In fact, the

results for blacks are sensitive to the specification of equation (9), which

causes us concern, This fact must be borne in mind when interpreting the

black/white differences below, Still, there is nothing in the procedure used

that would by itself produce this point estimate and the similarity between

black men and black women is not automatically implied by our method.

       The last bit of information necessary to perform the simulations is the

final salary at time of retirement, since many plans are geared to these

figures. The estimate is based on a standard earnings regression for each

race/sex group of the form:


(10)                Earnings   c0 + c1a + c2a2 +         +          ÷ u
                                                   c3i       c4i2

where the Cs6     are regression parameters and u is         regression errors After
                                         —15—




fitting this equation for each age—sex group, the estimated average salary fr
the average person is estimated by evaluating it at a —      and i — EiR.

The regressions are contained in Appendix A. The earnings estimates are shown
in the third column of table 1, labeled.ES.5
     The salary regression does not include the usual elaborate list of
controls such as education, marital stAtus, occupation, and the like because
we are not particularly interested iii this study of the partial effects of
such variables •   Hence   the coefficients on the. age and. tenure variables cap-
ture the effects of variations in these other variAbles that are correlated
with age and tenure. This is conceptually appropriate for our purposes
because   desire an estimate of mean fnal salary for eaSt race—sex gràup
over all education, occupation, industry, p4 marital àtatus classes. A more
elaborate regression would require reweightiag these other effects by relative
sample proportions: The regression above is self—weighting in this reipect and
is sufficient for the problem at head. Also, the regression has been
specified in terms of earnings levels rather thin the usual log of earnings.
A log transform is known to provide a better fit when All age groups are
included in the sample, but there is no compelling reason for using thAt
transform for the older people in our sample tirice it Is well known thAt much
of the curvature in life-cycle earnings patterS odcurs at younger ages.
Furthermore, it is the level and not the log of eatnings that is relevant for
pension determination, so we also avoid the questionable 0u correction for
error variance in transforming the log to the leivel by thu procedure.




     5Note that although the earnings regressions are imprecise, the estimates
derived f rem them and used in table 1 are close to the unconditional mean for
each group.
                                            —16—



      The percentage differences between white men and women at EaR             and       EiR

in   table 1   conform to the percentage differences in earnings found in the

population     as a whole. This is rather surprising because the       women   in   our

sample exhibit the same     mean   age of   retirement   and tenure at retirement as men
do, and    it is   generally thought that the      raw difference in earnings between

men and women in the population at large is related in some way to differences

in labor force activity over the life cycle. No doubt many of the women in

our sample re—entered the market after child—bearing. Whatever the case, they

never caught up with the men. This is both surprising and worthy of more

detailed investigation. The same relative pattern is repeated among blacks,

but at a much lower level.

       One final qualification is necessary concerning these salary estimates.

The salary observations are censored by the retirement decision itself, Thus

the older individuals in the sample who were working found it in their

interest not to retire because their wage prospects were evidently larger than

their opportunity cost of leisure, People who continue to work are generally

healthier than average and many have superior earnings prospects, so the

observed wages of older—than—average workers in our sample is likely to be

larger than the wage prospects available to workers of these ages who chose

not   to work, Therefore expected salary at age of retirement calculated above
probably    is too large for the average worker.



Pension Values             ical Retirees
       Given the information in table 1, the pension of these typical retirees

can be calculated from information on pension benefit formulas. The informa-

tion used comes from a data set generated by Lazear (1983). A description

follows:
                                           —17—



        The data for Lazears analysis were constructed using the Bankers Trust

 Corporate Pension Plan Study (1980) The study consists of a detailed verbal

description of the pension plans of over 200 of the nations largest corpora—

tions, The data set applies to approximately 10 million           workers,   and this

comprises    about one—fourth of the entire covered population. The major
empirical task was to convert the verbal descriptions into machine—readable
data, This required Setting up a coding system that was specific enough to
capture all of the essential detail associated with each plan. It was then
necessary to write a program which calculates the present value of pension
benefits at each age of retirement,
        Pension benefit formulas are of three different types. The two         most

common    fall under the rubric of defined—benefit plans, which specifies the
pension    flow as a fixed payment determined by    some formula, The patte
awards the recipient a flat dollar amount per year worked prior to retirement,

The conventional plan calculates the pension benefit       flow   from a formula which

depends upon years of service and some average or final salary. In contrast

to   the defined—benefit plans are defined—contribution plans in which the
employer (or employee) contributes a specified amount each year during work
life    to a pension fund, The   flow   of pension benefits that the worker receives

upon retirement is a function of the market value of that fund,          The defined—
contribution   plan is much less frequently used than is eithe.r the pattern          plan
or   conventional plan, Only defined—benefit plans are used here,
        Some plans do not permit the individual to receive early retirement
benefits or oniy permit early retirement up to a given number of years before
the normal date, This means that in order to perform the necessary compari-
sons,   some plans had   to be deleted because age or tenure values in table 1
violated restrictions of the plan, Less than 15% of plans were deleted for
this reason,
                                         —18—




       Host plans have restrictions on the maximum amount which can be accrued,

and many provide for minimum benefits. Additionally, a number reduce pension

benefits by some fraction of the social security benefits to which some basic

class is entitled, Moreover, a number of plans provide supplements fat

retirement before the social security eligibility age. Sometimes these

supplements relate directly to social security payments; at other times they

depend upon the individual's salary or benefit level. Other restrictions have

to do with vesting requirements, with the maximum age at which the individual

begins employment, and with the minimum number of years served before the

basic accrual or particular supplements are applicable. The accrual rate, or

flat dollar amount per year to which the individual is entitled, is often a

nonlinear function of tenure and salary, and these kinks had to be programmed

into    the calculations,
       This   permits computation of the flow of retirement income in each of

these plans, for each of the four typical workers, To get present values of

the pension flows, a 10% discount factor was used, Finally, in performing the

actuarial correction, it was necessary to choose a life table, The 1979 U.S.

Vital Statistics tables were used, The choice of table turns out to be the

least crucial part of the analysis. Values do not vary greatly from year to

year and discounting makes unimportant whatever small differences there are

among tables.

       Each of our   four typical individuals was run   through 172 of the plans for

which   qualification   criteria were met, The expected present value of

retirement benefits (in date of retirement dollars) was estimated far each of

those individuals in each of the plans. Table 2 provides some summary

statistics on the results of that simulation,
                                              •
                                                    —19—




—_____
White    Males
                           an

                     $30,284
                                       Pens ion

                                       $18,412
                                                  Table 2

              Pension Present Value for Typical Retiree (All Pensions)

                                       Expected
                                                       S td


                                                        $17,860
                                                                         Max

                                                                    $142,111
                                                                                   Me d


                                                                                 $28,422
                                                                                              Mi n


                                                                                             $862
White    Females      23,527            11,340           11,152       87,193      22,000      833
Black    Males        17,396             9,550            9,545       78,342      16,067      833
Black    Females       15,997            6,558            8,771       59,723      15,105      740


        Note: N = 172

     *Expected pension is defined as the raw probability (from table 6) times
the mean pension.


                                                  Table 3

                         Pension Present Value for Typical Retiree
                               Defined—Benefit Pattern Plans

                                                                                  ----
Group                           Mean          Std,    Dev,         Max            Med          Mm

White    Males               $23,277              $6,822          $40,483       $23,724     $4,486
White    Females              22,318               6,502           39,105        22,459      4,333
Black    Males                15,067               4,280           26,612        15,000     13,750
Black    Females              15,110               4,285           26,817        15,105      3,110


        Note: N = 48


                                                  Table 4

                         Pension Present Value for Typical Retiree
                            Defined—Benefit Conventional Plans




  9jeanStd
White   Males               $32,991           $20,042
                                                      Dcv,         Max

                                                               $142,111
                                                                                  Med

                                                                                $31,264
                                                                                          —••---
                                                                                              Mm

                                                                                             $862
White   Females              24,032            12,520            87,193          22,000       833
Black   Males                18,260            10,833            78,342          16,523       833
Black   Females              16,342             8,899            59,723          15,105       740


     Note: N       124
                                           —20—



                                          Table 5

                                   Ratios of Means


*                                         Pension Values and Final Salary

                                                                Expected          Final
AllPatternConventionalPenSion(ALL)S
White   female/white male   .776      .958            .728        .615            .635
Black   male/white male     .574      .647            .553        .518            .734
Black   female/white female .679      .677            .680        .578            .942
Black   female/white male   .919     1.002            .894        .687            .815



Black male pattern/white male conventional       .456
Black female pattern/white female conventional = .628




                                          Table 6

              Probability of Participation in a Private Pension Plan


Variable                                   Coefficient            Standard Error

Constant                                     1,559                       .121
Annual Earnings (bOOs)                        .01856                     .00098
Black                                        —.0019                      .0298
Female                                        .0035                      .0186
Age                                          —.0205                      .0019




Raw   Probabilities   of Participation:

White    Males   = .608
White    Females   .482
Black    Males     .549
Black    Females   .410
Results

     There are a number of interesting findings that come from this analysis,

Let us turn first to the question that was posed at the outset, namely, does

pension wealth exacerbate inequality? Recall that there are two aspects to

the question, The first relates to the probability that a worker in a given

demographic category has a pension; the second regards the expected pension

value for pension plan participants. The first was investigated by using the

CPS data to estimate a linear probability model, in table 6 the dependent

variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the    individual in question participates in a
private   pension plan, The sample consists of all working individuals between

55 and 76 years old with tenure reported.

     A look at the coefficients in table 6 makes it appear as if blacks and

females do not differ from white males in terms of their probabilities of

participation in a pension plan. (Both coefficients are essentially zero.)

Appearances are decieving because earnings are held constant. Earnings have a

strong positive association    with pensions,    and since   blacks and females have
lower earnings than white males, most of the difference can be accounted for
by differences in earnings. Wh:iie women and blacks who earn the same wages as
white males are likely to    enjoy the same pension participation     status, women
and blacks are unlikely to earn the same amount as white men,

     The more important statistic for this analysis is the raw probability of

participationin a pension plan Those probabilities are reported in table 6
as well, White males have the highest probability of participating in a
pension plan while other groups, especially black women, are        substantially

behind.   These   probabilities will play an    important   role in the subsequent
discussion.
                                                 —22—



       'lb   examine the second question,        namely how do   pensions vary among
participants by race and sex, we call on the information in tables                    2-5.

First, compare       the   first and last columns of table 5.
       The first column       reports the     ratio of pension value means from        table   2
for the      relevant group so that the first entry is 23,527/30,284. The fifth

column reports       the ratio of salary means      from   table   1   so the first entry is
11,414/17,970.
       First consider black males and white males. The second row of table 5 is
relevant. Note that the ratio of the mean salary at retirement for these
groups is .734 and         that the   ratio of pension benefits is .574. If workers
were distributed randomly across the plans (which they are not), then the
existence of pensions would           tend   to increase black/white male inequality.
This is true for two reasons. First, as reported earlier, blacks are less
likely to have pensions than whites. Second, given that black males do
receive a pension, they           receive   a considerably smaller amount      in   pension
benef its    than   whites • A measure that combines both          aspects   is the ratio of
expected pension, defined as the ratio of the mean pension times the raw
probabilities from table 6. That number is reported in the fourth column as
.518   so pensions appear to exacerbate inequality. (Recall, however, that

results for blacks         are   not robust to   specification.) The magnitudes, although
not astronomical, are        not trivial either. For       white males, the present value
of pension wealth averages somewhat less than two years' income. For black
males, the average value of pension wealth is somewhat less than one year of
income.

       Because of the significant salary differences, conventional plans, which
base the pension on final salary, exacerbate the black/white male differences.
Tables 3 and 4 split the sample of plans into pattern and conventional plans.
                                          —23—



The second column of table 5 reports the ratios of means given in table 3 and

the third column reports the ratios of means from table 4,

        A comparison of column 3 with column 1 in table 5 reveals that the ratios

in the third column are smaller for all groups that do not include black

females, because salary levels are important for computation of conventional

pension plans, Black males who have conventional plans are                 at   even more of a

disadvantage relative to white males in the same plans because their earnings

are lower, Perhaps more important is that blacks and whites are unlikely to

be found in similar proportions in the two plan types, Pattern plans are more

typical for production workers, whereas the conventional plan is the norm for

management and white—collar workers, To the extent that blacks are over—

represented among pattern plans, pension inequality is          even       more pronounced,

At the extreme, if    all   black males had pattern plans and        all   white males had

conventionalplans, then the ratio of the pension value means would be .456,
whereas salary ratios are .734,
        The findings for black females and white females are even more striking,
The salary column of table 5 reveals that the        ratio of black to white female

salary is .942, whereas the ratio of pension value is only .679. If all white

females were in conventional plan occupations and all black females were in

pattern plan occupations, the pension inequality would be even                  greater. That
ratio   would be .628 instead of .679, The reason for the difference is that

conventional plans are generally more lucrative than pattern               plans, except   at

very low salary levels, Similarly, the ratio of           expected   pension for these

groups is .578, implying     even greater inequality because black females are
less    likely to be enrolled in a   pension   plan at   all, No matter how we        measure

it,    pensions appear to   increase black/white inequality relative to that

estimated   by salary measures.
       The male/female comparisons are less clear—cut. Effects go in opposite

directions, As reported above, female workers are less likely to be enrolled

in a pension plan than male workers, but if they are enrolled, the white

females do well relative to their male counterparts The first row of table 5

contains the relevant information, The ratio of final salary of white females

to white males is .635 whereas the ratio of pension values is .776, This

implies an equalizing effect of pension benefits, Part of this results from

the fact that defined-benefit plans are not sex-specific, so that women, with

longer life expectancies, do better than men, But this cannot account for the

large difference between .776 and .635w

       The reason why women do so well in pension benefits can best be under-

stood by examining the distinction between pattern and conventional plans.

Note that women are almost on par with men in terms of pension benefits

received in pattern plans, This results from one factor: Pattern plans depend

only on years of service and in that respect, the women who are working at age

55 are quite similar to men, This large value of tenure maps into high

pension flows in the pattern plan. (Because of the actuarial unfairness of

the plan, it could actually have gone the other way, Since tenure levels are

close to comparable, the longer life expectancy of females could have made

their pattern plan pensions worth more than those for males.)

       The equalizing effect of pensions is offset almost exactly by the fact

that   fewer men are enrolled in pension plans than men. From table 6, white
men had a probability of receiving a pension of .608,   whereas white women had
a   probability of .482, It is useful, therefore, to compare expected pensions.

The ratio of expected pension for white females to white males is .615 from

the last column of table 5, Thus, pensions leave white female/white male

wealth inequality unaltered,
                                           25

       The same pattern is displayed for blacks. The black female's final

salary is 81% that of black males in this sample and the mean black female's

pension benefit is 92% of the mean black male's pension. But expected pension

ratios    tell the opposite story. Since black females        are much less likely to

be    pension   recipients, the ratio of expected pension benefits is .687. Thus,

pensions increase male/female inequality substantially among blacks,

       This conclusion is strengthened somewhat when it is recalled that these

women are not a random sample of the overall population of women. Since a

larger proportion of women will have dropped out of the labor force before

reaching age 55, and since it is likely that those individuals have very small

pension wealth, the numbers presented in the last paragraph tend to understate

the disequalizing effect of pensions in the overall economy.

       Other interesting findings are worthy of discussion, Most obvious        is    that

there is much more variation in the benefits provided by conventional plans

than in those provided by pattern plans. A comparison of tables 3 and 4 is

instructive, For all four groups, the        standard deviation is much larger       for

conventional     plans. Similarly, with the exception of white males, medians are
about the same across plan types, but the maximum and minimum values are much
more extreme in the case of conventional plans.

       Variance in pension benefits received in      conventional plans depends on
two factors, The first is that for a given salary, companies differ substan-

tially more     in   their conventional pension formulas than in    their pattern plan

formulas,       Second, a positive correlation   between   the firmas average salary
and   generosity of the pension formula contributes variance to benefits
received. Although it is conceivable that the two types of           variation will

offset one      another, it. is unlikely, There is   already some evidence of a

positive    correlation between average salary in the firm and       the generosity   of
pension benefits (see Asch, 1984 and the salary coefficients in table 6).

     Before concluding, we should mention that there is another study which

addresses the same questions as we do, but obtains somewhat different results,

McCarthy and Turner (1984) find that blacks actually have higher pensions than

whites do, both in terms of pension flow and pension wealth (see their table

1). They use the Survey of Private Pension Benefit Amounts, a data set that

permits pairing of individuals with the actual pensions they receive, On the

face of it, this data set is superior to those that we have used. But their

findings leave some grounds for doubt on that score. In particular, it is

difficult to believe that blacks have higher pensions than whites because even

in the group of pension plan participants, the average final salary of a black

male is only 63.5% of the white male (see our table 5). Since many pension

plans depend on final salary, even if tenure at retirement did not differ

between groups, the pension flow ratio would mirror the salary ratio, It is

important to reconcile the two sets of results, but McCarthy and Turner are

unable to make their data available to the public, so their results cannot be

replicated.



Conclusion

     The existence of pension plans appears to contribute to black/white

inequality, but leaves male/female inequality unchanged among whites, Even

though females are less likely to receive pensions than males, those females

who do receive pensions tend to receive relatively generous ones, Of course,

the average pension that the typical retiring female receives is well below

that received by the typical male retiree, But the difference is not as

pronounced as male/female differences in salary. Among blacks, pensions

exacerbate sex differences, mainly because black women are only about 75% as

likely to receive pensions as black males,
                                             —27—



                                         Appendix A

                                    Regression Results



____ninsEarnins
     Eq.
Dep. Var.        =
                      X(aI)       White Male White Female
                                                               (10)

                                                              Black Male Black Female


Constant             —12,80       66,077         13,777         28,493       214,280
                      (8.59)      (61,992)      (40,979)      (121,344)      (351,051)

a (age)                 .488      —1,199             —102         —404        —6,738
                       (.262)      (2,028)          (1,377)     (3,900)       (11,913)

a2 (age2)              —.0043        5,47            —.24         1,34           54.6
                       (.0020)      (16.5)          (10.8)         (31)          (101)

jf    (tenure)         —.0570         279              305            441         327
                       (.0484)       (104)             (77)       (261)          (262)

I (tenure)             —.00021      —1,82           —3.38       —8.17          —7.45
                       (.00034)     (2.48)          (2.01)       (5.91)         (6.85)

l.a                     .00092
                       (.00068)

B                     —2,96
                      (1.41)

F                     —1.69
                      (1.41)

D                       .556
                       (.445)

aB                      .038
                       (.021)

aF                      .024
                       (.021)

(D) (B)                —.258
                       (457)
(D) (F)                —.613
                       (.457)

DF                    911              937             509              65          42

2                       .038          077              .112           .074        .076
Mean of Dependent Variable          18,855          10,397       13,857         10,206
                                    —28—



                                 References

Banker's Trust Company. j ud of Cor orate       Pension Plans. New   York:
   Banker's Trust, 1980.

Lazear, Ekward P. "The Narrowing of Black—White Wage Differentials Is
    Illusory," American Economic Review 69 (September 1979): 553—64.

Lazear, ward P. "Pensions as Severance Pay," in Financialectsoe
   U.S. Pension System, a National Bureau of Economic Research Project
   Report, ed, Zvi Bodie and John Shoven. Chicago: University of Chicago
   Press, 1983,

Lillard, Lee A. "Inequality: Earnings vs. Human Wealth," American Economic
    Review 67 (March 1977): 42—53.

Lillard, Lee A., and Willis, Robert. "Dynamic Aspects of Earnings Mobility,."
    Econometrica 46 (September 1978): 985—1012,

McCarthy, David, and Turner, John A. "Earnings Comparisons and Race—Gender
    Differences in Private Pension Benefits," mimeographed, U,S,D.L., April
    1984.

Mincer, Jacob, and Jovanovic, Boyan. "Labor Mobility and Wages," in Studies
    in Labor Markets, ed, Sherwin Rosen. Chicago: University of Chicago
    Press, 1981.

Rosen, Sherwin, "Human Capital: A Survey of Enpirieal Research," in R.
    Ehrenberg, ed., Research in Labor Economics. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press,
    1977,
