NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RESET PRICE INFLATION AND THE IMPACT OF MONETARY POLICY SHOCKS
Mark Bils
Peter J. Klenow
Benjamin A. Malin
Working Paper 14787
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14787

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2009

This research was conducted with restricted access to U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) data.
Rob McClelland provided us invaluable assistance and guidance in using BLS data. We thank Jose
Mustre Del Rio for excellent research assistance. The views expressed here are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the BLS or the Federal Reserve System. We are grateful
to Carlos Carvalho, Jon Steinsson, and numerous seminar participants for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Mark Bils, Peter J. Klenow, and Benjamin A. Malin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Reset Price Inflation and the Impact of Monetary Policy Shocks
Mark Bils, Peter J. Klenow, and Benjamin A. Malin
NBER Working Paper No. 14787
March 2009
JEL No. E31,E32,E52
ABSTRACT
A standard state-dependent pricing model generates little monetary non-neutrality. Two ways of generating
more meaningful real effects are time-dependent pricing and strategic complementarities. These mechanisms
have telltale implications for the persistence and volatility of "reset price inflation." Reset price inflation
is the rate of change of all desired prices (including for goods that have not changed price in the current
period). Using the micro data underpinning the CPI, we construct an empirical measure of reset price
inflation. We find that time-dependent models imply unrealistically high persistence and stability of
reset price inflation. This discrepancy is exacerbated by adding strategic complementarities, even under
state-dependent pricing. A state-dependent model with no strategic complementarities aligns most
closely with the data.

Mark Bils
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
bils@troi.cc.rochester.edu
Peter J. Klenow
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
Pete@Klenow.net

Benjamin A. Malin
Federal Reserve Board of Governors
Mail Stop 97
21st and C St., NW
Washington, D.C. 20551
benjamin.a.malin@frb.gov

1. Introduction
Consumer prices change every seven or eight months in the U.S.1 Yet the real effects
of monetary shocks have been estimated to last around thirty months.2 These figures suggest
real effects lasting roughly four times longer than nominal price stickiness – i.e., a “contract
multiplier” of around four in Taylor’s (1980) terminology. In contrast, research on calibrated
DSGE models obtains much lower contract multipliers, at least in the absence of strategic
complementarities and sticky information.

Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2000) report

contract multipliers around one in a variety of time-dependent pricing models. Caballero and
Engel (2007) and Golosov and Lucas (2007) arrive at contract multipliers well below one in
their state-dependent pricing models.

Dotsey, King and Wolman (1999) and Midrigan

(2008) obtain intermediate contract multipliers in their state-dependent models.
As has been well-known since Ball and Romer (1990) and Kimball (1995), strategic
complementarities in the pricing decisions of individual sellers can produce large contract
multipliers.3 A starting point for these models is that the nominal stickiness be staggered, to
create the possibility of coordination failure among price setters.4

In response to an

aggregate shock, strategic complementarities mute the size of price changes for those
changing prices, as price setters wait for the average price to respond.
1

Klenow and Krystov (2008) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2008a). This figure ignores price changes involving
sale prices, otherwise the number would be about four months.
2

Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1999), Romer and Romer (2004), and Bernanke, Boivin, and Eliasz
(2005), each based on U.S. data, are a few of the many examples.
3

Recent papers in this vein include Altig et al. (2005), Carvalho (2006), Blanchard and Gali (2007), Gertler and
Leahy (2008) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2008b).

4

Staggered price setting appears to describe the U.S. data well. Klenow and Kryvstov (2008) find that the
fraction of consumer prices changing does fluctuate but is not highly correlated with movements in inflation.
They also find big individual price changes. Golosov and Lucas (2007) show these facts can be explained by
large idiosyncratic shocks that govern both the timing and size of price changes at the micro level.

1

We show that models with high contract multipliers at the macro level display slowmoving “reset” prices at the micro level. A reset price for an individual seller is that price it
would choose if it implemented a price change in the current period. Actual prices often
differ from reset prices, of course, because of nominal price stickiness.

We define

“theoretical reset price inflation” as the weighted average change of all reset prices,
including those of current price changers and non-changers alike. We denote “reset price
inflation” as the weighted average change of reset prices for price changers only. In the
Calvo (1983) time-dependent pricing model, the probability of changing price is independent
of the desired reset price change, so reset price inflation is a pure reflection of theoretical
reset price inflation. In state-dependent models, sellers weigh the benefits of moving to the
reset price against the (menu) costs of doing so. For these models reset price inflation can
depart importantly from theoretical reset price inflation.
Strategic complementarities should dampen the volatility of reset price inflation and
boost its persistence. An individual seller will move by smaller amounts, requiring multiple
price changes to fully respond to a shock. We confirm this intuition by simulating DSGE
models featuring time-dependent pricing (TDP) or state-dependent pricing (SDP), with or
without strategic complementarities. The models feature a single aggregate shock (to money
or productivity) plus idiosyncratic shocks to each seller’s productivity.

The

complementarities take the form of intermediate goods, as in Basu (1995). Intermediates can
slow down “monetary pass-through” because price changers have not seen their intermediate
costs fully adjust due to the sticky prices of their suppliers. Sellers are grouped into one of
two sectors: the flexible price sector (low menu cost, bigger idiosyncratic shocks) or the
sticky price sector (high menu cost, smaller shocks).

2

Using the micro data on prices collected by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics for the
Consumer Price Index, we construct an empirical index of reset price inflation for the months
January 1989 through May 2008. We impute to all items, both those changing and not, the
reset price changes exhibited by price changers. To arrive at the reset price change for an
item changing price, we compare the item’s new price to its estimated reset price the
previous month – not the item’s last new price, set perhaps months earlier. A useful analogy
is to home price indices constructed from repeat sales (e.g., Shiller 1991 and Zillow.com).
These indices estimate the value of residential homes even when they are not sold. Once a
home is sold, the difference between the transacted price and the previous period’s estimated
value is used to update the estimated value of other homes that were not sold. Our reset price
index is the analogue for all consumer items to these home price indices.
We compare the behavior of our empirical measure of reset price inflation to that of an
identically-constructed measure from simulated TDP and SDP models.

As mentioned

previously, reset price inflation is the exact counterpart to theoretical reset price inflation in
the Calvo model. Even though our constructed reset price inflation is not the same as
theoretical reset price inflation for SDP models, we find that simulated SDP models yield
clear predictions for our constructed reset price inflation.
To delve further into the role played by price rigidity, we partition the CPI goods into
“flexible” and “sticky” groups. The former reflects 30 percent of consumer spending and
displays an average monthly frequency of price changes of 1/3. The latter constitutes 70
percent of spending and displays an average monthly frequency of around 1/10.

Our

simulated models feature flexible and sticky-price sectors, with each sector’s frequency and
absolute size of price changes matching those statistics in the CPI data.

3

We find the models with big contract multipliers fundamentally at odds with the data.
TDP models, with or without strategic complementarities, and the SDP models with strategic
complementarities, generate unrealistically high persistence and low volatility of reset price
inflation. These models predict that the impact of a nominal shock on reset prices will build
over time. But in the data we see the opposite. An increase in reset price inflation predicts
lower, not higher, reset price inflation in subsequent months, so that an index of reset prices
responds more on impact than over time. Another model prediction is that goods with
infrequent price changes (the sticky-price goods) will display relatively more persistent
inflation (overall, not reset). But we do not see this in the data.
The SDP model with no complementarities comes closest to matching the empirical
patterns. It features broadly realistic volatility and persistence of reset and actual price
inflation for all goods, flexible goods, and sticky goods. Related, a way to rescue strategic
complementarities might be to incorporate endogenous monetary policy. If monetary policy
quickly offsets the aggregate shock (to money itself or to aggregate productivity), then models
with complementarities no longer imply outsized persistence of reset and actual inflation.
This solution creates two problems, however. First, endogenous monetary policy essentially
gets rid of the contract multiplier. Second, this solution reduces reset inflation volatility to
around one-fifth of the observed level, and the variance of actual inflation to less than onetenth the observed level. If monetary policy offsets shocks, price setters respond little to these
shocks and inflation becomes much too smooth.
The literature on monetary policy has coalesced on strategic complementarities in
order to rationalize a large contract multiplier. But our results strongly reject the predictions

4

of those sticky-price models we examine that feature sufficient complementarities to produce
an important contract multiplier.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the dataset and the
empirical properties of reset price inflation. Section 3 lays out the models and compares
statistics from the simulated models to their empirical counterparts. Section 4 concludes.

2. An empirical measure of reset price inflation
The CPI Research Database
We use the micro data underlying the non-shelter portion of the CPI to construct our
measure of reset price inflation. The BLS surveys about 85,000 items a month in its
Commodities and Services Survey. Individual prices are collected at around 20,000 retail
outlets across 45 large urban areas.5 The survey covers all goods and services other than
shelter, or about 70 percent of the CPI based on BLS consumer expenditure weights. The
CPI Research Database (hereafter CPI-RDB) maintained by the BLS Division of Price and
Index Number Research contains all prices in the Commodities and Services Survey since
January 1988. We use the CPI-RDB through May 2008, for a sample of “1988-2008”.
The BLS collects consumer prices monthly for food and fuel items in all areas. The
BLS also collects prices monthly for all items in the three largest metropolitan areas (New
York, Los Angeles, and Chicago). The BLS collects prices for items in other categories and
other urban areas only bimonthly. For our competing models, the impulse responses for reset
price inflation differ markedly in the initial periods after a shock, making it valuable to have

5

The BLS selects outlets and items based on household point-of-purchase surveys, which furnish data on where
consumers purchase commodities and services. The price collectors have detailed checklists describing each

5

an empirical counterpart that captures the data at high frequency. For this reason, we restrict
our analysis to the top three areas that have monthly data on all goods.
The BLS defines 300 or so categories of consumption as Entry Level Items (ELIs).
Within these categories are prices for particular items (we call a longitudinal series of
individual price quotes at the micro level a “quote-line”).

The BLS provided us with

unpublished ELI weights for each year from 1988-1995 and 1999-2004 based on Consumer
Expenditure Surveys in each of those years. We normalize the nonshelter portion of the
weights to sum to 1 in each year. We set the 1996 and 1997 ELI weights to the 1995 weights,
and the 1998 weights to their 1999 level. We set the 2005 and onward weights to their 2004
level. The CPI-RDB also contains weights for each price within an ELI. We allocate each
ELI’s weight to individual prices in each month in proportion to these item weights to arrive
at weights it that sum to 1 across items (i’s) in each month.
The BLS labels each price as either a “sale” price or a “regular” price. Sale prices are
temporarily low prices (including clearance prices). Golosov and Lucas (2007), Nakamura
and Steinsson (2008a), and others filter out such sale prices on the grounds that they are
idiosyncratic deviations from stickier regular prices.

Related, in classifying goods as

“flexible” or “sticky” and in calibrating the model economies, we do so based on the
frequency of regular price changes.

We adopt this treatment because it yields more

conservative results with respect to our conclusions. If, alternatively, we encompass the
higher rate of price changes involving prices labeled by the BLS as sales prices, we would
obtain an average frequency of price change of a little over 25 percent monthly rather than 22
percent. In turn, this would require even larger contract multipliers for our model economies
item to be priced  its outlet and unique identifying characteristics. They price each item for up to five years,
after which the item is rotated out of the sample.

6

to generate the same persistence in the impact of monetary shocks. But we find that the data
do not support large contract multipliers. We use all prices, including sale prices, when
constructing our inflation and reset price inflation series.

To the extent sales are truly

idiosyncratic their impact on the time series for price inflation, given the large samples of
price quotes in each sector, will average close to zero. To the extent sales do affect aggregate
price inflation, they are not idiosyncratic and so should not be excluded. That said, we will
show that our results are robust to excluding sales prices from the series for price inflation.
Forced item substitutions occur when an item in the sample has been discontinued
from its outlet and the price collector identifies a similar replacement item (e.g., new model)
in the outlet to price going forward.

The monthly rate of forced item substitutions is

consistently about 3 percent in the sample. Essentially all item substitutions involve price
changes. We include these price changes at substitutions in our statistics.6 But our results are
extremely robust to treating all price changes as zero at forced substitutions.
About 12 percent of the prices the BLS attempts to collect are unavailable in a given
month. The BLS classifies roughly 5 percent of items as out-of-season. We put zero weight
on out-of-season items when calculating both inflation and the frequency of price changes.
The BLS classifies the other 7 percent as temporarily unavailable. As these items may be
only intermittently unavailable during the month, we treat items out of stock as available at
the previously collected price. We employ this treatment both for calculating frequency of
price changes and time series of inflation rates.
Although the BLS requires its price collectors to explain large price changes to limit
measurement errors, some price changes in the dataset appear implausibly large. We exclude

6

For about half of forced substitutions the rate of price change imparted to the CPI reflects a BLS adjustment
aimed at capturing quality change. We employ these BLS adjustments in all price change statistics.

7

price changes that exceed a factor of five. Such price jumps constitute less than one-tenth of
one percent of all price changes.

Defining Reset Price Inflation
Section 3 below illustrates how models with high contract multipliers exhibit inertia
not only in price inflation, but also in reset price inflation — so the behavior of reset price
inflation is a barometer for lasting real effects of monetary shocks.
Whether pricing is time-dependent or state-dependent, the desired price level for item i
in month t, Pi*,t , satisfies an Euler equation taking into account effects on current and future
prices. Following Dotsey et al. (1999), the Euler equation is

 u '( ct 1 )
 i ,t
V 
  Et  
(1  i ,t 1 ) i ,t*1 
*
Pi ,t
Pi ,t 
 u '( ct )
where  i ,t denotes current profits, Et refers to expectations at time t,  u '( ct 1 ) / u '( ct ) is the
familiar stochastic discount factor, i ,t 1 is the probability of a price change for item i in
month t  1 , and Vi ,t 1 is next period’s value function. Note that the reset price can differ from
the optimal flexible price (the price that maximizes current period profits) because of future
price stickiness ( i ,t 1  1 ). Related, the actual price can differ from the reset price if the
seller does not change its price in the current period.
Reset price inflation for a given seller is the log first difference of its reset price:

 i*,t  ln( Pi*,t )  ln( Pi*,t 1 ) .
This definition does not require a price change at either t or t  1 . Aggregate reset price
inflation is then the weighted average of micro reset price inflation:

8

(2.1)

 t*   i ,t  i*,t ,
i

where the weights i ,t add to 1. By comparison actual inflation is  t   i ,t i ,t where
i

 i ,t  pi ,t  pi ,t 1 and pi ,t denotes the log of the actual BLS price of item i at time t.
Whereas starred variables denote reset values, those without stars represent actual
values. Let I i ,t be a price-change indicator:
1 if pi ,t  pi ,t 1
.
I i ,t  
0 if pi ,t  pi ,t 1

To construct an empirical measure of aggregate reset price inflation, each month we divide
items into those that change price ( I i ,t  1 ) and those that do not change price ( I i ,t  0 ). For
prices that change, the reset price is simply the current price. For prices that do not change,
we index our estimate of the reset price to the rate of reset price inflation among price
changers in the current period. Our estimate of the log reset price level for item i in month t is

 pi ,t if pi ,t  pi ,t 1
p *  
 *
i ,t
 p i ,t 1   t* if pi ,t  pi ,t 1
where ^’s denote our estimates. In turn, our estimate of aggregate reset price inflation is

i ,t ( p  p

t*  i
i i,t I
i ,t

(2.2)

*

i ,t 1

i ,t

9

) I i ,t
.

Although the estimate  t* only employs time t price changers, price changes from previous
months are captured in the base values of p i*,t 1 , which are indexed to reflect prior changes.7
In Table 1 we present a stylized example useful for contrasting the rate of reset price
inflation (  t* ) to actual inflation (  t ) and the average inflation of price changers (call this

 t ). The example has two goods. Both goods change price in period 0, establishing base
prices for calculating reset price inflation. Good A’s price increases by 20% in period 1, with
Good B’s unchanged. This yields a rate of 20% for reset price inflation, same as the average
rate of price increase conditional on changing price, while actual inflation is 10%. But note
that it also kicks up the base price for calculating reset price inflation by 20%, not only for
Good A, but also for Good B. Thus, when B’s price increases by 20% in period 2, while A’s
remain unchanged, B’s price just meets its updated reset price from period 1. As a result,
reset price inflation for period 2 equals zero, despite the same actual inflation rate and rate of
increase for price changers, respectively 10% and 20%, as in period 1.
Our estimated reset price inflation is equivalent to theoretical reset price inflation
under the special case of Calvo pricing. By contrast, under SDP the decision to change a
price reflects selection on the idiosyncratic component in a seller’s desired price change. For
this reason, estimated reset price inflation  * can differ markedly from theoretical reset price
inflation

 * . We illustrate this difference for SDP models in Section 3 as a means of

discriminating between the TDP and SDP models.

7

We considered an alternative measure of reset price inflation based on regressing each price change on monthly
dummies taking the value 1 for months spanning each price spell. This measure parallels the Case-Shiller Home
Price Index (Shiller, 1991), which allocates price increases for homes to the months between repeat sales. In our
data and model economies, this regression-based measure exhibits very similar statistics to that based on (2.2).

10

A key question for us is what extra information is contained in  t* that cannot be
gleaned from  t alone. Under Calvo, one can infer  t* from  t if one also knows the pricechange frequency.8 But endogenous price changing, and especially selection of changers,
breaks the simple translation from  t* to  t . By endogenous price changing we mean any
response in the fraction of goods changing price to underlying shocks. By selection of
changers we mean that, in contrast to Calvo, the changers may be those with larger gaps
between actual and reset prices. Related,  t* should be directly revealing about strategic
complementarities, whereas  t is also affected by any response of the fraction changing.
Some forces for a low contract multiplier (selection) or a high contract multiplier (strategic
complementarities) operate on  t* directly, whereas their effect on  t can be clouded by
movements in frequency. The persistence of  t may be informative about the contract
multiplier, but does not say where it is coming from (frequency or reset price inflation).
Similarly, we could focus on the average price change among changers (  t ) rather
than constructing the less direct measure  t* . In models we simulate, however, we find that
the volatility of  t /  t does not vary with the contract multiplier (e.g., SDP with or without
complementarities), whereas the volatility of  t* /  t falls sharply with the contract multiplier.
We will revisit this issue in Section 3 below.

8

Under Calvo,  t 
*

 t  1     t 1
where  is the frequency of price change.


11

Evidence on Reset Price Inflation
Table 2 contains summary statistics on our constructed measure of reset price
inflation, as well as on actual inflation for comparison. All the monthly series are HP-filtered
and seasonally adjusted.9 Our measure of “all goods” excludes not only shelter, which is
missing from the CPI-RDB, but also energy, fresh fruit and vegetables, and eggs. We exclude
these for two reasons. First, they are arguably subject to big “sectoral” shocks that are absent
from our models.

If these shocks are temporary, then they artificially lower aggregate

inflation persistence. Second, these goods involve little or no processing, and hence lack the
strategic complementarities through slow-moving input prices.
In addition to the aggregate statistics, we examine actual and reset price inflation for
two sub-aggregates: “flexible” goods and “sticky” goods. As mentioned, the BLS places
individual price quote-lines into one of about 300 categories (ELIs). We calculate the average
frequency of regular price changes within each ELI, then classify quote-lines as “flexible” or
“sticky” based on their ELI’s frequency. We choose a threshold frequency separating the two
groups of 1/6, similar to the overall mean (weighted) frequency of 16.8 percent.

This

generates a 70 percent share of spending on the sticky group compared to 30 percent on the
flexible group. We put more price quotes in the sticky group to mitigate sampling error there,
given its smaller number of price changes per observed price. The flexible goods average
3,100 price quotes per month, compared to 8,300 for the sticky goods. The mean frequency
of price changes is 33.3 percent in the flexible group, while only 9.5 percent for the sticky.
9

The HP-filter we employ is very smooth, with a penalty parameter of one million (!). It removes a downward
trend in inflation during the first part of the sample, and little else. With no filtering, results for reset price
inflation are nearly unchanged. As an alternative, we subtracted the 10-year inflation forecast from the Survey
of Professional Forecasters (SPF, available quarterly from 1991:Q4). For the common sample the correlation
between HP-filtered reset price inflation and SPF-filtered reset price inflation is 0.997, with virtually identical
serial correlations and standard deviations. Inflation is likewise very similar when filtered in these two ways.

12

We calculate reset price inflation using formula (2.2) for flexible goods and sticky
goods separately. We then calculate aggregate reset price inflation as the weighted average of
reset price inflation for the two groups, with weights 0.3 on the flexible and 0.7 on the sticky,
consistent with their expenditure shares. We do the same in calculating actual inflation at the
aggregate level.

Constructing reset price inflation at the group level first avoids

overweighting frequent changers in calculating aggregate reset price inflation.10
The first row of Table 2 reports a standard deviation of monthly reset price inflation of
almost 1.0 percent.11 There is no persistence in reset price inflation as measured by its firstorder autocorrelation. In fact this serial correlation is notably negative, at –0.44. We provide
more evidence on persistence below. The third and fourth rows report the comparable
statistics for actual inflation. Actual inflation is much less volatile than reset price inflation,
with a standard deviation, at 0.18%, less than one-fifth that for reset price inflation. This
lower volatility for actual inflation follows mechanically from its including many zero price
changes, unless variations in the frequency of changes play a major role in inflation
movements – but we know from Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) that frequency changes do not
play that role. Actual inflation (serial correlation –0.12) is more persistent than reset price
inflation (serial correlation –0.44). Again, this is expected under nominal price stickiness
unless the frequency of price changes is highly responsive to the inflation rate; in fact, all
models in Section 3 predict this result.

10

We also tried finer disaggregation, namely calculating reset price inflation for each of 64 BLS Expenditure
Classes (cereal, computers, medical services, legal services, and so on), before aggregating. The behavior of
reset price inflation – volatility, persistence – is similar to that with our two groups.
11

Whereas our raw sample goes from January 1988 through May 2008, our constructed series run from January
1989 through May 2008. We dropped the first year because we require a new price to initiate a reset price series
for a given quote-line.

13

Our serial correlation for actual inflation is lower than reported in many studies for
several reasons. First is our use of an HP filter (in addition to monthly dummies to capture
seasonality). If we do not HP-filter, the serial correlation in actual inflation is modestly
higher (+0.06 rather than −0.12). We also exclude energy and raw food items. Incorporating
these categories would noticeably raise the serial correlation of unfiltered inflation to 0.30.
Finally, longer time series – extending back to the 1970s or earlier – exhibit much more
persistence. Persistence fell markedly by the time our sample began in the late 1980s. See
Stock and Watson (2006) or Nason (2006), for example. Even for recent samples Stock and
Watson find inflation has a persistent component. When we estimate an ARMA(1,1) for
inflation we get an AR(1) coefficient of 0.89 (s.e. 0.03) and an MA(1) coefficient of −0.99
(.01). We highlight the AR(1) specification in our tables to be concise and to underscore that
transitory components dominate the variance of recent inflation, just as Stock and Watson
find. When estimating impulse response functions we consider less restricted specifications.
The second and third columns of Table 2 repeat the statistics from the first column for
the flexible and sticky groups separately. We see that reset price inflation is volatile in both
the flexible and sticky sectors, with standard deviations of 1.3 and 1.2 percent, respectively.
Actual inflation is more than twice as volatile in the flexible vs. sticky sector, reflecting the
important smoothing effect of many unchanging prices in the sticky sector. 12
Table 2 also shows the persistence in reset and actual price inflation across the two
sectors. The flexible and sticky sectors have similar persistence in reset and actual price

12

The correlation between reset inflation rates in the flexible and sticky sectors is only 0.18. The correlation
between actual inflation rates in the two sectors is only 0.12. The aggregate reset inflation rate is correlated 0.54
with reset inflation in the flexible sector and 0.92 with reset inflation in the sticky sector. The aggregate actual
inflation rate is correlated 0.77 with inflation in the flexible sector and 0.73 with inflation in the sticky sector.

14

inflation as all goods. This runs counter to the prediction of many sticky price models that
infrequent price changes act as a force for actual inflation inertia.13
The price series (reset and actual) described in Table 2 reflect sale prices as well as
regular prices. The results, however, do not hinge on this treatment. Table 3 repeats all the
statistics from Table 2 but treats sales prices as temporarily missing, carrying forward the
most recent regular price as the price for that month. The patterns highlighted from Table 2
are nearly unchanged in Table 3. In particular, reset price inflation continues to show a strong
negative serial correlation of –0.43 (vs. –0.44 in Table 2), and the serial correlation of actual
inflation increases only modestly to –0.06 (vs. –0.12 in Table 2). This means that sale prices
either wash out in the aggregate or mimic the movements in regular prices. Inflation is
modestly more persistent at 0.15 (vs. –0.09) for sticky goods under this treatment.
To further investigate the persistence properties of these inflation rates, we next show
impulse responses derived from univariate AR(6) regressions. (The choice of 6 monthly lags
is based on the Akaike criterion.) Figure 1 gives the response of reset prices to a 1% impulse
for all goods. The (level) response in reset prices is much greater on impact than over time.
The impact effect is more than double the long-run response. This mean reversion in reset
prices does not reflect temporarily sales, as the patterns are very similar for series purged of
sale prices as shown in Figure 2. The shape also holds separately for flexible and sticky
goods, as depicted in Figures 3 and 4.14
One concern about Figures 1-4 is that the shocks themselves may be transitory.
Responses to permanent shocks may exhibit far greater persistence. We therefore estimated
13

These results are not driven by HP filtering. Serial correlations of reset price inflation are unaffected by the
filter—they still equal –0.41 and –0.49 for the flexible and sticky goods without filtering. Serial correlation is
only modestly higher for actual inflation, absent filtering, at –0.07 for flexible goods and 0.08 for sticky.

15

the response of reset prices to a shock with a permanent 1% impact on actual prices, identified
by imposing a long run restriction on a bivariate VAR with reset and actual price inflation.
Reset prices overshoot their long run response just as much in this case.
We carried out a number of data robustness checks.

Unless noted, the serial

correlations and impulse functions were virtually unaffected. We aggregated the monthly
time series up to the bi-monthly, quarterly, or even annual level. We split the monthly time
series into two time periods, January 1989 through December 1998 and January 1999 through
May 2008. We split the panel to create two samples (both going from January 1989 through
May 2008) with half as many prices in each. The variance of reset price inflation was
modestly higher in the two subsamples, as one would expect given greater sampling error.
We dropped all price changes associated with product turnover (i.e., item substitutions). We
looked only at services, whose prices are stickiest and whose spending exhibits little volatility
(sectoral shocks thus being less of a concern). In each of these deviations from our baseline
case, our findings remain intact. Finally, we looked at bi-monthly data for all areas (45 cities,
as opposed to the monthly data for just New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago areas). This
important robustness check incorporates much more data (68,500 quotes per bi-month vs. the
11,400 per month in our baseline dataset). Doing so materially lowers volatility by mitigating
sampling error. We will return to these all-area results when comparing models to the data.

3. Sticky price models and reset price inflation
The leading TDP and SDP models have predictions for the behavior of reset price
inflation. We will illustrate using a Calvo TDP model and an SDP model in the spirit of
14

The impulse response functions for reset prices look similar from an ARMA(1,1) as from the AR(6).

16

Golosov and Lucas (2007), respectively. They will be two-sector models with and without
strategic complementarities, so Carvalho (2006) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2008b) are
even closer antecedents.

We first sketch the models, then report statistics from model

simulations for comparison with the facts documented in the previous section.

The Models
Infinitely-lived households have preferences over labor supply and a composite
consumption good, where composite consumption is a CES aggregate of individual
consumption varieties. They also have access to state-contingent bonds (in zero net supply)
for transferring resources across time periods, and they choose bond holdings, consumption,
and labor supply to maximize discounted utility subject to a lifetime budget constraint.
Individual varieties are supplied by a continuum of monopolistically competitive
firms. The production function of a particular firm (good) i is given by
(3.1)

yt (i)  At (i) Lt (i)1 x X t (i) x

where A(i ) denotes productivity, L(i ) labor, X (i ) a CES aggregate of individual
intermediate goods, and  x the share of the composite intermediate good. Firms are grouped
into one of two sectors distinguished by how frequently firms change price.
Production function (3.1) exhibits two key features commonly used in macro models
of price stickiness. Following Danziger (1999) and Golosov and Lucas (2007), a firm’s
productivity is subject to idiosyncratic shocks, which will be important for capturing the
dispersion of individual price changes seen in the data. A second key feature is the inclusion
of intermediate goods, following Basu (1995) and Dotsey and King (2006). For  x  0 , each

firm uses intermediate inputs produced by all other firms in the economy. Intermediates are a

17

way of generating strategic complementarities in price-setting, as costs fully respond to a
shock only when other firms’ prices respond. In an excellent survey, Mackowiak and Smets
(2008) suggest such “macro rigidities” are promising for obtaining high contract multipliers.
Firms hire inputs and set prices to maximize expected discounted profits subject to a
fixed cost of changing price. In the SDP models, the cost is constant over time for each firm,
but does vary across firms depending on the firm’s sector. For the TDP models, firms receive
a menu cost draw of either 0 or  in each period, with the sector-specific probability of a
menu cost of zero being fixed over time.
Finally, we assume a cash-in-advance constraint on a household’s nominal spending

PC
t t  Mt .
In turn, we assume the money supply evolves as follows:

(3.2)

  M t 1 
M
  ln 
 P
  Pt 1 

ln M t    ln M t 1   m ln 


   t


where t is a monetary policy shock and ln  M  is steady-state aggregate real demand.
 P
When  m  0 , the money supply evolves exogenously according to a geometric random walk
with drift. We will also consider an “endogenous monetary policy” case, in which  m  0
and money growth is inversely related to lagged aggregate real demand.
An appendix provides a more thorough mathematical exposition of the model,
including its key parameters, and describes the solution method.15

15

We thank Emi Nakamura and Jon Steinsson for making the solution routines for these models available on
their website. See Nakamura and Steinsson (2008b) for a detailed description of the solution procedure.

18

Calibration
Table 4 reports the values of economy-wide parameters in the TDP and SDP models.
We consider three specifications: a baseline case featuring no strategic complementarities, a
strategic complementarities specification that generates a “contract multiplier” of 4, and a
specification with strategic complementarities and “endogenous monetary policy.” Most
parameters remain constant across the three specifications. The monthly discount factor is

  0.961/12 . We consider log utility in consumption (   1 ) and linear labor supply (  0 ),
while the parameter governing the disutility of labor supply (  ) is set so that steady state
labor supply is 1/3. The elasticity of demand for consumption varieties is   4 , within the
range of values estimated in the trade and IO literatures, e.g., Broda and Weinstein (2006) and
Hendel and Nevo (2006).16 We set the parameters for the money growth process (  ,  m ,  m )
to match the mean growth rate of inflation (0.2%), the standard deviation of nominal nonshelter PCE growth (0.48%), and, for the “endogenous monetary policy” case, the serial
correlation of nominal PCE growth (–0.31) over our sample period.17 The serial correlation
of the idiosyncratic productivity shock is set to   0.7 , based on estimates in Klenow and
Willis (2006) using the serial correlation of new relative prices in the CPI-RDB.
Table 4 also presents parameter values determining the degree of strategic
complementarity in pricing.

Following Ball and Romer (1990), we define strong real

rigidities (more strategic complementarities in this model) as low responsiveness of a firm’s

It is also in the range used by other sticky price papers; Midrigan (2008) uses   3 , Nakamura and Steinsson
(2008b) use   4 , and Golosov and Lucas (2007) set   7 .
16

17

We deliberately do not calibrate the money supply process to data on money supply as our money supply
process is a stand-in for monetary policy shocks, not actual money growth.

19

real price to changes in aggregate real demand. The firm’s optimal price in the absence of
menu costs can be expressed (ignoring constants) as
(3.3)

ln  pt (i )      1   x  ln( M t )  1     1   x   ln( Pt )  ln At (i ) .

As in Woodford (2003), we define strategic complementarity as a positive weight on the
aggregate price, rather than having all weight on the aggregate money stock.

Thus,

when     1   x  is small, prices exhibit greater complementarity. Our baseline model has
log utility in consumption (   1 ), linear labor supply (  0 ), and no intermediate goods
(  x  0 ), so that    1   x   1 . This baseline case has no strategic complementarity
(the coefficient is 0 on the aggregate price level). In our “strategic complementarities” case,
we choose the intermediate input share to generate a contract multiplier of 4, where the
contract multiplier is calculated as the ratio of the duration of real effects of a monetary policy
shock to the number of periods in a typical contract.18 This requires an intermediate share of

 x  .95 in the SDP model (  x  .67 for TDP) and yields    1   x   0.05 , or strong
strategic complementarities (a coefficient of 0.95 on the aggregate price level).19

As

emphasized by Basu (1995), more intensive use of intermediate inputs makes the response of
marginal cost to monetary shocks a function of not only the nominal wage but the extent of
price adjustment at other firms – a strategic complementarity.
Table 5 reports the values of sector-specific parameters in our models. In the SDP
model, we calibrate the standard deviation of each sector’s idiosyncratic productivity shock
18

Specifically, we follow Christiano et al. (2005) by calculating the amount of time it takes the expansion in
aggregate real demand caused by a positive policy shock to drop below 10% of its initial response. We then
multiply this number by the aggregate frequency of price changes.
19

A realistic share based on BEA Input-Output Tables would be around 0.7 (Nakamura and Steinsson, 2008b).

20

and each sector’s menu costs to generate frequencies of price change by sector of 0.33
(flexible) and 0.10 (sticky), as well as an average size of price change of 8% and 9.5% in the
respective sectors. These figures correspond closely to the frequency and average size of
price changes in the BLS data by sector, excluding energy and raw food. The required shocks
have standard deviations of 4.94% for the flexible sector and 4.75% for the sticky sector.
Expended menu costs average about 0.20% of revenue, somewhat lower than the estimates of
Levy et al. (1997) and Zbaracki et al. (2004). Finally, 30% of firms are in the flexible sector
and 70% are in the sticky, to match the BLS expenditure shares on these two groups.
For the TDP model, only the menu cost parameters differ from the SDP model. We
actually embed Calvo in an SDP model with time-varying menu costs. Each period, the menu
cost is zero for a fraction s of firms, while prohibitively large for a fraction1  s of firms.
Results and Interpretation
We now compare statistics from model simulations to the data statistics. To match the
data sample, we simulate economies with 3,100 firms in the flexible sector and 8,300 firms in
the sticky sector for 233 periods. We run 100 such simulations and report the average and
standard deviation of the statistics across the simulations. We find that models generating
large contract multipliers, either through the use of TDP or strategic complementarities,
display unrealistically high persistence and low volatility of reset price inflation. Compared
to the empirical data, reset price inflation in the models is way too persistent and stable.

21

In Table 6 we present statistics for the Calvo TDP model without strategic
complementarities. This model has a contract multiplier around two.20 Model reset inflation
rates are too smooth relative to the data, exhibiting only one-fourth the observed variance.
Reset price inflation is also too persistent (–0.04 in the model vs. –0.44 in the data), and the
discrepancy is even greater for actual inflation (0.73 in the model vs. –0.12 in the data).
Figure 5 presents the univariate IRF for model reset prices for all goods. The model IRF is
flat, meaning the average desired price fully responds on impact. Equation (3.3) shows why:
the average desired price, washing out idiosyncratic shocks At (i ) , moves one-for-one with a
change in money supply in the absence of strategic complementarities. Because money
growth follows a random walk, the result is a flat impulse response function. Figure 5 also
shows the confidence intervals from the data for comparison; the empirical IRFs are, in
contrast, highly transitory. The model and empirical bands do not overlap despite each
representing +/- two standard deviations. The contrast is similarly stark for flexible and
sticky goods separately (not shown).
Table 7 presents results from a Calvo TDP model with strategic complementarities.
The contract multiplier here is approximately four. The complementarities further depress the
volatility of reset price inflation, so that the model variance is now more than an order of
magnitude smaller than the empirical variance. The excess persistence problems seen in
Table 6 (TDP without strategic complementarities) remain. Figure 6 shows that, if anything,
the univariate IRF for reset prices builds because of the strategic complementarities, in

20

Chari et al. (2000) obtain a contract multiplier near one in a Taylor model. Using their definition (the half-life
of real effects relative to the half-life of a price), we obtain a multiplier near one in our Calvo TDP model. We
report higher numbers in the text using the Christiano et al. (2005) definition of the duration of real effects
relative to the duration of prices. The difference stems from slower-than-exponential decay of real effects.

22

contrast to the falling empirical IRF. The model IRF would build more briskly if not for the
sampling error from the finite sample of firms, as in the data.
Table 8 presents the SDP model without strategic complementarities. As in Golosov
and Lucas (2007), the contract multiplier in this model is well below one at 0.4. Inflation
persistence is markedly reduced relative to the TDP models—a result anticipated by Caballero
and Engel (2007). The persistence of reset price inflation is now within striking distance of
the data (–0.31 model vs. –0.44 data). And Figure 7 shows that the model impulse response
function for reset prices is much closer to the empirical pattern. The selection effect stressed
by Golosov and Lucas means first-responders actually overshoot the long run response after
selection effects have faded. But the persistence of actual inflation is still too high (0.38
model vs. –0.12 data for actual inflation). The gap is even larger for sticky goods (0.53 model
vs. −0.15 data). Finally, the volatility of reset price inflation is too high in this model relative
to the data, with variances more than double the actual ones for all goods and sticky goods.
Still, the discrepancies are notably smaller than for the TDP models.
The reduced persistence and greater volatility of actual inflation for the SDP model do
not reflect important fluctuations in the frequency of price changes under the SDP model.
The standard deviation of the frequency of price changes is very low for the SDP model,
equaling about 0.2 and 0.4 percentage points, respectively, for flexible and sticky goods.
Directly related, the average rate of price increase conditional on changing, t , provides little
information beyond that in actual inflation. For instance, for sticky goods under TDP the
standard deviation of  t is exactly 10 times the standard deviation of actual inflation with or
without complementarities. For the SDP models this ratio remains very similar, equaling 9.4.
Reset price inflation, in contrast, is much more volatile for the SDP model than under TDP,
23

making it a more discriminating statistic. In particular, for the TDP model with strategic
complements, the standard deviation of reset inflation for sticky goods is only 4.6 times its
standard deviation for actual inflation, whereas for the SDP model without complementarities
this ratio is 8.0. Based on the CPI data (Table 2), the observed ratio is 7.6.
In Table 9 we add strategic complementarities (intermediate share  x  0.95 ) to
produce a contract multiplier of around four. Doing so makes reset inflation much smoother,
to the point that empirical reset price inflation is almost four times as volatile as reset price
inflation in the model. Model inflation rates become more persistent as well, moving away
from the data (e.g., serial correlation −0.24 in the model vs. −0.44 in the data). Model
inflation becomes too stable; for flexible goods the model variance is less than one-eighth its
empirical counterpart. Perhaps most problematic, inflation persistence is 0.73 in the model,
about 16 standard errors from the empirical counterparts of −0.12. In short, a big contract
multiplier makes reset and actual inflation rates way too stable and persistent.
Figure 8 plots the IRF for reset prices in the SDP model with strategic
complementarities. The trajectory is largely flat, in sharp contrast to the plunging profiles in
the SDP model without complementarities (Figure 7) and in the data (Figures 1-4).
Because we can produce time series for theoretical reset price inflation in model
economies, we can use its IRF to document the impact of the “selection effect” and sampling
error on our estimated reset price inflation in the model. Figure 9 displays the response of the
theoretical reset price in the SDP model with complementarities. Note its upward sloping
trajectory. Strategic complementarities mute the size of price changes for those changing
prices, as price setters wait for the average price to respond. Thus, theoretical reset price
inflation is small on impact but accumulates over time as more firms change price.
24

Constructed reset price inflation in Figure 8 differs sharply from theoretical reset price
inflation in Figure 9 in part because of a strong “selection effect” (see Caballero and Engel,
2007, and Golosov and Lucas, 2007). The firms changing price in a given period are not an
unbiased sample of the population, but rather those who most benefit from a price change.
The response of reset price inflation is much greater on impact because only firms in the tails
of the distribution change price. For example, in response to a positive monetary shock, the
average productivity of the price changers is below the average productivity of all firms,
causing the measured reset price inflation (which depends only on price changers) to be much
higher than theoretical reset price inflation. In the long-run, the response of these two
measures is the same. As a result the selection effect also explains much of the greater
volatility found in the SDP models relative to the TDP models.
Sampling error is another reason the IRF for measured reset price inflation is flatter
than that for theoretical reset price inflation. Our theoretical plot (Figure 9) is for the
population (continuum) of firms in the model economy, whereas Figure 8 is from simulations
with a finite sample of firms to mimic the data. Our idiosyncratic shocks (serial correlation
0.7) are less persistent than our aggregate shocks, which follow a random walk. In finite
samples the idiosyncratic shocks do not wash out, imparting less persistence to reset price
inflation.21 Below we present results with bi-monthly data from all cities, a much larger
sample with correspondingly lesser sampling error.

21

We believe our simulations are more affected by sampling error than is the actual data. As mentioned earlier,
split empirical samples with half as many items have only modestly higher variance of reset price inflation than
the whole sample. Split simulation samples, in contrast, have much higher variance than the whole sample.
Note that the models appear to understate inflation’s true volatility. Therefore, the sampling error captured by
the models, calibrated to correspond to the data measures, will exert an exaggerated impact on model statistics
relative to its impact on the actual data.

25

A potential explanation for our negative findings (too persistent IRFs in models with
big contract multipliers) is that we have neglected endogenous monetary policy, which can
reduce persistence in the presence of permanent shocks. The literature has estimated big
contract multipliers over long periods (such as 1950 to 2000), but the Fed may have reduced
inflation persistence and volatility dramatically in the 20 years covered by our sample (19882008). Authors have documented regime changes in U.S. inflation over the past two decades
(e.g., Nason, 2006), as well as for many inflation targeting countries (e.g., Benati, 2008).
In this spirit, we simulate the SDP model with complementarities and a version of
endogenous monetary policy. Specifically, we set  m  0.6 (the response of money growth
to lagged real money balances) in equation (3.2) to match the serial correlation of nominal
PCE growth (–0.31) over our sample period. Here money growth offsets movements in the
real money stock. As shown in Table 10 (summary statistics) and Figure 10 (univariate IRFs
for flexible and sticky groups), this specification succeeds in driving down the persistence of
reset price inflation to levels observed in the data (e.g., −0.43 in the model vs. −0.44 in the
data for all goods). Moreover, Figure 10 depicts a model IRF for reset prices that is spot on
with the empirical estimates. The required endogenous monetary policy involves price level
targeting rather than more conventional inflation targeting. Gorodnichenko and Shapiro
(2007) argue that the Greenspan Fed did target the price level.
Still, there are two problems with this endogenous monetary policy scenario. First,
there is no longer a contract multiplier above one.22

22

Second and more problematic,

This is what one structural VAR shows for the last twenty years. We re-ran the structural quarterly VAR of
Altig et al. (2005) on our 1988-2008 sample. The estimated IRF to a monetary shock exhibits no contract
multiplier for output and a very transitory inflation response. But the point estimates are not at all precise given
the short sample. The 20 years afford only 33 degrees of freedom (dropping the first 4 quarters to accommodate
4 lags of 11 variables), so we do not systematically explore structural VARs with many variables.

26

endogenous money growth saps inflation of most of its volatility. Empirical reset price
inflation has six times the variance in the endogenous money model, and empirical inflation
has thirteen times the variance in the model. The intuition is this: if endogenous monetary
policy undoes the impact of complementarities on inflation persistence, then there is little
reason for reset and actual prices to respond. If prices are sticky, one will not want to
incorporate very transitory shocks into new prices. Thus we are left with the problem of
reconciling a model with strong complementarities simultaneously with the observed
persistence and volatility of empirical inflation rates. This “excess smoothness” problem is
even worse for the population of prices than for finite samples presented in Table 10.
Sampling error dominates the variances in finite simulations, whereas it appears to account
for a much smaller fraction of the empirical variances.
Another robustness check we perform is to replace the aggregate monetary shock with
an aggregate productivity shock. Indeed, Altig et al. (2005) argue that shocks to aggregate
productivity are more important for inflation movements than are monetary policy shocks.
With random walk aggregate productivity, instead of random walk money, our results are
virtually identical (e.g., for SDP with complementarities, with or without endogenous money).
Finally, one could argue that we failed to entertain large, temporary sectoral shocks
that do not wash out in the aggregate. Boivin, Giannoni and Mihov (2009) provide evidence
that disaggregated inflation rates are much more volatile and transitory than aggregate
inflation. But strong strategic complementarities make it hard to explain large responses to
transitory shocks, whether they be aggregate or sectoral. And we calibrated our aggregate
shocks to generate the observed variability of nominal consumption growth. Thus adding
sectoral shocks (or more aggregate shocks) to generate more realistic volatility of reset price

27

inflation may require unrealistically high volatility of real consumption growth and/or its
covariance with inflation.
We now recap some of our key findings. Figure 11 contains bar charts of data
moments vs. moments from finite sample simulations of the SDP model with strong
complementarities. The top panel contains serial correlations, and the bottom panel standard
deviations.

Without endogenous monetary policy (“SDP Comps”), the model seriously

overstates the persistence and understates the volatility of reset and actual inflation.
Endogenous monetary policy (“SDP Endo M”) largely closes the persistence gaps, but widens
the volatility gaps.
In Figure 12 we provide the same model vs. data statistics, only for much larger bimonthly samples. Recall that we have roughly six times the prices per bi-month from all
cities as we have monthly prices per month from the top three cities. (So this greatly reduces
the impact of sampling error for both the data and model statistics.) The bi-monthly serial
correlations (top panel of Figure 12) are similar to those in the monthly samples. Without
endogenous monetary policy the SDP model with strong complementarities exhibits excessive
persistence, with endogenous monetary policy it does not.23 But, again, endogenous monetary
policy drains most of the volatility out of both reset and actual inflation rates (bottom panel of
Figure 12). We are unable to reconcile strong complementarities with both the transitory and
volatile behavior we observe in reset price inflation.
Although not shown, a model that comes closest to fitting all the empirical moments in
Table 2 is an SDP model with endogenous monetary policy and an intermediate goods share

23

In the case of the SDP model without endogenous money, the serial correlation of reset price inflation rises
(from -0.32 monthly to +0.30 bi-monthly) because sampling error is so diminished.

28

of only 1/3.

This degree of complementarities is not sufficient to produce a contract

multiplier above 1, however, even in the absence of endogenous monetary policy.

4. Conclusion
A large empirical literature has estimated that monetary policy shocks affect real
variables for several years, much longer than the duration of nominal prices. A popular
explanation

for

this

contract

multiplier

combines

sticky

prices

and

strategic

complementarities. The complementarities make reset prices build slowly after permanent
shocks, prolonging the real effects beyond the duration of nominal prices. That is, strategic
complementarities impart persistence to reset price inflation. We do not see persistence in
reset price inflation using data underlying the U.S. CPI from 1988-2008.
Temporary shocks (or endogenous monetary policy) might explain the low persistence
of reset price inflation, but at the expense of failing to generate as much volatility as seen in
reset price inflation in the U.S. from 1988-2008. Strong strategic complementarities severely
dampen the volatility of reset price inflation when shocks are transitory. In short, we fail to
find a model specification with strong complementarities that fits both the low persistence and
nontrivial volatility of observed reset price inflation. This is true whether we entertain
monetary or productivity shocks, and even accounting for how sampling error and temporary
sales affect the persistence and volatility of reset price inflation.
Models of complementarities not explored here might be able to reconcile low
persistence of reset price inflation with a high contract multiplier. But our intuition is that
other complementarities (e.g., sticky wages rather than sticky intermediates) have similar
predictions for the persistence of reset price inflation. A more promising reconciliation may

29

involve sticky information rather than strategic complementarities. The contract multiplier
might be high in response to a subset of shocks about which firms have sticky information.
Meanwhile, the variance and persistence of reset price inflation may be dominated by shocks
about which firms have more flexible information.

Mackowiak and Wiederholt (2008)

present a DSGE model in which this is precisely the case.24
Alternatively, the contract multiplier may not be so high after all. Perhaps the high
inflation persistence over longer samples reflects the persistence of monetary shocks rather
than complementarities. The low inflation persistence of recent decades could be because the
Fed stopped adding persistence, revealing low endogenous persistence.
Our conclusions overlap with those of several recent studies. Cogley and Sargent
(2001), Primiceri (2006), and Cogley and Sbordone (2008) all argue that U.S. inflation
persistence over long samples stems from changes in trend inflation (i.e., monetary regime
changes). They do not rely on a high contract multiplier per se. Klenow and Willis (2006)
and Kryvtsov and Midrigan (2008) find it difficult to reconcile specific types of strategic
complementarities with, respectively, large idiosyncratic price changes and countercyclical
inventories/sales. Gopinath, Itskhoki and Rigobon (2007) and Gopinath and Itskhoki (2008),
in contrast, see strategic complementarities behind the incomplete pass-through of exchange
rates to import prices.

24

Klenow and Willis (2007) find slow responses of individual price changes to the previous price changes of
other items. This evidence is in line with sticky information (more so than strategic complementarities).

30

Appendix
This appendix provides a more detailed exposition of the price-setting models and
discusses the solution method we used.
A representative household has discounted utility


 Ct1

U 0  E0   t 
t 0

 1 



L1t 


1  

where C is composite consumption and L is labor supply. Composite consumption is a CES
aggregate of individual consumption varieties c(i) :


(A1)

1
  1
11/ 
C    c(i)
di  .
 0


The household’s budget constraint is
1

PC
t t  Bt 1  (1  rt ) Bt  Wt Lt  Pt   t (i ) di
0

where P is the nominal price of a unit of composite consumption, W is the nominal wage, Bt
denotes holdings of state-contingent bonds (in zero net supply) that pay off in period t at
(gross) nominal interest rate (1  rt ) , and  (i ) are the (real) profits of firm i .25
The household chooses bond holdings, labor supply, and consumption of individual
varieties to satisfy the following first-order conditions:

(A2)



 Ct 1  Pt 

1   Et 1  rt 1  

Ct  Pt 1 





31

(A3)

Wt
  Lt Ct
Pt

(A4)

ct (i )  pt (i ) 


Ct
 Pt 



.

Turning to production, there are a continuum of monopolistically competitive firms
indexed by i , which denotes the one variety each produces. Firm i has productivity A(i ) and
combines labor L(i ) and a composite intermediate good X (i ) to produce good i :
(A5)

yt (i)  At (i) Lt (i)1 x X t (i) x

where  x denotes the share of the composite intermediate good. The intermediate composite
is a CES aggregate of individual intermediate goods:


(A6)

1
  1
X (i )    xt (i, j )11/ dj 
 0


where x(i, j ) is the quantity of intermediate good j used by firm i. Note that symmetry
between (A6) and the consumption aggregator (A1) means that the unit price of X is equal to
P, the unit price of the consumption composite. Firms are grouped into one of two sectors, to
be indexed by s , with the main difference between sectors being how frequently firms change
price. A firm’s productivity is subject to idiosyncratic shocks of the following form:

ln At (i)   ln At 1 (i)   t (i)
where  t (i )  iid N  0,  A2 , s  .

1

1
 1
1
25
The unit price of composite consumption is the dual of consumption aggregator (A1): Pt    pt (i ) di  .
0


32

Firm i in sector s maximizes its discounted (real) profits


E0  0,t  t (i)
t 0

C 
where 0,t   t  t 
 C0 

(A7)



is the stochastic discount factor and current profits are given by

 t (i) 

pt (i)
W
W
yt (i)  t Lt (i)  X t (i)  kt (i) It (i) t .
Pt
Pt
Pt

A firm’s profits equal revenue less input costs, including the cost of changing prices (the last
term). I t (i ) is an indicator function for whether firm i changes its price in period t at a cost of
kt (i ) units of labor. For the SDP models, we set kt (i )  ks . That is, in the SDP models the
menu cost is fixed over time for each firm, but does vary across firms depending on the firm’s
sector. For the TDP models, kt (i)  {0, } . Specifically, we mimic the Calvo model by
having firms in sector s face a menu cost of 0 with probability s and a menu cost of ¥ with
probability 1  s . These Calvo menu cost realizations are independent both across firms
within sectors and over time.
Firm choices of intermediates satisfy a first-order condition comparable to consumer
choices of final consumption varieties:
(A8)

xt (i, j )  pt ( j ) 


X t (i)  Pt 



.

Setting production equal to total demand (from consumers and others firms) for firm i yields

33

1

 p (i ) 
yt (i)  ct (i)  xt ( j, i) dj   t 
 Pt 
0



(A9)



 Ct  X t 

1

0

where X t  X t (i ) di . The aggregate resource constraints for output and labor are then


(A10)

1
1
  1
 Yt and Lt    Lt (i )  kt (i ) I t (i )  di .
Ct  X t   yt (i)11/ di 
 0

0



Finally, we assume a cash-in-advance constraint on a consumer’s nominal spending

PC
t t  Mt .
In turn, we assume the money supply evolves as follows:
  M t 1 
M
  ln 
 P
  Pt 1 

ln M t    ln M t 1   m ln 


   t


M 
where t  N  0,  m2  , and ln   is steady-state aggregate real demand.
 P
For setting up the firm’s value function, it is useful to substitute a few variables out of
the firm’s profit function. This (along with one assumption described below) will allow us to
express the firm’s value as a function of only three states: pt 1 (i ) / Pt , At (i ), and M t / Pt . First,
we use firm cost-minimization to substitute X t (i ) out of profits (A7) using
(A11)

X t (i ) 

 X Wt Lt (i )
.
1 X
Pt

Second, we use the firm’s production function to substitute Lt (i ) out of profits:
Lt (i )  1   X 

X

 Wt 
 X

Pt 


34

 X

yt (i )
.
At (i )

We next substitute yt (i ) out of profits using the demand curve (A9) and aggregate resource
constraint Yt  Ct  X t , and substitute Wt / Pt out of profits using labor supply (A3). Thus,
(real) profits are given by

1

(A12)

 p (i ) 
 t (i )  Yt  t 
 Pt 



 Lt Ct  Yt  ptP(i) 
 t 

1 x
1   x   x x At (i )


 1 x



 kt (i ) I t (i ) Lt Ct .

We then log-linearize the production function (A5), labor supply (A3), resource constraints
(A10), and equation (A11) around the flexible-price steady state to express Y t and Lˆt as
linear functions of Cˆt , where ^’s denote log deviations from steady state values. Specifically,
 C
X

 Y    Y x 


Lˆt  
1   1    X

x

Y



 Cˆ t


 

where C , X and Y denote steady state values, and
Yt  1   x  Lˆt   x Cˆ t .
Finally, the cash-in-advance constraint implies Ct  M t / Pt . Thus, profits – equation (A12) –
can be expressed as a function of just the three state variables pt 1 (i ) / Pt , At (i ), and M t / Pt .
(In the Calvo case, the menu cost kt (i ) is a fourth state variable.)
To write the firm’s value function in terms of these same three state variables, we
must make one more simplifying assumption. The state space of the firm’s problem is
actually infinite dimensional since the evolution of the price level depends on the entire
distribution of all firms’ prices and productivity levels. In the spirit of Krusell and Smith
(1998), we assume that firms perceive the evolution of the price level as being a function of a

35

single moment of this distribution. Specifically,
M 
Pt
  t  .
Pt 1
 Pt 1 

Nakamura and Steinsson (2008b) show that this assumption makes the model tractable while
still providing highly accurate forecasts of the price level.
In the end, the firm’s value function takes the recursive form

 pt 1 (i )
 p (i )
M 
M  
, At (i ), t   max   t (i )  t ,t 1EtVt 1  t , At 1 (i ), t 1  
Pt 
Pt 1  
pt (i ) 
 Pt
 Pt 1


Vt 

where t ,t 1 is the stochastic discount factor between periods t and t  1 . The model is then
solved using value function iteration, with the additional requirement that the forecast rule
 be consistent with the aggregation of firm pricing decisions.

36

Table 1
Constructing Reset Price Inflation: A Simple Example
Period 0

Period 1

Period 2

1

1.22

1.22

20%

0%

1.22

1.22

20%

0%

1

1.22

0%

20%

1.22

1.22

Reset Inflation for Good B

20%

0%

Inflation (  t )

10%

10%

Inflation for changers ( t )

20%

20%

* )
Reset inflation ( 
t

20%

0%

Price of Good A
Inflation for Good A
Reset price for Good A

1

Reset Inflation for Good A
Price of Good B

1

Inflation for Good B
Reset price for Good B

1

Note: The example assumes equal expenditure shares, equaling one half, for both goods. It also assumes that
both Good A and Good B exhibited a price change in period 0, establishing the base price for calculating reset
price inflation for period 1. The number 1.22 in the table represents exp(0.2) to two decimal places.

37

Table 2
Summary Statistics for Reset and Actual Price Inflation
All
Goods

Statistic

Flexible
Goods

Sticky
Goods

x

Serial correlation of

1.30%
(0.06)

1.21%
(0.06)

*

−0.47
(0.05)

−0.41
(0.05)

−0.49
(0.06)



0.18%
(0.01)

0.41%
(0.02)

0.16%
(0.01)

−0.12
(0.06)

−0.10
(0.06)

−0.15
(0.08)

Standard deviation of
Serial correlation of

*

0.99%
(0.05)

Standard deviation of



Notes: All data are from the CPI-RDB. Samples run from January 1989 through May 2008. The threshold
frequency of regular price changes is one-sixth per month: quote-lines in ELIs with average frequency higher
than one-sixth are in the flexible group, and those with lower frequency are in the sticky group. All series are
monthly, are HP-filtered with smoothing parameter 1,000,000, and are seasonally adjusted. Standard errors
are in parentheses.

38

Table 3
Summary Statistics Excluding Sale Prices

All
Goods

Statistic

Flexible
Goods

Sticky
Goods

x

Serial correlation of

1.38%
(0.06)

1.13%
(0.05)

*

−0.41
(0.05)

−0.42
(0.05)

−0.40
(0.04)



0.14%
(0.01)

0.39%
(0.02)

0.10%
(0.01)

−0.05
(0.06)

−0.05
(0.06)

0.09
(0.08)

Standard deviation of
Serial correlation of

*

0.95%
(0.04)

Standard deviation of



Notes: All data are from the CPI-RDB. Samples run from January 1989 through May 2008. The threshold
frequency of regular price changes is one-sixth per month: quote-lines in ELIs with average frequency higher
than one-sixth are in the flexible group, and those with lower frequency are in the sticky group. All series are
monthly, are HP-filtered with smoothing parameter 1,000,000, and are seasonally adjusted. Standard errors
are in parentheses.

39

Table 4
Economy-Wide Model Parameters

Baseline

Strategic
Complements

Endogenous
Monetary
Policy

0.961/12

Same

Same

Coefficient of Relative Risk Aversion (  )

1

Same

Same

Inverse of Frisch elasticity of labor supply ( )

0

Same

Same

0.333

Same

Same

4

Same

Same

0
0

0.95
0.67

0.95
-

0.7

Same

Same

Mean Growth Rate of Money (  )

0.2%

Same

Same

S.D. of Innovation to Money Growth (  m )

0.48%

0.48%

0.41%

0

0

-0.6

Parameter

Monthly Discount Factor (  )

Steady-state Labor Supply ( L )
Elasticity of demand (  )
Intermediate Input Share (  x )
SDP
TDP
Persistence of Idio. Productivity Shock (  )

Money Growth’s reaction to M/P (  m )

Notes: Parameter values apply to both the TDP and SDP models, unless otherwise noted. As shown in the text,
prices are strategic complements if

   1   x   1 .

The target steady state labor supply is obtained by

varying the utility function parameter  . The intermediate input share in the non-baseline cases is chosen to
generate a contract multiplier of 4. The parameters for the money growth process are chosen to match the mean
growth rate of inflation, the standard deviation of nominal non-shelter PCE, and, for the “endogenous monetary
policy” case, the serial correlation of nominal PCE.

40

Table 5
Sector-Specific Model Parameters

Parameter

Menu Costs (SDP Only)
Flexible
Sticky
S.D. of Idiosyncratic Productivity Shocks
Flexible (  A, f )
Sticky (  A,s )
Probability of Zero Menu Cost (TDP Only)
Flexible (  f )
Sticky ( s )
Sector Weights
Flexible
Sticky

Baseline

Strategic
Complements

Endogenous
Monetary
Policy

0.168%
0.218%

Same
Same

Same
Same

4.93%

4.94%

4.94%

4.70%

4.75%

4.75%

0.333

Same

-

0.100

Same

-

0.3000
0.7000

Same
Same

Same
Same

Notes: Expended menu costs are evaluated at the steady state wage and scaled by steady state revenue,

s k sWSS
PSSYSS

.

Although the expended menu costs are similar across sectors, the labor cost ( k s ) of changing prices is actually
more than four times greater in the sticky sector because the frequency of price change (s ) is 3/10 as large in the
sticky sector. The labor cost of changing prices also varies greatly across the model specifications. One can show
expended menu costs are proportional to s k s (1   x ) , so specifications with higher intermediate input shares
have larger labor costs of changing prices.

41

Table 6
Summary Statistics on Reset and Actual Price Inflation
TDP Model (no strategic complementarities)

All
Goods

Statistic

Flexible
Goods

Sticky
Goods

x

Serial correlation of

0.51%
(0.03)

0.49%
(0.03)

*

−0.04
(0.07)

−0.07
(0.07)

−0.04
(0.07)



0.12%
(0.01)

0.21%
(0.02)

0.10%
(0.01)

0.73
(0.05)

0.60
(0.05)

0.84
(0.04)

Standard deviation of
Serial correlation of

*

0.49%
(0.03)

Standard deviation of



Notes: Statistics are averages across 100 model simulations, each of 233 periods. Standard deviations across
simulations are in parentheses. Each simulation consists of 3,100 firms in the flexible sector and 8,300 firms in
the sticky sector.

42

Table 7
Summary Statistics on Reset and Actual Price Inflation
TDP Model (strategic complementarities)

All
Goods

Statistic

Flexible
Goods

Sticky
Goods

x

Serial correlation of

0.28%
(0.01)

0.32%
(0.02)

*

−0.02
(0.07)

−0.12
(0.07)

−0.04
(0.07)



0.08%
(0.01)

0.12%
(0.01)

0.07%
(0.01)

0.80
(0.05)

0.62
(0.06)

0.87
(0.04)

Standard deviation of
Serial correlation of

*

0.29%
(0.02)

Standard deviation of



Notes: Statistics are averages across 100 model simulations, each of 233 periods. Standard deviations across
simulations are in parentheses. Each simulation consists of 3,100 firms in the flexible sector and 8,300 firms in
the sticky sector.

43

Table 8
Summary Statistics on Reset and Actual Price Inflation
SDP Model (no strategic complementarities)

All
Goods

Flexible
Goods

Sticky
Goods

1.79%
(0.08)

1.34%
(0.07)

2.01%
(0.10)

*

−0.31
(0.06)

−0.38
(0.06)

−0.29
(0.06)



0.28%
(0.02)

0.40%
(0.02)

0.25%
(0.02)

0.38
(0.07)

0.16
(0.07)

0.53
(0.06)

Statistic

x
Standard deviation of

Serial correlation of

Standard deviation of
Serial correlation of

*



Notes: Statistics are averages across 100 model simulations, each of 233 periods. Standard deviations across
simulations are in parentheses. Each simulation consists of 3,100 firms in the flexible sector and 8,300 firms in
the sticky sector.

44

Table 9
Summary Statistics on Reset and Actual Price Inflation
SDP Model (strategic complementarities)

All
Goods

Flexible
Goods

Sticky
Goods

0.52%
(0.02)

0.40%
(0.02)

0.67%
(0.03)

*

−0.24
(0.06)

−0.34
(0.05)

−0.27
(0.06)

Standard deviation of



0.11%
(0.01)

0.14%
(0.01)

0.11%
(0.01)

Serial correlation of



0.73
(0.05)

0.43
(0.08)

0.76
(0.05)

Statistic

x

*

Standard deviation of

Serial correlation of

Notes: Statistics are averages across 100 model simulations, each of 233 periods. Standard deviations across
simulations are in parentheses. Each simulation consists of 3,100 firms in the flexible sector and 8,300 firms in
the sticky sector.

45

Table 10
Summary Statistics on Reset and Actual Price Inflation
SDP Model (endogenous monetary policy)

All
Goods

Statistic

Flexible
Goods

Sticky
Goods

x

Serial correlation of

0.37%
(0.02)

0.53%
(0.03)

*

−0.43
(0.05)

−0.46
(0.05)

−0.45
(0.04)



0.05%
(0.002)

0.10%
(0.004)

0.04%
(0.002)

0.12
(0.06)

−0.04
(0.06)

0.17
(0.07)

Standard deviation of
Serial correlation of

*

0.41%
(0.02)

Standard deviation of



Notes: Statistics are averages across 100 model simulations, each of 233 periods. Standard deviations across
simulations are in parentheses. Each simulation consists of 3,100 firms in the flexible sector and 8,300 firms in
the sticky sector.

46

Figure 1
Empirical Impulse Response of Reset Prices, All Goods

Figure 2
Empirical Impulse Response of Reset Prices, All Goods, Excluding Sale Prices

Notes for Figures 1 and 2: Dashed lines denote 95% confidence interval. Estimates reflect
accumulated responses to a univariate VAR for reset price inflation with 6 monthly lags.

47

Figure 3
Empirical Impulse Response of Reset Prices, Flexible Goods

Figure 4
Empirical Impulse Response of Reset Prices, Sticky Goods

Notes for Figures 3 and 4: Dashed lines denote 95% confidence interval. Estimates reflect accumulated
responses to a univariate VAR for reset price inflation with 6 monthly lags.

48

Figure 5
Impulse Response of Reset Prices, All Goods
(TDP Model, No Strategic Complementarities)

Figure 6
Impulse Response of Reset Prices, All Goods
(TDP Model, Strategic Complementarities)

Notes for Figures 5 and 6: Dashed lines denote 95% confidence interval. Estimates reflect accumulated
responses to a univariate VAR for reset price inflation with 6 monthly lags. Shaded area denotes the 95%
confidence interval for estimates based on CPI-RDB data.

49

Figure 7
Impulse Response of Reset Prices, All Goods
(SDP Model, no Strategic Complementarities)

Figure 8
Impulse Response of Reset Prices, All Goods
(SDP Model with Strategic Complementarities)

Notes for Figures 7 and 8: Dashed lines denote 95% confidence interval. Estimates reflect accumulated
responses to a univariate VAR for reset price inflation with 6 monthly lags. Shaded area denotes the 95%
confidence interval for estimates based on CPI-RDB data.

50

Figure 9
Impulse Response of Theoretical Reset Prices, All Goods
(SDP Model with Strategic Complementarities)

Note for Figure 9: Estimates reflect accumulated responses to a univariate VAR for reset price inflation with 6
monthly lags.

Figure 10
Impulse Response of Reset Prices, All Goods
(SDP Model, Strategic Complementarities, Endogenous Money)

Notes for Figure 10: Dashed lines denote 95% confidence interval. Estimates reflect accumulated responses to a
univariate VAR for reset price inflation with 6 monthly lags. Shaded area denotes the 95% confidence interval
for estimates based on CPI-RDB data.

51

Figure 11

52

Figure 12

53

References
Altig, David, Lawrence Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum and Jesper Linde (2005), “FirmSpecific Capital, Nominal Rigidities and the Business Cycle,” NBER Working Paper
11034 (January).
Ball, Laurence and David Romer (1990), “Real Rigidities and the Non-neutrality of Money,”
Review of Economic Studies 57 (April): 183-203.
Basu, Susanto (1995), “Intermediate Goods and Business Cycles: Implications for
Productivity and Welfare,” American Economic Review 85 (June): 512-531.
Bernanke, Ben S., Jean Boivin, and Piotr Eliasz (2005), “Measuring the Effects of Monetary
Policy: A Factor-Augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 120 (February): 387-422.
Benati, Luca (2008), “Investigating Inflation Persistence across Monetary Regimes,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (January): 1005-1060.
Blanchard, Olivier and Jordi Gali (2007), “Real Rigidities and the New Keynesian Model,”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Proceedings of the Conference on Quantitative
Evidence on Price Determination, 39 (February): 35-65.
Boivin, Jean, Marc Giannoni and Ilian Mihov (2009), “Sticky Prices and Monetary Policy:
Evidence from Disaggregated U.S. Data,” forthcoming in the American Economic
Review.
Broda, Christian and David E. Weinstein (2006), “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (May): 541-585.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Eduardo M.R.A. Engel (2007), “Price Stickiness in Ss Models: New
Intrepretations of Old Results,” Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (September): 100121.
Calvo, Guillermo A. (1983), “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal
of Monetary Economics 12 (September): 383-398.
Carvalho, Carlos (2006), “Heterogeneity in Price Stickiness and the Real Effects of Monetary
Shocks,” Frontiers of Macroeconomics 2 (Article 1).
Available at :
http://www.bepress.com/bejm/frontiers/vol2/iss1/art1.
Chari, V. V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan (2000), “Sticky Price Models of the
Business Cycle: Can the Contract Multiplier Solve the Persistence Problem?”
Econometrica 68 (September): 1151–1179.

54

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans (1999), “Monetary Policy
Shocks: What Have We Learned and to What End?,” Handbook of Macroeconomics,
volume 1A, Elsevier: New York, John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans (2005), “Nominal Rigidities
and the Dynamic Effects of Shocks to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy
113 (February): 1-45.
Cogley, Timothy and Thomas J. Sargent (2001), “Evolving Post World War II U.S. Inflation
Dynamics,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 16: 331-373.
Cogley, Timothy and Argia M. Sbordone (2008), “Trend Inflation, Indexation, and Inflation
Persistence in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” American Economic Review 98
(December): 2101-2126.
Danziger, Leif (1999), “A Dynamic Economy with Costly Price Adjustments,” American
Economic Review 89 (September): 878-901.
Dotsey, Michael and Robert King (2006), “Pricing, Production, and Persistence,” Journal of
the European Economic Association 4 (September): 893-928.
Dotsey, Michael, Robert King and Alexander Wolman (1999), “State-Dependent Pricing and
the General Equilibrium Dynamics of Money and Output,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 114 (May): 655-690.
Gertler, Mark and John Leahy (2008), “A Phillips Curve with an Ss Foundation,” Journal of
Political Economy 116 (June): 533-572.
Golosov, Mikhail and Robert E. Lucas, Jr. (2007), “Menu Costs and Phillips Curves,”
Journal of Political Economy 115 (April): 171–199.
Gopinath, Gita, Oleg Itskhoki, and Roberto Rigobon (2007), “Currency Choice and Exchange
Rate Pass-through,” NBER Working Paper 13432 (September).
Gopinath, Gita and Oleg Itskhoki (2008), “Frequency of Price Adjustment and Pass-through,”
NBER Working Paper 14200 (July).
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy and Matthew D. Shapiro (2007), “Monetary Policy When Potential
Output is Uncertain: Understanding the Growth Gamble of the 1990s,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 54 (May): 1132-1162.
Hendel, Igal and Aviv Nevo (2006), “Measuring the Implications of Consumer Inventory
Behavior,” Econometrica 74 (November): 1637-1673.
Kimball, Miles S. (1995), “The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist Model,”
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 27 (November): 1241-1277.

55

Klenow, Peter J. and Kryvtsov, Oleksiy (2008), “State-Dependent or Time-Dependent
Pricing: Does It Matter For Recent U.S. Inflation?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123
(August): 863-904.
Klenow, Peter J. and Jonathan L. Willis (2006), “Real Rigidities and Nominal Price
Changes,” unpublished paper (March).
Klenow, Peter J. and Jonathan L. Willis (2007), “Sticky Information and Sticky Prices,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (September): 79-99.
Krusell, Per and Anthony Smith (1998), “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity and the
Macroeconomy,” Journal of Political Economy 106 (October): 867-896.
Kryvtsov, Oleksiy and Virgiliu Midrigan (2008), “Inventories, Markups, and Real Rigidities
in Menu Cost Models,” unpubished paper (April).
Levy, Daniel, Mark Bergen, Shantanu Dutta, and Robert Venable (1997), “The Magnitude of
Menu Costs: Direct Evidence from Large U.S. Supermarket Chains,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 112 (August): 791-825.
Mackowiak, Bartosz and Frank Smets (2008), “Implications of Micro Price Data for
Macroeconomic Models,” CEPR Discussion Paper 6961.
Mackowiak, Bartosz and Mirko Wiederholt (2008), “Business Cycle Dynamics Under
Rational Inattention,” unpublished paper (November).
Midrigan, Virgiliu (2008), “Menu Costs, Multiproduct Firms, and Aggregate Fluctuations,”
unpublished paper, New York University.
Nakamura, Emi and Jon Steinsson (2008a), “Five Facts About Prices: A Reevaluation of
Menu Cost Models,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (November): 1415-1464.
Nakamura, Emi and Jon Steinsson (2008b), “Monetary Non-Neutrality in a Multi-Sector
Menu Cost Model,” NBER Working Paper 14001 (May).
Nason, James M. (2006), “Instability in U.S. Inflation: 1967-2005,” Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta Economic Review (2nd quarter): 39-59.
Primiceri, Giorgio E. (2006), “Why Inflation Rose and Fell: Policymakers’ Beliefs and US
Postwar Stabilization Policy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (August): 867-901.
Romer, David H. and Christina D. Romer (2004), “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks:
Derivation and Implications,” American Economic Review 94 (September): 1055-1084.

56

Shiller, Robert J. (1991), “Arithmetic Repeat Sales Price Estimators,” Journal of Housing
Economics 1 (March): 110-126.
Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson (2006), “Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to
Forecast?”, NBER Working Paper 12324 (June).
Taylor, John B. (1980), “Aggregated Dynamics and Staggered Contracts,” Journal of
Political Economy 88 (February): 1-24.
Woodford, Michael (2003), Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary
Policy, Princeton University Press.
Zbaracki, Mark J., Mark Ritson, Daniel Levy, Shantanu Dutta, and Mark Bergen (2004)
“Managerial and Customer Costs of Price Adjustment: Direct Evidence from Industrial
Markets,” Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (May): 514-533.

57

