                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  FOREIGN OWNERSHIP AND FIRM PERFORMANCE:
              EMERGING-MARKET ACQUISITIONS IN THE UNITED STATES

                                           Anusha Chari
                                            Wenjie Chen
                                      Kathryn M.E. Dominguez

                                        Working Paper 14786
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14786


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2009




We thank Patricia Dechow, Jeff Smith, Jim Levinsohn, James Hines, Paolo Pasquariello, Matias Busso,
Taryn Dinkelman, Dean Yang, Nirvikar Singh, and participants in the UM Development seminar,
the UM IPC lunch group, the NIPFP conference at the Indian Ministry of Finance, the Australian Treasury,
the Reserve Bank of Australia, and North Carolina State University for helpful comments and advice.
We are grateful to the International Policy Center at the Ford School of Public Policy for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Anusha Chari, Wenjie Chen, and Kathryn M.E. Dominguez. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Foreign Ownership and Firm Performance: Emerging-Market Acquisitions in the United States
Anusha Chari, Wenjie Chen, and Kathryn M.E. Dominguez
NBER Working Paper No. 14786
March 2009, Revised May 2009
JEL No. F21,F23,G34

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper examines the recent upsurge in foreign acquisitions of U.S. firms, specifically focusing
on acquisitions made by firms located in emerging markets. Neoclassical theory predicts that, on net,
capital should flow from countries that are capital-abundant to countries that are capital-scarce. Yet
increasingly emerging market firms are acquiring assets in developed countries. Using transaction-specific
acquisition data and firm-level accounting data we evaluate the post-acquisition performance of publicly
traded U.S. firms that have been acquired by firms from emerging markets over the period 1980-2007.
Our empirical methodology uses a difference-in-differences approach combined with propensity score
matching to create an appropriate control group of non-acquired firms. The results suggest that emerging
country acquirers tend to choose U.S. targets that are larger in size (measured as sales, total assets
and employment), relative to matched non-acquired U.S. firms before the acquisition year. In the years
following the acquisition, sales and employment decline while profitability rises, suggesting significant
restructuring of the target firms.


Anusha Chari                                        Kathryn M.E. Dominguez
301 Gardner Hall                                    University of Michigan
CB#3305, Department of Economics                    Department of Economics and Ford School
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill         Weill Hall
Chapel Hill, NC 27599                               Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER                                            and NBER
achari@unc.edu                                      kathrynd@umich.edu

Wenjie Chen
Department of Economics
Lorch Hall
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
wenjiec@umich.edu
1.       Introduction
         This paper examines the recent upsurge in foreign acquisitions of U.S. firms, specifically
focusing on acquisitions made by firms located in emerging markets. Neoclassical theory predicts that,
on net, capital should flow from countries that are capital-abundant to countries that are capital-scarce.1
Yet increasingly emerging-market firms are acquiring assets in the developed world. In particular, the
recent spate of cross-border acquisitions by Indian and Chinese companies is the subject of heated debate
in policy circles. For example, the acquisition bid by CNOOC, the Chinese state-owned oil company, to
takeover Unocal met with considerable resistance in Washington and was ultimately thwarted. This paper
provides a systematic analysis of what happens to U.S. firms when emerging-market acquisitions are
successfully completed. Using transaction-specific acquisition data and firm-level accounting data, the
goal of this study is to determine how U.S. firms that are acquired by firms from emerging markets fare
relative to their non-acquired counterparts.
         Evidence from developed-market foreign direct investment (FDI) flows to emerging markets
suggests that foreign ownership is associated with improvements in plant productivity (Aitken and
Harrision, 1999, Perez-Gonzales, 2005, Arnold and Javorcik, 2005, Petkova, 2007).2 The sources of
productivity gains are generally attributed to the ability of foreign multinationals to transfer superior
technology, bring organizational capital and provide access to international capital markets (Caves, 1996).
In the case of recent emerging-market acquisitions, while the role of sovereign wealth funds and the
build-up of U.S. dollar reserves in emerging-markets are seen as motivations for acquisitions in
developed-markets, the productivity-improving role of technology transfers from emerging- to developed-
markets are not obvious.
         Traditional theories of FDI also rely on comparative input costs or market access as the
motivating rationale for investment flows from developed to emerging markets. Whereas industrial
country acquirers often seek lower labor costs in emerging-markets, emerging-market acquirers may
relocate (or insource) manufacturing activity while keeping existing distribution networks in the host
country of the acquired business. These differences in motivation for FDI may, in turn, suggest that the
post-acquisition performance of target firms will be influenced by the country of origin of the acquiring
firm.


1
  According to estimates by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the developing economies as a group had a
current account surplus of $640 billion in 2007 (IMF, 2007). Because the financial counterpart to this surplus is a
deficit on the financial accounts, it represents the net capital outflow to the industrial economies. Just two years
earlier, in 2005, net capital flowed in the other direction (the developing economies as a group reported a gross
capital inflow of $720 billion).
2
  FDI includes “Greenfield” investment in new assets in a foreign country, and acquisition of pre-existing foreign
assets (also termed “Brownfield” investment).


                                                          1
         The most common motivations for overseas expansions by emerging-market firms include: 1)
entering new markets, 2) obtaining natural resources, and 3) acquiring advanced technology and related
brand equity.3 An example which highlights these factors is Lenovo's 2004 purchase of IBM's personal
computer business. This acquisition involved entry into the U.S. market, acquisition of technology, and of
an established brand.4 Even unsuccessful acquisitions, such as CNOOC's bid for Unocal, point to
emerging market demand for natural resources.
         The transaction-specific data on cross-border Mergers and Acquisitions (M&As) used in this
paper come from the Thompson Financial SDC Platinum database that records all M&As involving U.S.
firms that were announced between January 1, 1980 and July 1, 2007. We focus on publicly traded U.S.
targets both because open financial markets in the U.S. have led to a substantial number of cross-border
M&As, and because public U.S. firms are required to disclose detailed accounting data. It is also worth
noting that Forbes (2008) finds evidence that foreigners hold greater shares of their investment portfolios
in the United States if they have less developed financial markets, suggesting that our focus on FDI by
emerging market firms may provide insights into the implications of broader investment trends into the
U.S.
         The work that follows complements the existing literature on post-acquisition firm performance.
The focus on acquisitions made by emerging country firms allows us to test the general applicability of
theories of FDI flows for firms in apparently capital scarce markets.
         To evaluate the impact of emerging-country acquisitions on U.S. firm performance we examine
both stock market and accounting measures. The stock market measure, abnormal announcement returns,
provides a forward-looking estimate of expected shareholder value creation. After the acquisition has
taken place accounting measures of profitability, investment, sales and employment allow us to evaluate
the ex post performance of U.S. targets.
         The first empirical challenge we face in estimating post-acquisition performance is one of
causality versus selection. Are emerging-market firms simply picking certain types of acquisition targets
or do foreign acquisitions change target-firm performance? There is some evidence in the literature of
how acquirers select targets. In particular, the Froot and Stein (1991) model shows that asymmetric
information could lead foreign firms to buy U.S. firms in times when the value of the U.S. dollar is low
relative to the foreign currency. They provide empirical evidence of a negative relationship between the
value of the dollar and FDI flows into the U.S. using aggregate FDI data, and this relationship is also
explored in Chen (2008b) using more detailed firm-level data. Harris and Ravenscraft (1990) find


3
 See reports by Citigroup (2005) and Boston Consulting Group (2005).
4
 Lenovo had the right to use the IBM brand for five years, but actually dropped it after three years, apparently
because its own brand name was already so well established.


                                                          2
evidence that foreign firms prefer technology-intensive industries and Slaughter (2007) describes how
U.S. states differ in their incentive packages and taxes with regards to foreign acquirers.5 We also find
evidence of selection in that emerging country firms tend to acquire public U.S. targets with relatively
high levels of sales, employment and total assets.
         Crucial to any comparison between pre-and post-acquisition performance of target firms is
therefore the issue of selecting an appropriate expected performance benchmark in the absence of the
acquisition (Andrade et. al., 2001). The fact is that some firms get acquired while others do not. Ideally,
one would like to compare the performance of a firm that receives foreign investment to the performance
of the firm’s identical twin with no foreign investment.6
         In this paper we ask the counterfactual question: what would have happened to those firms that
did, in fact, receive foreign ownership, if they had not received it? While this exact counterfactual is not
typically observable, propensity score matching, which involves selecting a “control” group of non-
acquired firms closely matched to the “treatment” group of acquired firms, is one way to artificially create
sets of such twins. Propensity score matching can then be combined with difference-in-differences
estimates to further eliminate time-invariant and unobservable differences between the acquired and non-
acquired firms.
         In order to measure the performance of U.S. target firms after they are acquired, we focus on the
accounting measure of operating income before depreciation, amortization and taxes (OIBD). In order to
control for the relative size of the target firm, we scale OIBD by total assets, thus focusing on return on
assets (ROA). We also track changes in other aspects of target firm operations, such as investment,
employment, and sales following the acquisition.
         We find that the stock price response of target firms is positive and significant around the time of
acquisition announcement. Average cumulative returns on the target stock price within a three-day
window around the announcement date of the acquisition increase by 8%. This return remains significant
and positive when we extend the window to ten and twenty-one business days.
         Correspondingly, we find that after acquisition the performance of acquired targets tends to
improve. The target firm's return on assets increases by 16% in the five years following acquisition.
Further, there is strong evidence that acquiring firms undertake significant restructuring of target firms.
Measures of employment, sales and plant, property and equipment in the target firms decrease in the years
after acquisition.


5
  At the Federal level there were few legal restrictions on FDI into the United States during the time period studied
here, although more stringent laws were recently put into place in order to restrict FDI that threatens U.S. “national
security”; these restrictions came into effect in 2007. See: http://www.ustreas.gov/offices/international-affairs/cfius/
6
  An alternative question, which is explored in Chen (2008a), is whether, given that a firm is acquired, the country of
origin of the acquirer matters (so that the control group is other acquired firms rather than non-acquired firms).


                                                           3
        The pattern of increasing profitability (income/assets) and declining sales is consistent with
improvements in firm-efficiency following acquisition. For instance if firms shut down or get rid of
unprofitable divisions, sales would go down but profits as a percent of assets would increase. Also,
declining employment and net PP&E suggest downsizing of divisions to improve overall profitability as a
percent of assets. Declining sales in the target firms along with the downsizing of employment are also
consistent with the comparative input cost hypothesis where acquirers from emerging-markets may be in
the position to exploit the low wages in their home countries by downsizing labor-intensive activities in
the foreign country following the acquisition.
        The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews the existing literature.
Section 3 introduces the various datasets employed in the empirical analysis. The details of the difference-
in-differences propensity score matching estimator are explained in Section 4. Section 5 presents the
empirical results and section 6 concludes.


2.      Related Literature
        A large empirical literature compares the productivity of foreign-owned versus domestic-owned
firms. Doms and Jensen (1995) find that foreign-owned companies in the U.S. are more productive than
domestic-owned ones, but are on average less productive than U.S.-owned multinational companies. A
number of studies have investigated the causal link between foreign ownership and plant performance,
where the target firm is usually situated in an emerging market while the acquirer firm is from a
developed market.
        Aitkin and Harrison (1999) conclude from a sample of Venezuelan firms that foreign ownership
is correlated with productivity improvements. Using detailed plant-level information from Mexico, Perez-
Gonzales (2005) finds that multinational control leads to large improvements in total factor productivity,
particularly in industries that rely on technological innovations from their parent companies. Arnold and
Javorcik (2005) use plant-level data from Indonesia and find that foreign ownership leads to significant
improvements in productivity in the year of acquisition as well as in subsequent years. Petkova (2008)
conducts a similar study using Indian plant level data and concludes that foreign owned plants only
experience improvements in productivity at a three-year horizon.
        In the developed-market context, a series of papers concentrating on acquisition targets in the
United Kingdom, Girma et al. (Girma, 2005; Girma et al., 2006, 2007) document improvements in growth
rates of firm performance following foreign acquisitions. These studies, however, do not specifically
differentiate between emerging and developed country acquirers. Antkiewicz and Whalley (2006)
highlight several case studies of recent completed and failed attempts by Chinese companies to acquire




                                                     4
firms in the OECD. They suggest that the recent wave of Chinese outbound M&A is driven by the
necessity to acquire access to resources, new technology and distribution networks in the target country.
        Our study is also related to studies analyzing the effects of foreign and domestic M&As on firm
stock market performance. Harris and Ravenscraft (1991) examine the effects of inbound U.S. FDI on
shareholder wealth over the period 1970-1987 and find that target firm wealth gains are significantly
higher in cross-border takeovers than in domestic acquisitions. While they do not focus on the country of
origin of the acquiring firms, over their sample period, there were very few emerging-market acquisitions
of U.S. firms. 7
        Healy, Palepu and Ruback (1992) analyze the operating performance for the combined firm in
domestic acquisitions relative to the industry median and show that the operating cash flows of merged
firms actually drop from their pre-merger level on average, but that the non-merging firms in the same
industry drop considerably more. Thus, the post-merger combined operating performance improves
relative to the industry benchmark. Andrade et. al (2001) use an annual cross sections methodology
similar in spirit to Fama and Macbeth (1973) and find that post-merger operating margins (cash flow to
sales) improve, on average, relative to industry benchmarks. Using propensity score matching, we find
that the return on assets for acquired firms increases significantly relative to the matched control group of
non-acquired firms.


3.      Data Description
        Our data sample contains all M&As involving U.S. firms initiated by firms in emerging markets
that are announced between January 1, 1980 and July 1, 2007, and are reported by SDC Platinum, a
database from Thompson Financial. The data include all public and private M&A transactions involving
at least 5% ownership8 of a target firm in the U.S9. SDC collates information from over 200 English and
foreign language news sources, SEC filings and the filings from its international counterparts, trade
publications, news wire reports, and proprietary surveys of investment banks, law firms, and other
advisory firms. For each transaction, the SDC database provides the date on which the transaction was
first announced as well as the date on which the transaction became effective. The database provides
characteristics of the target and acquiring firms including: name, nation, industry sector, and primary
North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). The database also includes transaction-specific



7
  Edwards and Krugman (1995) provide a comprehensive empirical analysis of the growth of inward U.S. FDI from
other industrial countries, focusing on economic and national security implications.
8
  The IMF and the OECD define FDI using a 10% threshold, though a broader definition of FDI is ownership of an
amount of shares or voting power that allows participation in the management or control of the target firm.
9
  See Appendix A for a full list of the markets included in the database.


                                                      5
information on percent of shares acquired, the percent of shares owned before and after the transaction is
completed, the percent of shares sought by the acquiring firm, and the method of payment.
           Over the sample period, SDC covered 7,996 completed M&A transactions between a foreign
acquirer and a U.S. target. Out of that total number, 2,368 M&A transactions (30%) were conducted
between foreign firms and publicly traded U.S. targets. The focus of the analysis in the paper is on the
subsample of 480 outbound M&A transactions by emerging country firms and U.S. target firms that
remain publicly traded after acquisition. Furthermore, we eliminate countries that are tax havens, e.g.
Bahamas, Bermudas10, etc. which leaves us with a sample of 259 M&A transactions. Among the
remaining deals, 81 transactions involve multiple acquisitions of the same target. We only include the
first of multiple acquisitions in our dataset as we are interested in what happens to a U.S. target when it is
first acquired by an emerging-market firm. This trims our sample to 214 transactions. Where information
is available, these observations cover M&A transactions that result in a change in majority control in the
target firm as well as acquisitions of minority shares. Most of our observations include information on the
method of payment, the value of the transaction, and the NAICS codes of the respective acquirer and
target firms.
           Data on the U.S. target firms come from Compustat and the Center for Research in Securities
Prices (CRSP). Compustat reports financial statement data and CRSP contains stock return information.
Information provided in SDC on our target firms allows matching across these databases. During this
process, we lose observations because some of the target firms are renamed after acquisition or are
delisted. The availability of data in Compustat varies significantly by year and by variable. For example,
the employment variable is only reported on a voluntary basis in Compustat. Out of the original 214
transactions between emerging country acquirers and public U.S. targets in the SDC dataset, roughly 120
firms (56%) have performance variables reported in Compustat over the five years post acquisition and
175 firms (81%) have usable stock returns data in CRSP.
           Table 1 presents information by country of origin on the number and value of acquisitions of U.S.
firms. The top five emerging market countries whose firms acquired U.S. targets over the period 1980-
2007 are: Hong Kong, Singapore, Mexico, South Korea, and Taiwan. Figure 1 displays the number of
publicly traded U.S. firms that were acquired by emerging country firms by year; acquisitions occurred in
each of the years in our sample. In about half of all M&As reported in SDC information is available on
the value of the deal. Figure 2 presents this information together with the number of deals and the
industry in which the target firm is located. In the figure the surface area of each bubble shows the total
value of deals within each one-digit industry sector, while the location of the bubble is determined by the
average value and the total number of deals within an industrial sector. The figure indicates that in about

10
     See Appendix A for a list of tax-haven markets as defined by the OECD (2008).


                                                          6
half of all transactions the target firm is in the manufacturing sector and the average value of acquisitions
in the manufacturing sector is much larger than the value of acquisitions in other industries.
          Table 2 displays the top 20 deals by acquisition value between emerging country firms and public
U.S. targets. About half of the top twenty M&A transactions are horizontal, meaning that the acquirer and
the target are in the same industry. In our full sample about one sixth of the deals involve horizontal
M&As and about one third of the deals involve an acquisition of 50 percent or more of the target. Finally,
Table 3 provides average accounting information (OIBD, sales and employment) for the target firms
sorted by NAICS industry.


4.       Empirical Strategy
4.1 Difference-in-Differences Matching Estimation
          It seems unlikely that emerging country firms acquire U.S. firms at random. As discussed in the
introduction, ideally, in order to evaluate the impact of foreign ownership we would like to have
information on the set of prospective firms from which the target was selected. In other words, we would
like to compare the performance of a firm that receives foreign investment to the performance of the
firm’s identical twin (or multiple) with no foreign investment. While this sort of counterfactual is not
generally observable, we use propensity score matching techniques to construct a control group of non-
acquired U.S. firms that closely match the U.S. targets. A firm is “selected” into the control group if it is
sufficiently similar to acquired U.S. firms on the basis of the key determinants of the acquisition decision.
In other words, our goal is to find a set of control firms that are a priori equally likely to be acquired by an
emerging-market firm as those firms which ultimately are acquired.
          Let Ai ,t ∈ {0,1} be a dummy variable indicating whether a U.S. firm is acquired by an emerging-

market firm at time t and let yi1,t +u denote target firm performance u periods after the acquisition takes

place, where u ≥ 0 . The performance of a matched non-acquired U.S. firm is given by yi0,t +u . For a given

U.S. firm, we will only observe performance in one of the two states; foreign acquisition ( yi1,t +u ), or not
     0
( yi ,t +u ). The average effect of an emerging-market firm acquisition of a U.S. target is the following:

          E[ yi1,t +u − yi0,t +u | A = 1]

          = E[ yi1,t + u | A = 1] − E[ yi0,t + u | A = 0] − { E[ yi0,t + u | A = 1] − E[ yi0,t + u | A = 0]}

          The term in the first line is the average treatment effect on the treated (ATET), and the term in the
second line in braces is a “selection'' term, which is zero if the assignment to the treatment and control
groups is random. Our assumption is that firms have observable characteristics, X, that make them



                                                                   7
attractive targets. Our approach is to match acquired and non-acquired firms on the basis of these Xs and
then calculate the treatment differential (the effect of being acquired) on each of the outcome variables of
interest. The average of the differential over all acquired firms and all Xs measures the average effect of
foreign acquisition. Formally, Angrist and Krueger (2000) show that effect of the treatment on the treated
is given by

         E[ yi1,t + u − yi0,t + u | A = 1] = E { E[ yi1,t + u | X , A = 1] − E[ yi0,t + u | X , A = 0] | A = 1}

         = E[Δ x | A = 1] ,

where Δ x = E[ yi1,t +u | X , A = 1] − E[ yi0,t +u | X , A = 0] . The underlying assumption is that all the firms

(whether acquired or not) have the same expected performance under domestic ownership. This is
referred to as the conditional independence assumption (CIA):


         E[ yi0,t +u | X , A = 1] = E[ yi0,t +u | X , A = 0] = E[ yi0,t +u | X ] .


        For the CIA to be satisfied, the vector X should contain all variables that affect both acquisition
and performance outcomes. The choice of variables included in X is described in more detail below.
Another assumption required for matching is that it is not possible to predict the probability of a foreign
acquisition perfectly, i.e. 0 < Pr( A = 1| X ) < 1 .
        Matching on a vector of variables is difficult since it requires weighting differences in one
dimension against another. Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983) provide a solution to this dimensionality
problem by matching firms on propensity scores, which in our context is the conditional probability of
being acquired by an emerging county firm given X:
         Pi = Pr( Ai ,t = A( X i ,t −1 )) .
        This matching technique allows us to take into account differences in observable characteristics
across the firms in our database. We then combine matching with difference-in-differences analysis to
eliminate the differences between the acquired and control firms that are unobservable and time invariant.
        Rather than treating each of our firms linearly and with the same weight, our difference-in-
differences estimator paired with propensity score matching allows us to include only acquired firms
within the common support and picks control firms according to the metric function specific to the
matching method. We limit the common support to only contain those treated firms that do not lie above
the maximum or below the minimum propensity score for the matched control group. Similarly, matched
control group firms that lie above the maximum or below the minimum propensity score for the treated
firms are also dropped from the analysis.



                                                                   8
          In our analysis, we use the Mahanalobis distance metric, which allows us to confine the matching
between the acquired and control firms to the same 2-digit industry. Mahanalobis metric matching by
itself uses the observable covariates directly, by minimizing a distance defined for covariate values
X1(treated) and X2(control) as
          {( X 1 − X 2 )T S c−1 ( X 1 − X 2 )}1/ 2 ,
where Sc is the control sample covariance matrix. For the combined method, all non-acquired U.S. firms
within intervals surrounding each acquired firm’s propensity score are identified as potential matches, and
then Mahalanobis metric matching is applied to the subset of covariates, in our case 2-digit industry
characteristics, to make final selections from these potential matches. Finally, the standard errors from
the matching estimation are bootstrapped as suggested by Becker and Ichino (2002).


4.2 Evidence of Selection
          In order to examine whether our assumption that firms are not randomly selected for acquisition
is justified we check whether firm characteristics prior to acquisition are correlated with subsequent
foreign ownership. Our test involves a regression of our various performance measures on two dummy
variables. The first dummy variable indicates those U.S. firms with foreign ownership in year t. The
second dummy variable is switched on three years prior to the ownership change, for those U.S. firms that
were eventually foreign acquisition targets. We also control for industry, region and year fixed effects in
the regression. The estimation results, presented in Table 4, illustrate that future foreign acquisition
targets are larger in size, measured by log sales and log total assets, than non-acquired domestic firms up
to three years before acquisition. Furthermore, the regression estimates indicate that acquired firms have
more employees and higher debt than non-acquired firms. These systematic differences indicate that
foreign investors do not choose target firms at random. Our analysis of the post acquisition performance
of U.S. firms takes this selection into account.


4.3 Timing Issues
          Unlike longitudinal matching studies, where treatment occurs uniformly at one point in time, the
firms in our data set are targets of acquisition at varying times. This variation in treatment timing poses
the challenge of how to assign counterfactual treatment dates to the firms that are not acquired by
emerging-market firms. We follow Petkova's (2008) approach of proportional-random acquisition time
assignment. We determine the fraction of the total number of acquisitions that occur in each calendar year
during our sample period, and then assign the hypothetical treatment year to the firms in the control group
in the same proportion as their occurrences in the acquisition group. For example, if one tenth of all
acquisitions occurred in 1995 in our sample of targets, then one tenth of all firms in the control group


                                                       9
receive the hypothetical treatment year 1995. Before assigning the date, we make sure that the control
firm's year of incorporation precedes the treatment year and that the firm remains non-acquired
throughout the entire span of our data.


4.4 Propensity Score Matching Estimation
         After assigning the hypothetical foreign acquisition dates to the control firms that are not acquired
(do not receive treatment) over our sample period, we need to realign the time series data for each firm.
More specifically, in the year of acquisition (actual or hypothetical), we set t=0, in the year following the
acquisition t=1, and in the year prior to the acquisition, t=-1, etc. The propensity score is the estimated
probability of being acquired in period t=0 based on firm characteristics in period t=-1. We estimate this
probability using a probit model, where the dummy variable Ai ,t equals 1 in the year a firm is the actual

target of acquisition and zero otherwise11.


4.4.1 Choice of Covariates
         We select our control group of non-acquired firms based on a set of observable characteristics
that comprise the vector X. The control variables include factors that drive both the acquisition and
performance of the firm, such as: age, size (measured by log of total assets, log of sales and log of
employment), operating income, debt, cash, net income, and net property, plant, and equipment. In the
estimation, the values of each of these variables are from the year prior to the actual or hypothetical
acquisition year.12 The “age” of a firm indicates the level of development of a potential target. Variables
such as total assets and sales convey information about the market power of the target firm as well as its
productive capacity. Operating income before depreciation (OIBD) and net income describe the
profitability of the target firm. Debt and cash variables are indicators of the internal structure of the firm.
Measures of property, plant and equipment gauge the physical capital stock of a firm. Lastly, we include
year, region and industry dummies in the vector of control variables, where industry dummies are based
on 2-digit NAIC codes and regional dummies are based on the U.S. state where the target firm is located.




11
   Alternatively, we could also assign zero to a target firm where there has been an acquisition announcement that
eventually fell through. Due to the limited amount of data, however, this analysis was not feasible.
12
   In choosing the year preceding the acquisition, there arises a concern of an “Ashenfelter Dip.” This term is based
on the finding in Ashenfelter (1978) that in job program evaluations, participants tend to experience a temporary
decline in earnings prior to enrolling in a program. In this data set of target firms, however, there is no visible
decline in target firm performance in the year prior to acquisition. As a robustness check we also use variables in
different years prior to acquisition, the results remain unchanged.


                                                         10
5.       Results
5.1 Preliminary Evidence: Stock Market Reaction to Acquisition Announcements
         If capital markets are semi-strong form efficient with respect to public information, stock prices
will quickly adjust following an acquisition announcement, incorporating any expected value changes
(Andrade et al, 2001). The two commonly used event windows are the three days immediately
surrounding the acquisition announcement, and a longer window beginning several days prior to the
announcement and ending at the close of the acquisition. We examine the abnormal stock return for the
acquired targets around various different windows of time surrounding the announcement of the
acquisition.
         We calculate the mean cumulative return of the target stock price within a one, three, and twenty
day window of the announcement date. We assume that stock prices follow a single factor market model.
Our estimation period is 280 days before and up until 30 days preceding the event date. Using a
standardized value of the cumulative abnormal return, we test the null hypothesis that the return is equal
to zero.13
         Table 5 displays announcement period abnormal returns for U.S. targets that are acquired by
emerging country firms. The announcement period cumulative abnormal return over the three-day
window is 8.9% for 175 completed acquisitions. When the event window is expanded to three days prior
to the acquisition announcement and ending three days after the announcement, the mean abnormal return
is essentially identical. Over an even longer window of twenty days, the mean abnormal return increases
to 9.7%. In comparison to domestic U.S. M&As, where target firms' average three-day abnormal return is
around 16% for the three-day window and rises to 24% over the longer event window of 20 days
(Andrade et al. (2001)), acquisitions of U.S. targets by emerging-country firms tend to have lower
abnormal returns.


5.2 Propensity Score Matching Estimates
         Our approach to constructing an appropriate comparison group of non-acquired firms involves a
two-step matching process. The first step, a probit regression, estimates the probability of foreign
acquisition based on past values of various measures of firm performance (age, OIBD, cash, sales, assets,
employment, debt, income) as well as state, year and industry fixed effects. The results of the probit
indicate that firms with more cash, and those firms located in certain states and from specific industries
are more likely to be acquired. We impose a common support by dropping treatment observations (firms
that are acquired) whose propensity score is higher than the maximum or less than the minimum

13
  In future work we plan to also compare target firm returns to both their matched control firm returns and their
industry average return on the announcement date.


                                                         11
propensity score of the firms that are not acquired. The second step involves using the Mahalanobis
distance metric to select firms for the control group that are within the same 2-digit industry as the
acquired firms.
        Figure 3 provides an illustration of the effects of our two-step Mahalanobis matching approach.
The three densities plotted in the figure depict the predicted probability, i.e. propensity score, of
acquisition for the acquired firms (red), the non-matched and non-acquired firms (blue), and the
Mahalanobis metric matched non-acquired firms (green). The Mahanalobis matching estimator performs
extremely well as evidenced by the proximity between the density of the acquired firms and that of the
Mahanalobis matched non-acquired firms.14 In terms of our two step process, if we did not “select” our
control group, this group would include all U.S. firms that are not acquired (the blue line). Our two-step
matching involves constructing an appropriate counterfactual for each acquired firm given the set of
observable covariates available for the firms. The propensity score provides a summary index of all the
covariates combined, so that matching essentially brings the group of control firms closer to the acquired
firms on all available dimensions.
        The density plot in Figure 3 reveals that among the non-acquired firms a large proportion have
almost zero probability of being acquired. A simple difference-in-difference estimator would treat these
firms the same as those non-acquired firms that are more likely to be acquired. The Mahanalobis
matching estimator, in contrast, only selects firms that are similar to the acquired firms both in terms of
propensity score as well as in industry. In other words, propensity score matching in this context ensures
that our comparisons involve firms that are very similar prior to acquisition. One could argue that this
approach biases against finding differences in post acquisition performance (given that the firms are so
similar prior to acquisition), but it also ensures that our tests will not simply be picking up differences in
acquired and non-acquired firm performance that are unrelated to acquisition.


5.2.1 Balancing Test
        One way to assess the performance of our propensity score matching is to calculate the
standardized differences for the covariates in our probit regression. Specifically, for each covariate, we
take the average difference between the acquired firms and the matched control firms and normalize it by
the pooled standard deviation of the covariate in the acquired and control group samples. Based on
Rosenbaum and Rubin (1985), we calculate the following measure:



14
  We also try alternative matching estimators, such as kernel matching and propensity score reweighting. The
difficulty with kernel matching is the selection of an appropriate bandwidth parameter. Although the point estimates
based on propensity score reweighting are similar to our Mahalanobis results, the properties of the standard errors
from propensity score reweighting are less clear.


                                                        12
                               1
                                    ∑ [ X ki − j∈{∑
                               n1 i∈{ Ai =1}      A j = 0}
                                                           W ( Pi , Pj ) X kj ]
         SDiff ( X k ) = 100                                                         ,
                                  vari∈{ Ai =1} ( X ki ) + var j∈{ Aj =0} ( X kj )
                                                         2


where n1 is the number of acquired firms and n0 is the number of non-acquired firms in the control group.
        Table 6 shows that our propensity score method does a good job of matching a set of control
group firms that were not acquired to the set of firms that were acquired by emerging-market firms along
the dimensions of the observable covariates. The balancing test results indicate that the differences in our
matched parameters are all well below 2015 indicating that our approach is capable of grouping together
relatively similar firms. In particular, the covariates log cash, log sales, log employment, and log of net
property, plant and equipment before matching show significant differences in means between acquired
and non-acquired firms. After matching, however, the means of the covariates between the two groups are
not significantly different.
        For instance, consider the firm-size characteristic as measured by log sales. The first row of
coefficients for log sales compares the acquired (treated) firms with the non-acquired (control,
unmatched) firms. In other words, the “unmatched control” refers to the set of firms that would have
otherwise comprised the control group had we not undertaken propensity score matching. The coefficients
for log sales in the first row suggest that the acquired firms are significantly larger, on average, than the
unmatched set of control firms. The difference in size is statistically significant as evidenced by the t-
statistic and p-values in the final two columns. The second row presents mean log sales numbers for the
acquired firms along with the “matched control” firms that were not acquired. In stark contrast, the
differences in log size are not significantly different across the treated and control groups when matching
takes place. In fact the reduction in bias as a result of propensity score matching along the dimension of
log sales is about 83%. The reduction in bias for other observable covariates ranges from 20% for the
firm-age variable to 96% for the firm-cash variable.


5.3 Post-Acquisition Performance
        Tables 7, Panels A-D present our difference-in-differences Mahalanobis matching results for
various measures of post-acquisition firm-performance. t={0,5} denotes the post-acquisition year. The
second column presents the matched coefficient estimate.                                 Estimates in bold indicate statistical
differences in measured post-acquisition performance for acquired and matched non-acquired firms.

15
 A value for the standardized difference between treated and matched control mean values suggested by
Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983).


                                                                  13
Common support refers to the set of firms for whom the propensity score range overlaps across control
(non-acquired) and treated (acquired) firms. Off support refers to the number of treated (acquired) firms
whose propensity score lay above the maximum value or below the minimum value for the control (non-
acquired) firms. Note that changes in post-acquisition performance are calculated relative to year t=-1,
prior to the acquisition.
        Panel A presents results for OIBD scaled by total assets, also referred to as return on assets
(ROA). These estimates indicate that the ROA for acquired firms declines significantly compared to the
firms in the “propensity score matched” control sample in the year of acquisition. It appears that profits
continue to decline in years 1-3 following the acquisition but the decline is not statistically significant. In
years four and five after the acquisitions the ROA increases significantly for acquired firms (relative to
the non-acquired firms in our control group). In particular, the ROA increases by 8.3% in year four and
7.8% in year five for the acquired firms relative to the control sample and also relative to the year prior to
the acquisition. The time-series pattern in the ROA numbers is consistent with restructuring in the early
years following the acquisition leading to improved profitability in later years. We also conducted an F-
test of joint significance that shows that the post-acquisition increase in profitability is jointly significant
across the five years following the acquisition.
        The advantage of our methodology is that we are able to identify the timing of the profitability
improvements. Propensity score matching also requires large samples with substantial overlap between
groups of the treated (acquired) and control (matched non-acquired) firms. From Table 7a, we see that the
sample size of control firms under “common support” are an order of magnitude higher than the treated
group suggesting that our estimates are measured with high precision. Moreover, the numbers under “off-
support” suggest that there is substantial over lap in the treated and control samples since only two firm
years of treated observations are excluded from the estimation. A caveat that remains is that while
propensity score matching attempts to identify matched twins in the control group and difference-in-
differences estimation accounts for time-invariant, unobservable differences across treated and matched
firms, hidden bias may remain because matching only controls for observed variables to the extent that
they are perfectly measured (Shadish, Cook and Campbell, 2002). Also, to the extent that there are
unobservable time-varying differences in firm characteristics across the treated and control samples, we
are unable to account for them. However, it is not clear what unobservable and yet time-varying firm
characteristics could vary across the two samples of firms.
        The results in Panels B-D in Table 7 indicate that employment, net property, plant, and equipment
(PP&E), and sales all decrease significantly for acquired firms (again, relative to matched control non-
acquired firms) in the year of and the five years after the acquisition. While the decline in employment




                                                      14
and net PP&E is significant only in the early years, the decline in sales appears to persist across the five
years following the acquisition.
         The pattern of increasing profitability (income/assets) and declining sales is consistent with
improvements in firm-efficiency following acquisition. For instance if firms shut down or get rid of
unprofitable divisions, sales would go down but profits as a percent of assets would increase. Also,
declining employment and net PP&E suggest downsizing of divisions to improve overall profitability as a
percent of assets.
         The results of increasing profitability are also consistent with the hypothesis that foreign
ownership is associated with improvements in plant productivity (Aitken and Harrision, 1999, Perez-
Gonzales, 2005, Arnold and Javorcik, 2005, Petkova, 2007). Declining sales in the target firms along with
the downsizing of employment are also consistent with the comparative input cost hypothesis. Acquirers
from emerging-markets come from environments where labor costs are low and they may be in the
position to “insource” jobs by exploiting the low wages in their home countries by downsizing labor-
intensive activities in the foreign country following the acquisition. However, the U.S. target also
experiences improvements in profitability with more streamlined but efficient operations following
restructuring by the emerging-market acquirer.


5.4      Simple Difference-in Differences Estimation
         To highlight the importance of constructing an appropriate benchmark for comparison to evaluate
post-acquisition performance we conduct a simple difference-in-differences estimation without propensity
score matching. Here the underlying assumption is that US targets are chosen at random by emerging-
market acquirers. Table 8 (Panels A-D) present the results. From the coefficient estimates we may
erroneously conclude that there is no significant difference in the post-acquisition performance between
the treated (acquired) and control (non-matched non-acquired) firms. The estimates suggest that
OIBD/assets, employment, net PP&E and sales are not significantly different across the two groups of
firms following the acquisition. The simple difference-in-differences are essentially comparing the post-
acquisition performance of targets to the performance of all non-acquired U.S. firms. If the acquired firms
are bigger on average (as indicated in Table 4) in terms of assets, sales and employment before the
acquisition, and continue to be statistically different along these dimensions after the acquisition in
comparison to the sample of all non-acquired firms, simple difference-in-differences estimates would lead
to the inference that emerging-market acquisitions do not significantly alter the performance or operations
of the target firms.16 However, a comparison of the target firms with a set of hypothetical twin firms in the

16
  In unreported results we find that the observable characteristics (such as size and employment) that distinguish the
acquired and full (unmatched) set of non-acquired firms do not change significantly three years post-acquisition.


                                                         15
matched control set suggest that emerging-market acquirers undertake significant restructuring of the
target firms following the acquisition. The post-performance indicators from Section 5.3 show that the
acquirers downsize unprofitable divisions, as evidenced by falling sales and employment concomitant
with a significant increase in overall firm-profitability. This simple example serves to illustrate the
importance of constructing a careful benchmark from which to evaluate post-acquisition performance and
the advantage of propensity score matching in this context.


5.5 Robustness Checks
        SDC Platinum also provides information about acquisitions that are announced but not completed
or withdrawn. Using this sample of failed transactions we can examine whether the firms that were
potential acquisition targets differ from their non-acquired counterparts. If it is foreign ownership that
drives the post-acquisition performance of the acquired firms, then we expect that following propensity
score matching, the firms that were “potential” targets should perform similarly to the firms that are in the
matched control sample but not the subject of foreign interest since the foreign acquisition was never
successfully completed. Although it is not possible to test this hypothesis given the limited number of
failed acquisitions, Table 9 provides suggestive evidence; the eighteen potential targets in our sample
experience declines in employment and increases in sales in the year the M&A transaction is announced
and are similar to a group of matched non-acquired firms in the years after the failed acquisitions,
suggesting that post-acquisition performance of acquired firms is driven by the transfer of ownership to
foreign hands. However, given the small number of failed acquisitions in our sample, more formal
statistical analysis is not possible.
         We also perform a number of additional robustness checks that involve dividing our sample of
acquired firms into various subgroups consisting of: 1) majority and minority control acquisitions, 2)
acquisitions financed solely by cash, 3) only manufacturing firms, 4) acquiring firms located in Hong
Kong, Singapore, Taiwan and South Korea, and lastly, 5) firms not in the same industry as the acquiring
firm. The estimates are shown in Table 10 (Panels A-H). The statistical significance of the results varies
due to sample sizes. For example, for the group of horizontal acquisitions, in which both acquiring and
target firms share the same industry, the sample size is much smaller than that for diversifying
acquisitions. Thus, although the magnitudes of the estimates are similar to those of the whole sample, the
statistical significance is not. Overall, the robustness checks confirm the results in the main analysis when
using the full sample.




                                                     16
6.      Conclusion
        This paper undertakes the first systematic analysis of the performance of U.S. firms that are
acquired by firms located in emerging markets. To do so, we examine both stock market and accounting
based measures of firm performance following the announcement of an acquisition of a U.S. firm by an
emerging-market firm. In particular, we use transaction-level M&A information along with firm-level
financial statement data to examine the post-acquisition performance of publicly listed U.S. targets.
        Our results suggest that emerging country firms tend to acquire public U.S. targets with relatively
high levels of sales, employment and total assets. The selection of acquisition target is therefore non-
random. To address the issue of selection, we employ propensity score matching to carefully construct a
matched sample of control firms that were not acquired. The matching methodology is combined with
difference-in-differences estimation to eliminate time-invariant unobservable firm characteristics.
        The stock price response of these U.S. targets is positive and significant around the time of the
acquisition announcement. Following the acquisition, the performance of target firms tends to improve. In
particular, the return on assets in target firms increases by 16%, on average, in the five years following
the acquisition. The evidence also suggests that U.S. target firms undergo significant restructuring after
acquisition by an emerging-market firm. In particular, employment and capital decrease, suggesting that
divisions may be sold off or closed down. This conjecture is also supported by the fact that sales also
decline after acquisition.
                 Our results indicate that (i) acquisitions by firms from emerging markets influence post-
acquisition performance of target firms (sales and employment decline, profits rise); and (ii) there is
selection along observable characteristics based upon which emerging market firms choose acquisition
targets in the U.S. (higher sales, assets, employment). In the paper we attempt to control for (ii) using
propensity-score-matching and difference-in-difference estimation. There remains the possibility that
selection based on time-variant unobservable characteristics (that are orthogonal to the observable
characteristics used in our propensity score matching) may be driving our results. However, the evidence
presented in the paper strongly indicates that emerging market firm acquisitions impact the performance
of U.S. target firms. More generally, the results in the paper serve to illustrate the importance of
constructing careful benchmarks from which to evaluate post-acquisition performance and the advantage
of propensity score matching in this context.




                                                    17
References

Aitken, Brian J. and Ann E. Harrison, 1999. Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Direct Foreign
Investment? Evidence from Venezuela. American Economic Review, Vol. 89, 605-618.

Andrade, G., Mitchell, M., and Stafford E., 2001. New Evidence and Perspectives on Mergers. The
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 15, No. 2, 103-120.

Angrist, J. D. and Krueger, A. B. 2000. Empirical Strategies in Labor Economics, in A. Ashenfelter and
D. Card eds. Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3. Sections 1 and 2.

Antkiewicz, A. and Whalley, J., 2006. Recent Chinese Buyout Activity and the Implications for Global
Architecture. NBER Working Paper No. W12072.

Arnold, J. M. and Javorcik, B. S. 2005. Gifted Kids or Pushy Parents? Foreign Acquisitions and Plant
Performance in Indonesia. Development Studies Working Paper No. 197. Centro Studi Luca D’Agliano,
March.

Ashenfelter, O. 1978. Estimating the Effect of Training Programs on Earnings. Review of Economics and
Statistics 60, 1, 47-57.

Becker, S. and Ichino, A. 2002. Estimation of average treatment effects based on propensity scores. The
Stata Journal, Vol.2(4), 358-377

Chari, A., Ouimet, P. and Tesar, L. 2007. The Value of Control in Emerging Markets, mimeo.

Chen, Wenjie 2008a. Does the Country of Origin of the Acquiring Firm Impact Performance? mimeo.
http://www-personal.umich.edu/~wenjiec/jobmarket/wenjiec_job_market_paper.pdf

Chen, Wenjie 2008b. The Relationship between Exchange Rates and FDI, mimeo.

Citigroup, 2005. Cross-Border Acquisitions: A Value Creation Strategy for Emerging Market
Multinational Companies.

Dehejia, R. H., And Wahba, S. 2002. Propensity score matching methods for non-experimental causal
studies. Review of Economics and Statistics 84, 1, 151–161.

Doms, M. E. and Jensen, J.N., 1995. Geography and Ownership as Bases for Economics Accounting. The
University of Chicago Press, Ch. Comparing wages, skills, and productivity between domestically and
foreign-owned manufacturing establishments in the United States, pp. 235-258.

Fama, E. and MacBeth, J., 1973. Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests. Journal of Political
Economy, 81:3, 607

Forbes, Kristin, 2008. Why Do Foreigners Invest in the United States? NBER Working paper #13908.

Froot, K, and Stein, J., 1991. Exchange Rates and Foreign Direct Investment: An Imperfect Capital
Markets Approach. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106:4, pp. 1191-1217.

Girma, S., 2005. Technology transfer from acquisition FDI and the absortive capacity of domestic firms:
An empirical investigation. Open Economics Review 16, 175-187.


                                                   18
Girma, S. and Goerg, H., 2007. Evaluating foreign ownership wage premium using a difference-in-
differences matching approach. Journal of International Economics 72, 97-112.

Girma, S., Kneller, R., and Oisu, M., 2007. Do exporters have anything to learn from foreign
multinationals? European Economics Review 51, 981-998.

Graham, E. and Krugman, P., 1995. Foreign Direct Investment in the United States, 3rd Edition, Institute
for International Economics, Washington, D.C.

Harris, R. and Ravenscraft, D., 1990. The Role of Acquisitions in Foreign Direct Investment: Evidence
from the U.S. Stock Market. The Journal of Finance, Vol. 46, No. 3, 825-844.

Haskel, J., Pereira, S., and Slaughter, M. 2007. Does Inward Foreign Direct Investment Boost the
Productivity of Domestic Firms? Review of Economics and Statistics 89(3), 482-496.

Healy, P.M., Palepu, K.G. and Ruback, R.S., 1992. Does corporate performance improve after mergers?
Journal of Financial Economics 31, 135–175.

International Monetary Fund (2007). World Economic Outlook. Washington: IMF, April,
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2007/01/data/index.aspx

OECD (2008), Tax Cooperation: Toward a Level Playing Field,
http://www.oecd.org/document/55/0,3343,en_2649_33745_41233143_1_1_1_37427,00.html

Perez-Gonzales, Francisco, 2004. The Impact of Acquiring Control on Productivity: Evidence from
Mexican Manufacturing Plants, mimeo.

Petkova, N. 2008, Does Foreign Ownership Lead to Higher Firm Productivity? mimeo.

Rosenbaum, P. and Rubin, D., 1983. The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for
causal effects. Biometrika 70, 41–55.

Rosenbaum, P. and Rubin, D., 1985. Constructing a control group using multivariate matched sampling
methods that incorporate the propensity score. The American Statistician 39, 1, 33–38.

Shadish, W.R., T.D. Cook and D.T. Campbell (2002). Experimental and quasi-experimental designs for
Generalized Causal Inference. Houghton-Mifflin, Boston:MA.

Wells, L., 1983. Third World Multinationals: The Rise of Foreign Investment from Emerging Markets,
The MIT Press, Cabridge:MA.




                                                   19
Appendix A

Acquiring Countries in the sample:
Algeria, Argentina, Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Ecuador, Egypt, Hong Kong, India,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Malaysia, Mexico, Nigeria, Papua N Guinea, Russian Fed, Saudi Arabia, Singapore,
South Africa, South Korea¸ Taiwan, Thailand, Trinidad & Tobago, Uganda, Uzbekistan, Venezuela


Tax Haven Countries (as defined by the OECD, 2008) excluded from the sample:
Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Cyprus, Netherland Antilles, Panama


Appendix B


Steps followed in our propensity score matching methodology:
   1. Run Probit regression where:
      (a) Dependent variable: Y=1, if a firm is acquired by an emerging-market firm; Y = 0, otherwise.
      (b) Choose appropriate conditioning variables, covariates which are observable firm
          characteristics such as age, size, profitability, financing-mix, etc.
      (c) Obtain propensity score: predicted probability (p) or log[p/(1-p)].

   2. Match each acquired firm to one or more non-acquired firms based on propensity score. We use
      Mahalanobis metric matching in conjunction with propensity score matching to choose one non-
      acquired firm from multiple matches restricted to be within the same two-digit industry as the
      acquired firm. Procedure:
      (a) Calculate the distance between the acquired firm and all non-acquired firms in the same
          industry. The distance, d(i,j) can be defined by the Mahalanobis distance:
          d(i,j) = {( X 1 − X 2 )T S c−1 ( X 1 − X 2 )}1/ 2
          where X1 and X2 are propensity scores for acquired firm i and non-acquired firm j, and Sc is
          the sample covariance matrix of the matching variables from the full set of control group
          firms.
      (b) The non-acquired firm, j, with the minimum distance d(i,j) is chosen as the match for
          acquired firm i, and both are removed from the pool.
      (c) Repeat the above process until matches are found for all acquired firms.
      (d) The standard errors from the matching estimation are bootstrapped following Becker and
          Ichino (2002).

   3. Run multivariate difference-in-difference regression to eliminate time-invariant, unobservable
      differences between acquired (treated) and non-acquired (matched control) firms to examine post
      acquisition firm performance.




                                                 20
Appendix C

Details of Sample Construction:

                                                                    N      Percent
                          Number of Transactions with a Foreign
                          Acquirer and US Target                   7,996

                          Number of transactions with a Foreign
                          Acquirer and a Public US Target          2,368   29.60%

                                   Number of Completed
                                   Transactions with Emerging-
                                   Market Acquirer and public US
                                   Target                          480      20%

                                   Number of Transactions with
                                   Tax Haven Country17 as
                                   domicile of Acquirer            221      46%

                                   Number of Firms with Multiple
                                   Acquisitions                     45      17%

Source: SDC Thompson M&A database.




17
     Countries are listed in Appendix A.


                                                       21
Figure 1: Emerging-Market Firm Acquisitions of U.S. Targets by Year

  35

  30

  25

  20

  15

  10

   5

   0

     84      86     88     90     92     94     96     98      00     02     04     06
   19      19     19     19     19     19     19     19      20     20     20     20



Source: SDC Thomson M&A database. This figure shows the number of acquisitions of U.S. firms by
emerging-market firms in each year of our sample 1980-2007.




                                                22
Figure 2: Number and Value of M&A deals by Target Sector
Notes: The figure presents information on the industries in which the target firms belong along with the number (horizontal axis)
and average value of the transaction (vertical axis). The surface area of each bubble shows the total value of deals within
each one-digit industry sector, while the location of the bubble is determined by the average value and the total number of deals
within an industrial sector.



              Average Industry Deal
              Value                          400
              ($ million)
                                             350

                                             300                                                       Manufacturing


                                             250         Mining

                                             200

                                                            Retail Trade
                                             150
                          average = $125.4 million

                                             100         Health Care
                                                                                      Finance
               = $500 million                  50        Agriculture
                                                               Arts and Rec
                                                0
                                                     0                           50              100          150                 200
                                                            average = 41 deals

                                                                                                          Number of Deals in 1980 - 2006




Source: SDC Thompson M&A Database.




                                                                                                23
Figure 3: Propensity Scores for Acquired (treated), Control (matched non-treated) and
Non-treated non-weighted firms
Notes: This figure provides an illustration of the effects of our two-step Mahalanobis matching
approach. The three densities plotted in the figure depict the predicted probability, i.e. propensity
score, of acquisition for the acquired firms (red), the non-weighted and non-acquired firms (blue),
and the Mahalanobis metric matched non-acquired firms (green).


                                        Propensity Score
            30




                     Non-Treated
            20
  density




                         Treated
            10




                               Matched Non-Treate d
            0




                 0            .1          .2            .3        .4        .5
                                               prop score

                                    Non-Matched Control           Treated
                                    Matched Control




Source: Authors’ calculations based on SDC Thompson M&A Database and Compustat North
America 1980 – 2006.




                                                             24
Table 1: Number and Value of Acquisitions of U.S. targets by firms in Emerging Markets,
1980-2007.

Notes: This table provides a break down of transactions by acquiring country. The first column
lists the name of the acquiring country. The second column presents the number of transactions.
The third column presents the fraction of total transactions accounted for by the acquiring
country. The final column presents the total nominal transaction value in millions of US$ by
acquiring country.
                                     Number        % of          Nominal
                                     of            Total         Transaction
                 Acquiring Country Transactions Transactions Value ($ mil)
                 Hong Kong                 57           26.64      3309.572
                 Singapore                 36           16.82       6412.92
                 Mexico                    26           12.15      9346.126
                 Taiwan                    13            6.07       731.567
                 Saudi Arabia              11            5.14      1463.797
                 South Korea               11            5.14       319.409
                 India                     10            4.67       154.346
                 Russian Fed                7            3.27       932.947
                 Argentina                  5            2.34      5035.794
                 China                      5            2.34        44.83
                 Bahrain                    4            1.87      1478.356
                 Kuwait                     4            1.87        5.745
                 Malaysia                   4            1.87        38.11
                 Brazil                     3             1.4        4.313
                 Egypt                      2            0.93        8.905
                 South Africa               2            0.93      1900.151
                 Thailand                   2            0.93        27.12
                 Venezuela                  2            0.93        63.27
                 Algeria                    1            0.47           0
                 Costa Rica                 1            0.47         12.5
                 Croatia                    1            0.47           1
                 Ecuador                    1            0.47           0
                 Indonesia                  1            0.47          23
                 Nigeria                    1            0.47           6
                 Papua N Guinea             1            0.47          2.7
                 Trinidad & Tob             1            0.47          0.6
                 Uganda                     1            0.47         0.68
                 Uzbekistan                 1            0.47         30.8
                 Total               214           100%


Source: SDC Thomson M&A Database.




                                              25
Table 2: Transaction Characteristics of the Top Twenty Emerging Country Firm Acquisitions of U.S. Targets, 1980-2007.
Notes: The table displays the top 20 deals by acquisition value between emerging country firms and public U.S. targets based on the 214 completed transactions
in our sample. The transaction characteristics include target and acquirer names, nations and industries, the announcement date, the percent acquired, transaction
value and method of payment. Source: SDC Thompson –M&A Database.


                                                                                                                                   Transaction
   Date                                                                                                               Percent        Value          Acquirer         Payment
 Announced       Target Name           Target Industry           Acquirer Name            Acquirer Industry          Acquired        ($mil)          Nation          Method
                   Maverick           Mfg. steel tubular                                  Mfg. seamless steel
                                                                    Tenaris SA                                          100           3095.57       Argentina          Cash
   6/12/2006       Tube Corp                prod                                              pipe prod
                   Southdown             Mfg. cement;            CEMEX SA DE           Mfg.,whl cement,ready-                                                          Cash
                                                                                                                        100           2846.18        Mexico
   9/29/2000          Inc              limestone mining              CV                      mix prod                                                                Liabilities
                                        Mfg. electronic             Flextronics                                                                                       Common
                   DII Group                                                           Mfg. electn components           100           2591.41       Singapore
  11/22/1999                             components              International Ltd                                                                                     Stock
                                     Mfg. oil,gas drilling                                Mfg. seamless steel
                 Hydril Co LP                                       Tenaris SA                                          100           2212.17       Argentina          Cash
   2/12/2007                                equip                                             pipe prod
                  Oregon Steel                                                                                                                       Russian
                                        Mfg. steel prod          Evraz Group SA              Mfg. whl steel            90.87          2087.97                          Cash
  11/20/2006       Mills Inc                                                                                                                          Fed
                    Maxus                Oil and gas                                          Oil and gas                                                              Cash
                                                                     YPF SA                                             100           1843.82       Argentina
   2/28/1995      Energy Corp         exploration, prodn                                   exploration,prodn                                                         Liabilities
                                                                ST Assembly Test         Mfg. semiconductor                                                          Amer. Dep.
                 ChipPAC Inc        Mfg. semiconductors                                                                 100           1458.68       Singapore
   2/10/2004                                                      Services Ltd                 testing                                                                Receipt
                  United Asset          Investment              Old Mutual South                                                                      South
                                                                                          Insurance company             100           1456.67                          Cash
   6/19/2000      Mgmt. Corp        management services              Africa                                                                           Africa

                                      Mine, smelt, refine        Nueva Grupo
                 ASARCO Inc                                                            Mining invt. holding co.        90.48          1073.27        Mexico            Cash
                                            metals              Mexico SA de CV
   9/24/1999
             VoiceStream               Provide cellular            Hutchison                                                                          Hong
                                                                                           Pvd telecom svcs             6.03            957                            Cash
   6/23/1999 Wireless Corp                services                Whampoa Ltd                                                                         Kong




                                                                                26
                                                                                                             Transaction
  Date                                                                                             Percent     Value       Acquirer      Payment
Announced    Target Name         Target Industry       Acquirer Name      Acquirer Industry       Acquired     ($mil)       Nation       Method
                                 Shipping,trucking      Neptune Orient
4/14/1997      APL Ltd                                                     Shipping company         100        878.48      Singapore       Cash
                                     company              Lines Ltd
              CompUSA              Own,operate         Grupo Sanborns
1/25/2000                                                                    Mgmt hldg cia          85.5       805.261      Mexico         Cash
                 Inc              computer stores        SA de CV
               Marine
                                   Bank holding                                                                              Hong
7/15/1987      Midland                                    HSBC HK            Bank (foreign)        48.42        752                        Cash
                                    company                                                                                  Kong
                Banks
             Anchor Glass
                                Manufacture glass                                                                                         Cash
 8/9/1989     Container                                Vitro SA de CV     Mfg. glass containers    96.89        737         Mexico
                                   containers                                                                                           Liabilities
                Corp
                                                          Samsung
                AST            Mfg. computers;dvlp                                                                          South         Cash
1/30/1997                                              Electronics Co     Mfg.,whl electn prod     55.28        495.8
             Research Inc            software                                                                               Korea       Liabilities
                                                             Ltd
                                    Pvd e-bus          Dimension Data                                                       South
 5/7/2001    Proxicom Inc                                                  Pvd info tech svcs       100        443.481                     Cash
                                consulting,dvlp svc         PLC                                                             Africa
              Brookstone                               OSIM Brookstone
4/15/2005                      Own,op novelty stores                      Investment company        100        429.656     Singapore       Cash
                 Inc                                     Holdings LP
                                                                                                                                       Newly Issued
                               Pvd direct mail advg    Pacific Century      Internet Service                                 Hong
9/24/1999     CMGI Inc                                                                              3.4        377.952                  Ordinary
                                       svcs            CyberWorks Ltd        Provider{ISP}                                   Kong
                                                                                                                                         Shares
                                                         OAO MMC
              Stillwater         Platinum mining                                                                           Russian      Cash, Other
11/20/2002                                              Norilsk Nickel      Mfg. metal prod        51.12        340.9
              Mining Co              company                                                                                Fed        Consideration
                                                           Group
11/30/1993   Motor Coach           Mfg. railroad         Consorcio G      Manufacture trucks        100        334.64       Mexico      Dep. Share
             Industries Intl      cars,equipment       Grupo Dina'l'ads                                                                  Convert.
                                                                                                                                          Deb.




                                                                   27
Table 3: Number of Acquisitions of U.S. Targets by Emerging-Market Firms & Industry Characteristics,
1980-2007.

Notes: This table presents summary statistics for U.S. target by industry from Compustat North America. The first column
presents the industry code. Column 2 presents the industry description followed by the number of firm-year observations, the
total number of firms in the industry and the number of firms acquired by emerging-market firms. OIBD/Assets presents the
average operating income before depreciation, amortization and taxes ($ million). The last two columns present average sales
($ million) and employment (million) by industry.

                                                                        Total
                                             Total Number OIBD          Assets Sales                           Employment
                                Firm-Year number of Firms (Mean) (Mean) (Mean)                                 (Mean)
 NAICS     Industry            Observations of firms Acquired $million $million $million                       million
  11   Agriculture                       2,015          81            5     78.64 1,025.18         1,540.33           22.12

    21  Natural
        Resources                       13,486       1,287          12      61.62 483.75             296.16            1.68
   22   Utilities                       10,085         495           2      24.12 247.60             184.01            0.40
   23   Construction                     3,733         315           1      34.46 384.54             198.72            1.90
  31-33 Manufacturing                   92,935       7,604         118      94.72 824.18           1,000.49            6.74
   42   Wholesale Trade                  9,217         805           8     101.75 1,243.46         1,509.49            7.02
  44-45 Retail Trade                    10,802         978          16      77.87 743.30           1,475.87            7.76

  48-49 Transportation &
        Warehousing                      6,417         576          10     251.86 2,886.27         2,441.86           14.35
   51   Information                     22,753       2,627          30     201.39 1,754.11           737.93            3.21

    52     Finance &
           Insurance                    30,786       4,828          20 2,244.27 65,056.48          8,545.27           18.72
    53     Real Estate                   6,042         531           8     5.35 147.09                41.96            0.18

    54     Professional
           Services                     10,097       1,050            6     31.94     200.14         168.12            1.07

    56     Administrative
           Services                      4,743         492            1      -1.67      20.90          17.80           0.09

    62     Health Care &
           Social Assistance             4,049         441            2     16.42     121.52         131.32            2.03
           Arts,
    71     Entertainment, &
           Recreation                    1,848         193            2       0.83      14.33          11.88           0.18

    72     Accommodation
           & Food Services               5,245         469          10      17.36     159.18         167.09            2.59
    81     Other Services                1,126         115            8       NA          NA             NA             NA




                                                             28
Table 4: Evidence of Selection in the Three Years Preceding Acquisition

Notes: These regressions test whether U.S. firm performance prior to acquisition is correlated with subsequent foreign
ownership. The dependent variables are sales, assets, OIBD, cash, debt and employment and the independent variables
include: D_ foreignt (a dummy variable which indicates those U.S. firms with foreign ownership at time t), D_futureacq (a
dummy variable which indicates those U.S. firms that become acquisition targets of emerging-market firms three years prior
to the ownership change), and industry, region and year fixed effects. The dependent variables are expressed in log terms.
All significant coefficients are in bold and indicate that foreign investors do not choose target firms at random. * indicates
significance at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Standard errors are in parentheses.

                            Sales           Asset           OIBD              Cash              Debt           Employment
D_foreignt                0.906***        0.952***           0.281          0.815***         0.896***           0.737***
                            (0.19)          (0.19)           (0.21)           (0.20)           (0.24)             (0.20)
D_futureacqt              0.898***        0.897***         0.553***         0.925***         0.753***           0.790***
                            (0.10)          (0.10)           (0.11)           (0.11)           (0.13)             (0.10)
Observations               236223          244249           182936           217800           197547             161948
R-squared                   0.172           0.231            0.193            0.197            0.203              0.186




Table 5: Cumulative Abnormal Stock Returns for Acquisition Targets

Notes: The sample covers acquisitions of U.S. targets by emerging-market firms between January 1, 1980 and July 1, 2007.
The day of first mention of the acquisition in SDC Thompson is taken as day ‘0’. Abnormal gain to the U.S. target is
computed as the cumulative abnormal return based on a single factor market model. The estimation period is 280 days before
and up until 30 days before the event day. The CAR is the cumulative average abnormal return and is described in detail in
section 4 of the paper. The Patell Z statistic is based on the Patell (1976) test that assumes cross-sectional independence. It is
constructed by standardizing CAR by the respective standard errors. It follows a standard normal distribution under the null
hypothesis.




                                                                 Mean            Patell
                                    Days             N           CAR               Z
                                    (-3,+3)          175        8.87%         13.669***
                                    (-1,+1)          175        8.53%         20.068***
                                    (-10,+10)        175        9.71%          8.537***
                                    (-20,+20)        175        11.13%         6.466***
                                    (-30,+30)        175        11.44%         4.871***




                                                               29
Table 6: Balancing Tests

Notes: These tests check whether our matching approach is capable of grouping together relatively similar firms. The table
presents the average difference in each of the covariates between the: (1) acquired firms and the unmatched non-acquired
firms, and (2) the acquired firms and the matched (reweighted) non-acquired firms. Differences are normalized by the pooled
standard deviation of the covariate in the two samples.

                                                   Control
                                        Treated    Mean
                                        Mean       (Non-                         %reduction
Variable           Sample               (Acquired) Acquired) %bias               In bias    t-test          p>|t|
Age                Unmatched            24.02         23.92        0.90                        0.10         0.92
                   Matched              24.02         24.11        -0.70         20.10         -0.05        0.96

OIBD               Unmatched            198.92        306.99       -8.70                       -0.82        0.41
                   Matched              198.92        233.18       -2.80         68.30         -0.34        0.73

Log Cash           Unmatched            2.42          1.90         20.90                       2.20         0.03
                   Matched              2.42          2.40         0.70          96.70         0.06         0.96

Log Sales          Unmatched            5.38          4.87         22.60                       2.29         0.02
                   Matched              5.38          5.46         -3.70         83.50         -0.31        0.76

Log Assets         Unmatched            5.56          5.27         12.50                       1.28         0.20
                   Matched              5.56          5.63         -3.20         74.50         -0.26        0.79

Log Employment Unmatched                0.52          0.15         17.50                       1.89         0.06
               Matched                  0.52          0.60         -3.60         79.50         -0.29        0.77

Log Debt           Unmatched            3.31          3.06         8.20                        0.88         0.38
                   Matched              3.31          3.72         -13.40        -63.50        -1.11        0.27

Net Income         Unmatched            0.33          73.73        -12.60                      -1.07        0.29
                   Matched              0.33          23.17        -3.90         68.90         -0.42        0.68

Log Net PPE        Unmatched            3.99          3.58         16.10                       1.69         0.09
                   Matched              3.99          4.11         -5.00         69.20         -0.40        0.69




                                                             30
Table 7: Post-Acquisition Performance Characteristics (Propensity Score Matching and Difference-in-
Differences)

Notes: This table documents difference-in-difference estimates for the post-acquisition performance between
acquired and "matched control" firms that were not acquired. Panels A-D report post acquisition OIBD/Assets,
log employment, log net PP&E and log sales, respectively. t={0,5} denotes the post-acqusition year. The
second column presents the matched coefficient estimate. Estimates in bold indicate statistical differences in
measured post-acquisition performance for acquired and matched non-acquired firms. Common support refers
to the set of firms for whom the propensity score range overlaps across control (non-acquired) and treated
(acquired) firms. Off support refers to the number of treated (acquired) firms whose propensity score lay above
the maximum value or below the minimum value for the control (non-acquired) firms.
                             Panel A: Post-Acqusition Performance (OIBD/Asset)
                                                             Common Support                  Off Support
    Matching     Bootstrapped
t   Estimate       Std. Err.         Z-Stat       P>|z|      Untreated     Treated     Untreated     Treated
                  Difference-in-Differences combined with Mahalanobis matching estimates
0    -0.058          0.035           -1.66        0.097          4,750       126           0             0
1    -0.016          0.034           -0.47        0.638          4,203       113           0             1
2    0.015           0.059            0.26        0.793          3,788       100           0             0
3    -0.007          0.059           -0.12        0.906          3,434       84            0             1
4     0.083          0.040            2.04        0.041          3,060        72           0             0
5     0.078          0.037            2.11        0.035          2,743        68           0             0


                                   Panel B: Post-Acqusition Employment
                                                             Common Support                  Off Support
    Matching     Bootstrapped
t   Estimate       Std. Err.         Z-Stat       P>|z|      Untreated     Treated     Untreated     Treated
                  Difference-in-Differences combined with Mahalanobis matching estimates
0    -0.089          0.051           -1.74        0.081          3,063        94           0             0
1    -0.164          0.071           -2.30        0.021          2,683        82           0             0
2    -0.202          0.168           -1.20        0.228          2,345        74           0             0
3    -0.268          0.220           -1.22        0.223          1,897        60           0             0
4    -0.234          0.199           -1.17        0.240          1,621        50           0             0
5    -0.389          0.269           -1.44        0.148          1,397        45           0             0




                                                            31
                               Panel C: Post Acquisition Net PP&E
                                                         Common Support                 Off Support
    Matching   Bootstrapped
t   Estimate     Std. Err.      Z-Stat       P>|z|     Untreated    Treated     Untreated       Treated
               Difference-in-Differences combined with Mahalanobis matching estimates
0    -0.191       0.094         -2.04       0.041          4,760      127           0             0
1    -0.213       0.129         -1.65       0.098          4,203      113           0             1
2    -0.292       0.145         -2.02       0.044          3,780      101           0             0
3    -0.158       0.176         -0.90       0.369          3,422      85            0             1
4    -0.266       0.214         -1.24       0.215          3,043      73            0             0
5    -0.415       0.259         -1.60       0.109          2,726      67            0             0


                                  Panel D: Post-Acquisition Sales
                                                         Common Support                 Off Support
    Matching   Bootstrapped
t   Estimate     Std. Err.      Z-Stat       P>|z|     Untreated    Treated     Untreated       Treated
               Difference-in-Differences combined with Mahalanobis matching estimates
0    -0.104       0.063         -1.66       0.098          4,761      126           0             0
1    -0.215       0.084         -2.56       0.011          4,196      113           0             1
2    -0.283       0.104         -2.73       0.006          3,770      101           0             0
3    -0.239       0.117         -2.05       0.040          3,425      85            0             1
4    -0.280       0.172         -1.63       0.104          3,048      73            0             0
5    -0.323       0.159         -2.03       0.042          2,737      68            0             0




                                                      32
Table 8: Post-Acquisition Performance Characteristics (Simple Difference-in-Differences)



Notes: This table documents simple difference-in-difference estimates for the post-acquisition performance between acquired
and control (non-acquired) firms. Panels A-D report post acquisition OIBD/Assets, log employment, log net PP&E and log
sales, respectively. t={0,5} denotes the post-acqusition year. The second column presents the simple difference-in-differences
coefficient estimate. Estimates in bold indicate statistical differences in measured post-acquisition performance for acquired
and non-acquired firms.
                                  Panel A: Post-Acqusition Performance (OIBD/Asset)
         Coefficient
 t        Estimate            Std. Error            Z-Stat               P>|z|             Untreated             Treated

                                               Simple Difference-in-Differences
0          -0.061               0.061                -0.99               0.322               4,750                 126
1          0.167                0.985                0.17                0.865               4,203                 114
2          0.358                1.287                0.28                0.781               3,788                 100
3          0.089                0.285                0.31                0.755               3,434                 85
4          0.209                 0.56                0.37                0.708               3,060                 72
5          0.103                 0.23                0.45                0.656               2,743                 68


                                           Panel B: Post-Acquisition Employment
         Coefficient
 t        Estimate            Std. Error            Z-Stat               P>|z|             Untreated             Treated

                                               Simple Difference-in-Differences
0          -0.092               0.307                -0.30               0.765               3,063                 94
1          -0.070               0.321                -0.22               0.827               2,683                 82
2          -0.356               0.333                -1.07               0.285               2,345                 74
3          -0.587               0.361                -1.63               0.104               1,897                 60
4          -0.524               0.380                -1.38               0.167               1,621                 50
5          -0.335               0.392                -0.85               0.394               1,397                 45


                                            Panel C: Post Acquisition Net PP&E
         Coefficient
 t        Estimate            Std. Error            Z-Stat               P>|z|             Untreated             Treated

                                               Simple Difference-in-Differences
0          -0.225               0.326                -0.69               0.489               4,760                 127
1          -0.277               0.339                -0.82               0.414               4,203                 114
2          -0.350               0.352                -0.99               0.320               3,780                 101
3          -0.423               0.375                -1.13               0.260               3,422                 86
4          -0.529               0.396                -1.33               0.182               3,043                 73
5          -0.701               0.409                -1.71               0.087               2,726                 67




                                                             33
                               Panel D: Post-Acquisition Sales
    Coefficient
t    Estimate     Std. Error        Z-Stat               P>|z|    Untreated   Treated

                               Simple Difference-in-Differences
0     -0.063        0.296            -0.21               0.831     4,761       126
1     -0.220        0.306            -0.72               0.473     4,196       114
2     -0.335        0.315            -1.06               0.288     3,770       101
3     -0.379        0.335            -1.13               0.258     3,425        86
4     -0.460        0.357            -1.29               0.197     3,048        73
5     -0.454        0.364            -1.25               0.213     2,737        68




                                             34
Table 9: Failed Transactions
Notes: This table enumerates M&A transactions that were announced but failed to be completed. Columns 1-3
present the target name, acquiror name and acquiror nation. Columns 4 and 5 present the dates the transactions were
announced and withdrawn. Columns 6 and 7 present the change in the announced target's change in employment and
sales in the year the transaction was announced.
       (1)                  (2)                (3)              (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)
                                                                                            Target         Target
                                            Acquiror         Date            Date          Change in      Change
 Target Name          Acquiror Name          Nation        Announced      Withdrawn       Employment      in Sales
  Wits Basin               Easyknit
   Precious          Enterprises Hldgs
   Minerals                  Ltd           Hong Kong       11/29/2006       11/1/2007          NA           NA
                    Impala Pacific Corp
   KDI Corp               (Ariadne)        Hong Kong        4/28/1986       8/21/1986        -0.538        -0.033
                           Berjaya
   SSMC Inc         Corp(Malaysia)Bhd       Malaysia        2/6/1989        3/22/1989          NA           NA
                    Korean Airlines Co
   Aeronca Inc               Ltd          South Korea       6/10/1986       10/7/1986          NA           NA
   AT&T Latin          Southern Cross
 America Corp          Latin America        Argentina       1/7/2003        9/3/2003           NA            NA
American Maize-      Usaha Tegas Sdn
   Products Co               Bhd            Malaysia        2/27/1995       7/14/1995          NA           NA
Bear Stearns Cos      Jardine Strategic
       Inc              Holdings Ltd       Hong Kong        9/30/1987      10/23/1987        -0.046         0.009
  Cole National      Moulin Intl Hldgs
      Corp                   Ltd           Hong Kong       4/15/2004       7/25/2004           NA          0.173
   CalMat Co           Investor Group      Hong Kong       10/19/1987      10/30/1987         0.220        0.402
 FNB Rochester       Cukurova Holding
    Corp,NY                  AS              Turkey         5/9/1990        9/4/1990           NA           NA
    Friedman
  Industries Inc         Investor          Venezuela        11/7/1986       5/5/1987           NA           NA
 Emerson Radio      Semi-Tech(Global)
      Corp                Co Ltd           Hong Kong        3/15/1991       4/1/1992           NA           NA
  Metromedia
  International
     Group            Investor Group          UAE           10/2/2006      12/31/2006        -0.370        -0.008
                           MBf
Phoenix Medical     International(MBF
Technology Inc             Hldg)           Hong Kong        8/8/1990        10/4/1990          NA           NA
    Builders          TriSun Medical
 Transport Inc         America Inc            China         3/19/1990       10/4/1990          NA           0.053
    Tesoro           Oakville NV(Kuo
Petroleum Corp           Invt Ltd)         Hong Kong        5/31/1990      12/20/1990        -0.057         0.268
  Unocal Corp            CNOOC               China          6/22/2005       8/2/2005          NA            0.224
  Union Texas
   Petroleum        Chinese Petroleum
   Holdings            Corp{CPC}             Taiwan         9/28/1990      12/19/1990          NA           NA




                                                           35
Table 10: Robustness Checks (Propensity Score Matching and Difference-in-Differences)




Notes: This table documents difference-in-differences estimates for the post-acquisition performance between acquired and
matched non-acquired control firms. Each panel reports post-acquisition OIBD/Assets, log sales and log employment.
t={0,5} denotes the post-acquisition year. Each column presents the Mahalanobis propensity score matched difference-in-
differences coefficient estimate and bootstrapped standard errors based on reps=100 in parentheses.. Estimates in bold
indicate statistical differences in measured post-acquisition performance for acquired and matched non-acquired firms.


                                              Panel A: Majority Acquisitions
 t                OIBD/Asset                               Log Sales                            Log Employment
0              -0.309               (0.250)            -0.354                (0.184)            -0.423              (0.283)
1               0.090               (0.175)            -0.280                (0.308)            -0.167              (0.457)
2               0.325               (0.423)            -0.694                (0.483)             0.006              (0.626)
3              -0.220               (0.183)            -0.136                (0.472)             0.045              (0.691)
4              -0.166               (0.168)            -0.455                (0.787)            -0.016              (1.087)
5              -0.160               (0.171)            -0.808                (1.093)            -0.179              (1.452)


                                              Panel B: Minority Acquisitions
 t                OIBD/Asset                               Log Sales                            Log Employment
0              -0.001               (0.024)            -0.086                (0.066)            -0.037              (0.050)
1              -0.008               (0.031)            -0.193                (0.083)            -0.116              (0.082)
2               0.012               (0.027)            -0.215                (0.114)            -0.183              (0.162)
3               0.009               (0.069)            -0.208                (0.135)            -0.232              (0.262)
4               0.099               (0.053)            -0.231                (0.183)            -0.164              (0.208)
5               0.096               (0.040)            -0.269                (0.166)            -0.304              (0.279)


                                                Panel C: Cash Acquisitions
 t                OIBD/Asset                               Log Sales                            Log Employment
0              -0.052               (0.039)            -0.099                (0.079)            -0.101              (0.054)
1               0.009               (0.034)            -0.182                (0.092)            -0.144              (0.086)
2               0.031               (0.097)            -0.255                (0.114)            -0.161              (0.178)
3               0.008               (0.074)            -0.216                (0.144)            -0.242              (0.269)
4               0.105               (0.051)            -0.271                (0.171)            -0.249              (0.247)
5               0.090               (0.043)            -0.293                (0.183)            -0.449              (0.300)




                                                            36
                                           Panel D: Manufacturing Acquisitions
t               OIBD/Asset                                Log Sales                       Log Employment
0            -0.044              (0.038)              -0.104              (0.091)         -0.045             (0.048)
1             0.005              (0.039)              -0.191              (0.126)         -0.144             (0.092)
2             0.044              (0.039)              -0.150              (0.128)         -0.296             (0.174)
3             0.084              (0.126)              -0.089              (0.153)         -0.490             (0.205)
4             0.091              (0.071)              -0.296              (0.253)         -0.464             (0.316)
5             0.069              (0.061)              -0.302              (0.278)         -0.510             (0.330)




    Panel E: East Asian Acquirers from Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan and South Korea (excluding India and China)
t               OIBD/Asset                                Log Sales                       Log Employment
0            -0.101              (0.065)              -0.127              (0.075)         -0.148             (0.051)
1            -0.039              (0.040)              -0.256              (0.087)         -0.270             (0.097)
2             0.016              (0.066)              -0.311              (0.155)         -0.292             (0.232)
3            -0.038              (0.069)              -0.278              (0.159)         -0.430             (0.293)
4             0.076              (0.049)              -0.368              (0.205)         -0.441             (0.305)
5             0.044              (0.045)              -0.390              (0.263)         -0.580             (0.273)


                              Panel F: East Asian Acquirers including India and China
t               OIBD/Asset                                Log Sales                       Log Employment
0            -0.004              (0.028)              -0.075              (0.100)         -0.003             (0.099)
1             0.013              (0.050)              -0.163              (0.140)         -0.006             (0.118)
2             0.015              (0.047)              -0.235              (0.125)         -0.071             (0.190)
3             0.034              (0.111)              -0.189              (0.185)          0.013             (0.310)
4             0.092              (0.065)              -0.146              (0.247)          0.168             (0.417)
5             0.131              (0.079)              -0.222              (0.221)          0.082             (0.623)


                                            Panel G: Horizontal Acquisitions
t               OIBD/Asset                                Log Sales                       Log Employment
0            -0.033              (0.063)              -0.064              (0.107)          0.008             (0.103)
1             0.029              (0.040)              -0.063              (0.193)         -0.159             (0.180)
2             0.084              (0.066)              -0.142              (0.283)         -0.501             (0.531)
3             0.082              (0.053)              -0.220              (0.289)         -0.669             (0.509)
4             0.008              (0.083)              -0.350              (0.390)         -0.569             (0.629)
5             0.029              (0.096)              -0.120              (0.519)         -0.327             (0.735)




                                                           37
                             Panel H: Diversifying Acquisitions
t     OIBD/Asset                            Log Sales                 Log Employment
0   -0.063         (0.043)              -0.111              (0.077)   -0.105           (0.059)
1   -0.025         (0.036)              -0.244              (0.084)   -0.164           (0.081)
2    0.003         (0.067)              -0.304              (0.116)   -0.155           (0.174)
3   -0.026         (0.076)              -0.244              (0.132)   -0.187           (0.242)
4   0.096          (0.056)              -0.268              (0.170)   -0.160           (0.248)
5   0.087          (0.045)              -0.358              (0.202)   -0.400           (0.329)




                    Panel I: Diversifying and Minority Acquisitions
t     OIBD/Asset                            Log Sales                 Log Employment
0     -0.027       (0.023)                -0.039            (0.060)     -0.028         (0.079)
1     -0.062       (0.032)                -0.264            (0.093)     -0.178         (0.093)
2      0.022       (0.055)                -0.206            (0.126)     -0.269         (0.150)
3      0.299       (0.273)                -0.164            (0.167)     -0.210         (0.265)
4      0.013       (0.058)                -0.275            (0.174)     -0.173         (0.231)
5      0.007       (0.079)                -0.181            (0.228)     -0.375         (0.287)




                                            38
