                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




LABOR REGULATIONS, UNIONS, AND SOCIAL PROTECTION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES:
             MARKET DISTORTIONS OR EFFICIENT INSTITUTIONS?

                                           Richard B. Freeman

                                          Working Paper 14789
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w14789


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       March 2009




  The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
  reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
  NBER publications.

  © 2009 by Richard B. Freeman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
  may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
  the source.
Labor Regulations, Unions, and Social Protection in Developing Countries:¸˛Market distortions
or Efficient Institutions?
Richard B. Freeman
NBER Working Paper No. 14789
March 2009
JEL No. J01,J08,J2,J3,J31,J5

                                               ABSTRACT

This essay reviews what economists have learned about the impact of labor market institutions, defined
broadly as government regulations and union activity on labor outcomes in developing countries.
It finds that: 1) Labor institutions vary greatly among developing countries but less than they vary
among advanced countries. Unions and collective bargaining are less important in developing than
in advanced countries while government regulations are nominally as important. 2) Many developing
countries compliance with minimum wage regulations produce spikes in wage distributions around
the minimum in covered sectors. Most studies find modest adverse effects of the minimum on employment
so that the minimum raises the total income of low paid labor. 3) In many countries minimum wages
“spill-over” to the unregulated sector, producing spikes in the wage distributions there as well. 4) Employment
protection regulations and related laws shift output and employment to informal sectors and reduce
gross labor mobility. 5) Mandated benefits increase labor costs and reduce employment modestly while
the costs of others are shifted largely to labor, with some variation among countries. 6) Contrary to
the Harris-Todaro two sector model in which rural-urban migration adjust to produce a positive relation
between unemployment and wages across regions and sectors, wages and unemployment are inversely
related by the “wage curve”. 7) Unions affect non-wage outcomes as well as wage outcomes. 8) Cross-country
regressions yield inconclusive results on the impact of labor regulations on growth while studies of
country adjustments to economic shocks, such as balance of payments problems, find no difference
in the responses of countries by the strength of labor institutions. 9) Labor institution can be critical
when countries experience great change, as in China’s growth spurt and Argentina’s preservation of
social stability and democracy after its 2001-2002 economic collapse. Cooperative labor relations
tend to produce better economic outcomes. 10) The informal sector increased its share of the work
force in the developing world in the past two decades. The persistence of large informal sectors throughout
the developing world, including countries with high rates of growth, puts a premium on increasing
our knowledge of how informal sector labor markets work and finding institutions and policies to deliver
social benefits to workers in that sector.


Richard B. Freeman
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
freeman@nber.org
                                                                                                3

       Once about a time – not so long ago – the international financial institutions and

many in the economics and policy establishment believed that they knew how to create

sustainable growth in developing economies. They had a tool kit of policy prescriptions that

they could take from country to country to cure economic ills. For the labor market, the

package called for reduced regulations and lower social protection, cuts in public sector pay

and employment, weaker unions, and greater reliance on market wage setting compared to

collective bargaining or administrative rules. The enemy of growth was “urban bias”

(Lipton, 1977) -- government or union setting of pay and work conditions that benefit

modern sector workers but that reduce the flow of workers from low productivity informal

and rural sectors to the modern sector. The World Bank’s 1990 Development Report

presented the prevailing wisdom: “Labor market policies – minimum wages, job security

regulations, and social security – are usually intended to raise welfare or reduce exploitation.

But they actually work to raise the cost of labor in the formal sector and reduce labor demand

... increase the supply of labor to the rural and urban informal sectors, and thus depress labor

incomes where most of the poor are found.” (World Bank 1990, p. 63).

       Underlying this perspective was the Harris-Todaro (1970) two-sector model that

attributed joblessness in developing countries to institutionally imposed high urban wages.

The model posited that the high wages induced rural workers to migrate to urban areas,

where they became unemployed while waiting for good jobs. Migration continued until the

rate of unemployment equated the expected urban sector earnings (the wage times the

probability of employment) to rural earnings. In this situation, an increase in modern sector

employment at the institutionally determined wage does not raise GDP. This is because the

addition of a high productivity job induces enough rural workers to migrate into urban
                                                                                                 4

unemployment to reduce rural output by the increased output due to the new urban job.1

        World Bank and International Monetary Fund economists also worried that labor

institutions would undermine structural adjustment programs designed to cure balance of

payments deficits or other economic ills. Viewing the archetypical problem as one in which

the developing country ran into a balance of payments deficit, they stressed the need to shift

resources from labor-intensive non-traded goods and services to capital-intensive traded

goods sectors. The least costly way to do this was to devalue the currency, which would

raise the price of tradeable goods and services relative to non-tradeable goods and services

and thus attract resources into the traded sectors. As long as tradeable goods were capital

intensive, this would also shift the income distribution toward capital. The fear was that

unions or other institutions that raised wages to preserve labor incomes would stop relative

prices from moving in the desired direction. Absent a price-induced shift in resources, the

country would have to undergo a recession to reduce imports and raise exports, which would

be far more costly than a real devaluation.

       At the 1992 World Bank Annual Conference on Development Economics, I reviewed

extant evidence that labor institutions harmed economic development and stymied

adjustments to macro-economic problems per this analysis and found it sparse and

unconvincing (Freeman, 1993a). The strongest evidence was Fallon and Lucas's (1989)

comparison of the response of employment to output and wages in 35 industries in India and

29 industries in Zimbabwe before and after these countries strengthened labor laws. Their

analysis showed that industries adjusted employment to changes in output as rapidly after the



1       Let W be the wage in the urban sector and Wr be the wage in the rural sector. Then
the two sectors have equal expected earnings when eW = Wr, where e is the ratio of
employment (E) to labor force (L) in the urban sector. Since this means that EWr = LR, dL =
W/Wr dE. An increase in E increases the urban work force, which in turn reduces the rural
                                                                                                   5

laws as before the laws but that employment was lower at the same output after the laws (ie

that productivity improved, which could be interpreted as a positive outcome). Absent

evidence that firms complied with the laws and that other factors did not affect outcomes

over the same period (they noted that Zimbabwe became independent co-terminus with the

change in labor regulations) I viewed the results as inconclusive at best. I was more

impressed by the large declines in real minimum wages and average earnings in many

African and Latin American countries during the 1980s that suggested that labor regulations

were more “sawdust” than “hardwood”.

          The quantity and quality of research on labor institutions in developing countries has

increased greatly since the early 1990s. Some countries changed labor regulations in ways

that provide good pseudo-experiments of whether institutions help or hinder the working of

labor markets. Many countries now regularly provide researchers with micro data files on

individuals and establishments that permit deeper probing of hypotheses than is possible with

aggregate data. Research institutions and individual researchers have developed new data

sets with country labor codes and institutional practices that illuminate cross-country

differences and provide input into cross-country growth and other regressions.

          In light of all this, what have we learned about how labor institutions affect outcomes

in developing countries?

          The recent research has not uncovered a general law for the effects of institutions on

outcomes – economic circumstances and institutions probably vary too much among

countries to support any single generalization – but it has yielded new and in some cases

surprising findings on how institutions affect outcomes. This has led to a more measured




output.
                                                                                                6

view of what institutions do than in the World Bank’s 1990 proclamation. Here are the main

findings:

       1) Labor institutions vary greatly among developing countries but less than they vary

among advanced countries. Collective bargaining is weaker in developing countries than in

advanced countries while labor regulations are nominally similar.

       2) Contrary to my initial skepticism, compliance with regulations in the formal sector

of many developing countries is sufficient that minimum wages appear to be binding. They

produce spikes in the distribution of wages around minimum. Most studies find that

minimum wages reduce employment sufficiently modestly so that minimums generally help

the low paid.

       3) Contrary to Harris-Todaro type models, minimum wages induce spikes in the

distribution of earnings in the informal sector in several countries, suggesting that minimum

determine reservation wages of workers in those sectors.

       4) Wages and unemployment are negatively related across geographic areas,

consistent with the wage curve and contrary to the Harris-Todaro model.

       5) Mandated benefits increase labor costs and reduce employment modestly while the

costs of others are shifted largely to labor, with some variation among countries.

       6) Some mandated benefits increase labor costs and reduce employment modestly

while the costs of others are shifted largely to workers and thus presumably do not impact

employment.

       7) Unions are associated with higher wages and non-wage shares of compensation

and with lower turnover and less dispersion of pay. Estimates of the union effects on profits

and productivity differ across countries.
                                                                                                   7

        8) Cross-country regressions yield inconclusive results on the impact of labor

regulations on growth while studies of country adjustments to economic shocks, such as

balance of payments problems, find no difference in the responses of countries by the

strength of labor institutions.

        The research has led analysts at the World Bank and other international institutions to

moderate their initially negative assessments of labor institutions.2 Readers familiar with the

retreat of the Bank and the IMF from obiter dicta on free trade, unrestricted capital flows, and

laissez faire policies will note that this fits with the new modesty of these institutions about

what economists can scientifically assert about growth-inducing policies.3

        9) Labor institution can be critical when countries experience great change, as in

China’s growth spurt and Argentina’s preservation of social stability and democracy after its




2       The 1995 World Development Review was the first major Bank statement in this
regard: “Free trade unions are the cornerstone of any effective system of industrial relations.
Unions act as agents for labor … monitor employers’ compliance with government
regulations … can help raise workplace productivity and reduce workplace discrimination …
(contribute to) … political and social development.” (World Bank 1995, p 79). In 2003 the
Inter-American Development Bank declared: “Labor regulations are not cost-free, but
deregulation is not the answer.... Unions are neither the sand in the wheels of the labor
market nor the solution to low wages.... better labor market performance is compatible with
lower earnings inequality ... The new agenda requires a strengthened labor authority and a
complex network of public and private institutions” (Inter-American Development Bank,
2004 pp 7-8).
3
Indicative of this thinking: “Rising trade volumes are unambiguously related to growth, but
the direction of causation is unclear.” Zagha, Nankini, & Gill (IMF, 2006); ”some of the
more extreme polemic claims made about the effects of financial globalization on developing
countries, both pro and con, are far less easy to substantiate than either side generally cares to
admit.” Kose, Prasad, Rogoff, & Wei (IMF, 2007); “greater caution toward certain forms of
foreign capital inflows might be warranted”– Prasad, Rajan, & Subramian (IMF, 2007);
“expectations about the impact of reforms on growth were unrealistic…our knowledge of
economic growth is extremely incomplete… an economic system may not always respond as
predicted (Zagha, Nankini, & Gill, 2006). “The Washington Consensus has been dead for
years.” Wolfensohn (2004). On the role of government see World Bank (1993).
                                                                                                8

2001-2002 economic collapse. Cooperative labor relations tend to produce better economic

outcomes.

       10) In the 1990s-2000s, the informal sector’s share of employment increased or held

steady in virtually all developing countries, including those with healthy growth and limited

regulations (section 8). Even without deregulating the formal sector, an increasing

proportion of workers in developing countries are working in largely unregulated markets.

1. The Debate over Labor Institutions

       Developing countries, like advanced countries, evince substantial differences in labor

institutions that could impact economic outcomes and growth. To quantify this variation, I

summarize in exhibit 1 the mean and standard deviation of five measures of the institutional

orientation of formal sector labor markets. The five measures are: the labor component from

the Fraser Institute’s (2006) index of economic freedom; the Botero, et al (2004) indices of

the strength of employment laws and laws regarding collective rights; the power of firms to

set wages and hire and fire reported in the (World Economic Forum's Globa Competitiveness

Report (2006) and rates of unionization from the ILO (1996). I have scaled the indices so

that high values mean that a country relies more on market forces than on institutions in

determining outcomes. I differentiate developing countries by level of income and

distinguish the traditional advanced countries (the West and Japan) from recently the

developed Asian Tiger economies. Appendix A gives the measures for each country.

       The average values of the measures in exhibit 1 show that developing countries have

lower union density and are more likely to rely on firms/markets than collective

bargaining/regulations to set wages compared to advanced countries. The Botero et al

measure of employment law shows stronger laws in developing countries than in advanced

countries but the measures of hiring and firing practices, collective relations law, and the
                                                                                                 9

overall Fraser Index show little difference between advanced and developing countries. The

newly industrialized Asian countries are usually the most market-oriented. The correlation

matrix at the bottom of the exhibit shows that the four indices are positively correlated,

which indicates that they are measuring broadly similar phenomenon but the correlations are

lower than what one might expect if they were good measures of the same underlying

institutional structures. The could reflect genuine differences in country policies or practices

along the dimensions that each index covers or it could reflect substantial measurement error

in the indicators. Union density has a lower correlation to the four measures than they have

among themselves.

       The standard deviations below the means show considerable variation in institutions

within groups. In 5 of the 6 measures, the variation is smaller among the developing

countries than it is among the advanced countries. This is due to the divergence between the

market-oriented US and the other English-speaking countries and the more institution-

oriented countries in the European Union (Freeman, Boxall, Haynes, 2007). Finally, to the

extent that institutions distort the operation of labor markets per the 1990 World Bank

statement, the measures suggest that labor markets work better in some developing countries

than in some advanced countries. By the Fraser Institute’s index for labor, for example, the

Ugandan labor market should work better than the German or Swedish labor markets.

       Since institutions usually reduce dispersion of earnings across and among groups,

another way to assess the importance of institutions in advanced and developing countries is

to compare the dispersion of earnings among nominally similar workers. Exhibit 2 graphs

the standard deviation of ln earnings among occupations and industries in countries by GDP

per capita. It shows greater dispersion in lower income countries than in high income

countries. To the extent that high dispersion reflects informational or other market failures,
                                                                                                   10

institutions have greater scope to improve outcomes in developing countries than in advanced

countries. To the extent that the lower dispersion reflects institutionally-enforced

compression of wages from ideal market levels, on the other hand, the higher dispersion in

low income countries might reflect better performing labor markets, per the Fraser Institute

rating of the Ugandan market compared to those of EU countries.

Theoretical perspectives

       Economists use three types of theories to analyze labor institutions.

       The first, which I have labelled distortionism, views institutions as distorting

otherwise ideal competitive market equilibrium. Consider analyses of unionism in a market

where wages are at the competitive level and the union bargains for higher wages. The higher

cost of labor leads unionized firms to reduce employment, which forces some workers to

move to lower paid less productive non-union work, lowering economic efficiency. The

higher the elasticity of demand for labor, the greater is the distortion in resource allocation.

       The second type of theory treats institutions as mechanisms for efficient bargaining.

Models of efficient bargaining predict that when firms/workers bargain they “leave no money

on the table” and thus allocate resources optimally. This is the Coase Theorem at work in the

world of labor institutions (Freeman, 1993b). This analysis suggests that institutionally

determined rules, such as employment protection legislation, affect distribution but not

production. More modestly, it suggests that through legal arrangements or shadow economy

side-payments, there are “natural limits to the efficiency losses engendered by such

regulations” (Squire and Suthiwart-Narueput, 1997).

       The third type of theory focuses on ways institutions facilitate the flow of information

and foster cooperative behaviour that could raise productivity. In this vein Freeman and

Lazear (1995) modelled works councils as institutions that increase communication inside
                                                                                                 11

firms and allow management and labor to make more informed and presumably better

decisions. In addition, when dispersion of pay is high for non-competitive reasons such as

monopsony (Manning, 2003), informational failures, or other factors, collective bargaining or

government regulations can bring wages closer to the market-clearing level.

        In sum, there are arguments that institutions reduce efficiency, do not affect

efficiency, and raise efficiency. To determine which arguments are valid requires evidence

on the links between institutions and outcomes that isolate the effect of institutions compared

to other economic forces. On the basis of extant micro-data and statistical tools, I use a five-

fold sieve for evaluating research on the impact of institutions:

        1) The institution should affect the targeted outcome. For instance, if the policy is a

minimum wage, and the minimum is enforced, it should change the distribution of wages,

producing a spike in frequency around the minimum. If an institution does not affect the price

or quantity on which it is targeted it is likely to be a pro forma symbolic policy that is not

implemented. For example, a government may have strong labor codes consistent with the

Conventions of the International Labor Organization but allot no resources to enforce those

codes and not impact outcomes.

        2) Evidence that the institution alters quantities. Assuming that an institution affects

the targeted outcome, it is critical to determine whether it reallocates resources or simply

alters wages with no discernible impact on quantities. If it reallocates resources it is

potentially distortionary. If it alters wages but not quantities, it could be efficiently

redistributing income while leaving output unchanged, per efficient bargaining models. In the

minimum wage case the critical evidence is the effect, if any, on employment.

        3) Evidence that the outcome attributed to the institution did not occur in another

setting absent the institution. This applies a difference in difference analysis by treating the
                                                                                                  12

setting in which the new institution operates as the treatment and some setting where it does

not operate as the control. Since many countries, sectors, or workers without an institution

can serve as a counter-factual, there is a danger that the selection of one counter-factual

rather than another may determine the conclusion. To minimize such dangers, the analysis

should demonstrate that outcomes in the control were highly correlated with outcomes in the

affected group before the institutional change (Abadie et al., 2007). Otherwise, the control is

unlikely to be a good guide to how the affected group might have fared absent the policy.

       4) Evidence that the estimated effect of the institution is sufficiently large to affect

aggregate development. In advanced countries most workers are in the formal sector

finding that an institution affects outcomes means that it will have a widespread impact. In

developing countries where the share of the work force in the formal sector is small

institutions are unlikely to affect aggregate outcomes unless they have very large effects on

the formal sector, sizeable spillovers to the informal sector, or are located in sectors that may

be particularly important for economic development, for instance traded goods.

       5. Identification of an institutional innovation from outcome data. This is a “double

blind test” in which the researcher looks at outcome measures as if he/she had no knowledge

of any institutional change and identifies the period/country where the institution was at

work. It is based on Andrews’ (1993) test for structural changes in time series data with

unknown change points. Ideally, the outcome data show a break that lines up with the change

of policy that may have caused the break. In cross country time series growth data, the

question would be whether the growth record of countries would identify those that adopted

economic reforms that are supposed to help growth. It tests whether any innovation is

sufficiently important to affect outcomes when other factors are also at workl.

2. Micro-evidence on minimum wages
                                                                                           13

       The response of employment to minimum wages depends on the shape of the labor

demand schedule in the range of the minimum. For all its contentiousness, the literature on

minimum wages in the US and other advanced countries generally finds modest responses in

employment (Card and Krueger (1997); Neumark and Wascher, 2006). The evidence that

employment responses are often negligible does not mean that demand curves do not slope

downward nor that a high minimum wage cannot decimate employment. Rather, it suggests

that governments set minimum wages with due consideration to the risk that minima can

cause more harm than good.

       The studies summarized in Exhibit 3 find that in many developing countries,

minimum wages raise the pay of low paid workers in the formal sector by enough to produce

spikes in the distribution of earnings and that changes in the minimum change the wages for

low paid covered groups. Studying compliance in Indonesia. Harrison and Scorse (2003)

report that during the 1990s epoch of globalization compliance increased in both

multinationals and domestic firms. With respect to employment, most studies find that

minimum wages had modest adverse effects on employment, with however considerable

variation across countries and studies, even by the same analyst. Alatas and Cameron (2003)

and Rama (2001) found that employment effects in Indonesia were limited to small firms.

Bell (1997) found larger employment effects in Columbia than in Mexico. Analysing Brazil,

Lemos (2007) found no employment effects in the public or private sectors, while earlier

reporting small negative long run employment effects and modest negative employment

effects in the formal and informal sector (Lemos 2004a, 2004b)s. Gindling and Terrell

(2007a) estimated an elasticity of employment to the minimum in Costa Rica of -0.10 but

estimated an elasticity of employment to the minimum in neighboring Honduras greater than

-1.0 (Gindling and Terrell, 2007b). Studies that use panel data to identify the workers
                                                                                              14

directly impacted by the minimum find larger employment effects than studies that estimate

the effect from employment statistics for a wider group, but whether the differences among

countries reflect differences in labor markets and in enforcement or in research designs is

difficult to tell.

        That most studies obtain elasticities considerably less than unity implies that increases

in the minimum have the potential for being a viable anti-poverty tool. Analysing the link

between minimum wages and poverty in 22 developing countries Lustig and McCleod (1997)

find that changes in real minimum wages are associated with declines in poverty, which

requires that the elasticity of demand be low. The high elasticity found for Honduras is a

striking exception, indicating that each country case (and each potential change in the

minimum in each country) must be considered carefully.

        Studies that have examined the pattern of change in minimum wages as an

endogenous variable raise doubts about the standard assumption that changes in minimum

wages are exogenous to market conditions. Looking at changes in real minima wages in 23

developing countries in the 1980s-1990s, Squire and Suthiwart-Narueput found declines in

the real minimum in 16 countries. Presumably governments allowed real minima to fall

because they believed that in times of economic crisis falling real minima saved jobs. Rama

(2000) shows that African counties in the CFA zone changed minimum wages in response to

changes in the terms of trade, national output, and consumer prices.

        The big surprise in studies of minimum wages in developing countries is a substantial

body of evidence from Latin America that minimum wages raise wages in the informal sector

as well as in the covered sector (Gindling and Terrell, 2005, Lemos, 2004b, Kristensen and

Cunningham, 2006; Maloney and Nunez Mendez, 2003). In Brazil this is known as the

“Efeito Farol” or lighthouse effect. In some cases, increases in the minimum appear to raise
                                                                                               15

wages more in the informal sector than in the formal sector. This effect runs counter to the

model that economists often use to analyse minimum wages, in which labor displaced from

covered employment moves to the uncovered sector and depresses wages there.

       One interpretation of the positive wage spillover is that workers base their reservation

wages on the minimum, perhaps because the high dispersion of pay in developing countries

provides little guidance as to what wage they might expect. If low paid workers in the

informal sector are paid less than low paid workers in the formal sector, their wages would

increase more if the minimum induced all workers to have the same reservation wage. But

perhaps something else is going on that is not captured in the model4 or perhaps the measures

of wages in the informal sector are poor. In any case, the results devastate the application of

the standard model to understanding what minimum wages do in developing countries.

3 Wage Curve

       The wage curve is an empirical relation between wages (w) and unemployment (u)

that is usually written in log-log form: ln w = a + b ln u + X, where X refers to other factors

that affect wages (Blanchflower and Oswald, 1994). Fit with cross section data across

regions, the wage curve tests the prediction of the Harris-Todaro two-sector model that high

wages induce unemployment due to the migration of rural labor to high wage cities contrary

to the finding in advanced countries that wages are lower when unemployment is higher as

wages fall to equilibrate the supply-demand imbalance.5 If estimated wage curves had the



4          In a general equilibrium closed economy the minimum would shift capital as well
as labor to the informal sector, which could raise wages there if the shift raised its
capital/labor ratio.

        5        Note that the inverse relation indicates that the adjustment process is
insufficiently powerful to clear the labor market and eliminate the correlation in the time
frame covered. There is debate about the applicability of the wage curve analysis to the US,
but US studies also find unemployment and wages positively related.
                                                                                             16

opposite sign in developing countries from those in advanced countries this would signal a

major difference between labor markets. Migration would dominate the link between wages

and unemployment in developing countries whereas wage adjustments to unemployment

would dominate the link in advanced countries.

       Between 1993 and mid 2007 researchers estimated wage curves for 13 developing

non-transition economies: Argentina (Galiana, 1999), Brazil (Amadeo and Camargo, 1997),

Chile (Berg and Contreras, 2004); Mexico (Castro Lugo, 2006), Uruguay (Bucheli and

Gonzalez, 2007) in Latin America, Burkina Faso (Lachaud, 1998), Cote D’Ivoire (Hoddinott,

1996), South Africa (Kingdon and Knight, 1998, 2006), in Africa; and Turkey (Ilkkaracan

and Raziye, 2003), Korea (Blanchflower and Oswald, 1994), Taiwan (Rodgers and Nataraj,

1999) China (Sabin, 1999; Wu 2004), India (Bhalotra, 1993). These studies obtain negative

coefficients on ln unemployment of the same order of magnitude as the coefficients in

advanced countries – an elasticity of about -0.10. The negative estimated relation between

unemployment and wages implies that the Harris-Todaro model does not represent labor
                                                             6
markets in the developing countries in the period covered.

       This conclusion is consistent with analyses of labor market adjustments in the 1990s

in Sub-Saharan Africa, whose experience motivated the model. For South Africa Kingdon

and Knight (2004) reject the two sector story of urban joblessness on the grounds that

unemployed workers do not forego informal sector jobs to search for a high wage urban job.

Similarly, Rama’s (2000) analysis of the CFA African countries rejected ”the hypothesis that

labour market policies and institutions were the obstacles preventing wages in the formal

sector from adjusting to a more unfavorable international context” (p. 495). Summarizing



6
 See Babecky, Ramos and Sanromá (2008) for a meta-analysis of wage curves that cover all
countries that is consistent with this conclusion for developing countries.
                                                                                               17

research on African labor markets, Kingdon, Sandefur, and Teal (2006) conclude that real

wages were “more downwardly flexible than previously thought and … surprisingly

responsive to unemployment rates” though large wage differentials remain between the

formal and informal sectors. Sizable flows of labor between the informal and formal sector

in some countries also argues against the Harris-Todaro model.

       In short, the evidence rejects the two sector model that makes institutions the prime

cause of divergences between earnings and productivity among sectors and of the large pay

differences among industries and occupations shown in exhibit 2. Given that the two sector

model does not fit reality, we must seek look elsewhere for the causes of the great dispersion

of pay in developing countries: Efficiency wages or gift exchanges? Implicit profit sharing

between firms and workers? Unmeasured differences in human capital? Transportation or

communication problems that make the sectors separate islands in the economy and raise the

costs of search? The door is open for innovative analyses.

4. Employment Regulations

       Employment protection legislation (EPL) seeks to protect the jobs of current

employees by requiring that firms pay severance if they lay them off. Many laws also require

the firm to gain approval for dismissals from a labor court or works council. Closely related

regulations forbid firms from hiring replacements during a labor dispute and guarantee

workers the right to return to work after the dispute. The regulations essentially deal with

property rights at work – whether the worker or the firm “owns” the job. Regulations that

give greater ownership to workers should reduce job turnover and tilt market outcomes

toward experienced workers against new entrants, whereas those that give greater ownership

to firms tilt outcomes toward capital and more mobile younger workers. Still, by making
                                                                                                18

layoffs more expensive, EPL increases the cost of hiring workers (whom the firm may lay off

in the future), which risks reducing total employment.

       For advanced countries, two decades of studies spurred by the OECD have quelled

the fears that EPL greatly affects employment. Most studies find that EPL laws redistribute

employment to incumbent workers with no clear impact on aggregate employment or

unemployment (OECD, 2004, 2006).7 For developing countries, research has just begun. In

Latin America, job security provisions and costs of dismissals are extensive and thus more

costly than in advanced OECD countries (Heckman and Pages 2000). Even so, studies of

EPL legislation that compare employment before and after changes in the law and/or between

covered and uncovered groups in particular countries find effects on total employment in

some countries but not in others. The strongest country evidence for effects of laws is for

Columbia. In 1990 Columbia lowered severance pay and gave firms greater latitude to lay

off workers. Using the Colombian National Household Survey, Kugler (2004) found that the

weakened EPL was associated with growth of employment and a decline in job tenure in the

formal sector relative to the informal sector and with increased job separations and hires in

the formal sector. This churning induced a modest fall in unemployment duration and

aggregate unemployment.

       By contrast, studies of EPL legislation for Chile find no such effects in time series

data (Edwards and Edwards 2000) and household data (Montenegro and Pages 2004).

Montenegro and Pages find that EPL regulations shift employment from young unskilled

workers to senior skilled workers as in advanced countries. Petrin and Sivadasan's (2006)

analysis of establishment data shows no impact of Chile’s 1991 and 1994 changes in



7       In 2004 the OECD summarized the literature as saying that “the evidence of the role
played by EPL on aggregate employment and unemployment rates remains mixed” (p 81)
                                                                                              19

employment regulations on employment, the number of hires and fires, or the speed of

employment adjustment, though they estimate that wages and marginal productivity changed

in ways that they attribute to changing EPL laws.8

       Using firm-level data sets for 16 countries, including five Latin American countries,

Haltwanger, Scarpetto, and Schweiger (2008) show that gross job flows (the sum of jobs

created and jobs destroyed) range from 25 to 30 percent and vary similarly by size of firm

and industry across countries. Using the US as the metric for what a relatively unregulated

competitive labor market would produce they find that flows in the other countries are lower

than in the US and relate the differences to measures of labor regulations. Latin American

regulations are comparable to European Union regulations and both the Latin American and

EU countries have lower gross flows than the US. However, it is the entry and exit of firms

rather than the employment behavior of existing firms that underlies this difference, which

they term “somewhat surprising from a theoretical perspective (p 26)”. Given the high level

of gross job flows in all of the countries, it is unclear whether any regulation-induced

difference in job flows adversely impacts net job reallocation or efficiency.

       Several studies have looked at how India's labor laws affect outcomes in the formal

sector, exploiting the fact that labor regulations vary across states and over time. Besley and

Burgess (2003) created an index of changes in the laws governing employment protection

and industrial disputes for Indian states from 1947 to 1997 and made before-after contrasts of

employment and output in states that did/did not change the laws and between the formal and

informal sector within states. Their main specification showed that pro-worker regulations



8         I find their direct analyses of employment and hiring more convincing than their
interpretation of their estimated gap between wages and marginal productivity, hich show a
rise in the gap after the 1984 change in regulations but not after the 1991 change and a rise in
the gap for blue collar workers in 1995 when the law did not change.
                                                                                                20

induced firms to shift employment and output from the formal to the informal sector,.9

although they report that results “are not robust to including state-specific time trends.”

(Besley and Burgess, fn 21). Bhattacharjea (2006) criticizes the index as being based on: 1)

misreading legal changes in three states (Andhra Pradesh; Maharashtra, Rajasthan); 2) coding

laws so that passing three laws in one year in one direction counts less than passing the same

laws in three separate years; 3) failing to take account of the way state labor laws interact

with other labor laws. The result is that some of the patterns “stand out for anyone who is

reasonably familiar with India”: Kerala, known as pro-labor, is coded as pro-employer while

Gujarat and Maharashtra, known as pro-employer, are coded as pro-worker.

       Ahsan and Pages (2008) report, however, that the results are robust to Bhattacharjea's

amended measures. They find that the laws that regulate the procedures for the resolution of

industrial disputes have more robust and greater effects on formal sector output and

employment than those relating to employment protection legislation. Neither Burgess &

Besley nor Ahsan and Pages find any gains to workers from the legislation, which raises

questions about the purpose of these regulations: why have EPL or . Finally, looking at the

effect of regulations in the context of trade liberalization, Hasan, Mitra, and Ramaswamy

(2007) find that states with greater regulations have smaller elasticities of labor demand,

which suggests that the laws may protect jobs by reducing flexibility. Overall, Indian labor

institutions come closer to fitting the 1990 World Bank view that regulations do more harm

than good than the institutions in other countries, though their impact is limited on the

aggregate economy due to the huge size of the Indian informal sector.



9        Indicative of the political sensitivity of the analyses, the Indian Ministry of Finance
misread the study as showing that “states which have more pro-worker regulations lost out on
industrial production” when the finding is that more pro labor laws shifted production to the
informal sector, conditional on omitting state time trends, as cited by Bhattacharjea, 2006.
                                                                                                 21

5. Mandated benefits

       Mandated benefits are non-wage compensation (social insurance, compensation for

injuries at the job, maternity leave, vacation or holiday pay, and so on) that governments

require firms to provide workers or to pay taxes for government provision. Employers often

complain about the cost of the benefits as if they are add-ons on wages. But if workers desire

the benefit and if wages are flexible workers will pay part and possibly the full cost through

lower wages. Summers (1989) argued that mandated benefits can be a more cost-effective

way to deliver public goods than government provision through general taxes. Studies of the

incidence of mandated benefits for advanced countries show that workers bear the full

incidence in some cases (Gruber, 1997a) and a sizable share of the cost in others (Gruber and

Krueger (1991), Ooghe, Schokkaert, and Flechet (2003)). Workers are more likely to bear a

large proportion of the cost when they value the benefit highly.

       Many developing countries mandate benefits for workers. Most Latin American and

Caribbean countries use payroll taxes to fund retirement, work injury benefits, and health

care in national social insurance systems. Most have paid vacations, and some have

maternity leave as well as other benefits that could increase the cost of labor. Analyses of the

incidence of mandated benefits in Latin America give different results by benefit and

country. Gruber (1997b) estimated that when Chile switched funding social security from

payroll taxes to general revenues, the reduction in payroll taxes was passed entirely onto

workers in the form of higher wages. This implies that the payroll taxes had no effect on

labor demand. But using a similar methodology In Colombia, Kugler and Kugler (2003) find

modest shifting of the payroll tax, which implies that the tax raised the cost of labor in the

formal sector, and affected demand. When Colombia changed its mode of funding severance

pay from a pay-as-you-go system to private accounts in which the employer deposited a
                                                                                               22

proportion of the worker’s wage, Kugler (2002) estimated that 60% to 80% of the cost shifted

to workers in the form of lower wages. This suggests that under the pay-as-you-go system

workers were dubious that firms would pay severance if financial difficulties forced layoffs

whereas the private accounts guaranteed that they would get severance pay.

6 Union Effects

       Developing country unions range from China’s All Chinese Federation of Trade

Unions, a government controlled agency that seeks to advance worker interests within

bounds set by the Communist party to Korea's aggressive independent enterprise unions to

Peronist unions in Argentina to South Africa's COSATU, which played a major role in the

anti-apartheid struggle. Most developing country unions are weak. Many are more involved

in political activity than in collective bargaining. But enough unions in developing countries

engage in collective bargaining to enable researchers to examine what unions do to wages in

the tradition of Lewis (1963, 1986) and what they do to non-wage outcomes in the tradition

of Freeman and Medoff (1984).

       Because data is limited, however, many studies estimate union effects from small non

representative samples and most compare outcomes between union and nonunion

workers/firms with similar characteristics rather than undertaking more methodologically

preferable longitudinal analyses of workers or workplaces that change union status. The one

advantage of studying union effects in developing countries is that in some countries

governments have changed drastically their treatment of unions in short periods of time – for

instance from outlawing collective bargaining and restricting unions to allowing them to

operate freely, which offers the rare opportunity to compare the functioning of a union-free

economy to an economy with free unions.
                                                                                               23

       Exhibit 4 summarizes the findings on the link between unionism and economic

outcomes in the countries for which I found quantitative studies.

       The most extensive work is on Mexico. Estimated union/nonunion wage differentials

ranges from 5% or less to 10%-15%, with unions having their biggest effect on the wages of

lower paid workers. This implies that they reduce wage dispersion and inequality. Popli

(2006) confirms this result but reports that the lower dispersion of pay between union and

nonunion workers narrowed from 1984 to 2000. Comparing unionized and nonunion

establishments, Fairris (2005, 2006) finds that unionism is associated with a higher share of

compensation to non-wage payments and more training of workers; with lower quits in

foreign-owned firms (though not in Mexican-owned firms). Union firms have higher

productivity and comparable profits as in nonunion firms. In contrast, Maloney and Ribeiro

(1999) estimate that unions increase employment in Mexico, which suggests that they lower

productivity. Absent longitudinal changes in union status, however, these patterns could

reflect selectivity of unionized firms rather than any causal impact of unions on firm

performance.

       For Brazil, Arbache estimates a union wage premium in manufacturing on the order

of 5% to 7%, but also finds, contrary to most studies, higher wage dispersion among union

workers than among nonunion workers. Menezes-Filho et al (2005) estimates that union

density within Brazilian manufacturing firms is associated with a union wage effect of 12%,

and that unionized firms have lower productivity and profitability but that union firms that

introduced profit-sharing schemes had substantial increases in productivity and profits. The

studies for other Latin American countries, based on small surveys, find that unions are

associated with lower productivity or profits. The study for Peru reports lower profits but

comparable productivity in unionized firms as in nonunion firms, which implies that the
                                                                                            24

unions must have gained higher wages. The study for Guatamala finds 10% lower

productivity among unionized coffee plantations in a sample of 37 large plantations but finds

no union/nonunion differential in productivity in the five plantations that changed union

status over the period.

       Quantitative studies of unions in Africa have concentrated on wage effects. In

South Africa, unions appear to raise wages by 10% to 20%. Since South Africa has high

unemployment, one might be tempted to blame the unemployment on high union wages per

the Harris-Todaro model but Butcher and Rouse note that the union share of the South

African work force is too small for the estimated wage effects to explain the country’s

unemployment. The wage curve for South Africa shows an inverse relation between wages

and unemployment. In other African countries, Blunch and Verner (2004) estimate that

unions raise wages by about 6% in Ghana, with the effect coming largely from higher wages

for lower paid workers while Verner reports a larger union-nonunion differential in Ghana of

16%. Tsafack-Nanfosso (2007) estimates a union/nonunion wage differential of about 14%

in the Cameroon10 and finds that the standard deviation of log earnings among unionized

workers is considerably lower than among nonunion workers.

       Three studies find lower wages among unionized worker in Africa. Estimates for

Zimbabwe show higher productivity as well as lower pay in union workplaces, which is not

easily reconcilable with other research (Verner, 1999). Estimates for the Cameroon give

lower union wages in 1993 and 1994 (Thomas and Vallee, 1996). Estimates for Senegal find

lower union wages in 1980-85 (Terrell and Svejnar, 1989). Since it makes little sense for



10        He reports a 51% union wage effect using a selectivity term, but has no way to
identify the likelihood of being union beyond functional form. Models of this type often yield
extremely high or low estimates that reflect the absence of any genuine instrumental variable.
(Freeman and Medoff, 1982).
                                                                                                         25

independent unions to negotiate lower wages for members, in all of these cases, the unions

are presumably not “normal unions” doing collective bargaining. At various times,

governments in these countries suppressed independent unions or ran unions as appendages

of the governing party.11 What is needed is a study of the circumstances and behavior of

African trade unions to inform the quantitative analyses.

     Turning to Asia, Malaysian unions operate primarily at the establishment level because

the government restricts industrial unions. Using establishment data Standing (1992) finds

that unions reduce skill differentials and lower quits, and are associated with higher

productivity, more product and process innovations, more firm-sponsored training, and

greater enrollment in a pension plan. The differences between the outcomes for firms with

and without unions far exceed the differences in outcomes between firms with plant level

unions and those that had industrial level unions. Bhandari's (2008) data on the wage

differences between union and nonunion Indian workers based on a small (551 person)

sample reports differences of wages 6% for contractual workers and 25% for permanent

workers.12

        Like Malaysia, Korean unions are largely enterprise based, with membership

restricted to regular employees. Studies compare wage and other outcomes between regular

employees in firms with and without collective bargaining agreements, and between non-

regular workers between those firms as well. The estimated impact of Korean unions on

wages is in the low single digits. Fields and Yoo (2000) found that the union differential

doubled during the period of rapid union growth, but this was from a modest 3% to a still


11      Unions in Senegal and Cameroon have been in conflict with governments over time,
and the unions in Zimbabwe have long opposed the Mobutu dictatorship
12        Using a regression model decomposition, he reports a 57% union wage effect for permanent workers.
This appears to reflect the way the decomposition treats huge differences in regional and migration
characteristics between union and nonunion workers.
                                                                                                26

modest 6%. Park (2006) reports a union differential of 5% for all workers, larger for women

(12%) than for men (2%), but also finds that non-standard workers, who are excluded from

the enterprise union, are paid less in union establishments. Unionism is also associated with

greater employment of non-standard workers, suggesting that firms substitute them for more

expensive union labor. Using a 1991 survey of establishments, Kleiner and Yee (1997)

estimated the impact of unions and works councils deemed ‘effective’ by management and

labor leaders on non wage outcomes. They found lower turnover, similar productivity and

lower job satisfaction among workers in the unionized settings. By contrast, they found that

works councils were positively associated with productivity and satisfaction. Both unions and

works councils appear to have affected decisions about terminations and downsizing.

       The country which experienced the most striking change in union status is Uruguay.

From 1973 to 1984 Uruguay’s military dictatorship outlawed collective bargaining. The

return of democracy gave unions the right to bargain with employers, first under a tripartite

system in which unions, management, and government bargained together (1985 to 1991,

covering some 60% of production workers), and later by management and unions without

government involvement. Labor market outcomes differed with these regime shifts. During

the dictatorship real wages fell 49 percent while the rate of unemployment varied cyclically,

reaching 16% in 1983. Thereafter unions raised wages, which induced firms to invest in

capital. Unionized firms had sufficiently higher productivity that firms suffered no profits

loss (Cassoni, Labadie, and Fachola, 2005). Using establishment data, Cassoni, Allen, and

Labadie (2000) found that elasticities of employment to output and wages were lower with

collective bargaining than in the union-free environment, suggesting that unions reduced

employment flexibility.
                                                                                            27

        Korea, like Uruguay, has had distinct regimes governing unionization. Before Korea

achieved democracy in 1987, the government allowed only an official union movement to

operate and used state police powers to assist employers in labor disputes. Democracy

brought with it a near doubling of union membership but union density fell in the 1990s and

2000s (Jeong, table 2.1, 2007). Some Korean unions formed a second more militant

federation, and the older federation became more aggressive as well. Governments have tried

unsuccessfully to ameliorate the intensity of disputes by establishing Tripartite Committees

for social dialogue and requiring that firms introduce works councils. Wages increased

greatly during democraticization and income inequality fell but the 1997Asian financial crisis

weakened union strength. Real wages fell by 9.3% in 1998, as unions agreed to low nominal

wage changes despite high inflation. Jeong’s (2007, chapter 4) analysis of collective

bargaining contracts shows that the unions shifted from seeking wage gains to protecting

jobs. Lee and Na’s (2004)1999 survey of 300 firms found only a weak union impact on firm

responses to the crisis: unionized firms were more likely to downsize through retirements

than layoffs.

       Finally, taking a more aggregate approach, Feldmann (2009) related the reports of

executives in the World Economic Forum's Global Competitiveness Report on the quality of

labor-management relations to aggregate unemployment. With measures of labor relations

for 1995 to 2003, he conducted a longitudinal regression analysis with country-specific

random effects that shows that cooperative relations reduce unemployment, as does flexible

labor regulations as reported by executives.

       In sum, research finds that unions are associated with higher wages (save for the

African studies noted), higher non-wage compensation, lower dispersion of earnings (save

for the Brazilian study noted), reduced quits and greater training. But the studies show
                                                                                               28

varying relations between unions and productivity or profitability across studies and

countries. While this variation is consistent with the notion that what unions do differs

across countries, it also reflects differences between the often small surveys and groups

covered and limitations of the study designs.

7 Cross country evidence

       Many economists are dubious about what we can learn from cross-country growth

regressions.13 The data sets are small, the measures of institutions are often weak, and our

knowledge of economics is too limited to identify the “right” model for analyzing how an

institutional intervention affects an entire economic system. Analysts have trouble pinning

down the effects of education or trade on growth in cross-country regressions (Krueger and

Lindahl 2001; Rodriguez and Rodrik 1999) so what hope is there of uncovering the more

subtle effects of labor institutions? These are valid concerns but since the bottom line in

development is growth, there is something to be learned from regressions of growth rates on

measures of labor institutions.

       One strand of cross-country analyses focused on labor institutions uses data from the

World Bank’s Data Base of Labor Market Indicators Across Countries (Rama and Artecona

2002). This data base contains measures of indicators of institutions such as the number of

ILO conventions a country has ratified, the level of minimum wages, mandated days of

maternity leave, union and government shares of the work force. Because the data are sparse,

Forteza and Rama (2001) average the four measures to form an aggregate indicator of




13       T.N. Srinivasan (National Academy of Sciences, 2004) worries about “data of
varying quality from disparate economies … (subject to) … measurement errors and biases
… (and) a two-way relationship between growth and some of the explanatory variables” (p
14)
                                                                                              29

institutional “rigidity” for 1970-1999 and warn analysts that “time-variant indicators of labor

market rigidity cannot be used in the empirical analysis”.

       By the indicators measure, the ten most flexible labor markets: South Africa, Uganda,

Zimbabwe, Kenya, Tanzania; and China, Hong Kong, Jordan, Indonesia, and Chile. The ten

most rigid labor markets include France, Sweden, Belgium, Denmark, and four former Soviet

bloc countries, Hungary, Belarus, Krygyz Republic, Bulgaria, and Algeria and Uruguay. I list

the countries to highlight the problems with categorizations of this type. There is remarkable

institutional variation among countries at both ends of the flexibility spectrum. In the

flexible group, South Africa has strong trade unions and an extensive labor code based on

those in Europe, whereas unions could barely operate in Idi Amin’s Uganda or Robert

Mugabe’s Zimbabwe; China did not have a working labor market until the 1990s while Hong

Kong had a free market under British law. In the inflexible group, Belarus is a residual

Soviet-style dictatorship, Hungary is part of the EU, Denmark is famed for high labor

mobility and “flexicurity” while France relies extensively on minimum wages. Changes in

labor regulations in Uruguay, the ex-Soviet countries, the African countries, and China

suggest that no single index can capture their institutions over the entire period. Given these

measurement issues, institutions would have to be incredibly powerful to show up as

determinants of growth in cross country regressions.

       Forteza and Rama (2001) test whether their measures of rigidity were associated with

the success of World Bank adjustment programs. They do this by interacting the indices with

dummy variables for the timing of World Bank credits and loans and entering the interaction

terms into regressions of the growth of GDP per capita. The idea is that countries that obtain
                                                                                                 30

Bank loans/credits should increase growth more if they have less rigid labor markets.14

Growth regressions with fixed country effects yield, however, similar coefficients on the

labor rigidity index before and after receipt of Bank aid.15 Decomposing the index into its

separate parts, Forteza and Rama find that different indicators have different relations with

growth: “relatively high minimum wages are associated with better economic performance

before adjustment” (p 24) while union and government shares of the work force were

associated with slower growth before and after the receipt of loans.16

       Ignoring the warning that the Labor Market indicators data should not be used as

time-variant measures, Calderon and Chong (2005) create rigidity indices over time to

conduct a panel analysis of growth rates. For developing countries their panel regressions

with country fixed effects show that the number of ILO conventions has a large negative

effect on growth, while the average of indicators has little effect. Models estimated with

generalized method of moments with instrumental variables show stronger negative effects

on growth,17 but regressions that relate growth over the entire period to the average

indicators find that one of the four measures is positively related to growth while the others

have no significant relation.




14      Someone skeptical of the value of Bank assistance and advice might argue the
opposite but the regressions show that growth rates tend to improve after receipt of Bank
assistance.
15       For instance, the estimated coefficient in table 5 on the interaction terms for the
aggregate rigidity indicator on the years right before a program is -.094 while the coefficient
on the years right after the program is -.097 -- a negligible difference of .003.
16       These measures are negatively associated with growth rates only when industrial
countries are included in the data set. (Forteza and Rama, p 23)
17      By contrast, for advanced countries, the indices have negative impacts on growth
regardless of the statistical methodology, which reflects the less rapid growth of institution-
driven EU countries than of the more market driven US and other English-speaking
countries.
                                                                                              31

       Botero, et al (2004) and Calderon and Chong (2005) use the Botero et al measures of

labor laws introduced in exhibit1 to analyse aggregate outcome. Botero et all report that

across all countries in the data set the employment law and collective action indices are

associated with lower utilization of labor overall and with higher unemployment for young

workers. Calderon and Chong (2005) (table 6) regress growth rates on the Botero measures

of labor codes and obtain an insignificant coefficient on the index of employment laws but a

positive coefficient on an index for social security laws, that at face value implies that

countries with social security laws grow more rapidly than others .

       The labor subindex of the Fraser Institute, which the Institute reports at five-year

intervals from 1970 to 2000 and yearly thereafter, provides another source of data on labor

institutions across countries. To see whether the labor subindex is associated with economic

growth I estimated the following equation:

       ∆Ln GDP = a + b INDEX + c LABOR + d ln GDP (-1) + Dc + Dt + uij

where ∆Ln GDP is the annual growth rate in ln GDP per capita over each period, 1970-75,

1975-1980, and so on through 2000 to 2004; INDEX is the Fraser index of economic

freedom excluding the labor subindex; LABOR is the subindex of measures of minimum

wages, hiring and firing practices, collective bargaining, unemployment benefits, and use of

the draft; Dd are country dummy variables; and Dt are time dummy variables.

       If market-driven economies improve growth, the b coefficient in this regression

should be positive. Similarly, if labor institutions harm growth the c coefficient will be

positive. The regression, which is summarized in appendix B, yields a significant positive

coefficient on the INDEX variable for developing and advanced countries, which supports

the notion that market-oriented economies enjoy higher growth. But for both sets of
                                                                                                  32

countries the coefficient on the LABOR measure is negative and insignificant, which rejects

the hypothesis that labor institutions reduce the rate of growth.

       In sum, there is no strong support for the proposition that labor institutions affect

economic growth positively or negatively.

8 Country Cases

       Case studies of country experiences are the methodological polar opposite of cross

country regressions. Country studies allow analysts to use country-specific data rather than

generic cross-country indicators and to situate their interpretations of the data in hopefully

deep knowledge of country institutions and practices. But country cases are not a random

sample from the countries in the world, and they invite attention to country specifics – great

leaders, particular events – that do not readily generalize. Still, there is much to be learned

from them.

       In 1988 the World Bank initiated studies of labor market adjustments in twelve

developing countries (Chile, Argentina, Bolivia, Costa Rica, Brazil; Ghana, Kenya, Egypt,

Cote D’Ivoire; and Korea, Malaysia, Thailand). The analysis (Horton, Kanbur, Mazumdar,

1994) reached three conclusions: 1) “real wages were more flexible than generally supposed,

which would support adjustment”; 2) “labor reallocation across sectors has been more or less

in the desired direction” (ie toward tradable goods); and 3) “labor market institutions such as

unions and minimum wages, often argued to be an impediment to adjustment, have more

subtle effects on the workings of the labor market” (Preface, p x). These conclusions fit with

the econometric findings reviewed earlier and with the more measured view of labor

institutions and economic outcomes that has emerged in recent years.

       That labor institutions have modest impacts on economic performance on average

does not mean that in particular situations they may not affect growth or help or hinder
                                                                                             33

economic adjustments. Some countries in the Bank study underwent major changes after the

researchers completed their empirical investigations – the Chilean economy improved

greatly; Argentina went from boom to bust; Cote D’Ivoire suffered civil war; East Asia

suffered financial crisis. Consideration of how labor institutions performed under these

circumstances would enrich the conclusions of the Bank studies. Much might also be learned

by analyses of cases where institutions appear particularly harmful or beneficial to the

economy or of institutions in countries with great growth failures or successes. From this

perspective I examine next institutions in China’s move to a market economy and in

Argentina’s recovery from economic meltdown.

China

        China’s transformation from communist planned economy to a market economy and

entry to the global trading system is one of the most important developments in recent

economic history. As part of this shift, the country radically changed its labor market

institutions. From the 1960s through the late 1980s, China did not have a working labor

market. The state/party controlled the demand and supply of labor (Walder, 1986). The state

was the primary employer. It set pay through a national pay grid and mandated benefits such

as health care, retirement, and housing. It controlled hiring and firing and assigned workers

to jobs. It limited migration through Hukou residency restrictions. Fearing that unemployed

urban youth might create a social problem in the 1980s, the state encouraged older workers to

retire by promising to assign their jobs to their offspring.

        Shifting from communist planning to markets in the mid 1980s through the 1990s,

China freed firms and workers to make demand and supply decisions. It gave management of

state-owned enterprises authority to hire and fire and introduce performance linked wages. It

allowed greater private employment. In the 1990s it privatized many small and medium state-
                                                                                              34

owned enterprises and laid off several million workers from state enterprises. It weakened

the Hukou system. With opportunity to find work, buy food, and obtain housing in the

market, upwards of 100-150 million workers moved from rural to urban areas -- the largest

internal migration in history. Workers and firms matched themselves in the job market rather

than relying on state assignment.

       Could China have successfully transitioned to a market economy with its pre-labor

market institutions? Studies of wages, employment, and productivity during China’s growth

spurt suggest that the labor market reforms were an essential part of China’s success (Meng

2000; Knight and Song 2005). Wages for skilled work increased, raising the return to

education. Tens of millions found work in the private sector. Productivity rose in state

owned enterprises. It is hard to imagine these changes occurring with the state setting pay

and assigning workers to jobs, though it is hard to imagine a counterfactual test for this

assertion.

       The new Chinese labor market produced a huge income gap between rich and poor,

evinced in a Gini coefficient that reached US levels by 2005, disturbing Party leaders, who

worried about “mounting public anger over inequality and corruption” (Eckholm, 2001). To

deal with these concerns, China enacted a new labor code in 2007 that required employers

give written contracts to workers, restricted use of temporary laborers, made lay offs more

difficult, and strengthened the power of the All China Federation of Trade Unions to organize

and to bargain for wages and benefits. With World Bank (2006b) advice, the government

sought to establish a national pension system. China’s effort to develop labor institutions to

reduce income inequality and insure against social disorder reflects a very different

perspective on the role institutions in development than the fear that institutions are inimical

to growth that motivates many economic studies.
                                                                                               35

Argentina

       In the 1990s Argentina was the poster child of globalization and Washington

Consensus policies. With the advice and assistance of the IMF, the country pegged the peso

to the dollar, privatized many public enterprises, loosened controls on banking and foreign

currency, and greatly increased the market orientation of its economy. Between 1990 and

2000, Argentina rose in the economic freedom index of the Fraser Institute (which measures

reliance on market forces rather than institutions) from 84th in the world to 27th. Seemingly

reflecting these changes, the Argentine economy grew rapidly in the 1990s, although with

double digit unemployment and increased inequality. At its fall 1999 meeting, the IMF

lionized Argentine President Carlos Menem for his economic stewardship, and he responded

by thanking the IMF for its guidance. Washington Consensus? Think Argentina.

       Two years later, the Argentine economy collapsed. The value of the Peso dropped to

1/3rd of the dollar, interest rates zoomed, real GDP fell by 18% and unemployment rose to

21.5%. Poverty increased greatly. The government froze bank accounts. In winter 2001

Argentina went through five Presidents or acting Presidents in less than two months. Angry

protestors filled downtown Buenos Aires. The government gave up dollarization. It refused

to meet the demands by the IMF and creditors to repay loans quickly. It funded an emergency

unemployment benefits program and worked with Peronist unions to lessen social disorder.

These institutions helped Argentina maintain its democracy and social stability. The country

went on to a strong recovery based on an export-led boom that lowered unemployment and

poverty. As with China’s development of a labor market, there is no good counterfactual to

assess how Argentina might have fared if it had weaker labor institutions or chosen to

suppress protesters and unions to repay its international debts. But during the crisis labor

institutions helped maintain political and economic order.
                                                                                              36

9. The Informal Sector

       The majority of workers in developing countries work in the informal sector.18 The

traditional view has been that economic growth shrinks the informal sector and that as it

does, more workers will gain the higher pay and economic security of the formal sector. This

underlies the unease that 1990 World Bank Development Report expressed toward labor

institutions: if only unions and governments leave well enough alone, the natural process will

move workers out of the low productivity informal sector into good formal sector jobs.

       The employment data summarized in Exhibit 5 contravene the picture of a naturally

declining informal sector for the 1980s-2000s when the informal sector expanded its share of

global employment, even in developing countries with rapid economic growth. Line 1

indicates that the proportion of workers in self employment increased in every region in the

1980s and 1990s. Line 2 shows that the non paid share of employment (the self-employed,

employers, members of cooperatives, contributing family members and non-classified

workers) increased. Line 3, which gives estimates of informal sector employment in eight of

the ten most populous developing countries from a diverse set of country sources, tells a

similar story. In seven of the countries the informal sector share of employment rose while it

held stable in Indonesia. 19Line 4 shows that even in Korea, arguably the world’s greatest

growth success, the informal sector remains a large and growing share of the work force.

       The shocker in exhibit 5 is that informal sector employment rose in rapidly growing

countries such as China, India, and the Philippines, and Korea as well as in countries with



18       The ILO defines informal sector employment as self-employed; wage workers in
insecure and unprotected jobs (unregistered, casual, temporary); household workers.
19      Data for particular countries not covered in the table confirm the trend. ILO (2001)
estimates that the informal share of employment rose in 12 Latin American countries for
which it obtained data. Scattered estimates show informal employment up in Ghana,
Ethiopia, Kenya, and Nigeria.
                                                                                               37

anemic growth records. Why did rapid growth fail to shrink the informal sector? One likely

reason is that productivity growth in the modern sector was so great that even massive

expansion of output does not increase employment. China is instructive in this respect.

Despite becoming the world’s manufacturing center in the 2000s, China had fewer workers in

manufacturing in 2002 than in 1987 (Bannister, 2005b, table 1). Presumably this is because

it adopted modern labor-saving technology, though it could also reflect Chinese firms

outsourcing manufacturing jobs to the informal sector.20

       Traditional models of developing country labor markets treat the informal sector as a

last choice safety net where individuals seek employment when nothing is available in the

formal sector. But this is not the full story. Some workers and firms may prefer the informal

sector to avoid taxes and regulations and may make relatively good livings in those sectors.

Studies of sectoral mobility for Mexico (Bosch and Maloney, 2007), Brazil (Bosch, Goni and

Maloney, 2007), and Chile (Packard, 2007) show that formal/informal boundaries are porous,

with many workers shifting from one sector to the other in response to economic changes.

The dynamics of mobility in the sectors may, however, differ. Hoek (2007) finds that in the

Brazilian formal sector, reductions in employment take the form of a reduced job finding rate

while in the informal sector, reductions in employment take the form of higher separation

rates. Ulyssea and Szerman (2007) find that more educated and older workers had longer job

duration in the formal sector and shorter duration in the informal sector. They also show a

rapid decline in the hazard rate for exiting the informal sector that implies long spells if

workers do not leave within 6 months.



20      Loayza, Oviedo, and Serven (2005) show that rapid growth reduces the informal
sector share of output while labor and product market regulations raise the informal sector
share of GDP. There is no inconsistency between their regressions of the informal share of
output on growth and the failure of observed growth to reduce informal sector shares of
                                                                                              38

       Comparisons of wages across sectors and activities shows that in Mexico and Brazil

employees in the informal sector earn less than employees in the formal sector but that the

self-employed earn as much or more than formal sector workers (Maloney, 2000, Bosch,

Goni and Maloney, 2007). Still, workers laid off from formal sector manufacturing suffer

earnings decline of nearly 50% one year later and about 33% two years later, with middle

aged workers hit hardest by a layoff (Hoek 2006). For El Salvador and Peru, Marcouiller et al

(1997) find that informal sector workers earned significantly less than formal sector workers.

In Argentina poverty among older persons is greater the greater the proportion of their

working lives spent in the informal sector.

       Given the size and persistence of the informal sector in developing economies, we

need more studies of how workers fare in this sector, of the links between formal and

informal job markets, and of possible innovative social insurance schemes to improve the

working lives of those in the informal sector, be it through social security pensions

(Auerbach, et al 2007), occupational health and safety laws, increased enforcement of

regulations (Almeida and Carneiro, 2007) or perhaps through associations of the self-

employed like SEWA (http://www.sewa.org/) and so on.

Conclusion

       This review has found that regulations and unions are not the bugbear to development

that many believed them to be years ago. Some labor policies have adverse effects on

employment in some countries but the magnitudes are generally modest. Evidence on the

wage curve, the spillover of minimum wages to the informal sector, and the mobility of

workers between the informal and formal sectors show that the two-sector model that has

guided much thinking about labor markets in developing countries does not capture the way


employment.
                                                                                                39

those markets operate. The evidence suggests instead that labor markets adjust to conditions

in developing countries much as they do in advanced countries and do not impede macro-

economic adjustments. The Chinese example suggests that a functioning labor market can

help development while the Argentine example suggests that labor institutions can help

preserve social stability during turbulent times.

        The 800 pound gorilla in this review is the increased share of the informal sector in

successful developing countries. Because research has focused largely on formal sector labor

markets, we know far too little about the informal market setting in which most workers

make their living, about policies and institutions that can help raise productivity in the

informal sector, improve occupational health and safety, and deliver social services and

protections to workers. The informal sector is going to be the locus of work for the majority

of workers for the foreseeable future and should be the focus of labor market analyses as

well.
                                                                                                      40

Exhibit 1: Average values (standard deviations in brackets), of Measures of Labor
Institutions in Developing Countries, level of income compared to Developed Countries,
circa 200521


                                                      Collective
                           Fraser       Employment                   Wage       Hiring and
Income Group              Institute        law
                                                      relations
                                                                     setting       firing    Union density
                                                         law
                           5.410            6.08       6.260         5.224        3.906         13.208
Low income
                          (1.796)         (1.831)     (1.233)       (1.219)      (0.755)        (7.207)
Lower middle               5.400           5.011       5.428         4.997        3.793        12.705
income                    (1.202)         (1.802)     (1.255)       (0.664)      (0.716)       (8.481)
Upper middle               5.723           4.937       5.174         4.945        3.532          26.389
income                    (1.017)         (1.705)     (1.049)       (0.833)      (0.748)        (14.354)
                           5.501           5.292       5.575         5.036        3.738          17.855
All developing
                          (1.335)         (1.813)     (1.240)       (0.874)      (0.740)       (12.452)

Traditional                5.696           4.795       5.433         4.248        3.561        33.552
developed                 (1.374)         (2.224)     (1.562)       (1.174)      (1.034)      (19.723)

Recently                   6.364           5.814       6.000         5.600        4.179         29.589
developed                 (1.696)         (1.852)     (0.940)       (0.711)      (0.965)       (16.914)




                 Source: Tabulated from country data in Fraser (2007), Botero et al, World
                 Economic Forum as given in appendix table, with countries classified by
                 World Bank income levels. Recently developed countries include high
                 income countries outside the major Western countries.




21       The correlations among the six indicators.
                Fraser Institute Employment law Collective relations law Union density Wage setting
       Fraser Institute     1.000
       Employment law        0.435     1.000
       Collective relations
       law                    0.390    0.487               1.000
       Union density          0.092    0.317                0.113                1.000
       Wage setting           0.346      0.211              0.139                0.171      1.000
       Hiring and firing       0.462      0.260             0.424                -0.094      0.507
                                                                                   41


Exhibit 2: Dispersion of Earnings by Occupation and Industry, by income level of
countries

A) Standard Deviation of ln Earnings by Occupation (Freeman and Oostendorp, 2000)




B) Industrial Earnings


B) Standard Deviation of ln Earnings by Industry (ILO data, 19--

                                   1.2
 Unweighted Std Dev of Log wages




                                    1


                                   0.8


                                   0.6


                                   0.4


                                   0.2


                                    0
                                         6   7   8             9   10   11
                                                 Log GDP/capita
                                                                               42

C) Standard Deviation of ln Earnings by Industry (UNIDO data, 19--




                                      1.2
    Unweighted Std Dev of Log wages




                                       1


                                      0.8


                                      0.6


                                      0.4


                                      0.2


                                       0
                                            6   7   8            9   10   11
                                                    Log GDP/capita




Source: A, Freeman and Oostendorp, 2002
        B, Penn World Table (v6.2); ILO (2006)
        C, Penn World Table (v6.2); UNIDO Industrial Statistics (2006)
                                                                                                 43

Exhibit 3: Studies of Minimum Wage in Developing Countries, 1990s-2007


Area, study, year               Nature of data               Findings
BRAZIL Lemos (2006,2004)        Individual data              Compresses distribution in informal and
                                                             covered, 2006 no effect on employment;
                                                             2004 some
Chile, Montenegro and Pages     Changes in minimum,          Minimum shifts employment from young and
(2004)                          1960-1998, individual        unskilled workers to older and female
                                data                         workers
Costa Rica Gindling & Terrell   Individual data              Raises wages in informal + formal 1995
(2007, 2005, 1995)                                           study: no loss of employment in formal; gain
                                                             in informal; 2007, minimum lowers
                                                             employment in public sector
Honduras, Gindling & Terrell    Individual data to           1% increase in the minimum wage increases
(2007)                          establish spikes, sectors    wage in medium and large firms by 0.29% in
                                and size of firm over        the average wage; reduces employment by -
                                time, 1990-2004              0.46%; does not affect small firms where
                                                             employment grows
Columbia, Arango and Pachon     Panel date for cities,       Improves earnings of families high in income
2004                            1984-2001                    distribution, reduces it in bottom quintile;
                                                             reduces employment, especially for women,
                                                             young, less educated
Columbia, Mexico Bell (1997)    Firm level data              No effect in Mexico; effect in Columbia;
Mexico (Bosch and Manacorda     Individual                   Minimum shifts distribution for uncovered as
(2007)                                                       well as covered; small employment effect

Mexico (Feliciano, 1998)        Cross state panel data,      Decline in real value of Mexican minimum
                                1970-1990                    wage increased employment of women with
                                                             elasticity between -.58 and -1.25.
Trinidad &Tobago Strobl &       Individual with              Spikes shows that min affects wages, lowers
Walsh (2003),                   longitudinal job loss        employment of affected group
Puerto Rico Castillo-Freeman    Spike, Uses imposition of    W, modest E ε ~-0.10; large fall in
& Freeman (1992),               US min wage                  employment in very small industries
LA + Caribbean, Kristensen &    Individual data, focus on    In 10 countries minimum affects informal
Cunningham (2006),              spikes                       and covered; 4 it affects only informal
LA Maloney and Nunez            Individual wage to           Affects distribution in 6 of 8 LA countries
Mendez(2004), LA                establish spikes in formal   Stronger effect on informal in Brazil,
                                and informal sectors         Mexico, Argentina, Uruguay; employment
                                Longitudinal job loss        losses in Columbia; job loss greater for low
                                                             wage
LA Maloney et al (2001)         Spikes in wage data          Four yes, three no
LA, Lustig & McCleod, 1997,     Aggregate poverty 1990s      Reduces poverty
x-country                       vs 1980s
                                                                                               44


Area, study, year                    Nature of data                      Findings


Indonesia Alatas & Cameron (2003)    Individual W spike, firm E          Wage effects; no E in large firms;
                                     geographic time series              some in small

Indonesia (Harrison and Scorse,      Plant level data over time          Compliance with minimum wage
2003)                                                                    rises 1990-99 with both
                                                                         multinationals and exporting firms
                                                                         more likely to comply with labor
                                                                         standards

Indonesia Rama (2001),               Time series,                        Modest wage, little effect on
                                                                         aggregate employment but shift in
                                                                         employment from small firms
Indonesia SMERU (2001)               Individual data from National       Spikes in minimum wages for blue
                                     Labor Force Surveys; Firm-based     collar workers but not others;
                                     survey; province level panel for    compliance rises with firm size and
                                     employment 1988-1999                increased over time; .estimated
                                                                         elasticity of total employment –
                                                                         0.112, larger for females, youths,
                                                                         less educated;
                                                                         Spike at minimum in distribution;
Ghana Jones(1997),                   Individual wage data; time series   in informal as well as covered.
                                     21 years                            W, E shift to informal ε ~-0.10

Many countries Squire & Suthiwart-   Changes in minimum among            Real minimums fall in 16/23
Narueput (1997)                      countries, 1970-90                  Min/Average falls in 6/17
                                                                                        45

  Exhibit 4: Studies of Union Effects in Developing Countries

Country           wage          dispersion turnover benefits productivity profits     Other
Mexico            10-15%        lower      lower    higher higher         none        Increased
                                                                                      training
Uruguay           5%?                      Lower             higher         higher    Lowers elasticity
                                                                                      of demand
Guatamala                                                   Lower in
                                                            cross-section,
                                                            not in fixed
                                                            effects
Peru                                                        Modest           Lower in Higher capital
                                                            negative but all cases labor ratios
                                                            not significant
                                                            effect
Brazil             5% to 12%    higher                       Lower, unless Lower       More likely to
                                                            with profit- unless with go to profit-
                                                            sharing         profit-   sharing
                                                                            sharing
South Africa      10-20%,       lower                higher                           Lowers
                  bigger for                                                          coefficients on
                  blacks                                                              other variables
                                                                                      in earnings
Ghana             6-16%       Lower
Cameroons a       14%         Lower
Cameroons b       -8% to -11%
Senegal           -13%
Zimbabwe          -17%                                      14%
Malaysia          15-20%                   lower     higher higher                    Increases
                                                                                      training
Korea             3%-7%         Lower, but lower     higher Works council             Unions lower,
                  bigger for    non-                        raises                    WC raises job
                  women         standard                                              sat; substitute
                                                                                      non-standard

  Source: Mexico Fairris (2003, 2005); Popli (2006), Maloney and Ribiero (1999), Panagides
  and Patrinos (1994); Uruguay, Cassoni, Labadie & Fachola (2001), Cassoni, Allen, and
  Labidie (2000); Peru, Saavedra and Torero (2005); Brazil, Menezes-Filho, Zylberstajn,
  Chahd, Pazello (2005), Arbache, 1998; Guatamala Urizar and Lee (2005)
  South Africa, Kingdon, Sandefur, Teal (2004),; Butcher and Rouse (2001); Hofmeyr &
  Lucas (2001), Schultz and Mwabu (1998),; Moll (1993); P-C Michaud and
  D.Vencatachellum (2001); Ghana, Blunch and Verner (2004); Verner (1999); Cameroon, a,
  Tsafack-Nanfosso (2007), 1999 survey of 1,074 wage earners; b, Miller and Vallee (1995)
  and Vallee and Thomas (1994), 1993 and 1994 survey; Senegal Terrell and Svejnar (1989);
                                                                                   46

Zimbabwe (Verner, 1999); Malaysia Standing (1992) ; Korea, Lee and Na (2004); Fields
and Yoo,(2000) Park, 1991; Cheon, 2006
                                                                                                          47

Exhibit 5: Indicators of the trend in the informal sector share of employment

1) Self-employment share of non-agricultural Employment (ILO 2002) 1980s to 1990s
       World                            26% to 32%
       Africa                           44% to 48%
       Latin America                    29% to 44%
       Asia                             26% to 32%

2. Unpaid Workers as Share of Total Employment (ILO, LaborSta, 2007), 1993-2002
     World                             55% to 60%
     Developing Countries
     Advanced Countries

3. 22 Selected Country measures, by population of country
               China 1990 to 2005 51% to 52.8%
               India 1993/4 to 2004/5 92.7% to 94.1%
               Indonesia 1990 to 2003 28.2% to 28.2%
               Brazil Urban 1990 to 2003: 40.6% to 44.6%
               Pakistan, urban 1997/8 to 2001/2 64.6% to 66.5%
               Bangladesh to 2000s                   to 65%
               Nigeria, urban 1960s to 2005 25% to 45%-60%
               1970s to 1990s 50% to 65%
               Mexico 1991 to 1998 61.2% to 63.6%
               Philippines Vietnam 2000s 70%

4. Informal Sector Employment in Korea, by definition
                    Self-employed 1990 to 2004        39.5% to 34.0%
                    Non-regular 2001 to 2005          26.8% to 36.6%
                    Temporary    2001 to 2005         16.6% to 29.4%
                    Non-standard 1990 -2004           45.8% to 48.8%

Source: Line 1, ILO, Women and Men in the Informal Economy: a statistical picture (ILO,
2002), table 2.5
Line 2, Estimated from ILO, Laborstats, 2007
Line 3, China, India, Brazil from OECD, March 2007, table 1.1; Indonesia, Felipe and
Hasan, 2006, Pakistan, Gennari, 2004; Nigeria a, Nwaka 2005; Nigeria b, , Mexico, Martin
2000, table 4; Philippines, Venida; UN, ILO;
http://www.ilo.org/public/english/employment/skills/informal/who.htm for Bangladesh
Line 4 Korea, 1990-2004 OECD, Factbook 2006, Economic, Environmental, and Social
Statistics, Self employment rates as percentage of total civilian employment 2001-2005,
defined as non-regular; temporary, OECD, Korea, table 5.13; 1990-2004, Ki Seong Park
2006, Non-standard employment, figure 1


22        China, India, Brazil from OECD, 2007, table 1.A.3 For Indonesia Wiebe reports 68% for 1993;
http://www.socialalert.org/pdf/IndonesieBROCH%5B1%5D.pdf reports over half informal in 2000s.
         http://indonesiaurbanstudies.blogspot.com/2007/05/urban-planning-and-informal-sector-in.html reports
64%
                                                                                                 48

Appendix Table 1: Developing Country Labor Laws and Practices
                                                                                                     Co.
                                                                                                  Control of
                                                                               Co. Flexibility
                                                                                                    Hiring
                             Fraser                                               of Wage
                                        employment   collective      union                       and Firing
      Country               Institute                                          determination
                                        law          relations law   density                      Practices
                             (2004)                                             7 –employer
                                                                                                 7-employer
                                                                                   vs 1 cb
                                                                                                     1-
                                                                                                  regulated
      Uganda                  8.6          0.35          0.38           3.9         6.3              5.0
       Zambia                 8.6          0.15          0.29          12.5          --               --
      Pakistan                7.8          0.34          0.31           5.5         5.7              4.5
        Haiti                 7.3           na            na             --          --               --
    Bangladesh                6.7           na            na            4.3         5.3              4.0
       Ghana                  6.2          0.29          0.48          25.9         3.7              4.4
       Kenya                  5.8          0.37          0.23          16.9          5               4.9
        India                 5.7          0.44          0.38           5.4         5.4              2.6
       Malawi                 5.7          0.18          0.25            --          5               3.5
       Nigeria                5.5          0.19          0.21          17.2         4.6              4.5
      Mongolia                5.4          0.33          0.23            --         5.9              4.6
     Zimbabwe                 5.2          0.25          0.44          13.9         2.8              2.2
      Tanzania                5.1          0.68          0.32          17.4         4.5              3.7
      Vietnam                 4.8          0.54          0.48            --         5.4              4.2
        Benin                 4.1           na            na             --         5.3              4.1
        Chad                  3.7           na            na             --         5.4              3.6
         Mali                 3.6           na            na           13.7         4.5              3.4
    Madagascar                3.1          0.47          0.46                       5.3              3.6
      Senegal                 2.8          0.51          0.57         21.9           --               --
    Mozambique                2.5          0.79          0.58           --          8.7              3.6
       Guyana                 8.2           na            na          25.2          5.1              4.5
      Namibia                 7.2           na            na          22.0          4.3              3.0
      Thailand                7.0          0.41          0.36          3.1          4.7              4.2
     Nicaragua                6.8           na            na          23.4          5.5              3.7
     Cameroon                 6.6           na            na          14.7          4.8              3.6
      Jamaica                 6.6          0.16          0.23           --          5.5              4.0
       Jordan                 6.6           0.7          0.38           --          5.9              3.4
      Georgia                 6.5          0.77          0.57           --          6.0              4.9
     Sri Lanka                6.4          0.47          0.51           --          4.5              2.7
   Dominican Rep.             6.0           0.6          0.27         17.3          5.1              3.9
     Macedonia                5.8           na            na            --          5.5              3.3
       Albania                5.7           na            na            --          5.7              4.8
    El Salvador               5.5           na            na           7.2          5.5              4.9
     Azerbaijan               5.4           na            na            --          5.2              4.7
        Egypt                 5.3          0.37          0.41         29.6          5.9              3.9
      Armenia                 5.2           0.6          0.52           --          5.6              4.9
     Indonesia                5.0          0.68          0.39          2.6          4.2              3.6
     Philippines              5.0          0.48          0.51         22.8          4.4              2.6
     Honduras                 4.9           na            na           4.5          4.3              3.1
       Ukraine                4.8          0.66          0.58           --          5.0              4.8
       Bolivia                4.8          0.37          0.46         16.4          5.4              3.1
        China                 4.7          0.43          0.33         54.7*         5.2              4.5
     Colombia                 4.3          0.34          0.49           7           5.5              3.8
       Tunisia                4.3          0.82          0.38          9.8          3.7              4.2
        Peru                  4.3          0.46          0.71          7.5          5.7              3.3
     Guatemala                4.2           na            ns           4.4          4.4              3.6
      Ecuador                 4.2           0.4          0.64          9.8          4.5              3.0
                                                    49

    Morocco       4.1   0.26   0.49    4.8    5.1        3.7
     Algeria      3.7    na     na            3.9        3.4
   Paraguay       2.9    na     na     9.3    3.8        2.7
    Malaysia      7.9   0.19   0.19   11.7    5.6        4.0
    Uruguay       7.3   0.28   0.35   11.6    5.0        3.7
    Hungary       7.1   0.38   0.61   52.5    5.7        4.0
   Mauritius      6.7    na     na    25.9    3.1        3.6
 Slovak Rep.      6.6   0.66   0.45   52.3    5.6        4.8
   Botswana       6.5    na     na    11.5    5.1        3.7
  Costa Rica      6.1    na     na    13.1    4.4        4.1
    Bulgaria      6.0   0.52   0.44   51.4    5.6        4.5
     Russia       5.8   0.83   0.58   74.8*   5.6        5.0
      Latvia      5.8   0.72   0.53     --    5.7        3.9
    Panama        5.6   0.62   0.46   14.2    4.0        3.0
     Mexico       5.5   0.59   0.58    31     5.0        3.0
     Croatia      5.5   0.49   0.45     --    5.1        3.8
   Lithuania      5.4   0.62    0.5     --    5.8        3.1
      Chile       5.3   0.47   0.38   15.9    6.1        3.4
 South Africa     5.1   0.32   0.54   21.8    3.4        2.3
   Argentina      5.1   0.34   0.58   25.4    4.0        2.7
      Brazil      5.0   0.57   0.38   32.1    4.1        3.1
   Romania        5.0   0.33   0.57   40.7    5.6        3.1
     Poland       4.8   0.64   0.57   27.0    5.0        3.5
     Turkey       4.3    0.4   0.47   22.0    5.1        3.5
  Venezuela       3.5   0.65   0.54   14.9    4.2        1.9
Unit. Arab Em.    8.9    na     na      --    6.3        5.0
     Kuwait       8.6    na     na      --    6.1        4.5
  Hong Kong       8.6   0.17   0.46   18.5    6.4        5.8
    Bahrain       7.4    na     na      --    6.2        3.1
Trinidad & Tob.   7.1    na     na      --    4.9        4.0
   Singapore      6.9   0.31   0.34   13.5    6.0        5.9
      Malta       6.8    na     na    57.9    5.1        3.0
    Estonia       6.1    na     na    26.4    6.2        4.4
    Slovenia      5.6   0.74   0.49     --    4.6        2.9
     Taiwan       5.3   0.45   0.32   27.9    6.2        4.6
      Israel      4.8   0.29   0.31   23.1    5.1        4.4
     Cyprus       3.1    na     na    53.7    4.2        3.3
     Iceland      8.0    na     na    70.7    4.5        5.4
 United States    7.9   0.22   0.26   12.7    6.1        5.4
  Switzerland     7.4   0.45   0.42   20.0    5.8        5.4
    Canada        7.1   0.26   0.2    31.0    5.6        4.3
      Japan       7.0   0.16   0.63   18.6    5.9        3.6
United Kingdom    6.9   0.28   0.19   26.2    5.9        4.4
    Australia     6.6   0.35   0.37   28.6    4.6        3.5
 New Zealand      6.5   0.16   0.25   23.2    5.8        3.8
      Spain       6.2   0.74   0.59   11.4    4.8        2.9
    Portugal      5.9   0.88   0.65   18.8    4.4        2.8
     Ireland      5.8   0.34   0.46   36.0    3.2        3.4
     France       5.7   0.74   0.67    6.1    4.6        2.4
 Luxembourg       5.7    na     na    39.5    4.3        3.2
       Italy      5.5   0.65   0.63   30.6    3.3        2.6
 Netherlands      5.4   0.73   0.46   21.8    3.1        2.8
   Denmark        5.1   0.57   0.42   68.2    4.2        5.4
    Belgium       5.0   0.51   0.42   38.1    3.0        2.6
  Czech Rep.      5.0   0.52   0.34   36.3    5.6        3.5
                                               50

South Korea   4.9   0.45   0.54    9.0   5.5        4.1
  Austria     4.4    0.5   0.36   36.6   2.7        3.8
  Norway      4.2   0.69   0.65   51.7   3.9        3.0
  Greece      4.0   0.52   0.49   15.4   3.4        2.9
  Finland     3.9   0.74   0.32   59.7   2.5        3.6
  Sweden      3.5   0.74   0.54   77.2   3.3        2.4
 Germany      3.3    0.7   0.61   29.6   2.8        2.3
                                                                                           51

                      Appendix B: Regression:

Coefficients (Std Errors) on Regression of Annual Growth rates of GDP per capita on the
labor subindex and the economic freedom index of the Fraser institute (with the labor
subindex removed), 1970-2004


Lagged GDP per capita                                        -.066 (.007)
Labor subindex for developing countries                      -.002 (.002)
Economic freedom index* for developing countries              .010(.002)
Labor subindex for OECD countries                            -.001 (.002)
Economic freedom index* for OECD countries                    .009 (.003)
Year Dummies                                                      yes
Country Dummies                                                   yes
Number of observations                                            314
Number of countries                                                85


Source:
Indices of Economic Freedom, Fraser Institute 2006
Gwartney, James and Robert Lawson (2006). Economic Freedom of the World: 2006 Annual
Report. Vancouver: The Fraser Institute. Data retrieved from www.freetheworld.com.

http://www.freetheworld.com/2006/2006Dataset.xls

Labor subindex. Listed as 5B on the data set
Economic freedom index * Simple average of subindices for separate areas, excluding the
labor subindex. Analysis using the full economic freedom index gives comparable results,
but then has the labor index entered in two places

GDP growth rates – Change in natural log of real GDP/capita in const prices (Laspeyres) from
Penn World Tables divided by number of years (5 years except 4 years for 2000-2004)
Lagged GDP – log GDP per capita with 5-year lag (4 year in the case of 2000-2004)
                                                                                        52

              Bibliography

Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, Jens Hainmueller (2007) “Synthetic Control Methods for
Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California's Tobacco Control Program”
January. http://www.people.fas.harvard.edu/~jhainm/Paper/ADH2007.pdf

Ahsan, Ahmed and Carmen Pages (2008) “Are All Labor Regulations Equal?
Evidence from Indian Manufacturing” IZA Discussion Paper No. 3394 March 2008

Aidt Toke Tzannatos, Zafiros (2003) Unions and Collective Bargaining: Economic Effects in
        a Global Environment. World Bank

Alatas, Vivi and Lisa Cameron (2003) “The Impact of Minimum Wages on
Employment in a Low Income Country: An Evaluation using the Difference-in-Differences
Approach”, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 2985, March 2003.

Almeida, Rita and Pedro Carneiro (2007) “The Efficiency-Equity Trade-off in Labor Market
Regulations: evidence from Brazilian Cities” ” 2nd IZA/World Bank Conference,
Employment and Development, June 8-9

Amadeo, E. J. and J. M. Camargo (1997) “Brazil: Regulation and Flexibility in the Labor
Market,” in S. Edwards and N. C. Lustig (eds.), Labor Markets in Latin America.
Combining social protection with market flexibility, Washington DC: Brookings Institution
Press, pp. 201-234.
Andrews, Donald (1993) "Tests for Parameter Instability and Structural Change with
Unknown Change Point," Econometrica, 61, 1993, 821–856

Arango, Carlos, and Angélica Pachón (2004) Minimum Wages in Colombia: Holding the
Middle With a Bite on the Poor,” Banco de la Republica de Colombia, Borradores de
Economia Series No. 280 (Feb 6). http://www.banrep.gov.co/docum/ftp/borra280.pdf

Arbache J. (1998) “The Impact of Unions on Wages in Brazilian Manufacturing” January
http://www.kent.ac.uk/economics/papers/papers-pdf/1998/9805.pdf

Auerbach, Paula and Maria Eugenia Genoni, Carmen Pagés (2007) “Social Security
Coverage and the Labor Market in Developing Countries” IZA Discussion Paper No. 2979
August.

Babecky, Jan, Raúl Ramos and Esteban Sanromá “ Meta-Analysis on Microeconomic
Wage Flexibility (Wage Curve)” Sozialer Fortschritt volume 57, issue 10-11, 273-279

Banister, Judith “Manufacturing earnings and compensation in China,” Monthly Labor
Review, August 2005a

Bannister, Judith, “Manufacturing Employment in China, Monthly Labor Review, July 2005b
                                                                                           53

Bell, Linda (1997), “The Impact of Minimum Wages in Mexico and Columbia”, Journal of
Labor Economics, 15(3), pt.2., pp. S102-S135.

Berg, Janine & Contreras, Dante (2004). “Political-Economic Regime and the Wage Curve:
Evidence from Chile, 1957-1996,” International Review of Applied Economics, Vol. 18,
Number 2, pp. 151-165, April.

Besley, Tim and Robin Burgess (2004) “Can Labor Regulation Hinder Economic
Performance? Evidence from India" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 19(1), 91-134

Bhalotra, S. (1993), "Geographical differences in unemployment and wage rates in India",
mimeo, Wolfson College, Oxford University.

Bhandari, Amit, Union Membership Effect on Wage Premiums: Evidence from Organized
Manufacturing Industries in India IZA Discussion Paper No. 3747 October 2008

Bhattacharjea, Aditya (2006): “Labour Market Regulation and Industrial Performance in
India: A Critical Review of the Empirical Evidence”, Indian Journal of Labour Economics,
39(2), April-June.

Blunch, Niels-Hugo and Dore Verner (2004) “Asymmetries in the Union Wage Premium in
Ghana” World Bank Economic Review, vol 18, no 2, pp 237-252

Blanchflower, David & Andrew Oswald (1994). The wage curve, Cambridge and London:
the MIT Press.

Bosch, Mariano (2007) “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the presence of informal labour
markets” IZA WP

Bosch, Mariano and Marco Manacorda (2007) “Urban Inequality and minimum wages in
Mexico, LSE mimeo, Aug 2, 2007

Bosch, Mariano, Edwin Goni, William Maloney (2007) “The Determinants of Rising
Informality in Brazil: evidence from gross worker flows” IZA DP no 2970

Bosch, Mariano Mossi and William Maloney (2007) Gross Worker Flows in the Presence of
Informal Labor Markets: Evidence from Mexico, 1987-2002 IZA Discussion Paper No.
2864 June 2007

Botero, J., Djankov, S., La Porta, R., López de Silanes, F., and Shleifer, A. (2004) The
Regulation of Labor,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119: 1339-1382

Bucheli, Marisa, and C. Gonzalez (2007) “An estimation of the wage curve for Uruguay”
UdelaR June. http://www.bcu.gub.uy/autoriza/peiees/jor/2007/iees03j3400807.pdf

Butcher, Kristin, and Cecilia Rouse (2001) “Wage Effects of Unions and Industrial Councils
in South Africa.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 54(2): 349-74.
                                                                                          54

Calderon, Cesar and Alberto Chong (2005) “Are Labor Market Regulations an Obstacle for
Long-term Growth?” in Jorge Enrique Restrepo and Andrea Tokman (eds) Labor Markets
and Institutions, Santiago Chile, Central Bank of Chile

Calderon, Cesar, Alberto Chong and Gianmarco Leon (2006) “Institutional Enforcement,
Labor Market Rigidities, and Economic Performance” IADB Working paper 589, October.

Calderon, Cesar, Alberto Chong and Gianmarco Leon, and Rodrigo Valdes (2005) “Labor
Market Regulations and Income Inequality: Evidence for a panel of countries” in Jorge
Enrique Restrepo and Andrea Tokman (eds) Labor Markets and Institutions, Santiago Chile,
Central Bank of Chile.

Card, David and Alan Kreuger (1995) Myth and Measurement: the new economics of the
minimum wage. Princeton NJ Princeton University Press

Cassoni, Adriana, Steven Allen, and Gastón Labadie (2004) “Unions and Employment in
Uruguay,” in James Heckman and Carmen Pages, eds., Law and Employment: Lessons from
Latin America and the Caribbean University of Chicago Press

Cassoni, Adriana, Gastón Labadie, and Gabriela Fachola (2005) “The Economic Effects of
Unions in Latin America: their impact on wages and economic performance of firms in
Uruguay” in What Difference Do Unions Make? (Kuhn, Peter, and Gustavo Marquez,
editors) Inter-American Development Bank, Washington.

Castillo-Freeman Alida & Richard Freeman (1992) “When the Minimum Wage Really Bites:
The Effect of the U.S.-Level Minimum on Puerto Rico” in Borjas, George J. and Richard B.
Freeman (eds) Immigration and the Work Force: Economic Consequences for the United
States and Source Areas. Chicago: Univ of Chicago Press for NBER.

Castro Lugo D. (2006) “Curva salarial: una aplication para el caso de Mexico 1993-2002”
Estudios Economicos, vol 21, pp 233-273

Cheon, Byung-You (2006) “Suggestions for Improving Labor Market Flexicurity and Active
Labor Market Policy in Korea” in National Employment Strategy and its vision for Job
Creation, July 14. Seoul, Korea: KLI.

Chor, Davin and Richard Freeman (2005) “The 2004 Global Labor Survey: Workplace
Institutions and Practices Around the World,” NBER WP 11598.

Easterly, William, Michael Kremer, Lant Pritchett, and Lawrence H. Summers (1993) "Good
Policy or Good Luck? Country Growth Performance and Temporary Shocks." Journal of
Monetary Economics 32 (3): 459-83.

Eckholm, Erik (2001) “China's Inner Circle Reveals Big Unrest” New York Times, June 3.

Edwards Sebastian Edwards & Alejandra Cox Edwards (2000) “Economic Reforms and
Labor Markets: policy issues and lessons from Chile” NBER Working Papers 7646, National
                                                                                            55

Bureau of Economic Research, Inc

Fallon, Peter R. and Robert E. B. Lucas (1989) "Job Security Regulations and the Dynamic
Demand for Industrial Labor in India and Zimbabwe," Boston University, Institute for
Economic Development Series, No.2.

PR Fallon, REB Lucas - The Impact of Changes in Job Security Regulations in India and
Zimbabwe The World Bank Economic Review, 1991 - World Bank

Fallon, Peter R. and Robert E. B. Lucas (1991) “The Impact of Job Security Regulations in
India and Zimbabwe”, World Bank Economic Review, vol 5, no 3, 395-423

Fairris, David (2003) Unions and Wage Inequality in Mexico," Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, vol.56, no.3, 2003.

Fairris, David (2005) What Do Unions Do in Mexico? University of California Riverside
http://www.economics.ucr.edu/people/fairris/mexunioneffects.

Fairris, David (2006) “Union Voice Effects in Mexico," British Journal of Industrial
          Relations, 44(4), 2006.

Fairris, David (2009) Gurleen Popli, Eduardo Zepeda (Forthcoming) “Minimum Wages and
          Wage Structure in Mexico.” Review of Social Economy

Feliciano, Z (1998) “Does the minimum wage affect employment in Mexico?” Eastern
Economic Journal 24(2): 165-180

Felipe, Jesus and Rana Hasan Labor Markets in Asia: Issues and Perspectives Palgrave
Macmillan Published: August 2006

Feldman, Horst (2009) “The Quality of Industrial Relations and Unemployment in
Developing Countries” Review of Development Economics, 13(1), 56–69, 2009

Fields, Gary and Gyeongjoon Yoo (2000) “Falling Labor Inequality in Korea’s Economic
Growth : Patterns and underlying causes” Review of Income and Wealth, series 46, no 2,
June.

Forteza A. and Rama, Martin (2001) “Labour market rigidity and the Success of Economic
Reforms across more than one hundred countries” Journal of Policy Reform, 2006, vol.
9, issue 1, pages 75-105

Fraser Institute (2001) Economic Freedom of the World: 2001 Annual Report.

Fraser Institute (2003) Economic Freedom of the World: 2003 Annual Report

Fraser Institute (2006 ) Economic Freedom of the World: 2006 Annual Report
Fraser Institute (2007) Economic Freedom of the World: 2007 Annual Report
Freeman, Richard B. (1993a) “Labor Market Institutions and Policies: Help or Hindrance to
Economic Development?” Proceedings of the World Bank Annual Conference on
Development Economics 1992. Washington, DC: The World Bank.

------ (1993b) "Labor markets and institutions in economic development", American
Economic Review, Vol.83 No.2, May, pp. 403-8. .

------ (2002) “Varieties of Labor Market Institutions and Economic Performance”, presented
at the IRRA Session on Labor Market Institutions and Economic Outcomes Jan 4.

------ (2005) “Labour Market Institutions Without Blinders: The Debate over Flexibility and
Labour Market Performance,” International Economic Journal Korean International
Economic Association, vol. 19(2), pages 129-145, June NBER Working Paper 11246.

Freeman, Richard B., Peter Boxall and Peter Haynes (eds) (2007) What Workers Say:
Employee Voice in the Anglo-American Workplace, (Ithaca, NY: ILR Press, an imprint of
Cornell University Press)

Freeman, Richard B. and Edward P. Lazear (1995) "An Economic Analysis of Works
Councils", in Joel Rogers and Wolfgang Streeck (eds) Works Councils: Consultation,
Representation, Cooperation. (University of Chicago Press for NBER, 1995), pp 27-50.

Freeman, Richard B and James Medoff (1982) "The Impact of Collective Bargaining:
Illusion or Reality?" in J. Stieber, R.B. McKersie, D.Q. Mills, (eds.), U.S. Industrial
Relations 1950-1980: A Critical Assessment (Madison, WI: Industrial Relations Research
Association, 1982).

Freeman, Richard B and James Medoff (1984) What do Unions Do? (Basic Books, NY)

Freeman, Richard B. and Remco Oostendorp (2002) Wages Around the World: Pay Across
Occupations and Countries, with Remco Oostendorp, Chapter 1 in Richard Freeman (ed)
Inequality Around the World (London, UK: Palgrave, in association with the IEA, Conf Vol
#134 , 2002).

Galiani, S. (1999) "Wage determination in Argentina: an econometric analysis with
methodology discussion", University Torcuato Di Tella, Buenos Aires, mimeo.

Gennari, Pietro (2004) “The Estimation of Employment and Value Added of Informal Sector
in Pakistan” 7th Meeting of the Expert Group on Informal Sector Statistics, New Delhi, 2-4
February.
Ghose, A. K. (2005), “Employment in China: Recent Trends and Future Challenges,”
Employment Strategy Papers 2005/14, Employment Strategy Department, ILO, Geneva.
Gindling, T. H. & Terrell, Katherine, 1995. “The nature of minimum wages and their
effectiveness as a Wage Floor in Costa Rico, 1976-1991” World Development, Elsevier, vol.
23(8), pages 1439-1458, August
Gindling TH and Katherine. Terrell (2005) “The Effect of Minimum Wages on Actual wages
in the formal and informal sectors of Costa Rica, World Development 33(11), 1905-1921

Gindling TH and Katherine. Terrell (2007a) “The effects of multiple minimum wages
throughout the labor market: the case of Costa Rica” Labour Economics 12: 485-511

Gindling TH and Katherine. Terrell (2007b) “Minimum Wages and the Welfare of Workers
in Honduras” IZA DP no 2892 June 2007

Grimshaw Damian and Marcela Miozzo (2003) “Minimum Wages and Pay Equity in Latin
America” International Labor Organization, Geneva

Gruber, Jonathan (1997a) “The incidence of mandated maternity benefits” American
Economic Review 84(3), 622-41

Gruber, Jonathan (1997b) “The incidence of payroll taxation: evidence from Chile” Journal
of Labor Economics 15(3), S72-S101

Gruber, Jonathan and Alan Kreuger (1991) “The incidence of mandated employer-provided
insurance: lessons from workers’ compensation insurance” in David Bradford, ed Tax Policy
and the Economy vol 5, 111-44, Cambridge Mass MIT Press

Gwartney, James and Robert Lawson (2006). Economic Freedom of the World: 2006 Annual
Report. Vancouver: The Fraser Institute. Data retrieved from www.freetheworld.com.

Haltiwanger, John, Stefano Scarpetta, Helena Schweiger “Asssessing Job Flows Across
countries: the role of industry, firm size, and regulations” (NBER WP 13920, April 2008)/

Harris, J. and M. Todaro (1970) ”Migration, unemployment and development: A twosector
analysis” American Economic Review 60(1): 126-142.

Harrison, Ann and Jason Scorse (2003) “Globalization’s Impact on compliance with labor
standards” Brookings Trade Forum 2003, pp 45-95

Hasan, Rana, Devashish Mitra, K.V. Ramaswamy “Trade Reforms, Labor Regulations, and
Labor Demand Elasticities: empirical evidence from India” Review of Economics and
Statistics, August 2007, vol 89, no 3, pp 466-481

Heckman, James and Carmen Pages (2002) "The Cost of Job Security Regulation: Evidence
from Latin American Labor Markets" (June). NBER Working Paper No. W7773
Hoddinott, John (1996): “Wages and unemployment in urban African labour market”. The
Economic Journal, 106, (439), pp. 1610-26.

Hoek, Jasper (2007) “Labor Flows in Formal and Informal Labor Markets in Brazil” ” 2nd
IZA/World Bank Conference, Employment and Development, June 8-9

Hoek, Jasper (2006) Life Cycle Effects of Job Displacement in Brazil IZA
Discussion Paper No. 2291 September
Hofmeyr, J and R Lucas (2001) - The Rise in Union Wage Premiums in South Africa –
Labour.

Horton, Susan , Ravi Kanbur, Dipak Mazumdar (1994) Labor Markets in an Era of
Adjustment, volumes 1 and 3 Washington DC, World Bank.

Hussmans, Ralf, Defining and measuring informal employment
http://www.ilo.org/public/english/bureau/stat/download/papers/meas.pdf

Inter-American Development Bank (2004) Good Jobs Wanted: Labor Markets in Latin
America. Available at: http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?docnum=419963

Ilkkaracan, Ipek & Selim, Raziye (2003): “The role of unemployment in wage
determination: further evidence on the wage curve from Turkey”, Applied Economics,
Volume 35, Number 14, pp. 1589-1598, September.

ILO (2002) Women and Men in the Informal Sector: a statistical portrait
http://www.ilo.org/dyn/infoecon/docs/441/F596332090/women%20and%20men%20stat%20
picture.pdf

ILO (2002) Key Indicators of the Labour Market, 2001-2002, Geneva, ILO

ILO (2006) Key Indicators of the Labour Market, 2005-2006. Geneva, ILO

ILO (2007) Laborstats web site. http://laborsta.ilo.org/

Jeong, Jooyeon (2003) “Is Korean Enterprise Bargaining a Bona Fide Tool for Employee
Representation?” Journal of Industrial Relations, Vol. 45, No. 1, 94-100

Jeong, Jooyeon (2007) Industrial Relations in Korea, Routledge, London,

Jones, Patricia (1997) “The Impact of Minimum Wage Legislation in Developing countries
where coverage is incomplete” Centre for the Study of African Economies, Oxford, WPS 98-
2, December.

Kingdon, Geeta and John Knight (1998) "Wages and unemployment in South Africa; a spatial
analysis", Centre for the Study of African Economies, University of Oxford, working paper.

Kingdon, Geeta and John Knight (2006) “How Flexible are wages in response to local
unemployment in South Africa?” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, vol 59, pp 471-495


Kingdon,Geeta Gandhi and John Knight (2004) "Unemployment in South Africa: The Nature
of the Beast," World Development, Elsevier, vol. 32(3), pages 391-408, March

Kingdon, Geeta, Justin Sandefur and Francis Teal (2006) .Labor Market Flexibility, Wages
and Incomes in sub-Saharan Africa in the 1990s,” African Development Review, 18(3)
(December): 392-427(36). Blackwell Publshing
Knight, J. (1998) "What underlies the wage curve?", Institute of Economics and Statistics,
University of Oxford, working paper.

Knight, John and Lina Song (2005) Towards a Labour Market in China, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Kleiner Morris and Young-Myon Lee (1997) “Wage Councils and Unionization: lessons from South
Korea” Industrial Relations vol 36, no 1, January: pp 1- 16

Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei (2007) "Financial
Globalization: Beyond the Blame Game," Finance & Development, IMF, Vol 44: 1 (March)

Kristensen, Nicolai and Wendy Cunningham (2006) “Do Minimum Wages in Latin America
and the Caribbean Matter?” Evidence from 19 countries, World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper 3870, March

Krueger, Alan B. and Mikael Lindahl (2001) “Education for Growth:Why and For Whom?”
Journal of Economic Literature Vol. XXXIX (December) pp. 1101–1136

Kugler, Adriana (1999) “The Impact of Firing Cost on Turnover and Unemployment:
evidence from Columbian Labor Market Reforms, International Tax and Public Finance, 6:
389-410.

Kugler, Adriana (2002) "From Severance Pay to Self-insurance: Effects of Severance
Payments Savings Accounts in Colombia," Centre for Economic Policy Research DP 3197,
February 2002

Kugler, Adriana (2004)“The Effect of Job Security Regulations on Labor Market Flexibility:
Evidence from the Colombian Labor Market Reform,” in James J. Heckman and Carmen Pagés,
Eds., Law and Employment: Lessons from Latin America and the Caribbean. Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press, 2004.

Kugler, Adriana and Maurice Kugler (2003) “The Labour Market Effects of Payroll Taxes in
a Middle-Income country: Evidence from Columbia” Discussion paper 4046, Sept CEPR

Lachaud, J.P. (1998) "Efficiency wage, labour vulnerability and urban unemployment in
Burkina Faso", University Montesquieu-Bordeaux IV, France.

Lee, Young Myron and In-gang Na (2004) “ How did unions protect workers rights after the 1997
economic crisis in Korea?” Industrial Relations Research Association Proceedings

Lemos, Sara (2004a) “Minimum Wage Policy and Employment Effects: Evidence from
Brazil” Economia, fall 2004, pp 219-266

Lemos, Sara (2004b) The Effects of the Minimum Wage in the Formal and Informal Sectors
in Brazil - Bonn: Institute for the Study of Labor, IZA Working Paper, 2004 - repec.iza.org

Lemos, Sara (2007) “Minimum Wages Across the Public and Private Sectors in Brazil”
Journal of Development Studies, vol 43, no 4, 700-720, May 2007
Lewis, H. Gregg (1963) Unionism and Relative Wages in the United States (University of
Chicago Press).

Lewis, H. Gregg (1986) Union Relative Wage Effects: A Survey Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Lipton, Michael (1977) Why Poor People Stay Poor: Urban Bias in World Development.
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1977

Loayza, Norman, Ana Maria Oviedo and Luis Serven (2005) "The Impact of Regulation on
Growth and Informality Cross-Country Evidence" (June). World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper No. 3623.

Lustig N. & D. McCleod (1997) “Minimum Wages and Poverty in Developing Countries;
Some empirical evidence” in Labor markets in Latin America (ed S. Edwards and N. Lustig)
Washington DC, Brookings Institution 1997) pp 62-103.

Manning, Alan (2005) Monopsony in Motion: Imperfect Competition in Labor Markets.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Maloney, William F. (1998a), Are Labor Markets in Developing Countries Dualistic? Policy
Research Working Paper 1941, Washington DC: World Bank.

Maloney, William F. (1998b), Self-Employment and Labor Turnover in LDCs: Cross
Country Evidence, Working Paper 2102, Washington DC: World Bank.

Maloney, William F. (1999) Does Informality Imply Segmentation in Urban Labor Markets?
Evidence from Sectoral Transitions in Mexico THE WORLD BANK ECONOMIC
REVIEW, VOL. 13, NO. 2: 275-302

Maloney, William F, Jairo Nunez with Wendy Cunningham, Norbert Fleiss, Claudio
Montenegro, Edmundo Murrugarra, Mauricio Santamaria, and Claudio Sepulveda, (2001)
“Measuring the Impact of Minimum Wages: evidence from Latin America” World Bank
Policy Research Working Paper 2597, April 2001

Maloney, William F. (2003), ‘Informal self-employment: Poverty trap or decent alternative?’
in G. S. Fields and G. Pfeffermann (eds.), Pathways out of poverty. Private firms and
economic mobility in developing countries, London: Kluwer, pp. 65-82.

Maloney, William F.(2004) “Informality Revisited” World Development 32(7), 1159.

Maloney, William F., and Jairo Nunez Mendez (2004): "“Measuring the impact of minimum
wages: evidence from Latin America” in Law and Employment: Lessons from Latin America
and the Caribbean, ed. by J. Heckman, and C. Pagés. Cambridge, MA: NBER and University
of Chicago.
Maloney, William F. and Eduardo Pontual Ribeiro (1999) "Efficiency wage and union effects
in labor demand and wage structure in Mexico - An application of quantile analysis," Policy
Research Working Paper Series 2131, The World Bank

Manning, Alan Monopsony in Motion: imperfect competition in labor markets (Princeton,
2003)

Marcouiller, Douglas, Veronica Ruiz de Castilla, Christopher Woodruff (1997) “Formal
Measures of the informal-sector wage gap in Mexico, El Salvador and Peru”
Economic Development and Cultural; Change, vol 45, no 2 Jan 1997, pp 367-392

Martin, Gary (2000) “Employment and Unemployment in Mexico in the 1990s” Monthly
Labor Review, November.

Menezes-Filho, Naercio, Helio Zylberstajn, Jose Paulo Chahad, and Elaine Pazello (2005)
“Unions and the Economic Performance of Brazilian Establishments” in Peter Kuhn and
and Gustavo Marquez (coordinators) The Economic Effects of Unions In Latin America,
Inter-American Development Bank, Washington.

Meng, Xin (2000) Labor Market Reform in China Cambridge University Press.

Michaud, P-C and D. Vencatachellum (2001) “The union wage premium for Blacks in South
Africa,” (October 15).
http://www.commerce.uct.ac.za/research_units/dpru/Conf2001PDF/michaud&vencatachellu
m.pdf

Micco, Alejandro and Carmen Pages. “The Economic Effects of Employment Protection:
evidence from international industry-level data” IZA discussion paper 2433, November 2006.

Miller, V and L. Vallee (1995) “Labour Regulation and Segmentation in Cameroon” in B.
Guathier (wed) Economic Reform and the Development of the Manufacturing Sector in
Cameroon, RPED Country Study Series, Washington DC. World Bank

Moll, P.G. (1993) Black South African Unions: Relative Wage Effects in International
Perspective Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 2. (Jan., 1993), pp. 245-
261.

Montenegro, Claudio and Carmen Pages (2004) “Who Benefits from Labor Market
Regulations? Chile, 1968-1988, in J. Heckman and C. Pages (eds) Law and Employment:
Lessons from Latin America and the Carribean (NBER)

National Academy of Sciences (2004) Monitoring International Labor Standards, Quality of
Information, Summary of a Workshop.
Neumark, David and William Wascher (2006) “Wages and Employment: A review of
evidence from the new minimum wage research” NBER WP 12663, November.
Nwaka, Geoffrey, I. (2005) The Urban Informal Sector in Nigeria: Towards Economic
Development, Environmental Health, and Social Harmony,” Global Urban Development
Magazine 1(1) (May). http://www.globalurban.org/Issue1PIMag05/NWAKA%20article.htm

OECD (2004) Employment Outlook 2004. OECD, Paris

OECD (2006 )Employment Outlook 2004.OECD, Paris

OECD (2006b) OECD Factbook 2006.OECD, Paris

OECD (2007) OECD Employment Outlook OECD, Paris

OECD (2007) Working Party on employment, Labour markets in the BRICs
EDLSA/ESLA/WP5(2007), march.

Ooghe, Erwin, E. Schokkaert, and Jef Flechet (2003) “The Incidence of Social Security
Contributions: an empirical analysis” Empirica 30: 81-106.

Packard, Truman (2007) “Do Workers in Chile Choose Informal employment? A dynamic
analysis of sector choice” WPS4232 May.

Panagides, Alexis, and Harry Anthony Patrinos (1994) “Union/Non-union Wage Differentials
in the Developing World: A Case Study of Mexico.” Policy Research Working Paper 1269.
World Bank: Washington, D.C.

Park, Ki Seong (2006) “Non-standard Employment” Korea Labor Institute, Beyond
Flexibility, July 12.

Park, Young-Bum Park, 1991. "Union/Nonunion Wage Differentials In The Korean
Manufacturing Sector," International Economic Journal, Korean International Economic
Association, vol. 5(4), pages 79-91, December

Pencavel, John (1997) “The legal framework for collective bargaining in developing
economies” in Labor markets in Latin America (ed S. Edwards and N. Lustig) Washington
DC, Brookings Institution) pp 62-103.

Petrin, Amil and Jagadeesh Sivadasan (2006) “Job Security Does Affect Economic Efficiency:
Theory, A New Statistic, and Evidence” NBER, WP 12757 December.
Popli, Gurleen (2006) “The Rising Wage Inequality in Mexico, 1984-2000: A Distributional
Analysis,” Journal of Income Distribution, Forthcoming
Rama, Martin (2000) “Wage Misalignment in the CFA Countries: Were Labour Market
policies to blame? Journal of African Economies, 9(4) 475-511

Rama, Martin (2001), “The Consequences of Doubling the Minimum Wage: the Case of
Indonesia, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 54 (4), pp 864-881

Rama, M. and R. Artecona (2002) “A Database of Labor Market Indicators across Countries”
Washington: World Bank, Development Research Group

Rodgers, Y.V. and S. Nataraj (1999), "Labor market flexibility in East Asia; lessons from
Taiwan", working paper, Economic Development and Cultural Change, 48(1), 51-69,
October.

Rodriguez, Francisco & Dani Rodrik (1999) "Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A
Skeptic's Guide to Cross-National Evidence," NBER Working Papers 7081, National Bureau
of Economic Research.

Sabin, Lora (1999) “The Development of Urban Labour Markets: China's Urban Wage
Curve, 1980-92,” Journal of Development Studies, vol. 35, no. 3, February, pp. 134-52

Saavedra Jaime and Maximo Torero (2005) “Union Density Changes and Union effects on
firm Performance in Peru” (Kuhn, Peter, and Gustavo Marquez, editors) Inter-American
Development Bank, Washington.

Schultz, T.Paul and Germano Mwabu (1998) Labor Unions and the Distribution of Wages
and Employment in South Africa, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 51(4) (July): 680-
703.

Smeru Research Institute (2001) “Wage and Employment Effects of Minimum Wage Policy
in the Indonesian Urban Labor Market” The SMERU Research Institute, October
(www.smeru.or.id)

Squire L. & Suthiwart-Narueput S. (1997) “The Impact of Labor Market Regulations” World
Bank Economic Review 11, pp 119-143

Srinivasan. T.N (2004) “Comments” in National Research Council, Monitoring
International Labor Standards, Techniques and Sources of Information, Washington, National
Academies Press

Standing, Guy (1992) “Do Unions Impede or Accelerate Structural Adjustment? Industrial
versus Company Unions in an Industrializing Labour Market.” Cambridge Journal of
Economics 16(3): 327-54.

Strobl Eric & Walsh Frank (2003) “Minimum Wages and Compliance: the case of Trinidad
and Tobago” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 427-450

Summers, Lawrence (1989) What Can Economics Contribute to Social Policy? Some Simple
Economics of Mandated Benefits The American Economic Review, Vol. 79, No. 2, Papers
and Proceedings of the Hundred and First Annual Meeting of the American Economic
Association. (May), pp. 177-183.

Teal. Francis (1996) “The Size and Sources of Economic Rents in a Developing Country
Manufacturing Labour Market.” The Economic Journal 106: 963-976.

Terrell, K and J. Svejnar (1989) The Industrial Labor Market and Economic Performance in
Senegal Boulder Colorado, Westview Press

Thomas, Mark and Luc Vallée. 1996. .Labor market segmentation in Cameroonian
manufacturing.. Journal of Development Studies, 32(6): 876-98.

Tsafack-Nanfosso Roger (2007), “Union Wage Differential: Cameroon”
http://www.csae.ox.ac.uk/conferences/2002-UPaGiSSA/papers/Tsafack-Nanfosso-
csae2002.pdf

Ulyssea, Gabriel and Dimitri Szerman (2007) “Job Duration and the informal sector in
Brazil” 2nd IZA/World Bank Conference, Employment and Development, June 8-9

UNIDO (2006) The International Yearbook of Industrial Statistics 2006 (UK: Edward Elgar)

United Nations (2005) United Nations Human Development Report 2005.

Urizar, Carmen and Sigfrido Lee (2005) “The Effects of Unions on Productivity; evidence
from large coffee producers in Guatamala” in What Difference Do Unions Make? (Kuhn,
Peter, and Gustavo Marquez, editors) Inter-American Development Bank, Washington 2005

Vallee, L and M. Thomas (1994) “Labor Market Segmentation and Labor Absorption in
Cameroon” in B. Guathier (wed) Manufacturing Enterprises under adjustment in Cameroon:
a survey perspective”, RPED Country Study Series, Washington DC. World Bank

Venida, Victor, S., Employment, Productivity and the Informal Sector in the Philippines,
1974-1988: An Input-Output Analysis http://www.iioa.org/pdf/12th%20conf/nydrfr98.pdf

Verner Dorte (1999), “Are wages and productivity in Zimbabwe affected by human capital
investment and international trade?” World Bank Policy Research WP 2101

Walder, Andrew (1986) Communist Neotraditionalism: Work and Authority in Chinese
Industry. (University of California Press).

Wolfenson, James (2004) “Comments on ‘Scaling Up Poverty Reduction’ in Shanghai,” May
25.

World Bank (1995) World Development Report. Washington, DC: The World Bank.

World Bank (1990) World Development Report 1990. New York: Oxford University Press.

World Bank (1993) The East Asian Miracle New York: Oxford University Press

World Bank (2006a) “Minimum wages in Latin America and the Carribean: impact on
employment, inequality, and poverty. Office of the Chief Economist, January

World Bank (2006b) China - Pension Reform Project, Report No: 36024, July 10

World Economic Forum (2005) Global Competitiveness Report. 2005-2006
World Economic Forum (2006) Global Competitiveness Report. 2006-2007

Wu, Z. (2004), "Wage curve for urban China: a panel data approach", Applied Economics
Letters, 11(7), pp. 425-28, June.

Yamada, G. (1996) “Urban Informal Employment and Self-Employment in Developing
Countries: Theory and Evidence” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 44, 289-314.

Zagha, Roberto, Gobind Nankani, and Indermit Gill. 2006. “Rethinking Growth,” Finance &
Development, IMF, Vol 43: 1 (March).
