                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE LONG-RUN RISKS MODEL AND AGGREGATE ASSET PRICES:
                         AN EMPIRICAL ASSESSMENT

                                            Jason Beeler
                                          John Y. Campbell

                                        Working Paper 14788
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14788


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2009




We are grateful to Ravi Bansal, Dana Kiku, and Amir Yaron for their comments on the first version
of this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Jason Beeler and John Y. Campbell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Long-Run Risks Model and Aggregate Asset Prices: An Empirical Assessment
Jason Beeler and John Y. Campbell
NBER Working Paper No. 14788
March 2009
JEL No. E21,G12

                                                ABSTRACT

The long-run risks model of asset prices explains stock price variation as a response to persistent fluctuations
in the mean and volatility of aggregate consumption growth, by a representative agent with a high
elasticity of intertemporal substitution. This paper documents several empirical difficulties for the
model as calibrated by Bansal and Yaron (BY, 2004) and Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (BKY, 2007a).
BY's calibration counterfactually implies that long-run consumption and dividend growth should be
highly persistent and predictable from stock prices. BKY's calibration does better in this respect by
greatly increasing the persistence of volatility fluctuations and their impact on stock prices. This calibration
fits the predictive power of stock prices for future consumption volatility, but implies much greater
predictive power of stock prices for future stock return volatility than is found in the data. Neither
calibration can explain why movements in real interest rates do not generate strong predictable movements
in consumption growth. Finally, the long-run risks model implies extremely low yields and negative
term premia on inflation-indexed bonds.


Jason Beeler
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
jbeeler@fas.harvard.edu

John Y. Campbell
Morton L. and Carole S.
Olshan Professor of Economics
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 213
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
john_campbell@harvard.edu
1    Introduction

The prices of long-term assets re‡ect both the cash ‡ows that investors expect the
assets to generate, and the discount rates that investors apply to those cash ‡ows.
One of the most basic questions in asset pricing is whether asset price movements are
driven by changing expectations of cash ‡ows, as in the traditional random walk model
of stock prices, or by changing discount rates, as in the case of government bonds
which make credible promises of …xed future cash ‡ows. During the 1980’s and 1990’s,
a number of papers argued that changing discount rates are the dominant in‡uence
on aggregate stock prices (e.g. Campbell and Shiller 1988, Campbell 1991), and
proposed asset pricing models that have this property (e.g. Campbell and Cochrane
1999).

    Bansal and Yaron (henceforth BY, 2004) have recently reemphasized the impor-
tance of cash-‡ow news for stock prices. Their “long-run risks”model has persistent
variations in both the growth rate and the volatility of aggregate consumption, but
consumption growth–which drives up stock prices by increasing investors’ expecta-
tions of future cash ‡ows— is the most important in‡uence on stock prices in the
calibration of the model proposed by BY. The long-run risks model has attracted
a great deal of attention, with important subsequent work by Bansal, Khatchatrian,
and Yaron (2005), Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2007a,b), Bansal, Dittmar, and Kiku
(2008), Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008), and Pakoš (2008) among others.

    Of course, in general equilibrium the same underlying shocks may a¤ect both ex-
pected cash ‡ows and discount rates. In a consumption-based asset pricing model
where the aggregate stock market is treated as a claim to aggregate consumption, ex-
pected future consumption growth increases both future dividends and real interest
rates, and moves stock prices through both channels. The …rst e¤ect raises stock
prices while the second lowers them. If the intertemporal elasticity of substitution
in consumption is one, then these two e¤ects cancel out and expected future con-
sumption growth has no e¤ect on stock prices, which move one for one with current
consumption.

   The long-run risks model works within the consumption-based paradigm, but
avoids exact cancellation of cash-‡ow and discount-rate e¤ects. The model has four
key features. First, there is a persistent predictable component of consumption
growth. This component is hard to measure using univariate time-series methods,
but investors perceive it directly and so it can move stock prices. Second, there

                                         1
is persistent variation in the volatility of consumption growth, which also moves
stock prices and is roughly equal in importance for stock market variation. Third,
consumption and dividends are not the same; the stock market is a claim to dividends,
which are more volatile than consumption although correlated with consumption
and sharing the same persistent predictable component and the same movements in
volatility.

    Finally, assets are priced by a representative investor who has Epstein-Zin-Weil
preferences (Epstein and Zin 1989, Weil 1989). These preferences generalize power
utility by treating the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS) and the coe¢ cient
of relative risk aversion (RRA) as separate free parameters. In the long-run risks
model, EIS is greater than one and RRA is many times greater than one. The level
of EIS ensures that stock prices rise with expected future consumption growth and
fall with volatility of consumption growth, while the level of RRA delivers high risk
premia. Because EIS is greater than the reciprocal of RRA, asset risk premia are
driven not only by covariances of asset returns with current consumption, as in the
classic power-utility models of Hansen and Singleton (1983) and Mehra and Prescott
(1985), but also by the covariances of asset returns with expected future consumption
growth (Restoy and Weil 1998).2

    The purpose of this paper is to evaluate the long-run risks model along a number
of dimensions, most importantly challenging BY’s claim that stock prices respond
strongly to variation in expected future consumption growth. Some of our points
have been made in recent papers by Bui (2007) and Garcia, Meddahi, and Tédongap
(2008), but our examination of the long-run risks model is more comprehensive.

    Alongside the original calibration of the long-run risks model by BY, we also
consider a recent calibration proposed in an unpublished paper by Bansal, Kiku,
and Yaron (henceforth BKY, 2007a). This new calibration responds to the concern
that stock prices do not predict consumption growth by reducing the importance of
persistent shocks to consumption growth and greatly increasing the importance of
persistent shocks to volatility. Since volatility shocks move stock prices by changing
risk premia, the BKY calibration increases the importance of discount-rate news and
   2
    The Epstein-Zin-Weil model can alternatively be used to derive an augmented version of the
classic Capital Asset Pricing Model, in which asset risk premia are driven not only by covariances
of asset returns with the current return on the aggregate wealth portfolio, but also by covariances
with news about future returns on wealth (Campbell 1993, 1996, Campbell and Vuolteenaho 2004).
We do not explore this approach to the model here. Campbell (2003) gives a textbook treatment
of the Epstein-Zin-Weil model under homoskedasticity.


                                                2
reduces the importance of cash-‡ow news for stock prices. In this sense the BKY
calibration is closer to the work of Calvet and Fisher (2007, 2008) than to the original
BY model. We show that the BKY calibration is more successful than the original
BY calibration of the long-run risks model, but still faces a number of empirical
di¢ culties that should be addressed in future research.

    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the basic model, discusses
the alternative calibrations of BY and BKY, and explains how the model is solved
and simulated. BY use both numerical solutions and analytical solutions to a log-
linear approximate model of the sort proposed by Campbell and Shiller (1988) and
Campbell (1993). It is also possible to derive analytical solutions to a discrete-state
approximation of the model (Garcia, Meddahi, and Tédongap 2008). Here we rely
primarily on the loglinear approximation method, which appears to be highly accu-
rate for reasonable values of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, provided that
one solves numerically for the parameter of loglinearization (Campbell 1993, Camp-
bell and Koo 1997). We have also solved the model numerically but do not report
the results here.

    Section 3 explains the data that we use to evaluate the performance of the model,
and presents basic moments from the data and the model as calibrated by BY and
BKY. Section 4 examines the ability of stock prices to predict consumption growth,
dividend growth, and stock returns, while Section 5 looks at stock price predictions
of the volatility of these time series. Section 6 examines instrumental variables
estimates of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, which are usually less than
one in aggregate data, and asks whether the long-run risks model can explain this
fact. Section 7 studies the implications of the long-run risks model for the term
structure of real interest rates, and Section 8 concludes.




                                           3
2       The Long-Run Risks Model

Bansal and Yaron (2004), henceforth “BY”, propose the following process for con-
sumption and dividends:

                     gt+1 =       + xt + t t+1
                     xt+1 =      xt + 'e t et+1
                       2         2
                       t+1 =       + 1 ( 2t        2
                                                     ) + w wt+1                         (1)
                    gd;t+1 =     d + xt + 'd t ut+1
                                wt+1 ; et+1 ; ut+1 ; t+1 i:i:d: N (0; 1):

Here gt+1 is the growth rate of consumption, xt is a persistently varying component
of the expected consumption growth rate, and 2t is the conditional variance of con-
sumption with unconditional mean 2 . Dividends are imperfectly correlated with
consumption, but their growth rate gd;t+1 shares the same persistent and predictable
component xt scaled by a parameter , and the conditional volatility of dividend
growth is proportional to the conditional volatility of consumption growth.3

    Both the expected consumption growth rate and the conditional variance of con-
sumption follow …rst-order autoregressive processes. The variance process can take
negative values, but this will happen only with small probability if the mean is high
enough relative to the volatility of variance. In simulations, BY replace negative
realizations of the conditional variance with a very small positive number, and we
follow the same procedure here.

   Table I reports parameter values from the calibrations of BY and Bansal, Kiku,
and Yaron (2007a), henceforth “BKY”. All parameters are given in monthly terms;
thus mean consumption growth of 0.0015, or 15 basis points per month, corresponds
to annualized growth of 1.8%. The persistence of the predictable component of
consumption growth is 0.979 in BY and 0.975 in BKY, implying half-lives of between
two and three years: ln(2)= ln(:979) = 33 months for BY, and 27 months for BKY.

   Dividends are more variable than consumption, and this is captured by the para-
meters and 'd . The …rst measures the sensitivity of predictable dividend growth
    3
    This process does not impose cointegration between consumption and dividends. Some more
recent research, notably Bansal, Dittmar, and Kiku (2008) and Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008),
emphasizes such cointegration.


                                             4
to predictable consumption growth, while the second measures the ratio of the stan-
dard deviations of dividend shocks and consumption shocks. The …rst parameter
is 3 in BK and 2.5 in BKY, while the second is 4.5 in BK and 5.96 in BKY. Both
calibrations imply that dividend growth is less predictable than consumption growth,
but the di¤erence between the two processes is accentuated in BKY. In addition,
BKY introduces a contemporaneous correlation of consumption shocks and dividend
shocks that is absent in BY.

    The persistence of volatility is 0.987 in BY, implying a half-life slightly over four
years, and 0.999 in BKY, implying an essentially in…nite (58-year) half-life. Volatility
shocks have similar standard deviations in the two calibrations (0.0000023 in BY and
0.0000028 in BKY), but the greater persistence of volatility in BKY implies that
volatility shocks are very much more important for asset prices in that calibration.
The original BY calibration is driven by long-run consumption growth risk, whereas
in the BKY calibration long-run volatility risk is more important.

    Because volatility is so persistent in the BKY calibration, it is much more likely to
go negative than in the BY calibration. In simulations, we …nd negative realizations
of volatility 1.3% of the time for the BKY process, but less than 0.001% of the time
for the BY process. When we simulate 77-year paths of volatility using the BKY
calibration, over half of them go negative at some point, whereas this happens less
than 0.2% of the time for the BY process. Thus the censoring of negative volatility
realizations has a nontrivial e¤ect on the BKY calibration.


2.1    Solving and simulating the model

BY solve the long-run risks model using analytical approximations. They assume
that the log price-consumption ratio for a consumption claim, zt , is linear in the
conditional mean and variance of consumption growth, the two state variables of the
model:
                             zt = A0 + A1 xt + A2 2t ;                          (2)
and that the log price-dividend ratio for a dividend claim, zm;t , is similarly linear:
                                                           2
                            zm;t = A0;m + A1;m xt + A2;m   t:                         (3)

   Under the assumption that a representative agent has Epstein-Zin utility with
coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion and elasticity of intertemporal substitution ,

                                            5
the log stochastic discount factor for the economy is given by

                       ln Mt+1 = ln             gt+1 + (     1)ra;t+1 ;              (4)

where = (1         )=(1 1= ) and ra;t+1 is the return on a consumption claim, or
equivalently the return on aggregate wealth.

    BY use the Campbell-Shiller (1988) approximation for the return on the consump-
tion claim in relation to consumption growth and the log price-consumption ratio:

                           ra;t+1 =   0   +   1 zt+1   zt + gt+1 ;                   (5)

where 0 and 1 are parameters of linearization. Substituting equations (1) and (5)
into equation (4), the innovation in the log SDF can be written as

               mt+1    Et (mt+1 ) =           t t+1    e t et+1      w w wt+1 ;      (6)

where     = , e = (1            ) 1 A1 'e , and w = (1   ) A2 1 . The 0 s represent
the market prices of risk for consumption shocks t+1 , expected consumption growth
shocks et+1 , and volatility shocks wt+1 respectively.

    In order to solve the model, one must …nd the unknown parameters A0 , A1 , A2 ,
A0m , A1m , A2m , 0 , and 1 . Conditional on the linearization parameters 0 and 1 ,
the A parameters can be found analytically. The parameters A0 and A2 determine
the mean of the price-consumption ratio, z, and the parameters 0 and 1 are simple
nonlinear functions of z. It is straightforward to iterate numerically until a …xed point
for z is found. Campbell (1993) and Campbell and Koo (1997) study a somewhat
simpler model, without volatility shocks, and …nd that the loglinear approximation
method is highly accurate provided that numerical iteration is used to …nd a …xed
point for z, but approximation accuracy deteriorates noticeably if z is prespeci…ed.
Details of the approximate solution method for the long-run risks model are given in
the appendix.

    We compare the model with quarterly and annual data by simulating the model
at a monthly frequency and then time-aggregating the data to a quarterly or annual
frequency. First, we generate four sets of i.i.d. standard normal random variables
and use these to construct the monthly series for consumption, dividends, and state
variables using equation (1). Following BY, we replace negative realizations of condi-
tional variance with a small positive number. Next, we construct quarterly (annual)

                                               6
consumption and dividend growth by averaging three (twelve) consumption and div-
idend levels, and then taking the growth rate of the average.4 Low-frequency log
market returns and risk free rates are the sums of monthly values, while the log price-
consumption and price-dividend ratios use prices measured from the last month of
the quarter or year.

    The solution of the model depends on the preference parameters of the represen-
tative agent. Table I reports the parameters used in BY and BKY. BY consider
relative risk aversion coe¢ cients of 7.5 and 10, and assume an elasticity of intertem-
poral substitution of 1.5 and a time discount factor of 0.998 per month, equivalent
to a pure rate of time preference of 2.4% per year. BKY set risk aversion at 10 and
the EIS at 1.5, and use a higher time discount factor of 0.9989 per month, implying
a pure rate of time preference of 1.3% per year.



3        Consumption and Financial Market Data

In order to evaluate the performance of the long-run risks model, we follow BY and
use data on US nondurables and services consumption from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis. We consider both a long-run annual series over the period 1930-2006, and
a postwar quarterly US series over the period 1947:2-2007:3.

        Basic data moments

    Table II reports basic annual moments for US data over the period 1930-2006,
and the annual population moments implied by the BY and BKY calibrations of
the long-run risks model with relative risk aversion = 10. The population mo-
ments are calculated from a single simulation run over 1.2 million months or 100,000
years. Table III repeats this exercise for quarterly postwar US data and the quar-
terly population moments from the model. We look at …ve variables: the changes
in log consumption and dividends, log stock return, log riskfree interest rate, and log
price-dividend ratio. All variables are measured in real terms. For each variable, we
report the mean, standard deviation, and …rst-order autocorrelation.
    4
     We have veri…ed that when we generate underlying iid consumption growth series using this
procedure, the growth rate of time-aggregated consumption has a …rst-order autocorrelation of 0.25
as in the classic result of Working (1960).




                                                7
    It is apparent from Table II that the long-run risks model does a decent job of
matching many basic properties of the long-run annual data, including the means,
standard deviations, and …rst-order autocorrelations of consumption growth, dividend
growth, and stock returns. The model understates the volatility of the riskless interest
rate at about 1.3% in both calibrations, compared to 4.28% in the data. However,
this is actually a strength of the model, since the data record the ex post real return
on a short-term nominally riskless asset, not the ex ante (equal to ex post) real return
on a real riskless asset. Volatile in‡ation surprises increase the volatility of the series
in the data, but not in the model.

    A much more serious discrepancy is that the long-run risks model greatly un-
derstates the volatility of the log price-dividend ratio. In the model, the standard
deviation of zm is 0.16 in the BY calibration and 0.26 in the BKY calibration, as
compared with 0.46 in the annual data. Historical stock prices display low-frequency
variation relative to cash ‡ows, which is not captured by the model.5

   The same issues arise in postwar quarterly data in Table III. At …rst glance, the
behavior of quarterly dividend growth is an additional problem. The model implies
a modest positive autocorrelation of dividend growth, but in quarterly data dividend
growth has a …rst-order autocorrelation of -0.56. However this results merely from
seasonality in dividend payments, a phenomenon that is commonly ignored in stylized
asset pricing models. Dividend seasonality should not be regarded as an important
omission of the long-run risks model.

    A more serious di¢ culty is that postwar quarterly consumption growth has a
much lower …rst-order autocorrelation than implied by the model. The autocorrela-
tion in the data is only 0.20, less than the 0.25 autocorrelation that is obtained by
time-averaging a continuous-time random walk (Working 1960). The BY and BKY
calibrations imply autocorrelations of 0.38 and 0.34 respectively. It seems that the
evidence for a persistent component of consumption growth is critically dependent on
the use of consumption data from the period of the Great Depression.

       Higher-order autocorrelations

   Table IV sheds more light on the dynamic behavior of consumption and dividend
growth by reporting the …rst …ve autocorrelations of these growth rates in the annual
   5
     The historical standard deviation of the log price-dividend ratio is this high in part because
stock prices were persistently high at the end of our sample period. If we end the sample in 1998,
as in BY, we obtain a lower standard deviation of 0.36, still considerably higher than in the model.


                                                 8
1930-2006 data. The …rst two autocorrelations of consumption growth are positive,
but the next three autocorrelations are negative, suggesting some longer-run mean
reversion in the level of consumption. The …rst autocorrelation of dividend growth
is positive, but the next four are negative, again suggestive of mean reversion.

   Panel A of the table compares these data moments with those implied by the
BY calibration of the long-run risks model, while Panel B compares the data with
the BKY calibration of the model. In each panel, we report the model’s population
moment; the model’s median moment in 100,000 …nite-sample simulations of 924
months or 77 years; and the percentile of the cross-sectional distribution of the model’s
…nite-sample moments that corresponds to the moment in the data. This last number
can be interpreted as a p-value for a one-sided test of the model based on the data
moment.

    Not surprisingly, the long-run risks model implies that all autocorrelations of
consumption and dividend growth should be positive. Table IV shows that the
higher autocorrelations of annual consumption growth, particularly the third and
fourth, are strikingly low relative to the predictions of the long-run risk model. All
the autocorrelations of annual dividend growth are somewhat low, but the discrepancy
is particularly severe in the …rst two autocorrelations. The BKY calibration performs
somewhat better than the BY calibration, but there is some evidence against both
calibrations in these test statistics.

    A similar analysis can be performed with quarterly data, but more autocorrela-
tions must be included to capture mean reversion that manifests itself over several
years. Results are similar and to save space we do not report them here.

   Sensitivity to preference parameters

    Table V shows how the asset pricing properties of the long-run risks model vary
with the preference parameters assumed for the representative agent. The table
reports the mean and standard deviation of the log riskfree interest rate, equity risk
premium, and log price-dividend ratio for the BY calibration (Panel A) and the BKY
calibration (Panel B) with nine sets of parameters: relative risk aversion coe¢ cients
of 5, 10, and 15, and elasticities of intertemporal substitution of 0.5, 1.5, and 2.0.
The base case is the central one in each three by three matrix, with values almost
equal to those in Tables II and III (small di¤erences result from randomness across
simulations). The mean equity premium is calculated by adding one-half the variance
of excess stock returns to the mean log stock return (a Jensen’s Inequality correction),

                                           9
and subtracting the mean log interest rate.

    It is immediately apparent from this table that the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution has an important e¤ect on the behavior of asset prices in the long-run
risks model. When          < 1, the riskless interest rate is high and volatile because
the representative agent dislikes increasing consumption over time and would like
to borrow from the future to ‡atten the upward-sloping and time-varying expected
consumption growth path. Also, the equity premium is trivially small and the
volatility of the price-dividend ratio is low, implying that the volatility of stock returns
is close to the volatility of dividend growth.

    The low volatility of the price-dividend ratio results from o¤setting e¤ects of
expected consumption growth on stock prices. Rapid consumption growth raises
stock prices by increasing expected future dividends, but lowers them by increasing
real interest rates. The leverage parameter measures the strength of the e¤ect on
future dividends, while the reciprocal of the EIS, 1= , measures the strength of the
e¤ect on interest rates. If is close to 1= , then the two e¤ects roughly cancel and
stock prices respond only weakly to long-run growth shocks. The BY calibration
assumes = 3 and the BKY calibration assumes = 2:5, so the case of = 0:5
in Table V produces a relatively stable price-dividend ratio and a volatility of stock
returns close to the volatility of dividend growth.6

    The low equity premium with < 1 is closely related. In the BY calibration, there
is no contemporaneous correlation between consumption growth and dividend growth,
so in a power utility model with = 1= , the equity premium would be zero.7 With
Epstein-Zin utility, the equity premium depends not only on the covariance of the
stock return with contemporaneous consumption growth, but also on its covariances
with shocks to expected future consumption growth and consumption volatility. If
   > 1= as assumed in the long-run risks literature, an asset that pays o¤ when
there is an upward revision in expected consumption growth is risky and commands
a premium. However, this premium is small when the response of stock prices to
expected future consumption growth is weak. In addition, the sign of the premium for
consumption volatility risk is ambiguous. When < 1, stock prices increase when
volatility increases and the risk premium for volatility shocks is negative (Lettau,
   6
     Campbell (2003) gives a detailed account of these o¤setting e¤ects for a leveraged consumption
claim in a homoskedastic model.
   7
     The BKY calibration does allow for a positive contemporaneous correlation of consumption and
dividend shocks, producing a small positive equity premium even in the power utility case.



                                                10
Ludvigson, and Wachter 2008).

    In the BKY calibration shown in Panel B, an extreme problem can arise in the
case where < 1. Because the rate of time preference is relatively low, and long-
run uncertainty about consumption is high as a result of persistently time-varying
volatility, consumers have a strong desire to save in the BKY calibration. If they are
su¢ ciently risk averse, precautionary savings can make the equilibrium real interest
rate negative and an in…nite-lived consumption or dividend claim can have an in…nite
price. This happens when = 0:5 and = 10 or 15. Since the consumption claim
appears in the stochastic discount factor for Epstein-Zin utility, this problem prevents
us from even calculating the equilibrium riskless interest rate for these cases.

    The numbers in Table V make it clear that the long-run risks model can only
match the level of the equity premium, and the volatility of stock prices in relation
to dividends, if the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is greater than one. This
observation is not new; it has been emphasized by BY and other papers in the long-run
risks literature.

   The relative importance of consumption and volatility shocks

    The BY and BKY calibrations of the long-run risk model assign very di¤erent
roles to movements in consumption growth and volatility. Movements in volatility
have very little e¤ect in the BY calibration, whereas they are primary in the BKY
calibration. To establish this, we have calculated the moments shown in the central
cases of Table V for two simpler models, one with constant volatility and time-varying
expected consumption growth, and one with iid consumption growth.

    In the BY calibration, the equity premium is zero with iid consumption growth,
5.31% with constant volatility and time-varying expected consumption growth, and
5.61% with time-varying volatility. The standard deviation of the log price-dividend
ratio is zero with iid consumption growth and 0.16 with constant or time-varying
volatility. It is apparent that time-variation in volatility is of little consequence for
the results reported by BY.

    In the BKY calibration, the results are very di¤erent. The equity premium is
1.61% with iid consumption growth, 3.82% with constant volatility and time-varying
expected consumption growth, and 7.85% with time-varying volatility. (The positive
equity premium with iid consumption growth results from the positive correlation of
dividends and consumption growth assumed in the BKY calibration.) The standard


                                           11
deviation of the log price-dividend ratio is zero with iid consumption growth, 0.08
with constant volatility and time-varying expected consumption growth, and 0.27
with time-varying volatility. Most of the equity premium, and most of the variability
in stock prices relative to dividends, result from time-varying volatility in the new
calibration of the long-run risks model proposed by BKY.



4    Predictability of Stock Returns, Consumption,
     and Dividends

In the long-run risks model, the main cause of stock price variability relative to div-
idends is predictable and persistent variation in consumption growth, which creates
similar variation in dividend growth. Thus, it is natural to test the model by evalu-
ating the ability of the log price-dividend ratio to predict long-run consumption and
dividend growth. At the same time, a large empirical literature has argued that
the log price-dividend ratio predicts excess stock returns and not dividend growth or
real interest rates (Campbell and Shiller 1988, Fama and French 1988, Hodrick 1992).
This suggests that one should compare the predictability of excess returns with the
predictability of consumption and dividend growth, in the data and in simulations
from the long-run risks model.

    We undertake this exercise in Table VI. Panel A of each table compares the data
with the BY calibration of the long-run risks model, while Panel B uses the BKY
calibration. In each panel of each table we regress excess stock returns, consumption
growth, or dividend growth, measured over horizons of 1, 3, or 5 years, onto the log
price-dividend ratio at the start of the measurement period. We report results both
for annual data over the period 1930-2006 and for quarterly data over the period
1947.2-2007.3.

    In the data, one must adopt a convention about the timing of measured consump-
tion. Measured consumption is a ‡ow that takes place over a discrete time interval,
but in a discrete-time asset pricing model, consumption takes place at a point of time
and consumption growth is measured over a discrete interval from one point of time
to the next. To match the data to the model, one must decide whether measured
consumption should be thought of as taking place at the beginning of each period, or
the end. The former assumption gives a higher contemporaneous correlation of con-


                                          12
sumption growth and asset returns, and is advocated by Campbell (2003). The latter
assumption generates a higher correlation between consumption growth and lagged
…nancial market data, and is used by BY and Parker and Julliard (2005) among oth-
ers. Here we report results using both assumptions to clarify how this a¤ects the
results. In each case we time-aggregate the model from monthly data using the same
timing assumption so that the comparison of data and model is legitimate.

    The top part of Table VI shows regression coe¢ cients, t statistics, and R2 statistics
for predicting excess stock returns, …rst in the annual data and then in the quarterly
postwar data. At the left, we report the estimated regression coe¢ cients in the
data, then the population coe¢ cients implied by the long-run risks model, the median
coe¢ cients generated by …nite-sample regressions on simulated data from the long-run
risks model, and …nally the percentiles of the simulated coe¢ cients that correspond
to the estimated coe¢ cients in the data. In the center, we report the t statistics of
the estimated coe¢ cients, and at the right we report R2 statistics. Just as with the
regression coe¢ cients, we …rst report the R2 statistics in the data, then the population
values implied by the long-run risks model, median values from simulations, and the
percentiles of the simulated statistics corresponding to the statistics in the data.

   The remaining parts of Table VI repeat these exercises for consumption growth,
…rst with the end-of-period timing convention and then with the beginning-of-period
timing convention, and …nally for dividend growth.

     Panel A of Table VI shows a striking contrast between the patterns in the data and
in the BY calibration of the long-run risks model. In the data, the log price-dividend
ratio predicts excess stock returns negatively, with a coe¢ cient whose absolute value
increases strongly with the horizon. At a 5-year horizon, the R2 statistic is 28% in
long-run annual data and 30% in postwar quarterly data. However there is relatively
little predictability of consumption growth in the data. At a one-year horizon there is
some predictability in annual data if the end-of-period timing assumption is used, but
this predictability dies out rapidly and disappears entirely under the beginning-of-
period timing assumption. There is no predictability of consumption growth under
either timing convention in postwar quarterly data. Dividend growth predictability
also appears to be short-term, dying out rapidly as one lengthens the horizon, and is
absent in postwar quarterly data.

    These empirical patterns are the reverse of the population predictions of the long-
run risks model. According to the model, regressions of excess returns on log price-
dividend ratios have true R2 statistics that are never greater than 0.1%, while regres-

                                           13
sions of consumption growth on stock returns have true R2 statistics that increase
rapidly with the horizon. At …ve years, the true explanatory power of the log price-
dividend ratio is 37% for consumption growth with the end-of-period consumption
timing assumption, 24% for consumption growth with the beginning-of-period timing
assumption, and 27% for dividend growth.

    The contrast between the data and the predictions of the model is almost as strong
when we use the …nite-sample distributions of the model statistics rather than their
population values. For excess returns, median …nite-sample R2 statistics remain very
small under the null that the long–run risks model describes the data. However, the
…nite-sample distribution of these statistics has a fat right tail because of the well-
known Stambaugh (1999) bias in predictive regressions with persistent regressors
whose innovations are correlated with innovations in the dependent variable. The
bias a¤ects not only the coe¢ cients, but also the t statistics and R2 statistics of
predictive regressions (Cavanagh, Elliott, and Stock 1995). Because of this problem,
the predictability of excess returns can only be used to reject the model statistically at
longer horizons. For consumption and dividend growth, Stambaugh bias is a much
less serious concern, and both the regression coe¢ cients and R2 statistics deliver
strong statistical rejections of the long-run risk model at almost all horizons.

    BY conduct a similar exercise to this with qualitatively similar results. However,
they report only median …nite-sample regression coe¢ cients and R2 statistics, and
the contrast between the model and the data is much less extreme in their results.
We cannot explain the discrepancy, but we do note that Bui (2007) and Garcia,
Meddahi, and Tédongap (2008) report results similar to ours. More work is needed
to understand this issue.

    Panel B of Table VI repeats this analysis for the BKY calibration of the long-run
risks model. Recall that this calibration greatly increases the persistence of volatility;
it therefore increases the e¤ect of volatility on asset prices and the predictive power
of the log price-dividend ratio for excess stock returns, and reduces the predictive
power for consumption and dividend growth. At a …ve year horizon, the true ex-
planatory power of the log price-dividend ratio is 4% for excess stock returns, 4% for
consumption growth with the end-of-period timing assumption, 2% for consumption
growth with the beginning-of-period timing assumption, and 1% for dividend growth.
In …nite samples there are enough simulations in which stock prices have spuriously
increased predictive power for stock returns, and decreased predictive power for con-
sumption and dividend growth, that statistical rejections of the model are less extreme


                                           14
for this calibration. In annual data only consumption predictability seems anomalous
with respect to this calibration, and only at certain horizons (longer for the end-of-
period timing convention, and shorter for the beginning-of-period timing convention).
In postwar quarterly data, longer-term dividend predictability also provides evidence
against the model.

   The contrast between the long-run risks model and the data can be better under-
stood by studying the timing of the relationship between stock prices and consumption
growth. Consider a regression of K-period time-aggregated consumption growth onto
the log price-dividend ratio, with a lead of j periods:
                   ct+j + ::: +   ct+j+K =    jK   +   jK (pt   dt ) + "jKt :
When j       1, this is a predictive regression of the sort we have reported in Table
VI. The long-run risks model implies that both the regression coe¢ cient and the
R2 statistic of the regression should be highest when j is around K=2, for then the
K-period consumption growth rate is centered at time t and best approximates the
unobserved state variable xt that drives stock prices. The regression coe¢ cient and
R2 statistic decline slowly as we move j away from K=2, and remain high even when
j 0.

    Figures 1-4 plot the regression coe¢ cient jK and R2 statistic RjK
                                                                     2
                                                                        against j, for
several alternative horizons K. Figures 1 and 2 are based on annual data, while
Figures 3 and 4 are based on quarterly data. Figures 1 and 3 show regression
coe¢ cients, and Figures 2 and 4 show R2 statistics. The top panel of each …gure
shows a 1-year horizon, the middle panel shows a 3-year horizon, and the bottom
panel shows a 5-year horizon. Each panel contains three curves, one for the BY
calibration, one for the BKY calibration, and one for the historical data. The BKY
curves are much lower than the BY curves, but the historical curves are typically
lower again.

    It is also noteworthy that in the postwar quarterly data shown in Figures 3 and
4, the historical curves are particularly shifted down in the predictive region j     1
at the right of the …gures. In this sense the empirical curves appear shifted to the
left relative to the theoretical curves. To the extent that stock prices are related to
consumption growth, they appear relatively more responsive to lagged consumption
growth, and relatively less predictive of future consumption growth, than the long-run
risks model implies. Responsiveness of stock prices to lagged consumption growth
is a phenomenon that is captured by habit formation models such as Campbell and
Cochrane (1999).

                                             15
   In summary, the long-run risks model, as its name suggests, tends to generate
stock prices that reveal the long-run prospects for consumption and dividend growth.
This does not seem to be the case in the data, so extreme movements in volatility, as
assumed by BKY, are needed to bring the model into even rough concordance with
the data.



5       Stock Prices and Volatility

Movements of consumption volatility are also important drivers of stock prices in the
long-run risks model, and particularly so in the BKY calibration of that model. Thus
it is appropriate to evaluate the model by asking whether it matches the ability of
stock prices to predict future realized volatility of consumption, dividends, or excess
stock returns. In Table VII, we do this using a measure of realized volatility suggested
by Bansal, Khatchatrian and Yaron (2005). As before, Panel A refers to the BY
calibration and Panel B refers to the BKY calibration of the long-run risks model.

      We begin by …tting an AR(1) process for each variable yt that we are interested
in:
                                yt+1 = b0 + b1 yt + ut+1 :                          (7)
Then we calculate K-period realized volatility as the sum of the absolute values of
the residuals over K periods:

                                                     X1
                                                     K
                                V olt;t+K   1   =          jut+k j:                 (8)
                                                     k=0

Finally, we regress the log of K-period realized volatility onto the log price-dividend
ratio:
                        ln [V olt+1;t+K ] = c + c (pt dt ) + t :                     (9)

    For consumption and dividends, the data interval is annual or quarterly. It is
possible to calculate realized stock return volatility in the same manner, treating the
raw data as annual or quarterly, and we do this at the top of each panel of Table
VII. However, since stock returns are measured more frequently, a better measure
of volatility can be obtained by starting with monthly data, a procedure we follow
immediately below.


                                                16
    Table VII shows that the log price-dividend ratio predicts consumption volatility,
with a negative sign, at horizons from 1 to 5 years. The e¤ect is highly statistically
signi…cant, and the explanatory power of the regressions at a 5-year horizon is 24%
in long-run annual data and 34% in postwar quarterly data. The evidence that the
log price-dividend ratio predicts dividend or return volatility is considerably weaker.
The only statistically signi…cant prediction for return volatility is in annual data, at
a 1-year horizon, measuring volatility from monthly data.

    The BY calibration of the long-run risks model, in Panel A, generates a relation
between stock prices and consumption or dividend volatility with the same negative
sign that we observe in the data. However, the e¤ect in the model is far weaker than in
the data; the theoretical regression coe¢ cients are much smaller than the empirically
estimated coe¢ cients, and the explanatory power of the regressions is trivially small
both in population and in …nite samples. The BY calibration of the long-run risks
model is strongly rejected statistically on the basis of its lack of explanatory power for
consumption and dividend volatility. It does, however, …t the observed weak relation
between stock prices and the future volatility of stock returns.

    The BKY calibration of the model, in Panel B of Table VII, has a much more
persistent volatility process. This increases the predictive power of stock prices
for consumption and dividend volatility to levels that match the data quite well.
Unfortunately, the model also predicts that stock prices should be extraordinarily
good predictors of the future volatility of stock returns. If volatility is measured
from monthly return data, the population R2 at a …ve-year horizon is over 70% in
Panel B of Table VII, as compared with 8% in long-run annual data and 1% in postwar
quarterly data. Thus the BKY calibration creates a new puzzle: if stock prices are
driven by persistent changes in the volatility of consumption, which in turn moves
the stock market, why don’t they forecast the future volatility of the stock market
itself?

    To ensure the robustness of these results, we have also considered a measure of
realized volatility used by Campbell (2003). We start by regressing each variable of
interest yt+1 onto the log price-dividend ratio:

                             yt+1 = b0 + b1 (pt   dt ) + ut+1 :                      (10)

In the second stage, we regress the K-period average of squared residuals onto the




                                            17
log price-dividend ratio:
                         PK   1
                           k=0u2t+1+k
                                      = c + c (pt dt ) + t :                   (11)
                             K
The general pattern of results using this method is very similar to those using the
Bansal, Khatchatrian and Yaron (2005) method.

    The message of this section is that the BY calibration of the long-run risks model
greatly understates the e¤ect of consumption volatility on stock prices. The BKY
calibration does much better in this respect, in e¤ect changing the driving force of the
model from consumption growth to consumption volatility. However, this leads to a
new di¢ culty, which is that there has only been a weak historical relation between
stock prices and the volatility of stock returns themselves. An interesting challenge
for future research will be to build a model that matches the strong relation between
stock prices and consumption volatility without generating a counterfactually strong
relation between stock prices and stock return volatility.



6    Estimating the Elasticity of Intertemporal Sub-
     stitution

We have noted that the long-run risks model critically depends on the assumption
that the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is greater than one. In a model
with constant variance, this implies that the real interest rate should be perfectly
correlated with, but less volatile than, predictable consumption growth.

    Hansen and Singleton (1983), followed by Hall (1988), Campbell and Mankiw
(1989), and others, have used an instrumental variables (IV) regression approach to
estimate the elasticity of intertemporal substitution from the homoskedastic Euler
equation. One way to run the regression is as
                                             1
                          ri;t+1 =   i   +        ct+1 +   i;t+1 :                 (12)

In general the error term i;t+1 will be correlated with realized consumption growth
so OLS is not an appropriate estimation method. However i;t+1 is uncorrelated with
any variables in the information set at time t. Hence any lagged variables correlated
with asset returns can be used as instruments in an IV regression to estimate 1= .

                                             18
   Alternatively, one can reverse the regression and estimate
                               ct+1 =   i   + ri;t+1 +   i;t+1 :                     (13)
If the orthogonality conditions hold, then the estimate of in (13) will asymptotically
be the reciprocal of the estimate of 1= in (12). In a …nite sample, however, Staiger
and Stock (1997) have shown that the IV estimator is poorly behaved if the right
hand side variable is di¢ cult to predict. This means that if the Euler equation holds
and is small, it is better to estimate (13); however, if       is large, it is better to
estimate (12).

    Hall (1988) estimated an extremely small value of using this approach. Camp-
bell and Mankiw (1989) found some predictability of consumption growth associated
with predictable income growth, but little predictable variation associated with in-
terest rates, again implying a low . Campbell (2003) summarizes these results and
…nds similar patterns in international data.

     BY have criticized this literature on the grounds that time-varying volatility causes
time-variation in the intercept of the Euler equation and biases the estimate of the
elasticity of intertemporal substitution. While this criticism is correct in principle,
it is an empirical question whether there is a large downward bias. In Table VIII we
simulate the long-run risks model to see whether IV estimates of are importantly
downward biased.

    Table VIII reports two-stage least squares estimates of equations (13) and (12),
in both annual and quarterly data. As before, Panel A refers to the BY calibration
of the long-run risks model, and Panel B to the BKY calibration. The …rst two rows
of each part of Table VIII report results using the log short-term real interest rate
as the asset return, while the second two rows use the realized log stock return. We
use the beginning-of-period timing convention for consumption. The instruments
are the asset return, the consumption growth rate, and the log price-dividend ra-
tio, lagged twice to avoid di¢ culties caused by time-aggregation of the consumption
data (Wheatley 1988, Campbell and Mankiw 1989). The columns report empirical
estimates, population estimates implied by the long-run risks model, median …nite-
sample estimates implied by the model, and …nally the percentiles of the …nite-sample
distribution of model estimates corresponding to the empirical estimates.

   Panel A of Table VIII shows that the original BY calibration implies no downward
bias in IV estimates of . The population values of the regression coe¢ cients are
always above the true elasticity of intertemporal substitution of 1.5, and when the

                                             19
riskless interest rate is used as the asset return the discrepancy between the model es-
timates and the data estimates provides strong statistical evidence against the model.
There is however a serious …nite-sample problem with IV estimates of using the
stock return as the asset return. If the long-run risks model is true, these estimates
are strongly downward-biased and extremely noisy, so they cannot be used to reject
the model. Presumably the poor …nite-sample performance of IV regressions with
stock returns re‡ects a weak instrument problem.

    In the BKY calibration, in Panel B of Table VIII, we do …nd that IV estimates
of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution are generally biased downwards. This
re‡ects the greater importance of time-varying volatility in this calibration of the
model. In fact, when the stock return is used as the asset return we get a negative
population estimate of . Even in the BKY calibration, however, the low IV estimates
of in postwar quarterly data provide some statistical evidence against the model.

    These results highlight an empirical di¢ culty for the long-run risks model, that
(particularly in postwar quarterly data) the real interest rate is so volatile relative
to predictable variation in consumption growth. It is hard to reconcile this with
the assumption of the model that assets are priced by a representative agent with an
elasticity of intertemporal substitution greater than one.

    Some authors have looked at disaggregated data and have found greater pre-
dictable variation in consumption growth than appears in aggregate data. Attanasio
and Weber (1993) and Beaudry and van Wincoop (1996) have found higher values
for    using disaggregated cohort-level and state-level consumption data. Vissing-
Jorgensen (2002) points out that many consumers do not participate actively in asset
markets; using household data she …nds a higher value for         among asset market
participants. But these results do not con…rm the long-run risks model because that
model is calibrated to aggregate consumption data. A general equilibrium model
with limited asset market participation and long-run risk in the consumption of stock
market participants is a di¤erent model that remains to be explored.




                                          20
7    The Term Structure of Real Interest Rates

The long-run risks literature has focused primarily on stock prices, but the model
has important implications for the term structure of real interest rates as well. In
a consumption-based model with power utility, the risk premia on long-term real
bonds relative to short-term real bonds (real term premia) depend on the covariance
between innovations to consumption and innovations to real interest rates. If con-
sumption follows a mean-reverting process such that positive shocks to consumption
are expected to reverse themselves through slower subsequent consumption growth,
then a positive consumption shock causes real interest rates to fall, and bond prices
to rise. In this case real bonds are risky and there is a positive real term premium.
On the other hand, if consumption growth follows a persistent process such that pos-
itive shocks cause upward revisions in expected future consumption growth, then a
positive consumption shock causes real interest rates to increase and bond prices to
fall. In this case real bonds hedge consumption risk and have a negative real term
premium (Campbell 1986).

    With Epstein-Zin utility as assumed by the long-run risks model, revisions in
expected future consumption growth command a risk premium even if they are un-
correlated with shocks to contemporaneous consumption growth. Since increases
in expected consumption growth drive up real interest rates and drive down bond
prices, the long-run risks model with a positive risk premium for consumption growth
implies a negative real term premium. This fact has been pointed out by Piazzesi
and Schneider (2006).

    In Table IX we report the moments of yields and returns on real perpetuities for
the BY calibration (Panel A) and BKY calibration (Panel B) of the long-run risks
model. As in Table V, we consider a matrix of preference parameters with relative
risk aversion of 5, 10, and 15, and elasticity of intertemporal substitution of 0.5,
1.5, and 2.0. The BY and BKY calibrations are the central cases of Panel A and
Panel B respectively. In each panel we report the mean real perpetuity yield, mean
yield spread relative to the short-term riskless interest rate, the real term premium,
and the standard deviation of excess real bond returns.

    In Panel A, we …nd that with a coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion of 15, the
price of a real perpetuity becomes in…nite so the moments of returns are unde…ned.
Even when we do have de…ned moments, real perpetuity prices are extremely high,
implying negative yield spreads and real term premia of about -2% in Panel A for

                                         21
the BY base case. While there is relatively little data available on in‡ation-indexed
bond yields, what data we do have suggest higher average yields and real term premia
that are close to zero. The behavior of the real term structure is another troubling
di¢ culty for the long-run risks model of asset prices.

    In Panel B, the problem is even more serious. The persistence of volatility
in the BKY calibration makes long-run consumption extremely uncertain, lowering
the safe long-term discount rate in the manner described by Martin (2008a,b) and
Weitzman (2007, 2009).8 Thus the price of a real consol is in…nite for every parameter
combination considered except = 0:5 and = 5.



8       Conclusion

The long-run risks model of asset prices (Bansal and Yaron 2004) is an important
advance in that it allows economists to understand asset price variation in an economy
with persistent shocks to both consumption growth and volatility, while making a
realistic distinction between aggregate consumption and dividends.

    However, the model has several important di¢ culties as a quantitative description
of US …nancial history. First and most salient, in US data there is little evidence
either for long-run persistent ‡uctuations in consumption and dividend growth rates,
or for the ability of stock market participants to predict these growth rates. This
implies that the long-run risks model cannot use persistent variations in consumption
growth to explain stock market variation.

   Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2007a) appear to recognize this problem and recalibrate
the model to emphasize persistent variations in consumption volatility. However this
creates a second di¢ culty, which is that although stock prices strongly predict future
consumption volatility, they have little predictive power for the future volatility of
stock returns. The discrepancy between these two types of volatility movements is
an interesting issue for future research.



    8
     Barro (2006, 2009) also studies the e¤ects of fat-tailed consumption shocks on asset prices in
models with power utility and Epstein-Zin utility, respectively. However, he considers the short-term
real interest rate rather than the long-term real bond yield.


                                                 22
    A third di¢ culty for the long-run risk model is that aggregate consumption growth
does not respond to variations in the short-term real interest rate in the manner re-
quired by the model’s assumption that the elasticity of intertemporal substitution
is greater than one. Although Bansal and Yaron (2004) correctly point out that
time-varying consumption volatility can bias traditional estimates of the elasticity
of intertemporal substitution that assume homoskedastic consumption growth, this
bias is not large. Another challenge for future research is to resolve the apparent
contradiction between the smoothness of consumption in the face of real interest vari-
ation, which suggests a low elasticity of intertemporal substitution, and the negative
response of stock prices to consumption volatility, which suggests a high elasticity.

   Finally, the long-run risks model generates extremely low yields and negative term
premia on long-term in‡ation-indexed bonds. In the calibration of Bansal, Kiku, and
Yaron (2007a), this even implies an in…nite price for an in‡ation-indexed perpetuity.
While in‡ation-indexed bond yields were extremely low in the early stages of the
…nancial crisis of 2007-08, they have been high enough in most other periods to
suggest that this too is a challenge for the long-run risks model of asset prices.




                                         23
  References

Attanasio, Orazio P. and Guglielmo Weber, 1993, “Consumption Growth, the Inter-
    est Rate, and Aggregation”, Review of Economic Studies 60, 631–649.

Bansal, Ravi and Amir Yaron, 2004, “Risks for the Long Run”, Journal of Finance
    59, 1481–1509.

Bansal, Ravi, Robert Dittmar, and Dana Kiku, 2008, “Cointegration and Consump-
    tion Risks in Asset Returns”, forthcoming Review of Financial Studies.

Bansal, Ravi, Varoujan Khatchatrian, and Amir Yaron, 2005, “Interpretable Asset
    Markets?”, European Economic Review 49, 531–560.

Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku and Amir Yaron, 2007a, “A Note on the Economics and
    Statistics of Predictability: A Long Run Risks Perspective”, unpublished paper,
    Duke University and University of Pennsylvania.

Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku and Amir Yaron, 2007b, “Risks for the Long Run: Esti-
    mation and Inference”, unpublished paper, Duke University and University of
    Pennsylvania.

Barro, Robert, 2006, “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century”,
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 823–866.

Barro, Robert, 2009, “Rare Disasters, Asset Prices, and Welfare Costs”, forthcoming
    American Economic Review.

Beaudry, Paul and Eric van Wincoop, 1996, “The Intertemporal Elasticity of Sub-
    stitution: An Exploration Using a US Panel of State Data”, Economica 63,
    495–512.

Bui, Minh P., 2007, “Long-Run Risks and Long-Run Predictability: A Comment”,
    unpublished paper, Harvard University.

Calvet, Laurent E. and Adlai Fisher, 2007, “Multifrequency News and Stock Re-
    turns”, Journal of Financial Economics 86, 178–212.

Calvet, Laurent E. and Adlai Fisher, 2008, Multifractal Volatility: Theory, Forecast-
    ing, and Pricing, Academic Press.


                                        24
Campbell, John Y., 1986, “Bond and Stock Returns in a Simple Exchange Model”,
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 101, 785–804.

Campbell, John Y., 1991, “A Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns”, Economic
   Journal 101, 157–179.

Campbell, John Y., 1993, “Intertemporal Asset Pricing Without Consumption Data”,
   American Economic Review 83, 487–512.

Campbell, John Y., 1996, “Understanding Risk and Return”, Journal of Political
   Economy 104, 298–345.

Campbell, John Y., 2003, “Consumption-Based Asset Pricing”, Chapter 13 in George
   Constantinides, Milton Harris, and Rene Stulz eds. Handbook of the Economics
   of Finance Vol. IB, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 803–887.

Campbell, John Y. and John H. Cochrane, 1999, “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-
   Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior”, Journal of Political
   Economy 107, 205–251.

Campbell, John Y. and Hyeng Keun Koo, 1997, “A Comparison of Numerical and
   Analytical Approximate Solutions to an Intertemporal Consumption Choice
   Problem”, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 21, 273–295.

Campbell, John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw, 1989, “Consumption, Income, and
   Interest Rates: Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence”, in O.J. Blanchard
   and S. Fischer eds., National Bureau of Economic Research Macroeconomics
   Annual 4, 185–216.

Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 1988, “The Dividend-Price Ratio and
   Expectations of Future Dividends and Discount Factors”, Review of Financial
   Studies 1, 195–228.

Cavanagh, Christopher L., Graham Elliott, and James H. Stock, 1995, “Inference in
    Models with Nearly Integrated Regressors”, Econometric Theory 11, 1131–1147.

Epstein, Lawrence and Stanley Zin, 1989, “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the
    Temporal Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Frame-
    work”, Econometrica 57, 937–968.




                                      25
Epstein, Lawrence and Stanley Zin, 1991, “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the
    Temporal Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: An Empirical Investi-
    gation”, Journal of Political Economy 99, 263–286.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1988, “Dividend Yields and Expected
   Stock Returns”, Journal of Financial Economics 22, 3–24.

Garcia, René, Nour Meddahi, and Roméo Tédongap, 2008, “An Analytical Frame-
    work for Assessing Asset Pricing Models and Predictability”, unpublished pa-
    per, Edhec Business School, Imperial College London, and Stockholm School of
    Economics.

Hall, Robert E., 1988, “Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption”, Journal of
     Political Economy 96, 221–273.

Hansen, Lars Peter, John C. Heaton, and Nan Li, 2008, “Consumption Strikes Back?
   Measuring Long-Run Risk”, Journal of Political Economy 116, 260–302.

Hansen, Lars Peter and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1983, “Stochastic Consumption, Risk
   Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns”, Journal of Political
   Economy 91, 249–268.

Hodrick, Robert J., 1992, “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns: Alterna-
   tive Procedures for Inference and Measurement”, Review of Financial Studies
   5, 357–386.

Lettau, Martin and Sydney Ludvigson, 2001, “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth, and
    Expected Stock Returns”, Journal of Finance 56, 815–849.

Lettau, Martin, Sydney Ludvigson, and Jessica Wachter, 2008, “The Declining Eq-
    uity Premium: What Role Does Macroeconomic Risk Play?”, Review of Finan-
    cial Studies 21, 1653–1687.

Martin, Ian, 2008a, “Consumption-Based Asset Pricing with Higher Cumulants”,
    unpublished paper, Stanford University.

Martin, Ian, 2008b, “The Valuation of Long-Dated Assets”, unpublished paper,
    Stanford University.

Mehra, Rajnish and Edward C. Prescott, 1985, “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle”,
   Journal of Monetary Economics 15, 145–161.


                                      26
Pakoš, Michal, 2008, “Asset Prices Under Doubt About Fundamentals”, unpublished
    paper, Carnegie Mellon University.

Parker, Jonathan and Christian Julliard, 2005, “Consumption Risk and Cross-
    Sectional Returns”, Journal of Political Economy 113, 185–222.

Piazzesi, Monika and Martin Schneider, 2006, “Equilibrium Yield Curves”, in Daron
    Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogo¤, and Michael Woodford eds. National Bureau of
    Economic Research Macroeconomics Annual 2006, MIT Press: Cambridge,
    MA..

Restoy, Fernando, and Philippe Weil, 1998, “Approximate Equilibrium Asset Prices”,
    NBER Working Paper 6611.

Staiger, D. and James H. Stock, 1997, “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak
     Instruments”, Econometrica 65, 557–586.

Stambaugh, Robert F., 1999, “Predictive Regressions”, Journal of Financial Eco-
    nomics 54, 375–421.

Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, 2002, “Limited Asset Market Participation and the
     Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption”, Journal of Political
     Economy 100, 825–853.

Weil, Philippe, 1989, “The Equity Premium Puzzle and the Risk-Free Rate Puzzle”,
    Journal of Monetary Economics 24, 401–421.

Weitzman, Martin, 2007, “Subjective Expectations and Asset-Return Puzzles”, Amer-
    ican Economic Review 97, 1102–1130.

Weitzman, Martin, 2009, “On Modeling and Interpreting the Economics of Climate
    Change”, Review of Economics and Statistics 91, 1–19.

Wheatley, Simon, 1988, “Some Tests of the Consumption-Based Asset Pricing Model”,
   Journal of Monetary Economics 22, 193–218.

Working, Holbrook, 1960, “Note on the Correlation of First Di¤erences of Averages
   in a Random Chain”, Econometrica 28, 916–918.




                                       27
   Appendix: Solving the Long-Run Risks Model


  This appendix provides solutions for all assets used in the text for the generalized
BKY endowment process

                     gt+1 =          + xt + t t+1
                     xt+1 =         xt + 'e t et+1
                       2            2
                       t+1 =          + 1 ( 2t        2
                                                        ) + w wt+1                                      (14)
                    gd;t+1 =        d + xt + 'd t ut+1 + d t t+1
                                   wt+1 ; et+1 ; ut+1 ; t+1 i:i:d: N (0; 1):

In the BY model      d   = 0 so BY solutions are a special case. The Euler equation for
the economy is


                 Et exp       ln        gt+1 + (         1)ra;t+1 + ri;t+1        = 1;                  (15)

where ra;t+1 is the log return on the consumption claim and ri;t+1 is the log return on
any asset. All returns are given by the approximation of Campbell and Shiller (1988)
ri;t+1 = 0;i + 1;i zt+1;i zt;i + gi;t+1 .

    De…ne a vector of state variables Yt0 = [1 xt 2t ] and the coe¢ cients on the log
price consumption ratio zt = A0 Yt where A0 = [Ao A1 A2 ]. For any other asset i
de…ne coe¢ cients in the same manner A0i = [Ao;i A1;i A2;i ]. This appendix prices
the consumption claim, the dividend claim zt;m = A0m Yt and a levered consumption
claim zt;l = A0l Yt . The consumption claim has leverage l = 1, while a real consol
bond, that pays one unit of the consumption good in all future periods, has leverage
l = 0, We …nd zt , zt;m and zt;l by the method of undetermined coe¢ cients, using the
fact that the Euler equation must hold for all values of Yt0 .

   The risk premium on any asset is


                         1
    Et (ri;t+1   rf;t ) + Vart (ri;t+1 ) =      Covt (mt+1             Et mt+1 ; ri;t+1   Et ri;t+1 )
                         2                      X
                                                                   2
                                         =                 i;j j   j;t ;                                (16)
                                               j=n;e;w



                                               28
   where i;j is the beta and 2j;t the volatility of the j th risk source, and the                                                 j
represent the price of each risk source as de…ned in the text.

   Consumption claim

   The risk premium for the consumption claim is
                                1                                       2                       2                        2
        Et [ra;t+1      rf;t ] + Vart (ra;t+1 ) =                 n a;n t             +   e a;e t       +       w    a;w w ;   (17)
                                2
where a;n = 1, a;e = 1 A1 'e and                     a;w     =         1 A2 .         The conditional variance of the
consumption claim is equal to
                                                       2           2              2       2   2
                          Vart (ra;t+1 ) =             a;n   +     a;e            t   +   a;w w                                (18)


   The coe¢ cients A0 for the log price-consumption ratio zt are


                                            1                                 2                     1       2   2
                         ln + (1                )+      0    +     a;w            (1       1)   +   2       a;w w
             A0 =
                                                             (1          1)
                               1
                          1
             A1 =                  :                                                                                           (19)
                         1     1
                                        2                     2
                         1
                         2
                                            +          a;e
             A2 =
                                   (1           1 1)


   Dividend Claim

   The innovation in the market return rm;t+1                             Et (rm;t+1 ) is
    rm;t+1   Et (rm;t+1 ) = 'd t ut+1 +            m;        t t+1       +        m;e t et+1       +        m;w w wt+1 ;       (20)
where m; = d , m;e = 1;m A1;m 'e and                              m;w    =            1;m A2;m ,    which implies that the
risk premium on the dividend claim is


                             1                                            2                  2                          2
     Et [rm;t+1      rf;t ] + Vart (rm;t+1 ) =                    m;      t   +        e m;e t      +       w       m;w w :    (21)
                             2
                                                        29
  In the BY calibration d = 0 so the premium from consumption shocks is zero.
The coe¢ cients A0m for the log price-dividend ratio are as follows


               "                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                         2
                     log( ) + (                     )             w          (1      +( 1)                 1) [        0   + A0 (            1   1)]
                                                             2                         1                                           2     2
                          + 0 ;m +              m;w              (1           1) + d + 2                   m;w                 w         w
   A0;m =
                                                                          (1            1;m )
                            1
   A1;m =                        :                                                                                                                     (22)
               1       1;m
                                                                 h                                                                      i
                                                             1                          2                                  2
               (1        ) A2 (1          1 v1 ) +           2
                                                                     (   d            n) +         m;e             e           + '2d
   A2;m =
                                                         (1                  1;m 1 )



   Levered consumption claim

   The innovation to a levered consumption claim is


                   rl;t+1        Et rl;t+1 =        l;           t t+1       +        l;e t et+1   +       l;w w wt+1 ;                                (23)
where l; = l, l;e =               1;l A1;l 'e   and              l;w     =        1;l A2;l    so that the risk premium on the
claim is equal to

                             1
          Et [rl;t+1 rf;t ] + Vart (rl;t+1 ) = n l; 2t + e l;e 2t + w                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                       l;w w ;         (24)
                             2
and the coe¢ cients in the log price-levered consumption ratio are


         "                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                  2
               ln( ) + ((              1) + + l)                             w     (1           1) + (             1) (            0   + A0 (    1     1))
                                                                                              1 2                                  2
                                      + 0;l + l;w 2 (1                             1) +       2 w    l;w                   w
A0;l =
                                                                              1         1;l
          (l    1= )
A1;l =                                                                                                                                                     (25)
         (1      1;l )
                                                    h                                                      i
                                                1                                                      2
         (     1) A2 (          1 1    1) +     2
                                                        (l               )2 +           l;e        e
A2;l =                                                                                                         :                                           (26)
                                          1         1;l 1


                                                                         30
The consumption claim is the special case l = 1, and a real consol bond is the special
case l = 0.

   Riskfree interest rate

   To derive the riskfree rate, we use the Euler equation for a riskless asset:

                      rf;t =           log( ) +       Et [gt+1 ] + (1           ) Et ra;t+1                   (27)
                                    1
                                      Vart         gt+1 + (1         ) ra;t+1 :
                                    2

We subtract (1        ) rf;t from both sides and divide by , assuming                              6= 0. It follows
that:
                                             1                  (1     )
                 rf;t =        log( ) +          Et [gt+1 ] +              Et [ra;t+1     rf;t ]
                               1
                                 Vart (mt+1 ) ;                                                               (28)
                               2
                  2       2    2       2 2
Vart (mt+1 ) =    n   +   e    t   +   w w   and Et [ra;t+1          rf;t ] is given above.

   Linearization parameters

    For any asset, the linearization parameters are determined endogenously by the
following system of equations as discussed in Campbell and Koo (1997) and Bansal,
Kiku and Yaron (2007):
                                                                        2
                                   zi = A0;i (zi ) + A2;i (zi )
                                           exp(zi )
                                   1;i =                                                                      (29)
                                         1 + exp(zi )
                                   0;i = ln(1 + exp(zi ))                  1;i zi



    The solution is determined numerically by iteration until reaching a …xed point
of zi . The dependence of A0;i and A2;i on the linearization parameters is discussed in
the previous sections.




                                                      31
                                           Table I
                            Long Run Risks Parameters
                                  Preference Parameters
               Risk Aversion          EIS       Discount Factor

        BY         7.5-10               1.5                 .998
       BKY           10                 1.5                .9989

                         Consumption Growth Dynamics
               Mean Growth    Persistence LR Vol Multiple
                                                'e
        BY        .0015          .979          .044
       BKY        .0015          .975          .038

                           Dividend Growth Dynamics
               Mean Growth     Leverage   Div Vol Multiple                Cons Exposure
                     d                          'd                                d
        BY        .0015           3             4.5                               0
       BKY        .0015          2.5           5.96                              2.6

                                   Volatility Parameters
                  Base SD        Vol of Volatility Vol Persistence
                                         w                    1
        BY          .0078            .0000023               .987
       BKY          .0072            .0000028               .999

 Table I displays the model parameters for Bansal and Yaron (2004) (BY) and Bansal, Kiku and
 Yaron (2007) (BKY). All parameters are given in monthly terms. The standard deviation of the
long run innovations is equal to the volatlity of consumption growth times the long run volatility
multiple (LR Vol multiple) and the standard deviation of dividend growth innovations is equal to
 the volatility of consumption growth times the volatility multiple for dividend growth (Div Vol
Multiple). Cons Exposure is the magnitude of the impact of the one period consumption shock on
         dividend growth. Leverage is the exposure of dividend growth to long run risks.




                                                1
                                            Table II
                             Long Run Risks Moments
                                   Yearly Time Interval
                      Moment          Model           Model       Data
                                      BY              BKY         1930-2006
                      E ( c)          1.79            1.82        1.95
                       ( c)           2.92            2.96        2.16
                      AC1( c)         0.51            0.44        0.44
                      E ( d)          1.66            1.85        1.02
                       ( d)           11.57           16.42       10.69
                      AC1( d)         0.40            0.29        0.14
                      E (re )         6.62            6.58        6.20
                       (re )          16.88           21.35       18.34
                      AC1(re )        0.03            0.02        0.04
                      E (rf )         2.56            0.99        0.99
                       (rf )          1.30            1.28        4.28
                      AC1(rf )        0.85            0.86        0.59
                      E (p d)         3.00            3.04        3.31
                       (p d)          0.16            0.26        0.46
                      AC1(p d)        0.77            0.95        0.88

 Table II displays moments for the analytical solutions of the Long Run Risks model with the BY
 calibration in column 1 and the BKY calibration in column 2. The model moments are calculated
 from a simulation of 1.2 million months. The consumption growth rate and dividend growth rate
   are calculated by …rst aggregating monthly consumption to yearly levels, then computing the
   growth rate, then taking logs. The return on equity and the risk free rate are aggregated to a
yearly level by adding log returns within a year. For the log price-dividend ratio the yearly value is
taken from the last month of the year. The third column displays the moments from the 1930-2006
                      yearly dataset. All returns and growth rates are in logs.




                                                  2
                                        Table III
                           Long Run Risks Moments
                               Quarterly Time Interval
                   Moment         Model        Model        Data
                                  BY           BKY          1947.2-2007.3
                   E ( c)         1.77         1.80         2.06
                    ( c)          2.47         2.63         1.09
                   AC1( c)        0.38         0.34         0.20
                   E ( d)         1.66         1.84         1.87
                    ( d)          10.63        16.29        26.92
                   AC1( d)        0.27         0.22         -0.56
                   E (re )        6.62         6.58         7.38
                    (re )         16.62        21.18        15.45
                   AC1(re )       0.01         0.01         0.05
                   E (rf )        2.56         0.99         0.83
                    (rf )         1.34         1.32         1.73
                   AC1(rf )       0.96         0.96         0.38
                   E (p d)        3.00         3.04         3.40
                    (p d)         0.16         0.26         0.38
                   AC1(p d)       0.94         0.99         0.97

Table III displays moments for the analytical solutions of the Long Run Risks model with the BY
calibration in column 1 and the BKY calibration in column 2 The moments are calculated from a
  simulation of 1.2 million months. The consumption growth rate and dividend growth rate are
   calculated by …rst aggregating monthly consumption to quarterly levels, then computing the
  growth rate, then taking logs. The return on equity and the risk free rate are aggregated to a
    quarterly level by adding log returns within a quarter. For the log price-dividend ratio the
quarterly value is taken from the last month of the year. The fourth column displays the moments
        from the 1947.2-2007.3 quarterly dataset. All returns and growth rates are in logs.




                                               3
                                  Table IV: Panel A
      Autocorrelations of Consumption and Dividends: BY
                           Calibration
                                Consumption Autocorrelations
                     Moment      b           (pop)   (50%)           %(b)
                     AC1         0.444     0.509    0.468            0.416
                     AC2         0.156     0.282    0.225            0.317
                     AC3         -0.104    0.216    0.156            0.034
                     AC4         -0.237    0.170    0.103            0.006
                     AC5         -0.010    0.130    0.066            0.292

                                  Dividend Autocorrelations
                     Moment      b           (pop)    (50%)          %(b)
                     AC1         0.139      0.395    0.366           0.028
                     AC2         -0.259     0.158    0.120           0.002
                     AC3         -0.064     0.124    0.083           0.132
                     AC4         -0.034     0.094    0.052           0.251
                     AC5         -0.035     0.071    0.030           0.302

  Table IV.A displays consumption and dividend autocorrelations in yearly data and for the BY
 calibration. Population values are from a simulation of 1.2 million months.The medians are from
100,000 samples of equivalent length to the data (924 months) and the proportion of those samples
with an estimate at or below that of the data is also displayed. The consumption growth rate and
  dividend growth rate are calculated by …rst aggregating monthly consumption to yearly levels,
                        then computing the growth rate, then taking logs.




                                               4
                                  Table IV: Panel B
    Autocorrelations of Consumption and Dividends: BKY
                         Calibration
                                Consumption Autocorrelations
                     Moment      b           (pop)   (50%)           %(b)
                     AC1         0.444     0.433    0.397            0.658
                     AC2         0.156     0.195    0.148            0.521
                     AC3         -0.104    0.144    0.094            0.080
                     AC4         -0.237    0.107    0.055            0.015
                     AC5         -0.010    0.082    0.029            0.385

                                  Dividend Autocorrelations
                     Moment      b           (pop)     (50%)         %(b)
                     AC1         0.139      0.283    0.259           0.154
                     AC2         -0.259     0.036    0.012           0.017
                     AC3         -0.064     0.023    0.005           0.296
                     AC4         -0.034     0.024    -0.003          0.404
                     AC5         -0.035     0.012    -0.008          0.412

  Table IV.B displays consumption and dividend autocorrelations in yearly data and for the BKY
 calibration. Population values are from a simulation of 1.2 million months. The medians are from
100,000 samples of equivalent length to the data (924 months) and the proportion of those samples
with an estimate at or below that of the data is also displayed. The consumption growth rate and
   dividend growth rate are calculated by …rst aggregating monthly consumption to yearly levels,
                         then computing the growth rate, then taking logs.




                                               5
                                   Table V: Panel A
    Moments and Preference Parameters: BY Calibration
                      E (rf )                                  (rf )
                   Data     0.99                          Data     4.28

                    0.5      1.5       2.0                 0.5      1.5     2.0
              5     5.89    3.14      2.73           5     3.86    1.30    0.97
              10    6.06    2.58      2.11           10    3.87    1.31    1.00
              15    6.52    2.00      1.46           15    3.89    1.34    1.05


           E (re   rf ) + 21 var(re    rf )                 (re rf )
                   Data       6.89                        Data 18.37

                    0.5      1.5       2.0                 0.5      1.5     2.0
              5     0.69    2.70      3.09           5    13.08    17.06   17.77
              10    1.95    5.58      6.05           10   13.06    16.56   17.12
              15    3.39    8.21      8.89           15   12.96    16.56   16.68


                    E (p    d)                                (p   d)
                   Data     3.31                          Data     0.463

                    0.5      1.5       2.0                 0.5      1.5     2.0
              5     3.23    3.65      3.71           5    0.069    0.171   0.183
              10    2.92    3.00      3.01           10   0.067    0.161   0.172
              15    2.61    2.64      2.64           15   0.068    0.183   0.166

Table V.A displays moments for the BY calibration for di¤erent levels of the EIS and RRA. The
 moments for each combination of preference parameters are generated from an independent 1.2
 million month simulation. The corresponding moments from the 1930-2006 yearly dataset are
                        displayed above the moments from the model.




                                              6
                                      Table V Panel B
    Moments and Preference Parameters BKY Calibration
                        E (rf )                                   (rf )
                     Data     0.99                           Data     4.28

                      0.5      1.5       2.0                  0.5      1.5     2.0
               5      4.65    4.62      4.63            5     3.32    3.40    3.31
               10      NA     0.97      0.29            10     NA     1.32    1.12
               15      NA     -0.18     -0.99           15     NA     1.51    1.37


             E (re   rf ) + 21 var(re    rf )                  (re rf )
                     Data       6.89                         Data 18.37

                      0.5      1.5       2.0                  0.5      1.5     2.0
               5      1.33    1.36      1.39            5    19.50    19.93   19.42
               10      NA     7.85      8.60            10     NA     21.45   22.13
               15      NA     13.22     13.88           15     NA     21.45   22.27


                      E (p    d)                                 (p   d)
                     Data     3.31                           Data     0.463

                      0.5      1.5       2.0                  0.5      1.5     2.0
               5      3.79    3.79      3.79            5     0.15    0.14    0.14
               10      NA     3.03      3.04            10     NA     0.27    0.30
               15      NA     2.42      2.43            15     NA     0.30    0.33

Table V.B displays moments for the BKY calibration for di¤erent levels of the EIS and RRA. The
  moments for each combination of preference parameters are generated from an independent 1.2
  million month simulation. The corresponding moments from the 1930-2006 yearly dataset are
     displayed above the moments from the model. NA represent cases where the price of the
  consumption claim is in…nite. NA is listed for the risk free rate because it is a function of the
expected return on the consumption claim. The price of the log-price dividend ratio is unde…ned in
     these cases because it depends on coe¢ cients governing the relationship between the log
                         price-consumption ratio and the state variables.




                                                7
                                 Table VI: Panel A
        Predictability of Excess Returns, Consumption and Dividends: BY
                                    Calibration
                                      PJ
                                         j=1 re;t+j   rf;t+j 1930-2006 Sample
       Periods   b           (pop)       (50%) %(b)        t        Rb2      R2 (pop)         R2 (50%)   %(Rb2 )
       1Y        -0.059    -0.007      -0.049    0.471     -1.262   0.022    0.000            0.007      0.770
       3Y        -0.229    -0.026      -0.144    0.403     -2.678   0.143    0.000            0.018      0.956
       5Y        -0.421    -0.039      -0.230    0.358     -3.617   0.278    0.000            0.027      0.986
                                            1947.2-2007.3 Quarterly Data
       4Q        -0.116    -0.008      -0.063    0.362     -2.723   0.081    0.000            0.009      0.969
       12 Q      -0.293    -0.020      -0.179    0.384     -2.953   0.204    0.000            0.023      0.973
       20 Q      -0.478    -0.031      -0.288    0.370     -3.072   0.304    0.000            0.034      0.978

                             PJ
                                j=1   ( ct+j ) End of Period Timing    1930-2006   Sample
       Periods   b          (pop)       (50%) %(b)          t           b2
                                                                        R          R2 (pop)   R2 (50%)   %(Rb2 )
       1Y        0.012     0.114       0.113      0.000     1.704       0.068      0.390      0.361      0.005
       3Y        0.010     0.286       0.271      0.000     0.659       0.013      0.435      0.394      0.001
       5Y        -0.001    0.388       0.350      0.001     -0.043      0.000      0.373      0.322      0.000
                                             1947.2-2007.3 Quarterly   Data
       4Q        0.003     0.110       0.109      0.000     0.628       0.006      0.281      0.269      0.001
       12 Q      -0.001    0.262       0.245      0.002     -0.102      0.000      0.348      0.307      0.001
       20 Q      -0.002    0.353       0.304      0.012     -0.119      0.000      0.302      0.243      0.006

                          PJ
                             j=1 ( ct+j ) Beginning of Period Timing 1930-2006 Sample
       Periods   b          (pop)     (50%) %(b)          t        Rb2      R2 (pop)          R2 (50%)   %(Rb2 )
       1Y        0.001     0.097     0.092      0.001     0.175    0.000    0.280             0.242      0.000
       3Y        -0.010    0.230     0.207      0.004     -1.245   0.018    0.280             0.228      0.029
       5Y        -0.016    0.308     0.259      0.016     -1.466   0.040    0.235             0.176      0.134
                                           1947.2-2007.3 Quarterly Data
       4Q        0.000     0.103     0.102      0.001     0.063    0.000    0.248             0.225      0.000
       12 Q      -0.004    0.246     0.226      0.005     -0.385   0.003    0.306             0.255      0.009
       20 Q      -0.005    0.331     0.279      0.022     -0.319   0.003    0.266             0.200      0.028

                                           PJ
                                              j=1 ( dt+j ) 1930-2006 Sample
       Periods   b          (pop)       (50%) %(b)           t        b2
                                                                      R            R2 (pop)   R2 (50%)   %(Rb2 )
       1Y        0.064     0.343       0.339       0.004     1.793    0.074        0.228      0.207      0.084
       3Y        0.076     0.860       0.816       0.006     0.978    0.034        0.288      0.257      0.035
       5Y        0.051     1.171       1.053       0.016     0.716    0.013        0.265      0.224      0.036
                                             1947.2-2007.3 Quarterly Data
       4Q        0.009     0.331       0.328       0.004     0.374    0.002        0.156      0.146      0.007
       12 Q      0.002     0.790       0.733       0.016     0.028    0.000        0.229      0.196      0.002
       20 Q      0.002     1.065       0.911       0.041     0.020    0.000        0.213      0.167      0.003

      Table VI.A displays coe¢ cients, t-statistics, and R-squared from predictive regressions of excess returns,
consumption growth and dividend growth on log price-dividend ratios using the BY calibration. Standard errors are
  Newey-West with 2*(horizon-1) lags. Population values are from a simulation of 1.2 million months. The medians
from 100,000 samples of equivalent length to the data (924 or 726 months) and the proportion of those samples with
                             an estimate at or below that of the data is also displayed.




                                                          8
                                 Table VI: Panel B
       Predictability of Excess Returns, Consumption and Dividends: BKY
                                   Calibration

                                      PJ
                                         j=1 re;t+j   rf;t+j 1930-2006 Sample
       Periods   b           (pop)       (50%) %(b)        t        Rb2      R2 (pop)         R2 (50%)   %(Rb2 )
       1Y        -0.059    -0.078      -0.121    0.661     -1.262   0.022    0.009            0.012      0.642
       3Y        -0.229    -0.226      -0.344    0.607     -2.678   0.143    0.026            0.034      0.871
       5Y        -0.421    -0.368      -0.537    0.570     -3.617   0.278    0.041            0.053      0.930
                                            1947.2-2007.3 Quarterly Data
       4Q        -0.116    -0.078      -0.133    0.539     -2.723   0.081    0.009            0.014      0.919
       12 Q      -0.293    -0.230      -0.371    0.565     -2.953   0.204    0.027            0.039      0.918
       20 Q      -0.478    -0.374      -0.575    0.549     -3.072   0.304    0.042            0.060      0.923

                              PJ
                                j=1   ( ct+j ) End of Period Timing    1930-2006   Sample
       Periods   b          (pop)       (50%) %(b)          t           b2
                                                                        R          R2 (pop)   R2 (50%)   %(Rb2 )
       1Y        0.012     0.022       0.046      0.142     1.704       0.068      0.037      0.078      0.456
       3Y        0.010     0.052       0.107      0.148     0.659       0.013      0.042      0.092      0.176
       5Y        -0.001    0.069       0.134      0.183     -0.043      0.000      0.036      0.084      0.011
                                             1947.2-2007.3 Quarterly   Data
       4Q        0.003     0.021       0.048      0.105     0.628       0.006      0.028      0.061      0.132
       12 Q      -0.001    0.048       0.102      0.160     -0.102      0.000      0.034      0.079      0.026
       20 Q      -0.002    0.062       0.123      0.227     -0.119      0.000      0.030      0.077      0.040

                           PJ
                             j=1 ( ct+j ) Beginning of Period Timing 1930-2006 Sample
       Periods   b          (pop)     (50%) %(b)          t        Rb2      R2 (pop)          R2 (50%)   %(Rb2 )
       1Y        0.001     0.018     0.036      0.133     0.175    0.000    0.025             0.050      0.046
       3Y        -0.010    0.040     0.077      0.174     -1.245   0.018    0.025             0.056      0.289
       5Y        -0.016    0.053     0.092      0.235     -1.466   0.040    0.021             0.057      0.423
                                           1947.2-2007.3 Quarterly Data
       4Q        0.000     0.020     0.044      0.116     0.063    0.000    0.024             0.050      0.015
       12 Q      -0.004    0.045     0.093      0.178     -0.385   0.003    0.030             0.067      0.110
       20 Q      -0.005    0.059     0.111      0.246     -0.319   0.003    0.026             0.069      0.111

                                           PJ
                                              j=1 ( dt+j ) 1930-2006 Sample
       Periods   b          (pop)       (50%) %(b)           t        b2
                                                                      R            R2 (pop)   R2 (50%)   %(Rb2 )
       1Y        0.064     0.054       0.113       0.367     1.793    0.074        0.008      0.020      0.834
       3Y        0.076     0.133       0.265       0.326     0.978    0.034        0.011      0.034      0.504
       5Y        0.051     0.176       0.329       0.337     0.716    0.013        0.010      0.042      0.284
                                             1947.2-2007.3 Quarterly Data
       4Q        0.009     0.051       0.119       0.256     0.374    0.002        0.005      0.016      0.203
       12 Q      0.002     0.116       0.255       0.297     0.028    0.000        0.008      0.034      0.014
       20 Q      0.002     0.150       0.307       0.342     0.020    0.000        0.007      0.045      0.011

       Table VI.B displays coe¢ cients, t-statistics, and R-squared from predictive regressions of excess returns,
     consumption growth and dividend growth on log price-dividend ratios in the yearly datasets using the BKY
calibration. Standard errors are Newey-West with 2*(horizon-1) lags. Population values are from a simulation of 1.2
 million months. The medians from 100,000 samples of equivalent length to the data (924 or 726 months) and the
             proportion of those samples with an estimate at or below that of the data is also displayed.




                                                          9
                                             Table VII: Panel A

                           Predictability of Volatility: BY Calibration

                           Excess Returns, Consumption and Dividends
                                       Excess Return Volatility 1930-2006 Sample
       Periods    b            (pop)      (50%) %(b)         t        Rb2      R2 (pop)    R2 (50%)    %(Rb2 )
       1Y         -0.081     -0.123     -0.136    0.526      -0.316   0.001    0.000       0.007       0.205
       3Y         -0.059     -0.115     -0.114    0.537      -0.335   0.003    0.001       0.017       0.214
       5Y         -0.017     -0.113     -0.091    0.555      -0.114   0.000    0.002       0.024       0.073
                                             1947.2-2007.3 Quarterly Data
       4Q         -0.144     -0.138     -0.130    0.430      -0.785   0.011    0.003       0.007       0.487
       12 Q       0.047      -0.118     -0.109    0.414      0.337    0.003    0.006       0.018       0.561
       20 Q       0.086      -0.102     -0.086    0.364      0.986    0.015    0.007       0.026       0.665

                     Excess Return Volatility Estimated from Monthly Data 1930-2006 Sample
       Periods    b           (pop)   (50%) %(b)          t        Rb2     R2 (pop)   R2 (50%)         %(Rb2 )
       1Y         -0.075    -0.026  -0.021      0.087     -2.298   0.127   0.011      0.014            0.966
       3Y         -0.051    -0.022  -0.018      0.180     -1.339   0.092   0.018      0.028            0.793
       5Y         -0.039    -0.020  -0.015      0.242     -1.164   0.081   0.019      0.035            0.707
                                           1947.2-2007.3 Quarterly Data
       4Q         -0.004    -0.024  -0.021      0.657     -0.290   0.001   0.009      0.015            0.144
       12 Q       0.006     -0.021  -0.017      0.717     0.395    0.004   0.016      0.033            0.180
       20 Q       0.009     -0.019  -0.014      0.723     0.671    0.014   0.017      0.041            0.303


                                       Consumption Volatility 1930-2006 Sample
       Periods    b            (pop)      (50%) %(b)        t        Rb2      R2 (pop)     R2 (50%)    %(Rb2 )
       1Y         -0.481     -0.128     -0.140    0.336     -1.835   0.035    0.000        0.006       0.906
       3Y         -0.491     -0.122     -0.124    0.258     -2.248   0.122    0.001        0.015       0.957
       5Y         -0.564     -0.113     -0.104    0.183     -3.200   0.235    0.002        0.022       0.983
                                             1947.2-2007.3 Quarterly Data
       4Q         -0.684     -0.134     -0.139    0.146     -3.693   0.191    0.003        0.006       0.983
       12 Q       -0.657     -0.116     -0.120    0.096     -3.686   0.313    0.005        0.016       0.988
       20 Q       -0.543     -0.100     -0.099    0.056     -3.928   0.335    0.006        0.025       0.990

                                         Dividend Volatility 1930-2006 Sample
       Periods    b            (pop)      (50%) %(b)         t        b2
                                                                      R         R2 (pop)   R2 (50%)    %(Rb2 )
       1Y         -0.530     -0.146     -0.143    0.319      -1.576   0.035     0.000      0.006       0.899
       3Y         -0.478     -0.144     -0.126    0.269      -1.638   0.070     0.002      0.015       0.862
       5Y         -0.496     -0.123     -0.104    0.223      -1.498   0.084     0.003      0.023       0.815
                                             1947.2-2007.3 Quarterly Data
       4Q         -0.534     -0.138     -0.137    0.101      -1.858   0.082     0.003      0.007       0.997
       12 Q       -0.441     -0.120     -0.118    0.059      -0.974   0.070     0.006      0.017       0.976
       20 Q       -0.426     -0.103     -0.098    0.049      -0.877   0.076     0.006      0.025       0.932

  Panels 1, 3 and 4 of table VII.A display coe¢ cients, t-statistics, and R-squared from regressions of the log of the
sum of absolute residuals from an AR(1) model of consumption growth, dividend growth or excess returns on the log
price-dividend ratio using the BY calibration. In panel 2, the dependent variable is instead the standard deviation of
 monthly excess log returns over a 1, 3 or 5 year horizon. The monthly excess log return for this panel is calculated
using CRSP data for stock returns and one month Tbills and the standard deviation is multiplied by the square root
    of 12 to express it in annualized terms. All standard errors are Newey-West with lags equal to 2*(horizon-1).
   Population values are from a simulation of 1.2 million months. Medians are from a series of 100,000 samples of
equivalent length to the data (924 and 726 months). The percentile is the proportion of the 100,000 samples with an
     estimate at or below that of the data. The beginning of period timing convention is used for consumption.

                                                          10
                                              Table VII: Panel B

                           Predictability of Volatility: BKY Calibration

                           Excess Returns, Consumption and Dividends
                                       Excess Return Volatility 1930-2006 Sample
       Periods    b            (pop)      (50%) %(b)         t        Rb2      R2 (pop)     R2 (50%)    %(Rb2 )
       1Y         -0.081     -1.315     -1.366    0.884      -0.316   0.001    0.085        0.035       0.078
       3Y         -0.059     -1.268     -1.219    0.914      -0.335   0.003    0.273        0.117       0.064
       5Y         -0.017     -1.336     -1.085    0.914      -0.114   0.000    0.364        0.153       0.022
                                             1947.2-2007.3 Quarterly Data
       4Q         -0.144     -1.301     -1.258    0.954      -0.785   0.011    0.342        0.163       0.075
       12 Q       0.047      -1.252     -1.093    0.976      0.337    0.003    0.519        0.277       0.025
       20 Q       0.086      -1.213     -0.943    0.973      0.986    0.015    0.564        0.291       0.067

                     Excess Return Volatility Estimated from Monthly Data 1930-2006 Sample
       Periods    b           (pop)   (50%) %(b)          t        Rb2     R2 (pop)   R2 (50%)          %(Rb2 )
       1Y         -0.075    -0.234  -0.225      0.961     -2.298   0.127   0.572      0.358             0.143
       3Y         -0.051    -0.231  -0.205      0.972     -1.339   0.092   0.703      0.457             0.059
       5Y         -0.039    -0.226  -0.184      0.969     -1.164   0.081   0.721      0.443             0.062
                                           1947.2-2007.3 Quarterly Data
       4Q         -0.004    -0.230  -0.219      0.993     -0.290   0.001   0.583      0.321             0.007
       12 Q       0.006     -0.228  -0.194      0.992     0.395    0.004   0.714      0.411             0.012
       20 Q       0.009     -0.224  -0.169      0.987     0.671    0.014   0.734      0.391             0.033


                                       Consumption Volatility 1930-2006 Sample
       Periods    b            (pop)      (50%) %(b)        t        Rb2      R2 (pop)      R2 (50%)    %(Rb2 )
       1Y         -0.481     -1.420     -1.511    0.816     -1.835   0.035    0.095         0.042       0.451
       3Y         -0.491     -1.382     -1.402    0.829     -2.248   0.122    0.290         0.148       0.439
       5Y         -0.564     -1.336     -1.262    0.780     -3.200   0.235    0.372         0.193       0.576
                                             1947.2-2007.3 Quarterly Data
       4Q         -0.684     -1.473     -1.431    0.783     -3.693   0.191    0.371         0.200       0.484
       12 Q       -0.657     -1.408     -1.252    0.753     -3.686   0.313    0.524         0.315       0.497
       20 Q       -0.543     -1.360     -1.081    0.763     -3.928   0.335    0.561         0.321       0.522

                                         Dividend Volatility 1930-2006 Sample
       Periods    b            (pop)      (50%) %(b)         t        b2
                                                                      R         R2 (pop)    R2 (50%)    %(Rb2 )
       1Y         -0.530     -1.483     -1.563    0.810      -1.576   0.035     0.102       0.045       0.436
       3Y         -0.478     -1.431     -1.421    0.833      -1.638   0.070     0.305       0.149       0.306
       5Y         -0.496     -1.384     -1.270    0.804      -1.498   0.084     0.393       0.191       0.288
                                             1947.2-2007.3 Quarterly Data
       4Q         -0.534     -1.301     -1.462    0.849      -1.858   0.082     0.342       0.203       0.263
       12 Q       -0.441     -1.415     -1.268    0.854      -0.974   0.070     0.521       0.315       0.140
       20 Q       -0.426     -1.364     -1.091    0.822      -0.877   0.076     0.558       0.318       0.154

  Panels 1, 3 and 4 of table VII.B display coe¢ cients, t-statistics, and R-squared from regressions of the log of the
sum of absolute residuals from an AR(1) model of consumption growth, dividend growth or excess returns on the log
price-dividend ratio using the BKY calibration. In panel 2, the dependent variable is instead the standard deviation
of monthly excess log returns over a 1, 3 or 5 year horizon. The monthly excess log return for this panel is calculated
  using CRSP data for stock returns and one month Tbills, and the standard deviation is multiplied by the square
 root of 12 to express it in annualized terms. All standard errors are Newey-West with lags equal to 2*(horizon-1).
   Population values are from a simulation of 1.2 million months. Medians are from a series of 100,000 samples of
equivalent length to the data (924 and 726 months). The percentile is the proportion of the 100,000 samples with an
     estimate at or below that of the data. The beginning of period timing convention is used for consumption.

                                                          11
                                     Table VIII: Panel A

                     Long Run Risks and the EIS: BY Calibration

                                     ct+1 = i + ri;t+1 +   i;t+1
   Asset    Sample          b               (pop)             (50%)             %( b )
   rf;t+1   1930-2006       0.147         1.646             1.229               0.016
            1947.2-2007.3   0.230         1.462             1.379               0.002

   re;t+1   1930-2006       0.048        2.081              0.067               0.459
            1947.2-2007.3   -0.025       1.551              0.052               0.411


                                ri;t+1 = i + 1    ct+1 + i;t+1 :
                                        h       i        h         i             h      i
   Asset    Sample             d
                            1/ 1=            d
                                          1= 1=   (pop)    1= 1= d (50%)             d
                                                                                % 1= 1=
   rf;t+1   1930-2006       1.014        1.647              1.483               0.117
            1947.2-2007.3   0.728        1.463              1.503               0.010

   re;t+1   1930-2006       0.059        2.136              0.387               0.375
            1947.2-2007.3   -0.192       1.599              0.465               0.432


Table VIII.A displays the EIS estimates using both the risk free rate and the market return as the
    asset for the BY calibration. Population values are from a simulation of 1.2 million months.
    Medians are from a series of 100,000 samples of equivalent length to the data (924 and 726
months). The percentile is the proportion of the 100,000 samples with an estimate at or below that
of the data. The instruments are consumption growth, the log price-dividend ratio and returns for
the asset, all lagged twice. The beginning of period timing convention is used for consumption. In
                                     the model, the EIS is 1.5.




                                                 12
                                     Table VIII: Panel B

                     Long Run Risks and the EIS: BKY Calibration

                                     ct+1 = i + ri;t+1 +   i;t+1
   Asset    Sample          b               (pop)             (50%)             %( b )
   rf;t+1   1930-2006       0.147         0.933             0.916               0.121
            1947.2-2007.3   0.230         1.051             1.207               0.029

   re;t+1   1930-2006       0.048        -0.158             0.036               0.542
            1947.2-2007.3   -0.025       -0.311             0.006               0.396


                                ri;t+1 = i + 1    ct+1 + i;t+1 :
                                        h       i        h         i             h      i
   Asset    Sample             d
                            1/ 1=            d
                                          1= 1=   (pop)    1= 1= d (50%)             d
                                                                                % 1= 1=
   rf;t+1   1930-2006       1.014        1.564              1.545               0.218
            1947.2-2007.3   0.728        1.454              1.653               0.030

   re;t+1   1930-2006       0.059        -2.077             0.194               0.379
            1947.2-2007.3   -0.192       -1.170             0.097               0.394


Table VIII.B displays the EIS estimates using both the risk free rate and the market return as the
   asset for the BKY calibration. Population values are from a simulation of 1.2 million months.
    Medians are from a series of 100,000 samples of equivalent length to the data (924 and 726
months). The percentile is the proportion of the 100,000 samples with an estimate at or below that
of the data. The instruments are consumption growth, the log price-dividend ratio and returns for
the asset, all lagged twice. The beginning of period timing convention is used for consumption. In
                                     the model, the EIS is 1.5.




                                                  13
                                     Table IX: Panel A

                 Consol Bond Moments: BY Calibration

                        E (yb )                                E (yb   rf )

                      0.5      1.5       2.0                   0.5      1.5     2.0
                5     3.98    2.25      2.05            5     -1.95    -0.86   -0.69
                10    0.45    0.45      0.45            10    -5.66    -2.14   -1.63
                15     NA     NA        NA              15      NA     NA      NA


             E (rb   rf ) + 12 var(rb    rf )                    (rb   rf )

                      0.5      1.5       2.0                   0.5      1.5     2.0
                5    -1.50    -0.80     -0.65           5      9.85    3.58    2.76
                10   -4.97    -2.05     -1.57           10    11.82    4.37    3.45
                15     NA     NA        NA              15      NA     NA      NA


 Table IV.A displays moments for a claim to a consol bond that pays one unit of the consumption
good in all future periods for the BY Calibration. The yield spread and bond yield are the average
 of monthly yield spreads and bond yields multiplied by 1200. The excess return of the bond and
standard deviation are calculated by …rst aggregating monthly excess returns to annual levels and
    then computing the excess return or standard deviation. All moments are calculated from a
simulation of 1.2 million months. NA refers to cases where the price of the consol bond is in…nite.
 Bond prices are …nite when the discount factor is reduced to .995, .996 or .996 for EIS of 0.5, 1.5
                         and 2.0. The discount factor in the model is .998.




                                                14
                                     Table IX: Panel B

                Consol Bond Moments: BKY Calibration

                         E (yb )                               E (yb    rf )

                      0.5      1.5       2.0                    0.5     1.5      2.0
                5     3.05    NA        NA               5     -1.49   NA       NA
                10     NA     NA        NA               10      NA    NA       NA
                15     NA     NA        NA               15      NA    NA       NA


             E (rb   rf ) + 12 var(rb   rf )                     (rb   rf )

                       0.5     1.5       2.0                    0.5     1.5      2.0
                5     -1.16   NA        NA               5      9.47   NA       NA
                10      NA    NA        NA               10      NA    NA       NA
                15      NA    NA        NA               15      NA    NA       NA


 Table IX.B displays moments for a claim to a consol bond that pays one unit of the consumption
    good in all future periods for the BKY Calibration. The yield spread and bond yield are the
   average of monthly yield spreads and bond yields multiplied by 1200. The excess return of the
 bond and standard deviation are calculated by …rst aggregating monthly excess returns to annual
  levels and then computing the excess return or standard deviation. All moments are calculated
  from a simulation of 1.2 million months. NA refers to cases where the price of the consumption
claim or the consol bond is in…nite. For an EIS of .5 and risk aversion of 10 and 15 the price of the
  consumption claim is in…nite and the consol bond price is unde…ned as a result. All other NAs
represent cases where the price of the consumption claim is …nite but the price of the consol bond
     is not. Both bonds and the consumption claim have …nite prices when the discount factor is
 reduced to .998 for EIS of 1.5 and 2.0 with RRA 5, .996 for EIS of 0.5, 1.5 and 2.0 with RRA 10
    and .993 for EIS of 0.5, 1.5 and 2.0 with RRA 15 . The discount factor in the model is .9989.




                                                 15
Figure 1 Predictability of Consumption with Leads or Lags: Yearly Coe¢ cients




  Figure 1 displays the coe¢ cients from a regression of consum ption growth over a 1, 3 or 5 year
  horizon on the log price-dividend ratio at di¤erent leads and lags. Each datap oint on the graph
represents a di¤erent regression for that tim e horizon and lead or lag. The x-axis is the param eter
j as outlined in the text. M odel regressions are from a simulation of 1.2 m illion m onths. The data
                                   is the 1930-2006 yearly dataset.



                                                 1
Figure 2 Predictability of Consumption with Leads or Lags: Yearly R-Squared




   Figure 2 displays the R-squared from a regression of consum ption growth over a 1, 3 or 5 year
  horizon on the log price-dividend ratio at di¤erent leads and lags. Each datap oint on the graph
represents a di¤erent regression for that tim e horizon and lead or lag. The x-axis is the param eter
j as outlined in the text. M odel regressions are from a simulation of 1.2 m illion m onths. The data
                                   is the 1930-2006 yearly dataset.



                                                 2
      Figure 3 Predictability of Consumption with Leads or Lags: Quarterly
                                    Coe¢ cients




   Figure 3 displays the coe¢ cients from a regression of consum ption growth over a 4, 12 or 20
 quarter horizon on the log price-dividend ratio at di¤erent leads and lags. Each datap oint on the
  graph represents a di¤erent regression for that tim e horizon and lead or lag. The x-axis is the
param eter j as outlined in the text. M o del regressions are from a simulation of 1.2 m illion m onths.
                           The data is the 1947.2-2007.3 quarterly dataset.


                                                   3
      Figure 4 Predictability of Consumption with Leads or Lags: Quarterly
                                    R-Squared




   Figure 4 displays the coe¢ cients from a regression of consum ption growth over a 4, 12 or 20
 quarter horizon on the log price-dividend ratio at di¤erent leads and lags. Each datap oint on the
  graph represents a di¤erent regression for that tim e horizon and lead or lag. The x-axis is the
param eter j as outlined in the text. M o del regressions are from a simulation of 1.2 m illion m onths.
                           The data is the 1947.2-2007.3 quarterly dataset.


                                                   4
