                      ThER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        CHANGE AND PROGRESS IN
                    CONTEMPORARY MORTGAGE MARKETS




                            Edward J. Kane


                        Working Paper No. 1178




                NATIONL&L BUREAU OF E\CONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                             October 1984




The research reported here is rt of the uSER ' research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau   of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper !L47S
                                                  October 1984



      Change and Progress in Contemporary Mortgage Markets

                                     ABSTRACT



      Changes in political attitudes toward subsidizing mortgage loans and in
technologies for transacting mortgage loans and for pooling and refinancing
individual mortgage contracts threaten to remake the face of U.S.          mortgage
markets. This paper focuses on economic-efficiency benefits embodied in narrow-
ed interest-rate spreads and on distributional effects for different market partici-
pants created by three categories of change: changing strategies for controlling
implicit federal guarantees; continuing evolution in the character of mortgage-
backed securities; and expanding electronic mortgage-application networks. It
proves instructive to classify these effects further according to whether they are
transitional or permanent in nature and whether they are technologically driven or
filtered through the political process.
     The analysis emphasizes that technological change is reducing the con-
trollability of aggregate subsidies associated with longstanding patterns of provid-
ing implicit and explicit federal guarantees for the liabilities of important mort-
gage-market participants and discusses several proposals for bringing the market
value of these guarantees back under administrative control.




                                                                 Edward 3. Kane
                                                         Department of Economics
                                                            Ohio State University
                                                                343 Hagerty Flail
                                                           Columbus, Ohio 43210
                                                                     (61 4)—4 22-8708
                                                                 September 26, 1984
     CHANGE AND PROGRESS IN CONTEMPORARY MORTGAGE MARKETS

                                  Edward J. Kane*

      Whenever the landscape of our lives changes rapidly, it is helpful to contern-
plate two texts. The first is an aphorism enunciated almost 2,500 years ago by the

Greek philosopher 1-leraclitus: "Nothing is permanent except change:'

      Pursuing the psychological reverberations of this thought, we may observe
that the more rapid the rate of change becomes, the more deeply stressed and

disoriented disadvantaged participants feel. Feelings of unsettlement experienced
in confronting the unfamiliar are the distinctive fare of science fiction. In this
genre, writers have speculated repeatedly about how socially disruptive it would be
if scientists were to discover how to accelerate the rate of technological change.

      Reinforcing its readers' instinctive fear of a lurking unknown, this literature
often advances the view that accelerated technological change would evoke
undesirable adjustments in lifestyle and environment that would dramatically
worsen the human situation. However, for the long run, the history of scientific
and technological achievement supports the opposite result. If Heraclitus could be
transported to our time, he would be literally dazzled by advances in technology
that, by freeing mankind from slaving to fulfill its most basic requirements for
survival, have sharply expanded the horizons of human activity. This thought leads
conveniently into our second text (one that in the 1950s, as a television spokesman

for General Electric, Ronald Reagan used to preach every Sunday night): "Progress
is our most important product."

*Everett D. Reese Professor of 3anking and Monetary Economics, The Ohio State
University and Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research. The
author wishes to thank HUB for financial support and Ann Dougherty, ack
Guttentag, Joseph Humphrey, George Kaufman, Anthony Sanders, David Seiders,
Robert Yan Order, and Kevin Yillani for helpful comments. Opinions expressed are
those of the author and should not be construed to represent those of the NBER.
                                                                                       2


       Of course, not all change is progressive. Contemporary adjustments in
 mortgage markets are driven by two conceptually distinct forces: the shifting
 winds of political consensus and the steadier blast of technological change.
 Although the long-run effects of technologically driven change are progressive,
 politically driven change is oriented toward the short run and is often regressive.

                             Politically Filtered Changes
      What we may call politically filtered changes in mortgage markets represent
economic responses to changes in the flow of implicit and explicit federal taxes
and subsidies to housing finance. Historically, various federal agencies have sought

to help mortgage markets by smoothing the interest-rate cycle, underpricing
deposit-insurance guarantees for maturity and credit risk undertaken by specialized

mortgage lenders, imposing housing-related deposit-rate ceilings and asset restric-
lions on thrift institutions, guaranteeing cash flows on mortgage instruments, and
subsidizing interest rates on mortgage loans for low-income housing. During the
1980s, public policy has aimed at eliminating or at least reducing most of these
subsidies.

      We may identify two watershed changes, with several more still under
discussion. The first is the October 6, 1979 reorientation of Federal Reserve anti-
inflationary monetary policy. Since that date, the Fed has fought inflation in ways
that have greatly increased the volatility of market interest rates. Prior to this
date, Fed efforts to smooth short-run changes in interest rates served to reduce
the exposure of short-borrowing, long-lending mortgage lenders (i.e., thrift institu-
tions) to large overnight declines in the market value of their net worth.' The
second watershed change was the staged abandonment of the two-pronged regula-

tory strategy of simultaneously requiring thrift institutions to specialize in
mortgage lending and trying to beef up their profit margins by imposing a
discriminatory system of ceilings on the explicit interest rates they and other
                                                                                       3


 deposit institutions could pay on deposits. This change in strategy was first
 embodied in the Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of

  1980, which liberalized asset powers for thrift institutions and established an
 interagency committee to deregulate deposit-rate ceilings. The Cam-St Germain
 Depository Institutions Act of 1982 moved both legs of the new strategy forward by
 authorizing money market deposit accounts and further relaxing restraints on
 thrift-institution diversification. As documented in George Kaufman's and David
 Seiders' pieces for this symposium, thrift institutions' pursuit of opportunities to
 restructure their balance sheets only temporarily reduced these institutions'
 relative role in financing the flow of new mortgages.
       Other subsidy-reducing proposals under active consideration include:
       I. the possibility of introducing new restrictions on the guarantee and
          mortgage-banking authority of Fannie Mae, Ginnie Mae, and Freddie
          Mac;

      2. the possibility of explicitly or implicitly repricing federal deposit
          insurance to reduce the effective subsidy to maturity mismatching
          and default risk inherent in an insured thrift institution's mortgage
          lending.
My reading of the bureaucratic and legislative record indicates that (except for the
1984 passage of a tax—law provision to subject Freddie Mac income to federal
income taxation) the first proposal is at least temporarily stymied. The second
proposal has been embodied in FSLIC and FOIC requests for authority to set risk-
rated insurance premia and naive regulatory efforts to impose lower insurance
limits on brokered deposits and to persuade insured thrift institutions to switch
their new lending from fixed—rate mortgages (FRM5) to adjustable-rate mortgages
(ARMs). For many S&Ls, the FHLB's signalling that its examiners would view ARM
lending favorably made ARMs the vehicle of choice for exploiting deposit-
insurance subsidies to mortgage lending. The unintended effect of this FSLIC
effort to promote ARMs has been to encourage the sharpest of its clients to
transform straightforward interest-volatility risk into exotic forms of credit risk.
                                                                                       4


       Observable shifts in public policy respond to lobbying pressures against which
 it is feasible to organize an effective political counterattack. The profitability of
 managing the industry's lobbying efforts may explain why spokespersons for the
 traditional community of housing lenders tend to exaggerate the Jong-run effects
 of government subsidies on the profitability of mortgage lending. In effect, they
 advertise political action as both the cause and the remedy for all industry
 problems. While this may maximize political action and industry contributions to
 trade-association coffers, economic analysis suggests that, for individual managers,
 it is a distinctly unhelpful perspective. It directs their attention to battling
collectively to undo the effects of change rather adapting individually to its
consequences.
      Promoters of lobbying efforts fail to appreciate how quickly and how
thoroughly in a competitive industry the benefits of subsidies dissipate over time.
The age-old problem with striving to target subsidies to producers of any govern-
mentally approved good or service -- including that of housing finance -- is that
market entry by unintended beneficiaries and competition among the intended
beneficiaries tends to shift the subsidies away to other parties: specifically to
customers and to suppliers of the factor services employed in producing and
distributing the subsidized products. Even if the gcvernment had intended subsidies
to mortgage lenders to stay with these lenders (which is doubtful), it could not put
handles on them. As a result, price competition has spilled these subsidies out of
the income statements of specialized lenders into the economy at large. Unless
one recognizes that the fragility of market power prevents subsidies from staying
put, it is hard to understand why a group as heavily subsidized ex ante as
specialized mortgage lenders could have proved so spectacularly unprofitable ex
pover the last 18 years.
     For mortgage lenders, the bright side of this coin is that reductions in these
subsidies ought to be shifted, too. Because the shifting process figures to reduce
 both the aggregate value of new investments in housing and the amount of
 mortgage debt in the economy, in the short run specialized mortgage lenders can

 best maintain profit margins by diversifying their activities into additional lines of
 financial service. To do this most effectively, industry managers must understand
 and make friends with the technologically driven changes that are currently
 unfolding in contemporary markets for financial services.

                           Technologically Driven Changes
      During the last decade, technological change in the methods used to produce
and distribute credit in U.S. mortgage markets has been both extraordinarily rapid

and extraordinarily wide-ranging.      Innovations have occurred in the rights and
duties incorporated into mortgage contracts, in direct and indirect opportunities
for taking and unwinding positions in these contracts, and in the activities
undertaken by contracting parties and their agents in arranging deals. So that we
may have a label for each type of innovation, we may call them the destandardiza-
tion, the securitized stripping, and the electronification of mortgage loans. The
common effect of all three developments has been progressive:              to perfect
interregional and interinstitutional competition at all stages of making and
financing mortgage loans.       The effect is to reduce the implicit and explicit
resource costs of lining up and transacting the best deal possible.           Secular

reductions in transactions costs have sharply increased the transactional efficiency

of mortgage markets, reducing the cost of taking margined and short positions in
mortgage instruments and enabling market participants to adjust their pre-existing
balance sheets to changes in investment opportunities more quickly and more
completely than ever before.2

     By lowering barriers to entry into local mortgage markets, this increase in
transactional efficiency has fostered an invasion of these markets by extraregional

and other nontraditional competitor5. This has had three observable effects. First,
                                                                                   6



 it has lowered the costs of mortgage contracting and narrowed the spread between

 mortgage interest rates and yields on Treasury and corporate bonds of similar
 duration.   The development of electronic methods of mortgage banking and
organized forward and secondary markets for whole and stripped mortgage loans
has forged new and tighter arbitrage links between movements in interest rates in
informal markets for mortgages and movements in rates of returns in organized
markets for securities of various types. Second, it has restructured and relocated
industry work flows, establishing a more-extensive pattern of specialization that in
many cases reduces the flow of quasi-rents to traditional market participants from
personal expertise and localized transactional networks they have built up over the

years.

      Third, it has assisted the destandardization or customization of the contract
for home loans.     Customized elements include graduated payment schedules

(including first-year buydowns by sellers), prepayment options, assumability priv-
ileges, lines of credit conditioned on homeowner equity, equity sharing, and various
kinds of adjustable-rate triggers and caps on the level to which adjustable rates or

monthly payments may escalate.3 In exchange for an appropriate adjustment in
contract interest rates, other contract terms can be tailored either to eliminate or
to counterbalance portfolio risks of particular concern to the borrowing or the
lending party in the mortgage contract. For individual lending institutions, forward
and secondary markets facilitate a cafeteria-style offering of heterogeneous
contract forms in two ways. First, these markets provide base prices from which
lenders may conveniently calculate a market value for various customized contract

features that particular classes of borrowers find attractive. Second, opportunities
to sell uncongenial contracts into these markets (particularly improved opportuni-
ties for selling off relatively liquid FRMs) permit an institution to put a wider
range of loan contracts into its servicing portfolio than concern for economically
controlling its exposure to interest-rate risk might let it retain in its investment
portfolio.
                                                                                 7



Technological Innovations in the 1980s.

      During the early 1980s, partly because of pressure from deposit-insurance
agencies, adjustable-rate home loans have begun to push fixed-rate loans into the
background. This is especially true of the market for conventional mortgages,
where since November, 1983 ARMs' percentage of the flow of new loans has
exceeded 50 percent. This passage has been facilitated by two technologically
driven innovations: collateralized mortgage obligations and electronic mortgage-

application networks.
      Although CMOs based on ARMs are now only in the planning stage, CMO
technology has facilitated the spread of ARMs in two ways. First, because it
increases the liquidity of FRMs, this technology makes it easier for a local lender
to emphasize adjust4ble-rate lending without depriving its customers of an
effective choice between ARM and FRM financing. Preserving this choice has
neutralized consumerist fears that held up the introduction of ARMs in many
jurisdictions during the early l970s. Second, the success of the CMO as a vehicle
for unloading FRMs creates a parallel demand for forms of mortgage-backed
securities that could be based on ARMs. To keep their loans easily absorbable into

future ARM pools, lenders have an incentive to limit the variety of ARM triggers,
adjustment periods, and caps to conform to developing industry standards.
      Electronic mortgage-application networks allow adjustable-rate lenders to
offer funds over a wider region. They also make it easier for a would-be borrower
(perhaps with the assistance of an associated expert or software package) to
compare alternative contracts.      Taken together, these innovations provide a
market solution to the problem of information overload in comparing the terms of
customized mortgage contracts that leads Guttentag (1983) to declare a need for

industry self-regulation to control expansion in mortgage designs.
                                                                                 S




Collateralized Mortgage Securities. With aggregate mortgage debt approaching 1.5
trillion dollars, it is not surprising that securities firms would strive to win
themselves a piece of the action. To make mortgage-backed securities attractive
to a broad range of institutional investors, three serious conceptual problems had
to be solved:

      1. How to aggregate (or "package") cash flows from a collection of
         diverse low-denomination mortgage loans into an intelligible high-
         denomination asset pool;

     2. How to relieve investors in these pools of the need to evaluate the
         credit risk of the individual mortgages in the pool;
     3. What to do about the risk that optional borrower prepayments may
         drastically shorten the effective maturity of the pool.

     The first generation of mortgage-backed securities (MBS) solved the first two

problems without explicitly addressing the third. Called mortgage participations or

pass-through securities, these instruments promise to pass along all payments
custodians receive from servicers of the pooled contracts, with investors guaran-
teed against servicer nonperformance by an ownership claim on the mortgage pool
and against borrower default and delinquency by private mortgage insurers and/or
one of the big-five federal housing-credit agencies or agency-corporations. These
guarantors are the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation ("Freddie Mac"), the

Federal National Mortgage Association ("Fannie Mae"), the Government National
Mortgage Association ("Ginnie Mae"), the Federal Housing Administration (The
FHA), and the Veterans Administration (the VA).
     However, the unavailability of call protection limited the extent to which
passthroughs could appeal to insurance companies and pension funds. These long—
term investors were not excited about acquiring participation certificates which
                                                                                        9


  required them to take a short position in a call option owned by mortgage
  borrowers. They had reservations not just about the unpredictability of prepay-
  ments, but especially about the likelihood that they would be concentrated in
  periods when interest rates would be low, so that the proceeds would have to be

  reinvested at unfavorable yields. The collateralized mortgage obligation (CMO) is
 a second..generatjon mortgage-backed security designed specifically to permit
 different investors to take title to the early and late cash flows generated by the

 pool of mortgages serving as collateral (Villani, 1983). In that it involves stripping
 and repackaging the cash flows on a primary security, a CMO parallels the cutely

 nicknamed zero-coupon "animal" securities that investment_banking firms fashion

 from ordinary Treasury bonds. Packagers of CMOs sell investors, not direct
 participations in the proceeds of a mortgage pool, but segregated claims to the
 early, intermediate, and distant cash flows that the underlying pool of mortgages
 (or mortgage participation certificates) actually throws off.
      Pioneered by Freddie Mac in June 1983, the typical CMO designates three or
four classes of bonds, scheduled to be paid off serially. Until the first or shortest

class is fully retired, its holders receive all principal payments thrown off by the
pool. Only then do principal payments accrue to the second maturity class. Only
after both of these classes have been paid off, do principal payments begin to flow

to the third class, and so on. Usually, all classes pay interest semiannually,
although sometimes the longest class merely accrues its interest until all faster-
paying classes have been retired.

     Earmarking flows of principal payments for holders of the faster-paying
classes enlists into the direct provision of home finance institutional investors
whose hedging interests or maturity habitats are short-term. At the same time, it
serves to lengthen the duration (or average futurity) of the late-paying securities
                                                                                   10


 and to shift some of the burden of borrowers' prepayment options
                                                                  from long-term
 to shorter-term investors. Figure 1 shows that the relative shares purchased by

 deposit institutions, insurance companies, and pension funds in the three classes of
 Freddie Mac's first CMO correspond broadly with conventional wisdom about the
 distribution of these firms' marginal hedging interests.

       In 1983, approximately 11 CMO issues were floated publicly, amounting to
 about $4 billion in the aggregate. At least $6 billion more were issued in the first
 five months of 1984. Table 1 disaggregates the first 28 CMO issues by the type of

 institution doing the packaging. Table 2 disaggregates these same issues by the
 type of collateral whose cash flows are being stripped.

      Except that it maintains no net-worth account (which prevents it from
accepting any interest—rate risk) and issues its liabilities into securities markets
rather than directly to depositors, a CMO packager operates very much like an
S&L. It supports a portfolio of mortgages with liabilities of varying maturity.
CMOs issued by a government conduit are effectively government-guaranteed.
Although CMOs issued by private conduits are not guaranteed directly, they are
backed by mortgage assets that are at least partly insured by one of the
government mortgage corporations (usually GNMA). Also, because CMO liabilities
are securities rather than deposits, their minimum denomination is probably never
smaller than $25,000 and their average denomination is typically higher rather than

lower than the average denomination of the mortgages they finance. In fact, to
qualify for an FHLMC or FNMA guarantee, the value of the individual mortgages in
a CMO must not exceed a ceiling of approximately $114,000.

     As this analogy should make clear, any S&L could in principle package its
mortgage portfolio into a CMO and even issue CMOs in small denominations to
its retail customers. Because S&Ls' average yield on their mortgage portfolios
                                                                                             1!




                                                Figure 1
                 Institutional Profile of Investors in the Three Series of FHLMC's
                          First Collateralized Mortgage Obligation (CMO)
                                              (June 1983)


                           A-i                                                        A-3

    100%                                             ___________
                          Other                            Other                     Other


    80%
                       Investment                     Investment                   Investment
                        Advisors                       Advisors                     Advisors
                                      Pension
                       ____________ Funds
                       Insurance
    60%                companies                       Pension
                                                           Funds
                                                                                    Pension
                       Commercial                                                    Funds
                         Banks
    40%
                                                     Insurance
                                                     Companies
                        Savings                                                    ___________
                         Banks                                                      tns. Cos.
-
    20%
                                                                                    Commercial
                                                     Commercial
                                                                                      Banks
                                                        flanks                     ___________
                         S&Ls                                      Savings           Savings
                                                                   Banks              Banks
    0 ______________                 _____________         S&Ls    _____________      _______     S&Ls



      Source:   Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation
      Notes:
           1. "Other" includes trust companies, broker/dealers, credit unions, corpora-
                tions, and individuals.
           2. The fastest—paying security is labelled A—i, the slowest A-3.
                                                                                      12




                                       Table 1
           First Twenty-eight Issues of Collateralized Mortgage Obligations,
               Disaggregated by Type of Institution Doing the Packaging

                                                                            Dollar
                                   Number of         Number of             Amount
                                    Issuers            Issues             (in billions)
Freddie Mac                             1                4                     2.93
Builder Bonds                           4               11                     1.75
Private Conduits                        9               13                     5.64
      Financial Corp.                  (1)
      Insurance Companies              (2)
      Mortgage Bankers                 (3)
      Dealer—Sponsored Issuers         (3)
      Thrifts                          (0)

Totals:                                14               28                 10.32




          Source: Kevin Villani, "Innovations in the Mortgage Markets,"
                  Everett D. Reese-Park National Bank Distinguished.
                  Lectures, Columbus, Ohio, May 24, 1984.
                                                                                     '3




                                           Table 2
              First Twenty-Eight Issues of Collateralized Mortgage Obligations,
                       Disaggregated by Type of Collateral Employed
                                                                                     Dollar
                                               Number of       Number of            Amount
   Type of Collateral                           Issuers         Issues            (in billions)
1. PooLs of Whole Mortgage Loans Only
    a. Conventional Mortgagess                       2              5                 3.29
    b. Conventional and FHA/VA mortgages             1              1                 0.27
2. Pools Using Mortgage-Backed Securiti
    a. Conventional Mortgages,                       1              1                 0.08
      FNMA MBS, and FHLMC
      participation certificates
  b. PNMA MBS and GNMA securitj                      1              1                 1.25
  c. GNMA seeuriti                                   11            20                 5.44

                        TOTALS                       16            28                10.32




  Source: Same as Table 1

  tThis row includes the four FHLMC issues
currently lies well below today's roughly 14.25 percent yield on new fixed-rate
mortgages, such a CMO would probably need to be issued at a discount from par.
Compared to CMOs issued at par, a discount CMO would have the advantage of
providing greater call protection for all classes of investors than a nondiscount
issue.

         But because only its deposit liabilities are explicitly guaranteed (by the
Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation or FSLIC), an S&L's CMOs would
be subject to credit risk. Before they could be designated as investment—grade
securities, this credit risk would in practice have to be insured by a credible party
or rated formally by Moody's or Standard and Poor's. Under state prudent-man
rules and federal pension-fund legislation, CMOsthat are not rated as investment—
grade could be held only in limited amounts by individual insurance companies and

pension funds. However, until the FSLIC clarified how it would settle the claims of
CMO holders in the event that an issuing S&L went bankrupt, private insurance

companies and credit-rating firms could not analyze all relevant contingencies.
Without knowing how the FSLIC would treat holders of discounted CMOs in a
liquidation, they could not prudently undertake to guarantee or rate an Sc5cL's CMO.

In connection with a CMO proposed by Guardian Savings and Loan of Houston,
Standard & Poor's began to negotiate with the FSLIC in late 1983. In early 1984
they agreed upon a tentative formula for use in marking CMOs to market in the
event of the liquidation of an S&L issuer (LaGesse, 1984b). Because the FDJC has
not taken a position on the issue and because the FSLIC has reserved the right to
challenge CMOs that promise to pay a premium to bondholders if the bond
agreement is liquidated, Standard and Poor's still will not rate CMOs from FDJC-
insured institutions or from S&Ls that stipulate redemption at a premium in the
case of insolvency.

     Given how far underwater the S&L industry is sinking, the FSLIC might want to

investigate issuing its own CMOs and mortgage passthroughs, which could be
                                                                                    15


backed up by pools of mortgage loans it would take over in closing insolvent
institutions. In many cases, liquidating an S&L. via a CMO may offer a cheaper
method of resolving its failure than making merger-assistance payments and
regulatory concessions to an acquirer that is reluctant to take on the burden of the

failing firm's problems.
      Electronic Mortgage-Application Networks. CMOS and other MBS may be

regarded as establishing more-intricate connections between mortgage originators
and ultimate suppliers of mortgage capital.        Electronic mortgage-application
networks complement MBS by forging new links between homebuyers and mortgage

originators. Using realtors as points of personal contact, these networks computer-
ize and "telecommunicate" one or more steps in the process of shopping and
negotiating for a home loan.
      The pioneer network 15 Shelternet, which is owned by First Boston Corp. and

began operation in July 1983. At la5t report, Shelternet had 40 participating
lenders and serviced 125 originators in 30 states. Its services run the gamut from
maintaining lists of mortgage designs and contract interest rates currently offered
by participating lenders (so far, all of these are thrift institutions) through taking
and processing loan applications and committing lender funds. Two networks that
limit themselves merely to mortgage listing are: RKI Databanks and the Realtors
National Mortgage Access System (Rennie Mae). In early 1984, other full-service
networks were just beginning to come on-line.
     Quantitatively, electronic mortgage markets are still minor players. In its
first nine months, Shelternet processed about 1,000 applications and closed about
500 mortgages that in the aggregate were worth only about $3.5 million dollars
(LaGesse, 1984a). However, by April 1984, Shelternet was handling almost $100
million worth of applications a month. The outlook for these networks is extremely
favorable. They facilitate intelligible disclosure of relevant mortgage information.
Also, as long as realtors are clever enough to find a label for loan-origination fees
                                                                                   16


  that does not violate the Real Estate Settlement Practices Act, these networks

  permit realtors to upgrade their service package and to capture income that would
 otherwise accrue to local lenders or mortgage-banking firms. However, this
 activity might make them subject as "arrangers of credit" to the Fed's Regulation
 z.


                Winners and Losers From Mortgage-Market Innovations
 Effects on Mortgage Lenders

       The evolving division of labor in mortgage finance puts a premium on a firm's

 capacity to recognize and to adapt to changing business opportunities and greatly
 complicates the work of every regulatory agency whose mission requires it to
 influence the price or quantity of mortgage credit.
      Over time, electronic and abstract derivative forms of mortgage contracting

 are displacing familiar product forms and face-to—face systems for distributing
them. At the same time that this process reduces the profitability of traditional
activities, it opens up opportunities to produce, distribute, and finance the
emergent contract forms. Unfortunately, traditional mortgage lenders typically
see the darker side of the process more clearly than the brighter one. They tend to
be put off emotionally by the transitional costs of adjusting their skills, capital,
and operating procedures to the evolving requirements of the marketplace. In an
era of rapid change, resistance to jettisoning organization structures and contract
limitations that proved successful in the past makes traditional mortgage lenders

slow to recognize emerging opportunities for arbitraging differences in profitabil-
ity between new and old ways of doing things. This lag in adaptation by traditional
players encourages nontraditional players — in the form of mortgage-pooling firms
such as Freddie Mac and securities firms such as Salomon Brothers, First Boston,
and Merrill Lynch -- to expand their role in mortgage financing.

      Specialized mortgage lenders have traditionally viewed mortgagor and prop-
erty evaluation, contract design, loan processing, funds commitment, mortgage
                                                                                    17


  servicing, and mortgage financing as activities to be performed under their direct
  supervision. When activities are performed jointly in-house rather than contracted
 out to specialists, the implicit prices of component services are not separately
 observable. Only the bundled price is directly observed. Advances in telecommun-
 ications and in forward and secondary markets let outside observers unbundle the
 prices of the component activities of mortgage lending. They allow individual
 activities to be performed in different combinations, whose publicly quoted prices
 may be stripped apart to price individual functions separately. This stripping and
 explicit pricing separates activities in these submarkets and facilitates entry from
 extraregional functional specialists. This entry tends to eradicate any pockets of
 monopoly power in local markets for originating and servicing mortgages. At the
 same time, it squeezes ex ante returns for financing mortgage down to the level of
securities yields generally. Taken together, these changes encourage realtors to
guide homebuyers through the loan-application, contract-design, and loan-pro-
cessing stages and encourages traditional mortgage lenders both to concentrate on
the mortgage-origination and mortgage-servicing functions and to price these
services closer to operating costs.

      in principle, investment-banking houses, brokerage firms, and commercial
banks have back-office capabilities and delivery systems that make it relatively
easy for them to perform the so-called conduit function of buying up mortgages in
the secondary market and of packaging (or transforming) them into mortgage-
backed securities (MBS). On the marketing or distribution side, these same firms
are well-situated both to identify potential customers (household as well as
institutional investors) and to advise these customers as to the types of mortgage-
backed securities that would best fit their portfolio objectives. Their major
problem is to provide from their own credit standing or to secure from a third
                                                                                    18


 party credible guarantees of promised cash flows.         In practice, FNLMC has
 dominated the conduit function.4 In early 1984, highly rated private conduits for

 CMOs (specifically Sears Mortgage Securities Corp., General Electric Credit Corp.,
 Residential Funding Corp., Norwest Mortgage Co., and FCA Mortgage Securities)
 began to make substantial plays. On the underwriting side, pre-existing limitations

 on deposit institutions' investment_banking powers have helped to deflect the bulk
 of the underwriting business so far to securities firms.        Deposit institutions'
 principal cut of the MBS business has been to earn fees as servicers or as
custodians of the mortgage pool.

      Mortgage-backed securities collateralized by mortgage pools that are assem-
bled by builders (so-called "builder bonds") promise to shift additional opportunities
to make mortgages on new homes from deposit institutions to builders' mortgage-

banking subsidiaries and to securities firms. Builder bonds permit construction
firms to designate sales of completed homes as installment sales for tax purposes.
This means that builders are taxed as the owner makes amortization payments
rather than at the time of sale. The proceeds of the bonds enable builders to enjoy

the cash flow of an outright sale, while taking buyers' mortgages defers most of the
tax liability to future years. Because of the tax savings, a builder can afford to
offer a below-market interest rate to buyers of his products. U.S. Home Corp. and
Pulte Inc. have had their own builder—bond program for several years. Consor-
tiums launching multibuilder issues include:      the Ryland Group of Columbia,
Maryland; American Southwest Financial Corp.; and the National Association of
Home Builders (Schellhardt, 1983). More recently, investment-banking houses
(Kidder, Peabody, & Co. and Salomon Brothers, Inc.) have developed nonconsortium

programs for smaller builders (LaGesse, 1984c). Unless the installment-sales tax
option is changed, if thrift institutions don't want to be squeezed out of new-home
financing in the long run, they may have to establish themselves a developers.
                                                                                 19


       At the same time that entry into mortgage markets by builders and securities
 firms is squeezing margins in mortgage lending, the development of electronic
 systems for marketing mortgage loans through real-estate brokers is giving
 nonlocal lenders a growing role in mortgage origination and mortgage servicing. To
 meet this competition, thrift institutions may have to add real-estate brokerage to
 their product line. In any case, as these innovations mature, many localized
 lenders will find returns on all three of the activities undertaken by traditional

 lenders reduced to an interregionally competitive level. On average, traditional
 mortgage financing is becoming a less profitable business. This reduced profit-
ability should encourage former mortgage—lending specialists to diversify their
product mix into a richer variety of financial services.

Effects on Interest-Rate Spreads

      CMOs and conventional participation certificates differ importantly in tax-
ability. GNMA and Treasury securities differ in callability. When CMOs were first
issued, spreads between yields on CMOs and yields on equivalent participation
certificates averaged almost 100 basis points. By yearend 1983, the spread seemed
to stabilize around 50 basis points. However, in the spring of 1984, the spread
widened again but only to about 60 basis points. During the same interval, spreads

between GNMA securities and long-term Treasuries declined from over 100 basis
points to about 30 basis points. The narrowing of these spreads sharply reduced
new issues of MBS.

     These developments may be explained by inserting Arrow-Debreu notions of
market-completion services into a Marshallian framework for market adjustment.
In markets for the input services employed in producing securitized and electronic
mortgages, market completion takes the form of unbundling component lender
activities and borrower obligations (or of bundling them in combinations not
                                                                                   20


 previously available):    stripping apart origination, servicing, and warehousing
 functions in mortgage lending as well as the time-dated cash flows and optional
 features built into a mortgage contract. This stripping parallels the process of
 breaking butchered chickens apart and reassembling them as packages of homoge-

 neous parts, mainly wings, breasts, and legs (Colton, 1933). Stripping permits the
 various parts to be priced separately, instead of as a bundle. It may also permit a
 better price to be collected for "garbage parts" such as gizzards and backs that
 household customers and restaurants may not value much or at all, by letting
 butchers wholesale them out to nonhousehold users.         With a well—functioning
 market for chicken parts, manufacturers of dog and cat foods and sausagemakers
 may purchase supplies of these items in bulk. Who can get the best price for the
 garbage parts probably determines whether supermarkets or meat processers end
up doing the stripping and reassembly. In MBS, for lenders with long maturity
habitats, cash flows from mortgage prepayments probably serve as counterparts to
undesirable cuts of chicken.

      It is instructive to contrast the theoretical short-run, intermediate-run, and
long-run effects of such innovations. The Marshallian framework for analyzing
economic disequilibrium posits a sequence of temporary equilibria. This theory
permits firms that perform the stripping function to earn extranormal profits in
the short run, but requires that the intermediate-run and long-run equilibrium price
of chickens and MBS be reduced to sum of the new equilibrium prices of the parts.

In turn, this sum must equal the average cost of producing, stripping, and
repackaging. However, these average costs may vary between the intermediate
and long runs.

     If the needed stripping and packaging skills are initially in short supply and
difficult to acquire quickly, wages paid to strippers and repackagers must be bid up
                                                                                   21



 temporarily. This occurs in the intermediate run both to encourage entry into
 stripping and repackaging from allied occupations and to impute excess returns to
 the temporarily scarce resources involved in the enterprise. During this inter-
 mediate run, the costs of stripping and repackaging may exceed their long-run
 values.

       In early 1984, increases in the market value of stripping and packaging skills
 led Wall Street recruiters to offer dramatic increases in salary to leading finance
 professors and housing-finance agency personnel to move them into positions in the
 stripping and repackaging departments of investment-banking firms.
      In the long run, like the prices of chickens, the price of CMOs should fall
again as returns to human capital in stripping and repackaging adjusted for
differences in job security and job satisfaction equalize with those paid in
academia and in government-sponsored housing-finance firms.

Effects on Mortgage Borrowers

      Because for the nation as a whole mortgage markets were relatively efficient

to begin with, dramatic changes observed in patterns for financing mortgage loans
have only minor effects on the typical mortgage borrower. Having one's mortgage

incorporated into the collateral pool supporting a mortgage-backed security may
marginally reduce the cost of a mortgage loan, but it does not dramatically
complicate either the form of mortgage contracts or the nature of contract
negotiations. However, prevailing contract forms and the negotiation process
itself are being changed by electronic systems for shopping one's mortgage needs
across alternative lenders and by the proliferation of contract options.
     As extralocal lenders and new forms of mortgage instruments proliferate,
mortgage borrowers increasingly feel the need to employ a disinterested financial
adviser to help them pick their way through the array of contract interest rates
                                                                                  22


 and mortgage products offered by different sources. Borrowers recognize that
 their sketchy prior knowledge of the market value and particular advantages and
 disadvantages of alternative contract features leave them vulnerable to fast-
 talking predators. Consumers' growing need •for financial planning services opens
 new product opportunities for displaced mortgage lenders and (among others)
 enterprising university professors.

 Distributional Transition Costs Versus Permanent Efficiency Benefits
      Although transition costs of adapting to technological change impose a
 distributional burden on transitional mortgage lenders, winners and losers are not
 foreordained. If savings banks and S&Ls adapt quickly and appropriately to the new
risk-management, mortgage-origination, and mortgage-pooling systems, they can
earn much the same profits as nontraditional players can.
      Over the long run, innovation in mortgage markets is clearly progressive. It
is permanently lightening the pain and drudgery of mortgage contracting and
broadening and liquifying secondary and forward markets for mortgages. The
result is an increase in the availability and affordability of mortgage funds, a
steady expansion in the set of financial functions that a mortgage loan can perform
for parties on either side of a mortgage contract, and an increasing demand for
expert financial advice.     Traditional players that fail to seize the business
opportunities these developments provide will be left behind. However, for the
permanence of their maladaption, they will have no one to blame but themselves.

Effects on Mortgage Guarantors
      What we may call the dark side of recent changes in mortgage technology
concerns increased financial pressure on ill-informed mortgage borrowers and
dangers to the stability of the financial system raised by regulatory lags. In the
housing-finance system, the risk-bearers of last resort have been slow to appreci-
ate the changing nature of the risks that the new generation of destandardized
                               --                                                    23


 mortgages passes through to them and even slower to take action to bring these
 risks back under their administrative control.

       In mortgage lending, risk—bearers of last resort fall into four categories:
       1. Private mortgage insurers (PMIs)
       2.    Federal deposit-insurance agencies
       3. Federally-sponsored mortgage insurers
       4. The Fed, the U.S. Treasury, and ultimately the general taxpayer. (These
            parties explicitly or implicitly5 back up the first three sets of insurance
            providers).
       The first three sets of insurers have only     recently begun to see that the
 deepest layers of the inflation risk and interest—volatility risk that destroyed the
 market value of bookable net worth in the thrift industry and at FNMA during
 1965-1982 have not truly been shifted to mortgage borrowers through ARMs. In
ARMs, risk shifting remains incomplete for two reasons:
      1. Because many ARMs place lifetime and interim            on the magnitudes of
            increases in contract interest rates. This means that most of the effects
            of very sharp swings in interest rates still pass through to lender net
            worth.

      2. Because the FSLLC's stated preference for ARM lending, the thrift
            industry's depleted capital position, and the massive inflow of FDIC- and
            FSLIC-subsidized funds into Money Market Deposit Accounts have encour-
            aged a relaxation in underwriting standards that has greatly increased the
            degree of credit risk in ARM loans.

      In a superficially conceived effort to reduce the deposit-insurance subsidy to
interest—volatility risk, deposit insurers have encouraged thrifts to make ARMs
instead of FRMs.          Similarly, until the spring of 1934, mortgage insurers
treated ARMs as if these potentially graduated-payment instruments were subject
to roughly the same level of default risk as level-payment FRMs. They failed to
                                                                                  24


adjust mortgage-insurance premiums and house—appraisal and mortgagor-qualifica-
tion practices to take account of the distinctly greater dangers of default that are
occasioned by the built-in graduated payment shock dictated by sharp first-year
interest—rate buydowns and by the possibilities of negative amortization and
downward trends in the future price of housing.
      As Villani (1984) has emphasized, empirical evidence suggests that the chance
of mortgage default rises with the level and volatility of two ratios that are
central to any mortgage financing:
      I. the ratio of the monthly payment to the borrower's income;
      2. the mortgage's loan-to-value ratio.
For this reason, honest measures of these central ratios are critical to determining
whether a borrower is qualified for any particular mortgage loan.
     With level-payment fixed-rate financing, only the denominator of each ratio
is subject to adverse variation: the borrower's income and the value of the home.
The monthly payment is fixed and amortization steadily reduces the amount of the
outstanding Joan. But with adjustable-rate financing, the monthly payment may
increase sharply and amortization may turn negative. Moreover, in the environ-
ment of the mid-1980s, the value of the collateral may go down as easily as it may
go up.     During 1965-1980, except for special neighborhood effects, average
property values moved favorably.
     Given this increase in credit risk, mortgagors, mortgagees, and mortgage
insurers need to analyze alternative ARM contracts with great care. This requires
access to an appropriate information system and techniques of analysis. None of
these parties should make decisions without consulting a reliable advisor possessing
good communication skills and access to fast and reliable software.
     If borrowers are vulnerable to fast-talking mortgage originators who in the
manner of automobile salesmen prey on the unwary, mortgage insurers are, too. In
                                                                                   25


 Texas, borrowers are reported to have received first-year interest rates bought
 down as much as eight percentage points. Buydowns of this magnitude tempt a
 borrower to try to cut the effective return on his loan by taking the initial-period
 discount and planning to bargain (to the extent that discount points paid at
 purchase and prepayment penalties allow) for either a fresh buydown or at least a
 better basic contract rate in a subsequent financing. At the same time, under
 current appraisal practices, buydowns large enough to tempt borrowers to buy more
house than they can afford pass more risk to insurers than they may prefer to take

on. Large buydowns tend to be financed by builders and hornesellers who want to
bid up the transactions price of the house. This lets them transform what would be

flows of ordinary income into capital gains on an installment sale. This practice
tends to misrepresent the composition of the buyer's equity (by recording the part
of a borrower's equity that results from his below-market loan position as art
increase in the value of the collateral) and by contributing to an overestimation of
the appraised prices of other houses that appraisers may regard as comparable to
it.
      It is both microeconomically and macroeconomically dangerous to approve
contracts whose potential payment shocks are too large for a sizeable proportion of

borrowers to handle. In 1983-84, aggregate default risk in ARM loans has risen
quickly. Guarantors (private mortgage insurers, FNMA, GNMA, FHLMC, the U.S.
Treasury, and ultimately the general taxpayer) are exposed to interest—volatility
risk and inflation risk, but now the danger flows not only through the effects of
interest and inflation on the capitalized value of mortgagees' holdings of outstand-
ing mortgage loans, but also on their effects on the average rate of mortgagor
default. Today, the risk that increases in interest rates and inflation may occasion
widespread mortgage defaults is very real.
      Because financial analysis ultimately focuses on tradeoffs between risk and
return, in evaluating any investment opportunity, two questions predominate;
                                                                                   26


       I. What are the relevant risks?

       2. What return is offered for taking these risks on?

      Switching from FRMs to ARMs changes the Treasury's and the taxpayer's
 ultimate exposure to unpriced interest-volatility and inflation risk from mortgage
 loans a good deal less than a naive observer might suppose. It mainly changes the

 precise channels through which this risk converges on the Treasury. The capped
 portion of the risk still falls on deposit insurers.6 The uncapped portion of the
interest-volatility risk that used to pass directly through thrifts and deposit-
insurance agencies now flows first through borrowers and private and government-
sponsored mortgage insurers.

      ARM riskiness is excessive today because a breakdown in the system of
mortgage-market incentives provides unintended government subsidies to mortgage

risk. Mispricing Treasury guarantees causes adverse selection by mortgage lenders

and mortgage borrowers alike. Mortgage originators, private mortgage insurers,
and the government-sponsored mortgage corporations all face incentives that lead
them to maximize the volume of business they do and to be careless about
certifying and pricing the degree of interest and credit risk in contemporary
mortgage loans. S&L risk-bearing is subsidized by the FSLIC. In setting up to
insure GPMs and ARMs, private mortgage insurers carried over experience ratings

and qualification practices that were appropriate for level-payment FRMs. The
industry's lag in recognizing the need to develop different practices was lengthened
by fringe competitors that gambled in a go-for-broke manner on establishing a
much-larger foothold in the market.

     Risk-taking by PMI managers is encouraged to some degree by their faith
that political pressure would lead the Treasury and Federal Reserve to step in to
truncate their losses in the event of an industry-wide debacle. In May 1984, this
                             -
                                                                                       27


    faith was reinforced by federal regulators' handling of the crisis at Continental
    Illinois Bank.   If this faith is well-placed, whenever industry leaders adopt a
    questionable practice, the deepest layers of the resulting PMI risk exposure are
-   shifted implicitly and costlessly to the federal government.

         Finally, the government-sponsored mortgage corporations face conflicting
    incentives. Theirs is a duaJ mission: to promote home financing and mortgage-
    market stability and to earn profits in the process. Because the deepest layers of
    the portfolio risk that they take is also underwritten by implicit Treasury
    guarantees that remain unpriced, pursuing large amounts of interest-rate and
    credit risk improves their prospective rate of return, too. Hence, whenever the net
    worth of one of these corporations is underwater, its natural reaction is to adopt a
riskier investment strategy. It is no accident that, as FNMA's net worth sunk to
negative levels, the volume of its mortgage purchases soared.
         Policy Remedies:        In mortgage markets, the controllability of various
subsidies that are built into the regulatory system is reduced by lags in the
responses of Jenders, MBS packagers, and insurers in the home-finance industry to

technological change. Deposit insurers' poorly thought-out efforts to lead thrifts
to switch from FRMs to ARMs illustrate the problem and remind me of a story
about two lumberjacks. One of them, a man named Random Rates, was always
bullying the other. The second lumberjack's name was Fitz (Fitz Lick, actually).
        Those of you familiar with the Monty Python song, "I'm a Lumberjack and
I'm Okay," know that lumberjacks amuse themselves in odd ways. Because Fita was
a little slow in the brains department, Random had an easy time playing tricks on

him. RandomTs favorite trick was to hold his open hand just in front of a mammoth
redwood tree and to dare Fin to punch the palm of his hand as hard as he could.
                                                                               28


Just as Fitz would release his punch, Random would pull his hand back and Fitz
would end up painfully smashing his hand into the tree. (Spectators likened the
process to watching Charlie Brown trying to placekick a football out of a hold by
Lucy.) After months of watching Fitz injure himself in this way, one of the other
lumberjacks finally tired of the game and explained to Fitz just how Random was
able to slip his punches. Determined to turn the tables on Random, Fin practiced
setting up and pulling his hand away for hours until he had the move down pat.
Then, he found Random and proudly dared him to try to land a punch on his hand.

As Random wound up to swing at him, a gleeful Fitz eagerly lined up his hand
squarely in front of his own face.
     The point of the story is that turnabout isn't everything. Shifting interest—
volatility risk to borrowers is a lot more easily said than done. To carry out their

stabilization mission, housing-finance and deposit-insurance agencies should look
for ways to encourage mainstream lenders, appraisers, and insurers to avoid
defective qualification and appraisal practices and excessively hazardous mortgage
instruments. Specifically, they could take the following steps. First, they might
use regulatory pressure and market influence to promote improved qualification
and appraisal practices that would discourage excessive buydowns of initial ARM
interest rates. Clearly, the artificial inflation of transactions prices in housing
caused by interest buydowns does not strengthen the collateral used in qualifying a

borrower for a loan. Similarly, in secondary markets careful originators might be
encouraged to differentiate their product from that of go-for-broke competitors
and to coinsure the loans they sell off under reserve-based arrangements for
posting a credible performance bond. Second, governmental and private guarantors

and rating agencies might set up systems for identifying lenders and insurers whose
operations approach a go-for-broke mode and for imposing an appropriate discount
                                                                                  29

 or other penalty on the mortgages they bring into secondary markets.            This
 approach could implicitly price the Treasury's uhavoidable piece of the overall
 guarantee action and teach lenders and secondary-market investors to question the

 effectiveness of guarantees provided by particulary aggressive mortgage-insurance
 companies. Third, the Administration might draft legislation to price implicit and
 explicit Treasury guarantees of the performance of mortgage insurers.

            Politically Filtered Changes Revisitech The Privatization Issue7
         The Reagan Administration has long voiced the suspicion, that Fannie Mae,
Ginnie Mae, and Freddie Mac unfairly divert secondary-market opportunities
                                                                           away
from private firms. Some of the most-prominent
                                                   arguments cited in support of this
position are economically fallacious. They assume that the borrowing undertaken

by these federal housing-credit agency-corporations "crowds out" other types of
debt.     This assumption is fallacious because, as credit intermediaries, these
agencies do very little net borrowing. Their portfolio activity serves mainly to
arbitrage the cost of credit in different sectors of the capital market. Virtually
every dollar they borrow is recommitted in the housing—finance sector of the credit
market. However, a logical basis for the Administration's concern lies in
exemptions these federal agency-corporations are granted from securities regula-
tions and in their liabilities' receiving valuable explicit and implicit guarantees
from the U.S. Treasury without these corporations having to pay an appropriate fee
for the value received.8

        If Administration reformers wish to remove the offending subsidies, this
could be accomplished in either of two ways. The most straightforward approach
would be to eliminate inappropriate burdens that securities regulation of MBS
places on private players and to eliminate the Treasury guarantees by recapitaliz-
                                                                                   30


  ing each corporation as a strictly private
                                           entity. Alternatively, Treasury officials
  could at least endeavor to determine and to collect from each agency-corporation
  the market value of the Treasury guarantees it enjoys.

       The TIMs Question.       These conceptually simple approaches must raise
 unspecified political, bureaucratic, and pricing problems, because Congress has
 consistently followed the economically less-defensible course of controlling the
 aggregate size of Treasury guarantees by placing various restrictions on these
 agency_corporations! asset and liability powers. Continuing this tradition, legisla-
 tion drafted to broaden opportunities for greater private participation in secondary
 markets by authorizing the formation of CMO-like "Trusts for Investment in
 Mortgages" (or TIMs) specifically excludes Mr. Mac and the Mae Sisters from
 organizing such trusts. This exclusion was intended to impose statutory controls on
 the mortgage_securitization activities of the agency-corporations. Elements of
 various bills now before Congress would: authorize the use of a nontaxable trustee;
 exempt TIMs from SEC registration and net capital requirements imposed on
 broker—dealers; grant broker-dealers the power to extend credit to purchasers of
mortgage-backed securities; allow appropriate investment authority to thrifts and
national banks; and preempt state blue-sky laws which might otherwise make it
illegal for state-chartered institutions to market private MBS issues.
      As a trust, a TIM could not only repartition cash flows from a mortgage pool
as a CMO trustee does now, it could also purchase mortgages directly into the
trust. Putting mortgages into such trusts takes them completely off the books of
originators and, if adopted prior to the 1984 tax act, would have opened up several
favorable timing options for taxable investors. Although these tax—timing options
are being phased out under the Tax Reform Act of 1984, they would have permitted
an investor to use mortgage prepayments and fluctuations in interest rates to lower
                                                                                    31

 the effective tax rate on the income the mortgage generates by realizing declines
 in market value as short—term capital losses and taking increases in market value
 as   long-term capital gains (Villani, 1933; Constantinides and Ingersoll, 1983). For
 whole single-family mortgages and many mortgage participation certificates, even
 prior to the 1984 tax act, discounts had to be amortized unfavorably as ordinary
 income and premiums to be amortized unfavorably as capital losses. However,
 timing options could be claimed both for mortgages on multifamily properties
 (providing they may be construed to be corporate debt) and for "actively traded"
 mortgage-backed securities.       The latter provision appears to be a loophole
 inadvertently opened by Title V of The Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 in the
 process of defining rules to govern the tax treatment of straddles. It seems likely
 that, in an audit situation, the IRS would contest taxpayer attempts to apply this
language to ordinary trades.
       Most (if not all) of the timing options that would have been opened by TIMs
have been rendered moot by the 1934 tax act and in any case already accrue to
holders of CMO "bonds." However, TIMs would allow mortgage originators and
packagers two other advantages: accounting flexibility as to whether to record an
issue of MBS instruments as a liability or an asset sale and tax savings for thrift
investors. Unlike CMOs (which are classified as bonds the Financial Accounting
Standards Board and by the IRS), thrift-institution investments in a TIM should
qualify as mortgage assets under Section 593 of the tax code, which governs
favorable tax treatment of transfers to bad-debt reserves. It is more than a little
ironic that what is advertised as a technique for getting the government out of the
mortgage-subsidization business would increase the flow of tax expenditures to
mortgage-lending and mortgage-banking institutions.
       Even if these tax expenditures could be determined to be socially desirable,
authorizing TIMs is not a necessary condition for their occurrence. It would be
                                                                                 32
 simpler   for Congress merely to define some or all series of CMOs as qualified
 assets under Section 593. Moreover, Sears Mortgage Corporation maintains that a
 tax—exempt vehicle for holding assets in trust already exists under current tax law.

 According to Sears and its affiliated underwriter Dean Witter, interest received by
 a self-liquidating mortgage trust should not be taxed at the conduit level. Acting
 on this opinion, Dean Witter formally bought $1 billion in GNMA securities for
 incorporation into self-liquidating trusts. In February 1984, it sold investors $500
 million of CMO-like multiclass shares in such a trust. When the IRS formally
objected to the structure of this deal and proposed to tax such trusts as
associations or partnerships, members of the Sears braintrust claimed to be
confident that the courts would uphold their interpretation of the tax status of
trust income. However, by August 1984, Dean Witter had not shown itself
confident enough to issue another round of these securities, as it could have done
by promising to compensate investors in the event the courts should rule against
their contention. According to the August 13, 1984 issue of Bond Week, Dean
Witter chose to sell off its second $500 million of GNMA securities directly into
the market instead.

      Privatization versus Economic Efficiency. Economically, the Administra-
tion's goal of "privatizing" housing credit need not in itself increase economic
efficiency. What could increase economic efficiency would be to place greater
reliance on free markets and to identify and to eliminate waste in the operation of
federal subsidy programs. Neither of these more-appropriate goals is obviously
promoted in the draft legislation on TIMs that the Reagan Administration circulat-
ed in February, 1984. The draft bill seeks simultaneously to authorize TIMs and to
spare operators of TIMs from having to compete against agency-guaranteed CMOs.
The draft plan is to prohibit the future use of CMOs that are supported by
mortgage-backed securities issued by federal agencies and to deny FNMA, GNMA,
and FHLMC the right to package CMOs of their own.
     This proposal goes beyond the fair competitive chance at CMO-type business
that financial-industry representatives requested in Congressional hearings last
                                                                                  33


 year (U.S. Senate, 1984). It would actually punish FHLMC for having participated
 in introducing so successful an innovation as the CMO and hand its share of future
 business over to tax-exempt copy-cat private competitors.

      Barring important competitors is seldom a promising way of establishing
economic efficiency. On the contrary, the modern theory of industrial organiza-
tion emphasizes the desirability of minimizing barriers to entry into any product
line in which existing competitors earn above-normal returns.
      To make economic sense of the Administration's proposal, we must attribute
two assumptions to its architects. First, they must estimate that the value of the
Treasury's implicit and explicit guarantees of CMOs is large and hard to price.
Second, they must estimate that the disruptive transition costs of terminating a
prosperous enterprise in agency CMOs is small.
      Data need to be developed on both of these issues. My preliminary judgment
is that both assumptions are dangerously false. First, given that a private markets
exist both for mortgage insurance and for FNMA stock, pricing out the value of
Treasury guarantees of mortgage—backed securities should be a relatively straight-
forward (albeit tedious) problem. Prohibiting agencies from being active in CMO
markets would be far less efficient than charging them the value of the guarantees
their activity generates. Moreover, if Treasury guarantees were fully priced, they
could be sold directly to private as well as public issuers of MM. Having to
compete against private packagers on an equal basis would let the market
determine whether the FNMA, GNMA, and FHLMC could operate efficiently
enough to survive.
     Second, except for distortions caused by the subsidy to risk-bearing, I believe
that the competitive force exercised by the big-three agency-corporations in MBS
has been progressive. As potential entrants into any mortgage-related enterprise,
                                                                              34


 these arbitrageurs keep mortgage and capital markets closely linked and help to

 keep local markets for mortgages from departing very far and very long from
 nationwide competitive norms. While wholly new private entities could develop to
 perform these same functions, it may be wasteful to incur the transition costs of
demolishing a structure that could be brought under market incentives at much
lower cost.

                              A Summary Perspective

      Change is a permanent part of any healthy financial landscape. In fact, the
only thing permanent in finance may be the very fact of change. Always on the
lookout for instructive metaphors, financial columnists have compared the acceler-
ation of financial change that has occurred in the 1980s to a revolution. However,

because the word "revolution" places the process in a political rather than
evolutionary context, I prefer to compare financial change to a biological
morphosis. Both metaphors dramatize the sharpness of the changes taking place,
but they disagree as to the suddenness of the switch and the logical necessity,
intelligibility, and manageability of the process involved.     Metamorphosis is
exemplified by the slow conversion of a caterpillar into a butterfly or the rapid
passage of Lon Chaney, Jr. into the Wolfman. A metamorphosis is a predictable
and endogenous transformation: a welcome or unwelcome change of form. In
contrast, the overthrow of a constitutional government is surprising and organized
by disgruntled outside parties plotting in secrecy.     In financial change, the
disgruntled parties are usually customers and consumerists rather than the inno-
vators, whose interest in building a profitable career leads them to develop new
patterns by which to serve these customers.

     While incentive problems are raised by regulatory lags in responding to
technological developments, financial change is shaped by economic logic rather
                                                                                     35


 than by political grievances and spreads its shoots gradually through time and
 space. Reliance on the wrong metaphor has led to the widely voiced impression
 that political acts of "deregulation" are breaking down established patterns of
 competition in the U.S. On the contrary, political adjustments in the regulatory
 framework are following rather than leading financial change. Moreover, while the
 precise timing of the various institutional transformations is hard to forecast, the
 generalized spread of new financial instruments and new patterns of financial
 competition may be anticipated by any knowledgeable observer and is in fact a
source of relatively predictable gains and losses.

      Another potentially useful metaphor is that of a geological upheaval:
Financial change may be compared to a shift in the terrain of competition. Like a
metamorphosis, such shifts are sometimes sudden and sometimes gradual in their

development. Although some pre—existing competitors are disadvantaged by the
shifting lay of the land, others are strengthened. What matters is not only what
happens to the ground one occupies, but also how rapidly a competitor adapts his
operations to his altered circumstances and whether the government declares his
property part of a disaster area.

      Managers who are quick on their feet reap new opportunities, while managers

who spend their energy mourning for the good old days typically see their markets
transformed away from them. The benefits of the changes discussed in this paper

lie principally in opening up markets to new customers and new suppliers. The
costs lie in reducing the controllability of pre-existing subsidies to risk-bearing. By

facilitating market entry, stripped and electronic mortgage instruments decrease:
financial transactions costs, average profit margins, effective tax rates, and the
net implicit tax rate that government regulation levies on activities in U.S.
financial markets.
                                                                              36




                                    REFERENCES
Colton, Kent W., "The Role of the Secondary Mortgage Market in Managing Risk,"
     Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco Ninth Annual Conference,
     December 8, 1983.

Constantinides, George M., and Jonathan E. Ingersoll, Jr., "Optimal Bond Trading
     with Personal Taxes: Implications for Bond Prices and Estimated Tax
      Brackets and Yield Curves," Working Paper No. 70, Graduate School of
      Business, University of Chicago (revised April 1983).
Guttentag, Jack M., "Solving the Mortgage-Menu Problem," Housing Finance
     Review, 2 (July 1983), pp. 227-252.
                     "Recent Changes in the Primary Home Mortgage Market,"
     Housing Finance Review, 3 (1984, forthcoming)
Jaffee, Dwight, "The Impact of Financial Futures on Capital Formation," Journal
     of Futures Market, 5 (Fall 1984; forthcoming).
Kaufman, George G., "The Role of Traditional Mortgage Lenders in Future
    Mortgage Lending: Problems and Prospects," Housing Finance Review, 3
     (1984, forthcoming).
LaGesse, David, "Mortgage Networks Arrange Loans on Computers," The American
    Banker, Volume 149, January 23, 1984(a).
________________ "FSLJC:    Will Back Mortgage Obligations If Issuer Fails," The
     American Banker, Volume 149, April 3, 1934(b).
                  "Kaufman Unveils Builder Bond Plan," The American Banker,
     Volume 149, June 6, 1984(c).
Lea, Michael 3. and Carolyn Brown, "ARM Pricing: Theory and Practice," Paper
     presented at the Midyear Meetings of the American Real Estate and Urban
     Economics Association, Washington, D.C., May 29, 1984.
Schellhardt, Timothy 0., "Builders Issuing Bonds to Gain Cheaper Source of
     Mortgages," Wall Street Journal, October 26, 1983.
Seiders, David F., "Mortgage Pass-Through Securities: Progress and Prospects,"
     Washington, D.C.: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May
     18, 1983.
                   "The Future of Secondary Mortgage Markets: Economic Forces
     and Federal Policie5," Housing Finance Review, 3 (1984, forthcoming).
U.S. Senate, Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, Secondary
     Mortgage Market Enhancement Act of 1983, Hearings before the Sub-
                                                                         37

      committee on Housing and Urban Affairs, September 21—22, 1983, Washing-
      ton: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1984.
U.S. Office of Management and Budget, "Lesiglative Referral Memorandum
                                                                           on
     Draft Treasury Bill on Trusts for Investments in Mortgages," Washington,
     D.C.: Executive Office of the President, February 3, 1984.
Villarii, Kevin E., "Cash Flow and Risk Arbitrage Opportwiities in the Mortgage
      Securities Markets," Washington,D.C.: Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corpor-
      ation, October 28, 1983.
________________ "Innovations in the Mortgage Markets," Everett D. Reese—Park
     Nationaj Bank Distinguished Lectures, Columbus, Ohio, May 24, 1984.
                                                                                    38



                                     FOOTNOTES

 10f course, both the old and the new policy procedures expose the net worth of
these institutions to secular deterioration.

2Similar effects on spot markets for financial instruments from introducing
parallel futures markets are discussed in Jaffee (1984).

3Guttentag (1984) provides an insightful discussion of the range of features
available in destandardized mortgages. Lea and Brown (1984) use data from a
Freddie Mac survey of lenders conducted in August and September of 1983 to
estimate the yield differentials associated with differential contract features.

4Colton (1983) estimates that in June 1983 only 33 percent of the $158.6 billion of
mortgages traded in the secondary market were purchased by private participants.

5lmplicit guarantees arise out of predictable political pressures for federal
authorities to bail out (i.e., truncate the losses of) institutions that fail spectacu-
larly.

6Consistent with the view that the deepest layers of interest-rate risk pass on to
governmental third parties, FHLMC survey data analyzed by Lea and Brown (1984)
indicate that, controlling for other features, caps have an insignificant (and often
negative) effect on contract interest rates.

7seiders (1984) also covers this issue.

8Moreover, because their arbitrage activity increases the flow of resources toward
a tax-advantaged set of investments, even if the federal housing-credit corpora-
tions were not subsidized, we could not be sure that their behavior increases
economic efficiency.
