                    NBER WDRKING PAPER SERIES




                 A DYNANIC SPEC IFICF'ACTORS MODEL
                      OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE


                          Jonathan Eaton


                      Working Paper No. 1419




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October 198)4




I gratefully acknowledge support from the National Science
Foundation under grant no. SES82Oy6)43. The research reported here
is part of the )BER 'S research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Eureau of Economic Research,
                                                      NBER Working Paper I1479
                                                      October 1984




                     A Dynamic Specific—Factors Model
                          of International Trade


                                    ABSTRACT




     In a dynamic economy land and capital serve not only as factors of

production but as assets which individuals use to transfer income from workinq

periods to retirement. Static models of international trade based on the

specific-factors   model incorporate only the first of these. Once the second
is recognized the supply of capital and evaluation of land can be derived from
underlying   intertemporal optimization   behavior.

     Changes   in the terms of trade and in the endowments of fixed factors do
not necessarily have the same effects on factor prices and the composition of

output as they do in the static specific—factors model. Changes in these

variables affect both total savings and the amount of savings that is diverted

toward investment in land. Results derived from the traditional static model

are more likely to emerge when the sector using land as a factor of production

has a higher labor share than the sector using capital. In this case the

land-using sector dominates factor markets more than asset markets.




                                                      Jonathan Eaton
                                                      Department of Economics
                                                      Rouss Rail
                                                      TJniversity of Viriginia
                                                      Charlottesville, VA 22901
 I.    Introduction




        A major achievement of the factor—endowments theory of international

 trade has been to provide simple, intuitive insights into the relationships

 between commodity prices and factor prices, factor supplies and factor

 rewards, and factor endowments and the pattern of production and trade. The

 Stolper—Samuelson (1941), Rybczynski (1955) and Heckscher—Ohlin theorems

 describe these relationships for the two—factor, two—commodity case.

       A number of factor—endowment models of international trade have

 incorporated land as a third factor of production distinct from labor and

capital. Jones (1971) provides a thorough analysis of a model in which one of

two factors (land or capital) is used specifically in the production of each

of two commodities, while a third factor (labor) is used commonly in both

production activities. The formulation has its origins in Ricardo's (1817)

theory of rent and capital accumulation, while Viner (1959) has used a similar

formulation in a trade context.'

       The specific-factors model has become popular in trade theory. In

particular, it has been used widely as a framework to analyze movements of

capital. Unlike the two—factor Heckscher—Ohlin model, the specific-factors

model does not imply that trade in commodities, unless it leads to complete

specialization, removes any incentive for foreign investment.2 Despite its

origins in Ricardo's dynamic theory of rent, most formulations of the

specific—factors model are static. In the tradition of the factor-endowments

approach, capital, as well as land and labor, is available in fixed supply.

      This paper develops a dynamic, two—sector, three—factor model in which
the   supply of capital is derived from individual savings behavior. The
dynamic specification is a   variant   of Samuelson's (1958)   overlapping
                                         -2—


 generations (OLG) model. There are an infinite number of generations, only

 two of which, one young and working and one old and retired, are economically

 active in any period. Workers supply labor to earn a wage. Some wage income

 is consumed. What is saved is invested in land or capital. The retired

generation consumes the value of their assets and the income they have

earned. There are a fixed (and constant) number of workers entering the labor

force each period, and there is a fixed supply of land. The supply of capital

is determined by the savings and portfolio allocation of workers in the

previous period.3

      Incorporating land and capital together in a dynamic model illustrates

the role of land not only as a factor of production but as an asset, unlike

capital ,   in   fixed supply.4 A channel through which changes in exogenous

variables affect the economy is through their effect on the value of this

asset. The value of land in turn has implications for the supply of capital.5

     Because of this evaluation effect, many results that emerge from the

static specific-factors model about the relationships between commodity prices

and factor prices, factor endowments and factor rewards, and factor endowments

and the pattern of production, must be amended. For example, a permanent

increase in the relative price of one commodity does not necesarily lower the

steady-state income of the factor specific to the industry producing the other

commodity. An increase in the price of the land—using commodity, by raising

the value of land, reduces savings available for investment in capital. The

return on capital may consequently rise.

     In addition, the effect on overall welfare in steady state of a change in

the terms of trade is not solely determined by the pattern of trade. A

permanent increase in the relative price of the land—using commodity can lower

the steady—state welfare even of a large exporter of that commodity.     It does
                                      —3.-


  so by raising the price of land, diverting savings away from investment in

  capital. The steady state of an economy in which land serves as both a store

 of value and a productive asset must always have an interest rate in excess of

 the Golden Rule. Permanent changes that reduce investment act to reduce

 steady—state welfare.

      Finally, an increase in the supply of the non—specific factor (labor)

 does not necessarily reduce the wage and raise the incomes of specific factors

 in steady state. An increase in the labor force, because it increases the

 SUPiy of savings, can raise the steady—state capital stock sufficiently to

 raise the wage and lower the rate of interest and return on land.

      In a dynamic context, then, asset—evaluation effects on the price of land

 can offset many of the predictions of the static specific-factors model. It

turns out, however, that simple conditions on technologies in the two sectors

indicate when the asset—evaluation effect dominates the static effect. if the

elasticity of substitution between land and labor is one, then whenever the

labor share in the land—using sector is larger than in the capital—using

sector, the predictions of the static model are maintained.   Conversely, if
the labor—share is larger in the capital—using sector the asset evaluation

effect dominates. In the first case the land—using sector claims a larger

share of the labor force than it does of portfolio wealth. Consequently

effects operating through the labor market, which are analyzed in the static

model, dominate. In the second case the asset-market effects dominate.

     The outline of the paper is as follows: Part II presents the basic

assumptions of the model. The existence and stability of the steady state are

discussed in Part III. Part IV treats the effect of a permanent shift in the

terms of trade, both on impact and in steady state. The relationship between

the supplies of fixed factors and factor rewards are investigated in Part V.
                                     -4—


Part VI considers the role of savings behavior while some concluding remarks

are provided in Part VII.




II. The Model



     In each period t the economy is identical to the three—factor, two—

commodity model analyzed in a static context by Jones (1971) and Mussa

(1974). One commodity, commodity 1, employs capital and labor in

production. Its output, given factor inputs of K1 of capital and L1 of labor,

is


          Q1 = F(K1, L1)



The second commodity, commodity 2, employs land and labor. With factor inputs

of T2 of land and L2 of labor an amount



             =
                 G(T2, L2)


of this commodity is produced. Both F and G are continuous, twice

differentiable and linear homogeneous. Labor is intersectorally mobile.

     Given the period t price of commodity 2 in terms of commodity i,       and

the period t factor endowments Kt, Lt and Tt, competition in factor markets

will yield a wage wt, an interest rate rt, a land rent 7tt and an allocation of

labor Lit that, in the absence of corner solutions, satisfy the equations



          w = FL(Kt,    Lit)                                               (2.1)
                                               —5—


          w = PtGL(Tt,      Lt -   Lit)                                     (2.2)



             =
                 FK(Kt,   Lit)                                              (2.3)



                                          -          -
                 ptG(t, Lt -     Lit)         wt(L       Lit)               (2.4)




Equations (2.1) —   (2.4)   characterize equilibrium in period t as a function of

factor supplies and the relative commodity price.

     The domestic supplies of land and labor are given by natural endowments

that are exogenous and, for the purpose of this analysis, constant over

time. The size of the labor force is L and, with no loss of generality, the

endowment of land is 1. New investment in capital in period t takes the form

of currently produced units of commodity 1 that are not used for

consumption. The supply price of capital in terms of commodity I is

consequently one. The national supply of capital is determined by individual

savings behavior. In the absence of international capital mobility the

national and domestic supplies of capital coincide.

     Savings is determined as part of a simple life—cycle optimization.

Individuals live two periods. In the first period of economic life they

provide one unit of labor services in exchange for a wage payment of w in

terms of commodity 1. Using commodity 1 as numeraire, an amount c-'' is spent

on current consumption and the remainder invested in land and capital. In the

second period the individual consumes the value of his holdings of land and

capital, and the income that they generate. This amount is denoted c0.

    For simplicity the individual's utility function is assumed to be

intertemporally additively separable. Lifetime utility as a function of c,
                                                         -6—


c0, and the relative price of commodity 2 each period, pY and p0,
respectively, is therefore given by



             U   V'(c, pY)           + V°(c°,          p°)



where V is, in indirect terms, the contribution of the working period to

lifetime utility and V° that of the retirement period.

       The price of land in period t is q. Denoting the individual's

investment in capital as kt and in land as                            the budget constraint implies

that




                 - w.   -            -       £
             C              k
                                                 t+1


                   =
                        (1 +                       +          +
                                rt+i)kt+i

       If   individuals anticipate rt+l,                          and +1 perfectly, then, for

strictly positive values of kt and                           to emerge requires that




              t+1q
                                 =       1   +
                                                 r+i                                              (2.5)




If the left—hand side of expression (2.5) strictly exceeds the right, then

kt = 0 while the opposite inequality implies that
                                                                            =   0.   Assuming positive

investment in capital, then, under perfect foresight



              c1 =      (1 +    rt i)(w - c)                                                      (2.6)
                                             —7—



      In the working period of life the individual's problem is to choose an

expenditure level c to maximize



              yy                0                                 -
                       + V [(1 +                   —
          V
              (cr, )                    rt+i)(wt       Ct),


The utility-maximizing level of c is denoted by the function c(w, rt+l, t'



      In the absence of trade in capital or in claims on land the supplies of

domestic and national capital coincide, and all domestic land is nationally

owned. Equilibrium in the markets for capital and land then implies:



          Kt+i = L     kt+i
                                                                                 (2.6)




and



           1 = L                                                                 (2.7)




      The perfect foresight equilibrium of the economy can be characterized by

                                                                      = L   and Tt =   1,
the period equilibrium conditions (2.1) through (2.4), with

given Kt, and the dynamic equations:



                            -                                 -                  (2.8)
           Kt+i =   L[wt        c'(w.   r+1. p, r+)]


and


                            +
               =                                                                 (2.9)
                      1 +
                                          -8-



       Since the land price       does not appear in equations (2.1) through (2.4),

                                                       and t alone, i.e., as
wt, rt, 1t and Lit can be expressed as functions of Kt
                                                           It is easy to demonstrate
w(Kt, Pt)' r(Kt, Pt)' lt(Kt,          and Li(Kt, Pt)•

that WK > 0, rK < 0,         < 0, L1K > 0, w > 0, r1 < 0,          > 0, L < 0. Here

XK =            and x = ôx/Op,    x    w, r, it,   L1.   See, for example, Jones (1971)
       ox/oKt
and Mussa (1974).




III. The Steady State



       A steady state is characterized by an exogenous, constant relative

price p and levels of the capital stock K and value of land q that satisfy



            K =   (K, ) - (K, )                                                   (3.1)




            (K, )    =   -' -                                                     (3.2)
                         r(K, )



Here



                  L[w(K, )   - c'[w(K, ), r(K, ),        , 'i]]
which is aggregate savings given a constant K and p.
       Subject expressions (3.1) and (3.2) to the following restrictions:
                                                   -9—


Condition 3.1

             ck(O, ) > q(O, )



where

                                                   -
                                            F(K,
             r(O,   )        Urn [max                  K
                             K-{)
                                       L1


and




            q(K, )
                             it(K,   )
                             r(K,     p)


        This restriction implies that if the capital stock is zero the

capitalized value of land does not satiate aggregate saving. Otherwise a

steady state with K = 0 would exist, with land serving as the sole store of

value. The price of land would be



            q =     L{w(0,    )      - c'[w(O,     ', , •]}

               .i____
                      q




Condition 3.2: There exists a K > 0 such that



             K > (K, )                 VK   > K                          (3.4)
                                          - 10   -




      This condition implies that for sufficiently high levels of K the savings

 generated at the consequent factor prices is less than that level of capital.




Condition 3.3: The functions (K, ) and q(K, ) are, for any

finite f, continuous functions of K.



      Condition 3.1 through 3.3 are sufficient to establish:



Theorem 3.1: For any finite, positive relative price          a steady state level

of capital, K, and a steady state value of land, q, exist, with 0 < K < K.



      The proof is a simple application of the intermediate—value theorem. At

K=O


           '(K, )    - q(K,   •) > K



while at K > K,




           ck(K, )   - q(K,   )   <   K




Therefore, there exists a K such that



           1(K, )    - q(K,   )   =K



      In addition, if K(K, ) + dq/dK < 1 V K c       (0,   K), the steady state is

uni que.
                                                             — 11 —




         Consider now the stability of the model in the neighborhood of
                                                                        steady
 state. The equations of motion for the capital stock and the price of land,

 equations (2.8) and (2.9), can be expressed as a linearization around the

 steady state as follows:



                 x1 =         L(1   -
                                         )wKxt
                                                   -
                                                       LcrKxf+l
                                                                      -
                                                                          y                       (3.5)




                         it

                      = Li+r -                   rKJx÷l +
                                        (1+r)2                        yt+1                        (3.6)




where the terms c', cs',
                                         WK rK, r, it and             assume their steady—state values,

and x Kt_ Kandy Eq -q
        These two equations constitute a second-order system of homogeneous

linear difference equations which can be expressed as:




            -xt+1i
                                =
                                             F11       F12       r
                                                                                                 (3.7)
                                             21 2?

where


                        L(1 -       c')w
                                     w___
            F
                 11
                        1 + Lcy
                                        rK

            I,
                 12
                        1 +
                               Lc'rK

            F21 E      -K -              rK)Fll
                                                               — 12      —




             r22
                           1 +   r     +



        The solution to this system is of the form




            x = A1(X1)                 + A2(x2)t                                                               (3.8)




                       I         1-'                       1        1'
                       "1
                   =                       A (x   )t   +
                                                               r             A2(X2)t                           (39)
                                12                                 12




where      and X2 are the two roots of the characteristic equation of (3.7):



               -                    + r11r22 -                                  =0                             (3.10)
                       (F11 + F22)x                                                    ,




with      and X2 defined so that                                         The scalars A1 and A2 are determined

by initial and/or terminal conditions.

       At any period t the capital stock Kt, and hence xt, are predetermined.

The price of land q. and hence t' are determined by asset—market equilibrium

each period. Considering an arbitrary period, t =                                       0,   A1 must satisfy the

initial condition



                            -
            A1 = x0              A2



       The nature of the behavior of the capital stock and land price near

steady state can be ascertained from                                 and X2. A necessary and sufficient
                                       — 13    —




 Condition   for the existence of a unique stable non-oscillatory
                                                                    convergence
 path to steady state is that 0 <      < 1 <

      If     < 0 the system exhibits oscillation. The condition F11 > 0 is

 necessary and sufficient to preclude oscillation. Since WK > 0 and rK < 0,

 F11 > 0 is guaranteed if c < 1 (the marginal propensity to save is

 nonnegative) and c' < _l/LrK. This second condition requires that an increase

 in the interest rate not have an overly negative effect on savings. These

 assumptions are imposed.

      If     < 1 and     > 0 then for •y value of A2 the system converges to

steady state, while if      > 1 no path converges. If 0<      < 1 <      then
A2 = 0 is a necessary and sufficient condition for
                                                   convergence. The remainder
of the analysis is for the case in which parameter values satisfy the

condition that 0 <      < 1 < 2' so that there is a unique stable non—

oscillatory equilibrium.

     Changes in the values of exogenous variables can now be examined, both in

terms of their effect on the steady state itself and characterizing the

transition from the initial situation to the new steady state, An important

feature of the transition is the degree to which the changes are

anticipated. Alternative assumptions about whether or not changes are

anticipated are examined. The effect of a change in the terms of trade on

factor prices, the price of land and the capital stock is the topic of the

next section. Part V considers a change in fixed factor endowments and Part

VI a shift in intertemporal preferences.
                                                       — 14     -




 IV.    The Terms of Trade



        In the static specific—factors model, an increase in the price of the

 land—using commodity raises the land rent and lowers the return to capital in

 terms of either commodity. The wage falls relative to the price of the land—

 using commodity, but rises relative to the price of the other commodity

 (Jones, 1971).

        In a dynamic context a change in the relative price of commodities

 affects asset prices and investment in capital. These create additional

effects on factor prices.6



A. Steady-State Effects

        The steady-state effects of a permanent change in the terms of trade on

the capital stock and price of land are given by the expressions:



                —
            dK          (-r12 )(rS
                                p -V)
                                   p =             S --i-V
                                                            r       p
                                                                                                      4 1
            dp
                                                 l_SK+VK

            d       =   (F12r21/r11)s
                                            + (1 -
                                                       r)v              = VKSP
                                                                                 +    (1
                                                                                            _SK)Vp
                                                                                                      (4.2)
            dp                                                            r(1        SK +   r   VK)




where




            S                    c)w    -
                                            cr     -
                                                       c]
                        L[(1 -          -
            SK                   c)wK       crK]
                                                     15 —




                 it   — (it/r)r
            VP




           VK    ltK —




                 -[(1    -
                             r11)(1
                                      -
                                          F22)
                                                 -
                                                     r12r21]


                 ôc'/op' +     ôc'"/ôp°


      Here S is the effect of a permanent change in                  on total savings,

 the capital stock and value of land. Since the effect of interest rate and

 price level changes on savings is ambiguous, there is no strong presumption

 about its sign, although the first term is positive if future consumption is

non—inferior. VP is the effect of a change in                   on the price of land, given
the capital stock. Since              is positive and r is negative this term is

unambiguously positive. Finally, the sign of                   is positive if there is a

unique, stable path of convergence to steady state.7

     The effect of a change in the terms of trade can thus be divided into two

parts. One is the effect through savings, given the price of land. This is

captured by the term S. The second is the effect of the price change on the

price of land, given total savings. It is captured by the term VP.

     1. The Savings Effect

     To the extent that an increase in                raises savings it acts to raise the

stock of capital. The effect of an increase in savings on the land price is

ambiguous. it depends upon the sign of VK, which reflects the effect of a

change in the capital stock on the steady—state land price, given .                 There
are two conflicting effects. First, an increase in K reduces profit earned on
                                         — 16 —



land,   since the capital—using sector demands more labor, bidding up the

wage. This acts to reduce the value of land. Second, an increase in K

reduces the interest rate, so that the discounted value of a given profit

stream increases. This acts to raise the price of land. If VK > 0 the second

effect dominates and to the extent that the price change encourages savings

(S > 0) it also acts to increase the price of land. The higher capital

stock, by reducing the interest rate, raises land values. If VK < 0, meaning

that the first effect dominates, to the extent that the price change

encourages savings it reduces the value of land, by raising the wage.

     The sign of VK has implications for other aspects of the behavior of the

economy as well. These are discussed below. Its sign is the same as:

           —     •8   Thus if the land—using sector has a lower labor share than

the capital—using sector, an increase in the capital stock raises the value of

land, and conversely.

     The ratio of the labor shares in the two sectors corresponds to their

relative importance, in steady state, in the labor market and in portfolios.

If the land—using sector has a smaller labor share than the capital—using

sector, then, since q =   it/r,   q/K > (L —   L1)/L1,   the land—using sector employs

proportionately less of the labor force than the value of land in wealth. In

this case the effect a change in the capital stock on the interest rate

dominates its effect on the wage in affecting the price of land.          If the land—

using sector has a larger labor share the converse is true.

     2. The Land Valuation Effect

    The effect of an increase in        through VP acts to reduce the capital

stock. Given savings, an increase in           raises the price of land. More

savings is therefore channeled into investment in land.
                                            — 17 —



           The total effect of the increase in
                                                     through VP on the price of land is,

     however, ambiguous, depending on the sign of 1             If an increase in K,
                                                          SK.

                 raises saving by less than it raises K itself, 1 —        is positive.
                                                                      SK

     If        > 0, the condition for a unique stable solution (t > 0) insures that
 1 —
          SK   > 0. Otherwise, values of SK > 1 cannot be excluded on the criterion

 of a unique stable solution. If, for example, S 0 and                > 1, an increase
 in
           actually lowers the steady—state value of land. The reason is that the

 drop in the capital stock engenders an even greater drop in savings.



           In summary, the criterion for a unique stable solution cannot alone

 insure that an increase in the price of the land—using commodity raises the

 price of land and lowers the capital stock in steady state. If the effect of

 the relative price on savings (sr) is not too strongly positive, then a lower

steady—state capital stock is guaranteed. If, in addition, a reduction in the

capital stock, given land prices, does not lower savings by an even greater

amount, then an increase in the price of the land—using commodity will raise

the price of land.

          3. Commodity Prices and Factor Rewards

          The effect of a change in    on factor prices consists of a direct effect,

taking factor supplies as given, and an indirect effect through the induced

changes in factor supplies. The static specific-factors model, with fixed

factor supplies, incorporates only the first. The direct effect of an

increase in         is to raise st and to lower r relative to both commodity prices,

and to raise w but to lower w/p (Jones, 1971).          If in fact an increase
in
          lowers the steady state capital stock, the effect on the return to land

is augmented in steady state, while the effects on the interest rate and wage
                                                      - 18 -


are diminished. They can even be reversed: the steady—state interest rate
can rise, and the wage can fall in terms of both commodity prices.

        The steady-state effect of a rise in the price of the land-using

commodity on the interest rate is given by:



             —=
             dF
              —        r
                           p
                               +      —
                                      dK
                                   r K—
             dp                       dp

                       Gww (L — L )L
                  =       K                11   cit
                                                         -   rK
                                                                                        43
                                   rKitc


where


                      GGLT
             c
                      GL GT



the elasticity of substitution between land and labor in sector 2. The
effect of a change in                  on the wage is the negative of that on the interest

rate.

        From equation (4.3) follows:



Proposition 4.1. An increase in the price of the land—using commodity is more

likely to raise the interest rate and lower the wage (i) when the labor share

in the land—using industry is smaller than in the capital—using industry and

(ii) when the elasticity of substitution between land and labor is large.

        If expression (4.3) equals zero, which is the case if industry 2 is Cobb—

Douglas and labor shares are equal in the two industries, then the steady—

state values of the interest rate and wage do not change at all as a

consequence of a commodity price change. In this case steady-state welfare

unambiguously falls as a consequence of an increase in p. This is true
                                                - 19   -




  regardless of the countrys trade position: When expression (4.3)                 equals

  zero, changes in the capital stock insure that steady—state factor rewards in

 terms of the capital--using commodity are independent of the relative price of

 the land—using commodity. The only effect of a rise in                   is a reduction in

 the real purchasing power of the wage and of interest income.



 B. Dynamic Adjustment: An Unanticipated               Piceçe
      Consider now the effect of an unanticipated, permanent increase in the

 relative price of the land—using commodity in some period t, t = 0.                 If the

 economy is initially in steady state, the capital stock cannot immediately

 assume its new steady state value. From expression (4.1), on impact the

 capital stock will deviate from its new steady state level by an amount




                         dK            S-iv
                                          r p
                                                                                         (4.4)
                         dp        1




Imposing this initial condition on the solution (3.8), along with the

condition for eventual convergence to the new steady state, implies that

A1 = x0 and A2 =     0.       Subsequent values of Kt are given by



          Kt =   K   +
                         x0(x1)t                                                         (4.5)



where K is the new steady state capital stock.                 As discussed above, the

presumption is that x0 is positive: A rise in                   lowers K. Immediately

following an unanticipated rise in ,            then,      the capital stock lies above its

new steady state level.          It descends toward that value according to (4.5).
                                      - 20   —




     From expression (4.2), immediately after the price rise the value of land

will deviate from its new, steady state level by




                  x1 -F 11
             =
                                                                          (4.6)
                      12




From (3.10), X1                  0. Since F12 < 0, the coefficient of A1 in
                     F11 as F1
expression (4.6) has the same sign as VK. If an increase in the capital stock

raises the price of land then, if x0 is positive so is y0. The increase

in   causes the price of land to Ibovershootu its new steady—state level: as

capital decumulates the price of land then descends toward that value.

Conversely, if an increase in the capital stock causes the price of land to

fall (VK negative) then the value of land rises by less than the full steady—

state amount on impact, and continues to rise toward its new steady—state

value in subsequent periods.



C. Dynamic Adjustment: An Anticipated Price Change

     Consider now what happens if the change in    in period 0 is anticipated

as of some previous period, say period -s, s > 0. The steady—state effect of

the change is, of course, the same. Assuming that before period s the economy

was in steady state, at the moment of the announcement



           a    a    a
          x5 = A1 + A2 = 0   ,                                           (4.7)


where x denotes the derivation of Kt from its initial steady—state value,
                                                                    — 21 —



      a          a                                                           a
 and A1 and A2 are the values of A1 and A2 that govern x before the actual

 change in j5.       Between period s and period 0



             a           a            t+s         a        t+s
           x = A1(X1)                       +
                                                 A2(X2)


Using the fact that K0 has the same value regardless of whether it is

expressed as a deviation from its old or new steady—state level,


                                                       e
           x     =
                     A(X1)             +
                                            A(?2Y



                                                                                 (4.8)
                                            dp                  dp




where x is the deviation of Kt from its new steady-state value

and A and A govern x for t > 0. Similarly, for the price of land,


            a =
                     x
                      1
                             -F                             ?
                                                                2
                                                                    -F
                             F          A(X1)5 +                    F
                                 12                                     12




                     X -r                         ?.   —F
                 =
                             F
                                 12
                                        A +
                                                           12
                                                                        A        (4.9)




Convergence to the new steady state continues to require that A = 0.

Therefore (4.7), (4.8) and (4.9) together imply that:
                                                                  — 22 -




                                     +           -
                   = F12 dp               (F11           X1) dp
             A                                                                                          (4.10)
                               (X)S(x         - X2)



                  =
                          —A                                                                           (4.11)



                  =
                          [(x)S                          -                                             (4.12)
                                         (x2)5]A

Since




                          X1 -r                  X       -F11 a
              a       =              11
                                     — a +           2
                                         A1                         A2
                               r12                       r12



then



                  =
                       (X)           ,    -s -   t            0
                                                                                                       (4.13)



At the moment of the announcement the price of land changes in proportion to

the change that will occur when the commodity price change actually happens,

discounted by (X)_S

       When VK = 0 the dynamic adjustment path is especially simple:

   =
       '11   2 =      1 +      r,   and y =               .       Just   at the moment   rises the price of
                                                 dp
land assumes its new steady—state value. Between the period when the increase

is first anticipated and it actually occurs the land price moves toward the

new steady—state value in proportion to the interest rate. As r                                  0 q5 jumps
                                         -. 23



 to   its new steady—state value at the moment the change in p is first

 expected. As r +      no change occurs until period 0.

       Since    > X, the behavior of x during the announcement period is

 dominated by A. When        =
                                 0, a permanent increase in p necessarily raises
 the steady—state value of land, (.-- > 0), insuring that A > 0 and A < 0.
                                    dp
 The anticipation of a rise in     at period 0 therefore leads to capital

 decumulatjon during the announcenent period: the reason is that the

 anticipation of a rise in    causes the land price to rise continually,

 diverting savings away from investment in capital. The capital stock begins

 to fall as soon as the rise in     is anticipated. The rate of return on

 capital rises, the wage falls, and the profit on land rises continually during

the anticipation period.

      Capital decumulation during the announcement period is unlikely to

proceed to the extent that, at period 0, the capital stock is below its new

steady—state level. Even if s +     , so   that the rise in pwas always

expected, xg has the same sign as [(x1 —            + (1 + r)V] which can be
                                             x2)s
negative only if S is very large; i.e., if an increase in p causes a large
increase in savings.




V. Factor Endowments



      In the static specific-factors model, factor rewards respond to factor

supplies. An increase in the supply of any factor, given commodity prices,

lowers its own reward. If the factor is specific to a sector, an increase in

its supply lowers the reward of the other specific factor as well, but raises

the reward of the nonspecific factor, An increase in the SUiy of the
                                            — 24 —




nonspecific    factor raises the rewards of the two specific factors.

      The static model also makes strong predictions about the effect of factor

endowments on production patterns. An increase in the supply of either

specific factor raises the output of the industry in which it is used and

lowers output of the other industry. An increase in the supply of the

nonspecific factor raises outputs of both industries.

      If preferences are similar and homothetic across countries, trade

patterns can then be inferred from relative endowments of the specific

factors. Countries tend to export the commodity which uses the specific

factor relatively more abundant within their borders.1°

      In a dynamic model in which the capital stock is determined by savings

behavior, only the supplies of land and labor are exogenous. Since production

is at constant returns to scale, for given commodity prices only the relative

endowments of land and labor are relevant for determining factor prices and

relative outputs. This section considers the effect of a permanent increase

in the labor force on factor prices and the pattern of production.



A. Steady—State Effects

      The steady-state effects of a permanent increase in the labor force on

the capital stock and land values are, respectively:




                   -r   (rS   —V)           S -1V
                                        =

          dL                                1 _SK+VK
and



                   (rl2r?l/rll)SL + (1       -                     + (1 -
          d                                      rll)VL   =   SL          SK)VL
                                                                                  (5 2)
                                    A
          dL
                                                              r(1-S K £K
                                                          - 25   —




  where



            SL
                      [w -       c    +    L(I   -
                                                     c')w[ - LcrL]

                             -
            VL                       (t/r)rL]

       Here SL is the effect of a change in the labor force on total savings

 ven the capital stock and value of land. The increase in the labor force

 raises the number of savers but since WL < 0, it lowers the wage that each

 saver receives. Consequently there is no strong presumption about the sign of

 SL. VL is the effect of a change in the labor force on the price of land

 given the capital stock. Since



                 =               -
                     _wL(L           L1)                                 (5.3)


and




           rL =
                     -(Ll/K)wL                                           (5.4)



then




          VL         _(K/Ll)vK                                           (5.5)



VL has the opposite sign of VK: If an increase in the capital stock raises

the price of land (given savings) an increase in the labor force lowers it,

and conversely.
                                                       - 26


        Using (5.3) through (5.5), expressions (5.1) and (5.2) may be written as



                 —          3a
                             L (SKrVK)L         I
                 —
                 dK     =
                                            1                                                  (5.1)
                 dL            i_SK+FVK



                        =
                                        +
                                                                                               (5.2)




        1. The Value of Capital and Factor Rewards

        From (5.1), if the labor share in the capital—using sector is very small

relative to the land—using sector, the aggregate capital stock can actually

fall when the labor force rises. If the shares in the two sectors are the

same, however, then                 =           , and the increase in the capital stock is
                               Li
proportional to the capital—labor ratio in industry 1.                     In this case an

increase in the labor force generates an increase in the capital stock just

large enough to absorb the new labor in industry i at the initial wage and

interest rate.              In this case an increase in the labor force has no effect on

the wage, rent on land or interest rate in steady state. If the land—using

sector has a larger labor share than the capital—using sector, then

-
    <        .        In this case an increase in the labor force raises the capital
         1
stock in a smaller proportion. The qualitative effect of an increase in the

labor force on factor prices is the same as in the static version of the

model: the real wage falls and the rent on land and the interest rate rise.

If the land—using sector has a snaller labor share; however,                       >       .   An
                                                                                       1
                                          - 27


  increase   in the labor force raises   the real wage and lowers the rent on land
  and the interest rate.

       Expression (5.1) implies the following proposition about the

  relationship between factor endowments and factor prices among trading

 countri es:




 Proposition 5.1. If two countries have identical technologies and if the

 land—using and capital—using industries have the same labor shares, then, in

 steady state, the real wage, the rent on land, and the rate of interest (and

 consequently welfare) are the same in the two countries. If the
                                                                      land-using
 industry has a higher labor share, then the land—abundant country has a lower

 real wage and a higher land rent and interest rate in steady state.

 Conversely, if the land—using industry has a lower labor share, then the land-

abundant country has a higher real wage and lower land rent and interest rate.



     2. The Value of Land

     If the land—using sector has a lower labor share than the capital—using

sector, then VK > 0 and       > —   .    Expression (5.2) is then positive. But
if the labor share in the land—using sector is lower, both inequalities are

reversed. Either way expression (5.2) is positive. This implies:



PrOposition 5.2. An increase in the labor force raises the steady-state price

of land.




B. narnjc Adjustment

    As is the case with a change in the terms of trade, if VK = 0
                                                                  upon any
change in the population the price of land immediately assumes its new steady
                                         2P




 state   value. If VK < 0 and 4f > 0, an unanticipated increase in L causes, on

 impact, the value of land to overshoot its new steady—state level from the

 initial steady state. As capital is accumulated, the land value descends

 toward the new steady—state level.    If VK > 0 the land value undershoots, on

 impact, and continues to rise in subsequent periods.

      If the change in L is anticipated then the value of land rises before the

 actual increase. This diverts savings away from capital investment. The wage

falls and the interest rate rises from their initial steady—state levels until

the increase in L actually occurs.




VI.




      A comparative static exercise frequent in the trade literature is to

consider the effect of changes in the capital endowment on factor prices and

the composition of output. In the static specific—factors model an increase

in the capital stock lowers the rate of interest on capital and return to land

and raises the wage.    In a dynamic optimization model the supply of capital is

an endogenous variable. To consider the effect of a change in its supply is

consequently not a well-defined exercise. A closely related issue is the

effect of a change in preferences that affect the interteniporal allocation of

resources. Consider then the effect of a shift in preferences toward current

consumption. This shift can be introduced by entering a parameter      into the

indirect utility function introduced in section 2,



           U =   V'(c', y    +   V°(c°, p°) ; V > 0
                                                             29 -



  From the budget constraint and first—order condition
                                                       for a maximum




            acy
                    =
                                        —V
                                             c                >0
                                  + (1 + r            )2V0
                             cc                  t+1' cc



 The utility—maximizing level of c can now be expressed as a function cY
                                                                                     (Wt,
 rt+l,      t+p ), with             c > 0. The effect of a reduced savings propensity

 can be represented by an upward shift in .



 A.   State Effects
      The steady—state effects of a permanent increase in           on the capital

stock and price of land are, respectively,




           dK   -        124        —    _______
                                                  K      rK

and




                    F        r'                    Y
                =       1221                      cVK
                                                                                 6 2
                        11               r(1 —
                                                   SK + •-    VK)




      Expression (6.1) is unambiguously negative: a reduced savings propensity

reduces the steady—state capital stock. The interest rate and return on land

are consequently higher, and the wage lower.
                                    - 30 -


     From (6.2), the effect of a change in the savings propensity on the land

price, like other magnitudes, depends upon the sign of VK.    If VK > 0 the

value of land falls as a consequence of lower savings: the effect of reduced

capital in raising the interest rate dominates the effect of lowering the

wage. If     < 0 the opposite is true. There is no presumption, then, that a

reduced savings propensity will lower the price of assets in fixed supply.

The capital stock bears the primary impact of shifts in savings behavior.

     From expression (6,1) and (6.2) follows:



Proposition 6.1.   If two countries have identical technologies and endowments

of land and labor, the country with the lower savings propensity will have a

lower capital stock, a lower wage, and a higher interest rate and return on

land. That country will produce less of the commodity produced in the

capital—using sector and more of the commodity produced by the land—using

sector. Land will be more or less expensive in the low—savings country

depending on whether the land—using sector has a higher or lower labor share

than the capital—using sector.



B. Dynamic Adjustment

    On impact, a permanent, unanticipated increase in     causes the initial

steady—state level of capital to exceed the new steady—state level. Over time

the capital stock declines to its new steady—state level. As before, upon the
                                                                       >
increase in ,      is above or below its new steady—state value as VK < 0.
     If the decline in savings is anticipated, then the price of land begins

to move toward its new steady-state level before   changes.    If VK > 0, q

begins to fall. Capital is actually accumulated during the anticipation
                                        - 31


  period, the interest rate and return on land fall and the wage rises.    If

  VK < 0 the opposite happens.




 VII. Conclusion



      Land plays a role in a national economy both as a factor of production

 and as an asset in fixed supply. Static models of international trade that

 incorporate land typically recognize only the first of these,   Changes in
 international prices and in domestic preferences, technology and population

 affect the value of land as an asset, which in turn affects the supply of

 savings allocated toward investment in capital. When the steady—state

 interest rate exceeds the population growth rate, as is always the case where

 land is both productive and is valued as an asset, changes that reduce the

 interest rate raise welfare in steady state, and conversely. Changes in

exogenous variables that raise the price of land have a negative effect on

steady-state welfare because they divert savings away from investment in

capital.

     This paper has focussed on land and capital   as assets and factors of

production, land being fixed in supply while the Supply of capital is

perfectly    elastic. The value of other assets in the economy, not incorporated

in this analyses, may respond to changes in international prices or domestic

conditions in ways that are important for capital accumulation, Access to

monopoly rents or the rents associated with the reputations of particular

firms are examples. An interesting problem for international trade theorists

is the incorporation of the response of these asset prices to exogenous

variables.
                                            Appendix



                    The Effect of a Change in the Terms of Trade on

                                  Factor Prices in Steady State



        This appendix derives expression (4.3) in the text, indicating the effect

of an increase in the relative price of the land—using commodity, p. on the

interest rate, F.         From duality



             r =                                                          (A.1)
                    _(L1/K)w


                                                                          (A.2)
             rK



Since



            w =                                                           (A.3)
                   FL


                          dL1
            w =     FLL   T                                               (A.4)


and from the first—order conditions (2.2) arid (2.3)




             dL               G
                    —
             dp           FLL+PGLL

and


             dL            -F.

             dp           FLL+pGL[
 Thus
             dL1        —       G[        dL1
                                                                             (A.7)



        Similarly, since also



            w =                 —
                    pGL(L            L1)                                    (A.8)



                =                   dL1
                        _pGLL                                               (A.9)



Combining (A.1), (A.2), (A.4), (A.7) and (A.9)




                    =        GLFLL
                                          rK                                (A.1O)
                            PGLLFKL




Therefore, using (4.1)




                                               GF
                           _____
            rp +rK dK— = rK[GF
                             L LL
                                                    +    prp
                                                         S
                                                                            (A.11)
                   d                                    1 -
                                                              5K
                                                                   +
                                                                       VK




But, using (A.1), (A.2) and (A.1O),




                   =        GLFLL
            S
                            GF 5K                                           (A.12)
                                     GF LL
          V       =   G    +                                           (A.13)
                               VK   G
              p
                                    LLKL


Substituting (A.12) and (A.13) into (A.11) gives



                               GLFLL         1
          —
          dr
                      rK[G LL F KL ——G]
                                    r
                  =
                                                                       (A.14)
          dp




From duality,



                           =
                                — K/L1                                 (A.15)



                                      -
          GLL =           _GTLI'(t        L1)                          (A.16)




which upon substitution into (A.14), using (A.2) once again, gives expression

(4.3).
                                     Footnotes



  1.    Kenen (1965) develops a more complicated version of the model

 incorporating both natural resources and human capital as well as labor and

 physical capital.



 2.    Examples of papers that use the specific—factors model to analyze capital

 flows are by Brecher and Findlay (1983) and Srinivasan (1983).



 3.    Other trade models have derived the capital stock from underlying savings

 behavior. This is done in a two-sector infinite-horizon context
                                                                    by Stiglitz

 (1970) and Findlay (1978) and in an OLG framework by Buiter (1981). The last

is a one—sector model which Buiter uses to investigate the implications of

capital mobility. None of these papers incorporates land as a separate asset

and factor of production.



4.     Kareken and Wallace (1977) and Fried (1980) develop two—sector OLG models

in which land is the only asset. There is no capital accumulation, and labor

is the other productive factor aside from land.



5.     The implications for international trade of the role of land as an asset

as well as a factor of production are largely unexplored. A literature does

exist on the public finance implications for a closed economy of land's use as

an asset. Feldstein (1977) shows how the evaluation effect of a tax on land

destroys the presumed neutrality of a tax on a fixed factor. Feidstein's

analysis has been extended by Calvo, Kotlikoff, and Rodriguez (1979) and

Chamley and Wright (1983), in particular.
6.     For the analysis in this section the assumption that investment in

capital uses only the commodity produced by the capital—using sector involves

some loss of generality. A more complete analysis would introduce a price

index for investment. Examination of the polar opposite case, an investment

good produced by the land—using sector, did not yield conclusions upsetting

those discussed here. For starkness, and because it seems empirically more

interesting, the analysis sticks with the case of an investment good produced

by the capital-using sector.



7.     This can be demonstrated by defining the function



                            (p —                 —           —
                                     F11)(p           r22)


The characteristic roots of the system (3.7), X1 and X2, are obtained by

setting (p) = 0.                For p c
                                               (Xi,   X2), 4.'(p) < 0. Since t =   -4(1),   is positive

if and only if                  < 1 < X2. The conditions t          > 0 and c < _l/LrK imply the
conditi on




                 1 -
                       SK
                            +   -   VK
                                         > 0



This states that, ceteris paribus, an increase in the capital stock must not

increase investment in capital by an even greater amount.



8.     From the zero—degree homogeneity of FK, rKK + wKL1 = 0, so that

rK =   -   WK L1
                       Therefore
             K
                                                               itL
                =
           VK       itK   _rrK =wK[_(L -



                                     wL       (L — L       )
                               =wK        1
                                              rK   —[w(L —
                                                       1             it
                                                                          -   rK
                                                                              wL1




Since WK is positive the relative shares determine the sign of TEK -
                                                                                    rK


9.   The derivation of this expression Is provided in the appendix.



10. If the elasticities of substitution between the specific and non—specific

factors differ across sectors, the relative endowments of specific to non-

specific factors also matter. Countries with relatively more of the

nonspecific factor will, given relative supplies of the specific factors,

produce and export more of the commodity produced by the sector with a greater

elasticity of substitution. See Mussa (1974).
                                     References



Brecher, Richard A. and Findlay, Ronald. "Tariffs, Foreign Capital and

     National Welfare with Sector—Specific Factors." Journal of International

     Economics 14, no. 3/4 (May 1983): 277—288.

Buiter, William H.   "Time Preference and International Lending and Borrowing

     in an Overlapping-Generations Model." Journal of Political Economy 89,

     no. 4 (August 1981): 769—797.

Calvo, Guillermo, A., Kotlikoff, Lawrence, and Rodriguez, Carlos Alfredo.

     "The Incidence of a Tax on Pure Rent: A New (?) Reason for an Old

     Answer." Journal of Political Economy 87, no. 4 (August 1979): 869—874.

Chamley, Christopher and Wright, Brian D.     "Fiscal Incidence in a Dynamic

     Life-Cycle Model with Land," mimeo, Yale University, 1983.

Feldstein, Martin. "The Surprising Incidence of a Tax on Pure Rent: A New

     Answer to an Old Question." Journal of Political Economy 85, no. 2

     (April 1977): 349—360.

Findlay, Ronald. "An 'Austrian' Model of International Trade and Interest

     Rate Equalization." Journal of Political Economy 86, no. 6 (December

     1978): 989-1007.

Fried, Joel. "The Intergenerational Distribution of the Gains from Technical

     Change and from International Trade." Canadian Journal of Economics 13,

     (February 1980): 65—81.

Jones, Ronald W. "A Three—Factor Model in Theory, Trade and History." In

    Trade, Balance ofyments and Growth, edited by Jagdish Bhagwati et

    al. Amsterdam: North—Holland, 1971.

Kareken, John and Wallace, Neil. "Portfolio Autarky: A Welfare Analysis."

    Journal of International Economics 7, no. 1 (February 1977): 19—43.
 Kenen, Peter B, "Nature, Capital and Trade." Journal of Political Economy

      73, no. 5 (October 1965): 437—460.

 Mussa, Michael. "Tariffs and the Distribution of Income: The Importance of

      Factor Specificity, Substitutability, and Intensity in the Short and Long

      Run." Journal of Political Economy 82, no, 6 (November/December 1974):

      1191—1203.

 Ricardo, David. On the Princtples of Political Economy and Taxation      London:

      John Murray, 1817. Reprinted in The Works and Correpondence of David

      Ricardo, (edited by Pierro Sraffa), Vol. I, Cambridge University Press,

      1951.

Rybczynski, 1. M. "Factor Endowment and Relative Commodity Prices."

     Economica 22, no. 84 (November 1955): 336-341.

Samuelson, Paul A.   "An Exact Consumption Loan Model of Interest with or

     without the Social Contrivance of Money." Journal of Political
                                                                        Economy
     66, no. 6 (December 1958): 467-482.

Srinivasan, T. N. "International Factor Movements, Commodity Trade and

     Commercial Policy in a Specific Factor Model." Journal of International

     Economics 14, No. 314 (May 1983): 289—312.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Factor Price Equalization in a Dynamic Economy."

     Journal of Pol itical Econoy 78, no. 3 (May/June 1970): 456-488.

Stolper, Wolfgang F. and Samuelson, Paul A. "Protection and Real Wages."

     Review of Economic Studies 9, no. 1 (November 1941): 58—73.

Viner, Jacob. "Relative Abundance of the Factors and International Trade."

     Ekonomi, Politik,Samhalle. Stockholm: Bokforlaget folkoch samhalle,
    1959.
