NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONSUMPTION AND REAL EXCHANGE RATES IN PROFESSIONAL FORECASTS
Michael B. Devereux
Gregor W. Smith
James Yetman
Working Paper 14795
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14795

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2009

We thank the Social Sciences Research Council of Canada and the Bank of Canada research fellowship
programme for support of this research. The opinions are the author's alone and are not those of the
Bank of Canada or the Bank for International Settlements. We thank Rasool Zandvakil for skilled
research assistance and seminar participants at the University of Washington, McGill University, the
BIS, and the Bank of Korea for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Michael B. Devereux, Gregor W. Smith, and James Yetman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Consumption and Real Exchange Rates in Professional Forecasts
Michael B. Devereux, Gregor W. Smith, and James Yetman
NBER Working Paper No. 14795
March 2009
JEL No. F37,F41,F47
ABSTRACT
Standard models of international risk sharing with complete asset markets predict a positive association
between relative consumption growth and real exchange-rate depreciation across countries. The striking
lack of evidence for this link the consumption/real-exchange-rate anomaly or Backus-Smith puzzle
- has prompted research on risk-sharing indicators with incomplete asset markets. That research generally
implies that the association holds in forecasts, rather than realizations. Using professional forecasts
for 28 countries for 1990-2008 we find no such association, thus deepening the puzzle. Independent
evidence on the weak link between forecasts for consumption and real interest rates suggests that the
presence of 'hand-to-mouth' consumers may help to resolve the anomaly.

Michael B. Devereux
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, B.C.
CANADA V6T 1Z1
and NBER
mbdevereux@gmail.com
Gregor W. Smith
Dept of Economics, Queens University
Kingston, Ontario, K7L 3N6, Canada
smithgw@econ.queensu.ca

James Yetman
Bank for International Settlements
IFC 2
Central, Hong Kong
James.Yetman@bis.org

1. Introduction
A wide range of international macroeconomic models imply a positive relationship
between relative consumption growth and real exchange rate depreciations as a consequence
of integrated asset markets and risk sharing. As is well known, though, most of the evidence
is that there is no such link in historical data, or that the relationship may even be negative.
This rejection of an implication of these models is sometimes called the consumption/realexchange-rate anomaly or Backus-Smith puzzle.
Recently, a number of researchers have proposed theoretical models in which asset
markets are incomplete in speciﬁc ways, and shown that they can produce low or even
negative correlations over time between relative consumption growth and the real exchange
rate. This property is a form of indirect inference in favor of these models. But these same
models typically also imply that the original relationship holds in conditional expectations,
rather than state-by-state, due to conditional risk sharing. This alternative property can be
tested using instrumental-variables methods, but such tests are hampered by the challenges
of forecasting consumption growth and real exchange rate depreciations, which often have
very little statistical predictability.
We provide a new, direct test of an implication of the incomplete-markets models. We
investigate the link between relative consumption growth and real exchange rate changes
in panels of forecasts made by professional forecasters. Outsourcing the forecasting problem in this way does not require us to calibrate a speciﬁc economic model. We provide
graphical evidence using these forecasts for 28 countries over 1990-2008. We also specialize
the evidence by pairs of countries, by time, and by exchange-rate regime. The overall
conclusion is that there is still very little evidence of a positive relationship. This deepens
the puzzle.
We then provide an interpretation of the failure of conditional risk sharing in the
forecast data. For conditional risk sharing to hold, agents must have access to some asset
markets, though not necessarily a full set of Arrow-Debreu securities. A substantial body
of evidence suggests that households either do not use asset markets at all, or else fail to
actively adjust their asset holdings optimally over time. In that case, even the conditional
1

link between relative consumption growth and real depreciations may not hold. Instead
the predicted relationship may be of either sign, depending on the sources of shocks and
preference parameters. We develop a model of hand-to-mouth consumers which illustrates
these points. Interestingly the model also illustrates a pitfall in a conventional test of
the consumption/real-exchange-rate relationship. Researchers using that test may fail to
detect conditional risk sharing, even if it holds.
Section 2 outlines notation and the risk-sharing conditions. Section 3 describes the
tests of necessary conditions used in previous work as well as the ﬁndings of those tests.
Section 4 outlines the sources and nature of the forecast data we use. Section 5 presents
the evidence, in the form of scatter plots. Section 6 provides a simple interpretation based
on the presence of rule of thumb consumers, and section 7 concludes.
2. Risk-Sharing Indicators and Incomplete Markets
We start with some basic theory. Take an N -country, world economy where households
within a country i, i = 1, 2, ..., N , have identical preferences and unrestricted access to
intra-national markets for risk sharing. Hence there is a representative household for each
country. Time is discrete, beginning at t = 0. In each time period, the aggregate state
is labeled zt , where zt comes from a ﬁnite set of possible states of the world. At time t,
the state history is labelled z t = {z0 , z1 , ..., zt }, and π(z t ) is the probability of history z t .
Households in country i have preferences given by
E0

∞ 


β t π(z t )u(ci (z t ))

(1)

t=0 z t

where ci (z t ) represents country i’s consumption composite at history z t . We are assuming
that preferences over consumption composites are identical across countries, and that discount factors β are also identical, but we do not necessarily assume that the composition of
the consumption aggregates are the same in each country. There may be a country-speciﬁc,
non-traded good for example.
Associated with each country’s consumption aggregate is a consumer price index
pi (z t ), deﬁned in terms of currency i. Nominal exchange rates are deﬁned with respect to
2

a numeraire currency. Letting currency 1 be the numeraire currency, we deﬁne si (z t ) as
the currency–1 price of currency i, with s1 (z t ) = 1. Hence the real exchange rate between
country 1 and country i is deﬁned in the usual way as q i (z t ) = si (z t )pi (z t )/p1 (z t ). We
make no special assumptions about real exchange rate determination; q i (z t ) may reﬂect
the presence of trade frictions, non-traded goods, sticky prices, or other goods market
imperfections. Table 1 summarizes the notation used so far and supplemented below.
Asset markets are frictionless in the sense that agents in all countries face the same
set of asset prices and returns, when measured in any numeraire. This assumption does
not imply that assets markets are complete. But it means that for the set of assets that
are traded across countries, all agents face the same prices and payoﬀs.
Table 1: Notation
t

time

i, j

countries

u

period utility

β

discount factor

γ

EIS

zt

state history

c

consumption

p

price

π

state probability

m

asset price

s

nominal exchange rate

q

real exchange rate

y ij

ċit − ċjt

xij

j
i
q̇tij ≡ ṡij
t + ṗt − ṗt

We begin with risk-sharing under complete markets. Assume that there exists a set of
assets which have payoﬀ in currency 1 in each possible history. Assets paying oﬀ in other
currencies are redundant because markets are complete. Deﬁne m(z t+1 |z t ) as the price
of an asset which pays oﬀ one unit of currency in history z t+1 , conditional on history z t .
Then this price is determined by the condition:
m(z t+1 |z t )

u (ci (z t+1 ))
u (ci (z t ))
=
β
π(z t+1 |z t )
si (z t )pi (z t )
si (z t+1 )pi (z t+1 )

(2)

where π(z t+1 |z t ) = π(z t+1 )/π(z t ). Since this condition holds for each country i, and all
3

countries face identical asset prices, we must have:
u (cj (z t+1 ))  u (cj (z t ))
u (ci (z t+1 ))  u (ci (z t ))
=
,
si (z t+1 )pi (z t+1 ) si (z t )pi (z t )
sj (z t+1 )pj (z t+1 ) sj (z t )pj (z t )

(3)

∀i, j = 1, ..N. This is the complete markets risk-sharing condition of Backus and Smith
(1993). We can rewrite this condition as:
q ij (z t )
u (ci (z t+1 ))  u (cj (z t+1 ))
=
u (ci (z t ))
u (cj (z t ))
q ij (z t+1 )

(4)

∀i, j = 1, ..N, which says that the ex-post ratio of intertemporal marginal rates of substitution should be equal to the ex-post growth rate of the real exchange rate. Using dots to
denote growth rates, and taking a linear approximation of the risk-sharing condition (4)
around a non-stochastic steady state, we have:
ij
ċit+1 − ċjt+1 = γ q̇t+1

(5)

∀i, j = 1, ..N, where γ is the common, intertemporal elasticity of substitution. (No approximation is involved when utility is isoelastic.) Thus, full risk sharing implies that the
diﬀerence between ex-post growth rates in consumption across countries i and j should be
a positive, linear function of the ex-post growth rate of the real exchange rate q ij .
Condition (5) presents a simple and intuitive condition for testing risk sharing across
countries. Cross-country deviations in consumption per capita should occur only to the
extent that there are oﬀsetting real exchange rate changes. A country’s relative consumption should rise when the relative price of consumption falls. Note that the source of
real exchange rate variation has no bearing whatever on the prediction of condition (5).
Whether real exchange rates vary due to changes in the relative price of non-traded goods,
deviations from the law of one price in traded goods, or compositional eﬀects of terms of
trade changes, does not alter the predicted relationship between relative consumption and
the real exchange rate.
This risk-sharing condition must be amended if some assets markets are missing.
Consider the case where only non-contingent, currency-1-denominated, nominal bonds are
available. This case has been studied by Kollmann (1995) and Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc
4

(2008) for example. The price of such a bond is m(z t ) =


z t+1

m(z t+1 |z t ). This bond

price is determined by the condition:
m(z t )


u (ci (z t ))
u (ci (z t+1 ))
t+1 t
=
β
.
π(z
|z
)
si (z t )pi (z t )
si (z t+1 )pi (z t+1 )
t+1

(6)

z

Again, since m(z t ) is common across countries, this pricing implies:

z t+1

π(z t+1 |z t )

u (ci (z t+1 ))  u (ci (z t ))
=
si (z t+1 )pi (z t+1 ) si (z t )pi (z t )


π(z

t+1

z t+1

u (cj (z t+1 ))  u (cj (z t ))
,
|z ) j t+1 j t+1
s (z )p (z ) sj (z t )pj (z t )

(7)

t

∀i, j = 1, ..N. Taking a linear approximation leads to the risk-sharing condition for this
incomplete-markets economy:


 ij

E (ċit+1 − ċjt+1 )|z t = E γ q̇t+1
|z t .

(8)

Under this asset market arrangement, the time-t conditional expectation of the diﬀerences
in consumption growth rates should be proportional to the conditional expected growth
rate in the real exchange rate.
More generally, we may deﬁne any restriction on asset payoﬀ contingencies by constructing a combination of possible histories φt , so that an asset pays oﬀ a unit of currency
1 for all histories z t+1 ∈ φt+1 . Obstfeld (1994) discusses this general, intermediate case.
The approximate version of the empirical implication he draws is condition (8) but with
the expectation conditional on the information set {φt+1 , z t }.
The models we test in this paper have incomplete international risk sharing, but
complete risk sharing across households within a country, so that there is a representative
agent in each economy. Kocherlakota and Pistaferri (2007) consider the opposite case,
where there is limited risk sharing within each economy but complete insurance against
economy-speciﬁc shocks. They derive predictions, under several contracting schemes, for
the properties of real exchange rates conditional on the cross-sectional distribution of
consumption within an economy, and test those predictions using disaggregated data. The
5

forecasts for aggregates we study cannot be used to test the predictions of their models,
which require data disaggregated by households.
3. Tests and Previous Evidence
The complete-markets theory predicts a positive relationship between the predicted
consumption growth diﬀerential and the predicted real depreciation:
ċit − ċjt = γ q̇tij .

(9)

ij
We deﬁne the composite variables ytij ≡ ċit − ċjt and xij
t ≡ q̇t , so the relationship is:

ytij = γxij
t .

(10)

This relabelling keeps notation simple and serves as a reminder of the axis labels on
diagrams. The scatter plot of the two composite variables is an upward-sloping line in x−y
space, with slope γ. The strongest test of the complete-markets, risk-sharing condition is
to inspect the scatter plot of y versus x, for example for a given country or year or for all
data pooled. We call this the state-by-state test.
Backus and Smith (1993) studied two predictions of the complete-markets relationship. The ﬁrst of these was the monotonicity property. They calculated the mean, standard
deviation, and autocorrelation of the two sides of the equation. They then noted that the
two sides should be positively related in a cross-section of pairs of countries. For example,
a country-pair with a relatively volatile relative consumption growth also should have a
relatively volatile real exchange rate growth. (The use of growth rates ensured stationarity.) The slope should be γ in means and standard deviations, and 1 in autocorrelation
coeﬃcients.
Studying the monotonicity property in means involves averaging over time like this:
T
1  ij
=
y
T t=0 t

(11a)

T
1  ij
x
x =
T t=0 t

(11b)

y
and

ij

ij

6

and then inspecting the cross-country cross-plot for this relationship:
y ij = γxij .

(12)

The second prediction was for time-series correlations. The two growth rates should
be perfectly correlated over time for any pair of countries. The sample covariance is:
T
T
1  ij
1  ij ij 
ij
ij
ij
(y − y )(xt − x ) =
y x − y ij xij .
T t=0 t
T t=0 t t

(13)

When y = γx, covt (y, x) = γvart (x), so the covariance is positive, and corrt (y, x) = 1.
Two notable features of these tests are (a) they are weaker than the state-by-state
test and (b) they may conﬂict. Figure 1 illustrates these features using some arbitrary
numbers. Black, grey, and white refer to three countries, each relative to a common base
country. The circles represent annual data points for the growth rates x and y. The red
circles, one for each country, give the country averages.
In the top panel of ﬁgure 1 the data points lie along a downward-sloping line for each
country, failing the correlation test. But the means lie on an upward-sloping line, passing
the cross-country monotonicity test. In the bottom panel, the data pass the correlation
test in each country but fail the monotonicity test. Both data sets would fail the stronger,
state-by-state test. Removing the red circles and not distinguishing between shades of
grey, the points lie in a cloud, not along an upward-sloping line.
But in fact both these weaker tests reject. Backus and Smith used quarterly data for
8 OECD countries for 1971-1990. Using the monotonicity test in means (as well as other
moments) they found clouds of points, rejecting the risk-sharing condition. Obstfeld (2007)
examines more recent data for a wider set of countries. He too ﬁnds a negative association
between average consumption growth diﬀerentials and real exchange rate changes.
Using the correlation test, Backus and Smith found coeﬃcients near zero; the values
ranged over [-0.08,0.17], with an average value of 0.045. Kollmann (1995) ran regressions
like condition (5) for country pairs and found they had very low R2 , which provides similarly negative information on the correlations. (Kollmann also found that consumption
7

and real exchange rates were not cointegrated in levels, thus rejecting another necessary
condition.) This is consistent with the ﬁnding of Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2002),
who point out that, in time series observations, the correlation between relative consumption and real exchange rates is negative for most OECD economies. They refer to this
discrepancy between theory and data as the ‘consumption real exchange rate anomaly’.
So the complete-markets condition (5) is rejected. Theoretical approaches to explaining the evidence have relaxed the assumption of complete markets. Corsetti, Dedola,
and Leduc (2008), Benigno and Thoenissen (2008), Selaive and Tuesta (2003), and Opazo
(2006) all construct theoretical models in which the only asset that is traded across countries is a non-contingent bond. This gives a risk sharing condition of the form (8). This
condition is then set in an environment in which a shock that generates a real exchange
rate depreciation also leads to a rise in relative consumption. It then is possible to produce
a negative correlation between consumption and real exchange rate changes, like the correlation found in the time series data. In Benigno and Thoenissen’s model, for example, an
unanticipated positive shock to the output of traded goods generates a wealth eﬀect which
raises the demand for non-traded goods. This leads to a rise in relative consumption combined with a real exchange rate depreciation. Similar wealth eﬀects feature in the studies
by Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc (2008), Selaive and Tuesta (2003), and Opazo (2006).
While these papers develop general-equilibrium models in which condition (5) fails to
hold, due to incomplete markets, they still imply that condition (8) holds: expected consumption growth should be positively correlated with expected real exchange rate changes.
Since in almost any theoretical setting, consumption and real exchange rates are determined simultaneously, condition (8) makes no clear prediction regarding the correlation
between consumption growth rate diﬀerences and real exchange rates. Rather, the condition implies that, adjusted for real depreciations, consumption growth diﬀerentials should
be uncorrelated with any variables in the date-t information set.
If actual outcomes, state-by-state, lie in a cloud then can expected outcomes ever lie
on an upward-sloping line, if expectations are rational? The answer is that they can do
so for two reasons. First, forecast errors may be large. Adding volatile, white-noise errors
8

to a regression may make it impossible to detect a positive slope in outcomes. Second,
consumption forecast errors may be negatively correlated with exchange rate forecast errors. Again, then, the slopes of the scatter plots would diﬀer between actual outcomes and
expectations.
We next assess the appropriateness of testing the incomplete-markets, risk-sharing
condition (8) using either the monotonicity-in-means test or the covariance test. We do
not know z t . But if we have instruments ut and are conﬁdent that ut ∈ z t then we can
test and estimate with the sample versions of:
ij
E(yt+1
− γxij
t+1 |ut ) = 0.

(14)

This moment condition can be used for estimation either country-pair by country-pair or
for a pooled panel of data with a common γ. With more than one instrument a test of
over-identifying restrictions is possible.
Obstfeld (1994), Kollman (1995) and Head, Mattina and Smith (2004) test various
versions of this condition. In general these studies ﬁnd only weak evidence supporting the
incomplete markets condition. Obstfeld tested condition (8) (or its extension to a wider
information set φt+1 ) by regressing individual consumption on world consumption, with the
addition of world income and other variables to capture factors over which cross-country
insurance contracts may not be written. Conditional on uninsurable control variables,
there should be a unit coeﬃcient on world consumption. This is decisively rejected in his
estimates.
Kollmann (1995) studied the isoelastic utility model for G7 countries using data from
1972-1988 and lagged values of y and x as instruments. He found that the J-test did not
reject, and interpreted this as supportive of the incomplete markets model. But γ̂ was
negative in about a third of cases, and insigniﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero in many cases.
Overall, then, there often were unpredictable departures from a cloud of data points, not
from an upward sloping line.
Head, Mattina, and Smith (2004) noted that the incomplete-markets condition (8)
is also necessary for the complete-markets condition (5). They studied that condition by
9

GMM for 10 OECD countries from 1961 to 2001. They examined traditional, isoelastic
utility as well as models in which the marginal utility of consumption depends on government expenditure, real money balances, or external habit. They also considered models
with exogenously missing asset markets but an endogenous discount rate that anchors the
distribution of wealth and with endogenous market segmentation. Statistical tests reject
all models of marginal utility, with one conspicuous exception. The model with external
habit (which thus involves a moving average of consumption growth) passes the J-test and
also yields signiﬁcant parameter estimates with signs consistent with theory.
Drawing economic lessons from GMM estimation of the risk-sharing condition may
be hampered by the problem of weak instruments. For many countries both consumption
and real exchange rates (at least under ﬂoating nominal rates) are near random walks,
which means that their growth rates are very diﬃcult to predict. But drawing inference
from instrumental-variables estimation requires valid instruments with signiﬁcant predictive power. Without such instruments, standard conﬁdence intervals may have incorrect
coverage and the J-test may not have its nominal size. Neely, Roy, and Whiteman (2001),
Stock and Wright (2000), and Yogo (2004) have drawn attention to the weak-instrument
problem in estimating preference parameters.
An instrument of particular interest is ut = ι, a vector of ones. In that case, the
estimating equations for the incomplete-markets condition become:
ij
− Eγxij
Eyt+1
t+1 = 0.

(15)

This is simply the monotonicity condition in means used by Backus and Smith (1993) and
Obstfeld (2007). Provided these moments exist, then, the rejections of the risk-sharing
condition using unconditional means apply to both the complete-markets and incompletemarkets versions.
There are potential pitfalls with the monotonicity-in-means test, though. First, the
unconditional means may not be constant over history, so that the sample mean may
not converge to a well-deﬁned, population mean. Second, the unconditional means may be
identical across countries so that the scatter plot or regression (12) does not identify γ. For
10

example, suppose that the unconditional means of diﬀerential consumption growth, ytij ,
and of real exchange rate growth, xij
t were both zero for all pairs of countries. Then these
means could not be used to assess the slope of the conditional risk-sharing relationship.
What about the covariance test? This test does not naturally extend to the condition for risk-sharing with incomplete markets, essentially because the law of iterated
expectations does not apply to second moments. Thus,
ij
ij
ij
t
E(yt+1
− γxij
t+1 |z ) = 0 ⇒ covt (yt+1 , xt+1 |ut ) > 0.

(16)

If the instrument set coincides with the information used by market participants, so ut ≡ z t ,
then the conditional covariance is simply the covariance between their two forecast errors,
which is not restricted by the theory. At the other extreme, if ut ≡ ι then the covariance
is unconditional, which again is not restricted. Indeed, the theoretical models with incomij
plete markets are designed speciﬁcally to be consistent with a correlation between yt+1

and xij
t+1 that is not positive. For example, Bodenstein (2008) studies a model in which
asset markets are endogenously incomplete due to limited enforcement. He shows that it
can reproduce a negative correlation using numerical examples. However, the covariance
or correlation between forecasts is restricted:


ij
ij
ij
t
E(yt+1
− γxij
t+1 |z ) = 0 ⇒ covt (E(yt+1 |ut ), (Ext+1 |ut ) > 0.

(17)

Implementing this test requires instrumental variables, as in the GMM estimation described
earlier.
To sum up, the risk-sharing condition with incomplete markets can be tested in three
ways:
a. A complete model that includes this condition can be tested indirectly by seeing
whether it can reproduce a negative time-series covariance or correlation in actual
outcomes, treating that like any stylized fact. But this approach does not provide a
direct test of the condition. And it requires simulation of a complete model.
b. The monotonicity-in-means test across countries is a direct test of the incomplete
markets condition. Disadvantages of this test are that it requires a signiﬁcant number
11

of countries and that it does not allow us readily to study the evolution of the condition
over time. The test may be misleading if there is a trend or break in the unconditional
moments. And it may be uninformative if the unconditional means do not diﬀer across
countries (for example if they are zero). In section 6 below, we provide an analytical
example where the monotonicity-in-means test fails.
c. The condition can be tested by GMM (or the covariance between conditional expectations). One practical diﬃculty with this approach is that instruments may be weak,
so that it may be challenging to ﬁnd time-series variation in the forecasts. Both consumption growth, ċit and nominal depreciation, ṡij
t , are notoriously diﬃcult to forecast
econometrically. A second practical diﬃculty arises from the need to construct realtime instruments rather than using revised data to represent historical expectations.
Our method in this paper is to directly test the risk-sharing condition using professional forecasts. This approach allows us to avoid the weak-instrument problem and yet to
use numerous time-series observations for speciﬁc pairs of countries. The forecasts automatically are on a real-time basis. And we thus can study the evolution of the risk-sharing
condition over time, with multiple observations per country pair.
Forecast-based tests of necessary conditions also have been applied by Smith and
Yetman (2007) and Engel and Rogers (2008). Smith and Yetman study the Euler equation
linking forecasts of inﬂation, consumption growth, and nominal interest rates in the US
Survey of Professional Forecasters. Engel and Rogers study the present-value model of the
current account using long-horizon forecasts for the G7 from Consensus Economics.
4. Forecast Data
Each month, Consensus Economics (www.consensuseconomics.com) surveys professional forecasters in numerous countries. The forecasters make predictions for macroeconomic variables including real consumption growth and CPI inﬂation rates for the current
and subsequent calendar years. They also make predictions for nominal exchange-rate
depreciations, this time at ﬁxed horizons of 3, 12, and 24 months. Our data consist of all
available observations on 12-month forecasts for all three of ċ, ṗ, and ṡ from the December
12

surveys. Only in that month are the horizons for the foreign exchange predictions aligned
with those from the predictions for consumption growth and inﬂation. (We cannot use
the 24-month foreign-exchange predictions made in December 2004, for example, because
forecasters are not asked their predictions for ċ and ṗ for 2006 until January 2005.) These
forecasts are thus denoted Et−12 .
We use the mean forecast, which is the summary statistic reported by Consensus
Economics. They report individual forecasters’ predictions for consumption growth and
inﬂation but not for depreciations. And the set of forecasters is speciﬁc to each country.
For both these reasons we cannot use disaggregated, individual forecasts.
Table 2 lists the 28 economies we study, along with the date at which their forecasts
began. All series run to December 2007. We used all possible data points from this source.
Because the data are proprietary, the appendix contains further notes on the forecasts, so
that our work can be replicated or updated.
Table 2: Countries and Starting Years
Argentina

1993

Indonesia

1994

South Korea

1994

Australia

1993

Italy

1999

Spain

1999

Brazil

1994

Japan

1989

Sweden

1996

Canada

1989

Malaysia

1994

Switzerland

1998

Chile

1993

Mexico

1993

Thailand

1994

Columbia

1997

Netherlands

1999

UK

1989

Euro area

2002

New Zealand

1994

USA

1989

France

1999

Norway

1998

Venezuela

1993

Germany

1996

Peru

1998

Hong Kong

1994

Singapore

1994

We use 389 country-year combinations. We generally construct country pairs relative
to the US, treating it as country i. But some currency forecasts are for rates of depreciation
13

against the DM or Euro, so for those economies — France, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway,
Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland — we use Germany as country i.
Most country-pairs have ﬂoating exchange rates. The exceptions are (a) Hong Kong
and the US; (b) Argentina and the US for 1993-2000; and (c) the Euro-area economies
each relative to Germany beginning in 1999. Within the Euro area after 1999 we thus do
not need to align forecasts of consumption growth and inﬂation (which are on a calendaryear basis) with currency forecasts (which instead have ﬁxed horizons) and so can use the
monthly data for pairs chosen from France, Italy, the Netherlands, and Spain, relative to
Germany. The forecasts are thus made from 23 to 0 months in advance of the end of the
calendar year to which they apply. For this time period and set of countries we have 2
forecasts made each month (for two calendar years), 4 economy pairs, and 115 months
(from January 1999 to July 2008) for a total of 920 observations. We also consider a start
date of January 2002, when the new currency was introduced, leaving 632 observations.
The operator Et−h denotes the forecast for calendar year t made h months in advance.
Thus the risk-sharing condition in forecasts is:
Et−h ytij = γEt−h xij
t .

(18)

The condition predicts that the forecasts lie on an upward-sloping line, with slope γ. Our
reporting method is simple. For pairs ij and year or month t we plot predicted diﬀerential
consumption growth, Et−h ytij on the vertical axis and predicted real depreciation, Et−h xij
t
on the horizontal axis. We plot these average forecasts for various pairs of countries, years,
and for ﬂoating and ﬁxed exchange rates.
These statistics are transitive; the point for pair jk automatically lies on the line
connecting pair ji and pair ki. An upward-sloping line is evidence that the risk-sharing
condition holds. So as not to overstate the impression created by the scatter plots, then,
when we pool country pairs we plot only pairs relative to a base country i (generally the
US).
We also compare the ﬁndings to those using realized, historical data from the IMF’s
International Financial Statistics (IFS). The IFS data apply to exactly the same set of
14

countries and years as do the forecast data (except that we have forecasts for 2008 but not
yet realized data), so that we can compare the state-by-state and forecast versions of the
risk-sharing condition.
5. Evidence
Figure 2 presents evidence for all countries and years. The rate of real depreciation
ij
xij
t is on the horizontal axis, while the rate of relative, real consumption growth, yt is

on the vertical axis. The ﬁrst panel shows the realized outcomes (in dark red) and the
corresponding economy-pair means (in light red). The latter correspond to the statistics
graphed by Backus and Smith (1993) and Obstfeld (2007). The second panel then shows
the scatter plot of forecasts (in dark blue) and the corresponding economy-pair mean
forecasts (in light blue). The third panel in ﬁgure 1 then collects the realization means (in
light red) and forecast means (in light blue) for each economy pair.
The conclusions from ﬁgure 2 are straightforward. For this recent data and wide range
of countries, there is no evidence of an upward-sloping relationship in actual outcomes or
their means or in forecasts. (We also constructed a version of ﬁgure 2 that applies only to
pairs of economies with ﬂoating nominal exchange rates. The ﬁndings are the same.)
Figure 3 provides the data for individual economy-pairs. Realized outcomes again are
in red and forecast outcomes in blue. Recall that the second traditional way to examine
the evidence is to report the country-speciﬁc covariance or correlation in outcomes. Figure
3 shows that, for this group of economies, frequency, and time span, a negative correlation
is not a stylized fact. For Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and New Zealand, each relative to the
US, the red, realized outcomes slope down. But for the remaining 22 pairs the scatter
plots are better described as clouds of points, with little correlation apparent.
The second question we can ask with the economy-pairs is whether there is greater
evidence of a positive relationship in forecasts than in outcomes. An informal, visual
inspection suggests that for Australia, Canada, Columbia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico,
and Venezuela, each relative to the US, (7 of the 26 economy pairs) there is such evidence
of an upward-sloping pattern in forecasts to a greater extent than in realizations. As shown
15

by the theoretical studies discussed in section 2, this discrepancy between realizations and
forecasts can be consistent with a general equilibrium model where real exchange rates and
consumption are determined simultaneously, with country-speciﬁc shocks and incomplete
markets.
It is natural to wonder whether the results of tests for international risk-sharing trend
over time. Flood, Marion and Matsumoto (2008), for example, present a measure of
international consumption risk sharing (although without a control for real exchange rate
changes): the variance of the log of a country’s share of world consumption. They show
that this variance has been trending down for industrialized countries, indicating gradual
increases in risk-sharing. In a similar vein, we also disaggregated the data (both forecasts
and realizations) by year, instead of by economy-pair. The results (not shown) show no
trend to an upward slope in the scatter plots in both the forecasts and the realized data.
Several scholars have argued that the puzzle arises principally with ﬂoating exchange
rates. Hess and Shin (2006), for example, show the correlation puzzle is largely due to the
behaviour of the nominal exchange rate in OECD countries. They also study intra-national
data from US states, and ﬁnd that the correlation there (where the nominal exchange rate
is one) is positive. Hadzi-Vaskov (2008) studies quarterly data for the Euro area for 19992006 and applies the correlation test. He ﬁnds a positive correlation for countries with a
common currency, while the correlation remains negative for pairs of countries with ﬂoating
nominal exchange rates over the same period. (These papers estimate regressions in the
actual data – and so use the correlation test – but also use country-by-country and pooled
instrumental-variables estimation.)
Figure 4 shows our ﬁndings for economy pairs with a currency board or common
currency: Argentina–US 1992-2001; Hong Kong–US; France–Germany 1999-2007; Italy–
Germany 1999-2007; Netherlands–Germany 1999-2007; and Spain–Germany 1999-2007.
Again, whether in actual data or in forecasts or in means there is no evidence of an
upward slope. In fact, these scatter plots tend to slope down, at least in means.
Finally, recall that for the Euro-area economies we have monthly forecasts of annual consumption growth and inﬂation rates, at 24 monthly horizons. We combine these
16

monthly data to provide further evidence on the risk-sharing tests in this currency union.
Figure 5 contains these intra-Euro area results, for France, Italy, the Netherlands, and
Spain relative to Germany since 1999. (The results were very similar when we instead
compared each country to the remaining Euro members as a group instead of to Germany.)
For this time period, set of economies, and set of horizons there is now considerably
more evidence of a positive slope. The same is true for some individual economy pairs,
shown in ﬁgure 6. The scatter plots for the Netherlands-Germany and Spain-Germany in
particular slope up.
Figure 7 then disaggregates these high-frequency forecasts according to the year for
which predictions apply. Again the idea is to see whether there is evidence of a trend in
the slope linking the two conditional expectations, taking advantage of the additional data
provided by this approach. Figure 7 does show an upward slope for several years, but it is
hard to argue that there is any pattern over time.
Overall, then, the evidence suggests that the consumption-real exchange rate anomaly
remains unresolved. The puzzle lies not just in the lack of a positive correlation between
the movement in consumption diﬀerences and real exchange rates, but also in the absence
of a positive relationship between the conditional expectations of consumption growth differences and real depreciations, where conditional expectations can be represented by forecasts. While the ﬁrst failure (a problem for the complete-markets model) can in principal
be resolved by a combination of limited ﬁnancial assets (a non-contingent bond economy,
for instance) and a judicious choice of parameters and pattern of shocks (as outlined by
Benigno and Theonissen 2008, or Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc 2008), the second is more
problematic. Most international macroeconomic models with any form of capital mobility
imply a version of (8). But condition (8) seems to be rejected in most of the forecasts.
One perspective on this evidence is given by relating it to the ﬁndings from forecastbased tests of the consumption Euler equation. Deﬁning it as the one-period, nominal
interest rate, we may decompose the consumption/exchange-rate linkage as follows:





 

 ij

 i
 j
E ċit+1 |z t −E ċjt+1 |z t = γ iit+1 −E πt+1
|z t −γ ijt+1 −E (πt+1
|z t = γE q̇t+1
|z t . (19)
17

The ﬁrst equality comes from the consumption Euler equation; expected consumption
growth is determined by the real interest rate. The second equality follows with the addition of the uncovered interest rate parity equation. Thus, a failure of condition (8) may be
attributed to the breakdown of one or both of these relationships. Using professional forecasts, Smith and Yetman (2007) and Engel and Rogers (2008) ﬁnd no support for the ﬁrst
relationship. Engel and Rogers’s estimates with G7 forecasts show a strong relationship
between (forecast) consumption growth and GDP growth, but no signiﬁcant link between
consumption growth and long term real interest rates. From US forecasts, Smith and Yetman (2007) ﬁnd a small but signiﬁcant negative relationship between short term interest
rates and expected consumption growth. Of course, the second relationship is also highly
suspect. The empirical failure of UIRP is well known. Movement in short term interest
rates tend to be negatively related to exchange rates, rather than positively, as the theory
suggests.
6. Hand-to-Mouth Consumers
Next we outline a simple framework which may help to explain the failure of the
consumption-real exchange rate relationship in forecasts. We take the evidence of Smith
and Yetman (2007) and Engel and Rogers (2008) as a guide. The high correlation between
forecasts of consumption and income growth, and the weak connection between forecasted
consumption and interest rates suggest that forecasters anticipate that household spending
will be dictated primarily by current income. A simple way to implement this is to allow
for a portion of households to be ‘hand-to-mouth’ consumers, in the sense of Campbell
and Mankiw (1990). For hand-to-mouth consumers, consumption is simply equal to current income. But we emphasize that this interpretation does not simply add exogenous,
noisy consumption growth to the scatter plots. Instead it drives a new pattern linking
consumption and real exchange rates endogenously.
The following framework illustrates the eﬀect of these consumers. Suppose that there
are only two countries, labeled i and j. To keep notation simple, we omit the time subscript
where appropriate. Households in country i, for example, receive random, non-storable
endowments of a traded good wi and a non-traded good v i . The countries are of equal
18

size, with household preferences deﬁned over consumption of non-traded goods and an
aggregate of home and foreign traded goods. Again in country i, households consume diN
of non-traded goods and an aggregate diT of traded goods, in turn composed of ai of their
domestically-produced traded good, and bi of the traded good imported from country j.
We diﬀerentiate between two, country-speciﬁc traded goods because movements in the
terms of trade may play an important role in real exchange rate responses, given home
bias in preferences over traded goods.
Endowments of traded and non-traded goods are labelled w and v respectively. Market
clearing thus requires that:

ai + aj = wi

diN = v i

bi + bj = w j

djN = v j .

(20)

We next outline the consumption and price indexes, omitting the country-i superscript
for ease of reading. Utility depends on an aggregate of traded goods, denoted dT , given
by:
1

1

1

θ

1

dT = [μ θ a(1− θ ) + (1 − μ) θ b(1− θ ) ] θ−1 ,

(21)

where μ > 0.5 indicates home bias in tastes over the local traded good, and θ > 0 measures
the elasticity of substitution across goods. Then aggregate consumption is given by a
higher-level CES aggregator:
1

(1− 1 )

c = [α  dN

(1− 1 )

+ (1 − α)dT



] −1 ,

(22)

where α is the expenditure share on non-traded goods, common across countries, and

is

the elasticity of substitution between the traded and non-traded goods.
The prices of the two traded goods are pa and pb . The price index pT for the composite
traded good is deﬁned as:
1

(1−θ)  (1−θ)
pT = μp(1−θ)
+ (1 − μ)pb
.
a

(23)

The price of the non-traded good is denoted pN . Allowing for the consumption of both
traded and non-traded goods, the overall CPI is deﬁned as:
1
 (1−)
(1−)  (1−)
p = αpN
+ (1 − α)pT
.

19

(24)

In each country there is a measure 1 of households, but only n < 1 of these households
have access to international capital markets. Even then, capital markets are incomplete,
allowing trade only in the form of a non-contingent, one-period bond. Unconstrained
households can trade in this bond, with their holdings denoted hit . The other 1 − n
(constrained) households consume the value of their income. Campbell and Mankiw (1990)
estimated 1 − n to be between 0.4 and 0.5 for the US economy. To be conservative, we
choose a value of 1 − n = 0.4 in the numerical example below.
Let cu and cc denote consumption of the unconstrained and constrained households
respectively. Total consumption is
c = ncu + (1 − n)cc .

(25)

The budget constraints for unconstrained and constrained households, respectively, are
given as:
pt cut + ht+1 = pN t vt + pat wt + (1 + rt )ht

(26)

pt cct = pN t vt + pat wt ,
where we do not need separate notation for individual and aggregate measures because
there is a measure 1 of households.
Table 3 summarizes the new notation in this section.
Table 3: Notation

wi , wj traded-good endowments

vi

non-traded good endowment

ai

consumption of wi in country i

bi

consumption of wj in country i

diT

traded goods consumption

diN

non-traded goods consumption

pa

price of wi

pb

price of wj

piT

price of traded composite

piN

price of non-traded good

μ

share of ai in diT

θ

elasticity between ai and bi

α

share of diN in ci

cu

unconstrained consumption

cc

constrained consumption

n

unconstrained share

h

bond holdings

elasticity between diT and diN

20

All households consume the non-traded good, and both varieties of the traded good. In
addition, unconstrained households choose an optimal pattern of inter-temporal spending,
given that they have free access to international bond markets. Thus, unconstrained
households satisfy the bonds-only risk-sharing condition we have studied so far in this
paper:



 ij

E (ċiut+1 − ċjut+1 )|z t = E γ q̇t+1
|z t .

(27)

Constrained households, by contrast, have consumption growth limited by income
growth. Taking a linear approximation of the budget constraint for hand-to-mouth households, we can approximate the expected consumption growth diﬀerence between constrained households in economies i and j as:



j
j
i
i
E (ċict+1 − ċjct+1 )|z t = γE (1 − α)(ẇt+1
− ẇt+1
) + α(v̇t+1
− v̇t+1
)

− 2(1 − μ)(1 − α)(ṗbt+1 − ṗat+1 )|z t .

(28)

Comparing the constrained households across countries, the relationship between relative
consumption growth and real depreciations will depend on the scale of shocks to traded
goods versus non-traded goods, and the movement in the terms of trade.
From condition (28), holding the terms of trade pb − pa constant, a rise in the country’s i s expected growth rate of traded goods will directly increase expected consumption
growth of i s constrained households. The scale of this eﬀect depends on the share of traded
goods in GDP, (1 − α). At the same time, expected growth in traded good endowments
will generate an expected real exchange rate appreciation, since it raises expected demand
for i s non-traded goods. So expected consumption growth of constrained consumers will
rise (relative to that of the foreign country), but the expected real exchange rate will fall.
However, the terms of trade will also adjust. Expected growth in output of traded goods
will be associated with an expected fall in the terms of trade, or a rise in pb − pa . This
will reduce expected consumption growth for constrained consumers in country i. The
impact of this on relative consumption will be less the higher is the degree of home bias
in preferences of traded goods, μ. But for θ > 1, the negative eﬀect of a terms of trade
deterioration will not be enough to oﬀset the direct eﬀect of expected growth in traded
21

good endowments. Therefore expected consumption growth rises, while the expected real
exchange rate falls.
On the other hand, if income variation is primarily driven by persistent shocks to nontraded endowments, expected consumption growth of constrained households will co-move
positively with the real exchange rate. For example, a rise in the country i endowment of
the non-traded good will lead to a rise in consumption and a real exchange rate depreciation.
Hence, in the aggregate, the relationship between expected relative consumption
growth and expected real exchange rate changes for constrained households may be positive
or negative, depending on the source of shocks. Obviously, then, as a theoretical matter,
this illustrative model can allow for movements in aggregate expected consumption growth
diﬀerentials that are either positively or negatively related to movements in expected real
exchange rates, depending on both the source of shocks, and the measure of constrained
versus unconstrained households.
We carry out a simple, quantitative exercise that yields scatter plots of forecasts
that can be compared to the empirical scatter plots in section 5. We follow Benigno and
Thoenissen’s (2008) calibration closely. Take θ = 2,

= 0.44, indicating a higher elas-

ticity of substitution between home and foreign traded goods than between traded and
non-traded goods. Let μ = 0.72, so that there is home bias in the consumption of traded
goods, and assume the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is γ = 2. Take the relative
size of the non-traded goods sector to be α = 0.55. Assume that the log endowments in
the traded goods sector, wi and wj , follow AR(1) processes, with persistence 0.82, and an
innovation standard deviation of 1.9 percent. In the non-traded goods sector, endowments
v i and v j also follow AR(1) processes, but with persistence of 0.5, and an innovation standard deviation of 0.7 percent. Benigno and Thoenissen’s shocks are represented by Solow
residuals, as their model incorporates endogenous labour supply and capital accumulation.
Qualitatively, this diﬀerence is unlikely to aﬀect the nature of the illustration.
We simulate 100 draws of 100 time periods from these endowment processes. The
consumption/real exchange rate correlations then reﬂect a mixture of n unconstrained
22

households that satisfy the original forecasting restriction (27) and 1 − n households that
satisfy the constrained version (28). We calculate the economy-pair means over 100 time
periods of forecasts, denoted {Et−1 xij , Et−1 y ij }, where the forecasts use the correct, population values of the AR(1) parameters for the endowment processes. These calculations
thus simulate the monotonicity-in-means tests in forecasts.
Figure 8 shows the results. The upper panel of ﬁgure 8 shows simulations for n =
1, so that all households in both countries can access international bond markets. The
scatter plot shows the average, conditional, expected growth rates for the diﬀerence of
consumption and the real exchange rate (in light blue, just as in the historical survey
forecasts). The positive relationship reﬂects the actual risk-sharing condition (27) in this
incomplete-markets economy. The model displays conditional risk sharing as facilitated by
bond markets, despite the fact that the correlation between realized consumption growth
and real exchange rates may be negative.
The lower panel of ﬁgure 8 introduces hand-to-mouth consumers into the model, and
shows average, conditional, expected growth rates of consumption diﬀerences and real
exchange rate changes. Recall that n = 0.6. Again the scatter shows the mean forecast
from each of 100 simulations of 100 periods. For the calibration and shock processes chosen,
there is no apparent relationship between expected consumption growth and expected real
exchange rate changes. We see only a cloud, similar to the ﬁndings in the survey forecast
data.
Of course, the results would be diﬀerent with diﬀerent parameters and shocks. If
n = 0, so that all households are hand-to-mouth, then the forecast diagram would have a
distinct downward sloping shape, since in this case persistent endowment shocks, mostly
coming from traded goods, would lead to an anticipated negative relationship between
relative consumption growth and real depreciations.
Studies of incomplete risk-sharing that address the Backus-Smith puzzle predict an
upward-sloping plot in forecasts or in average forecasts, like the one in the top panel of
ﬁgure 8. As we have seen, such a pattern is not observed in professional forecasts. Our
simple interpretation in this section ratchets up the approach used in papers by Kollmann
23

(1995), Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc (2008), and Benigno and Thoenissen (2008). By
adding a further departure from the standard model, in the form of a 40 percent share
of hand-to-mouth consumers, we construct an example that avoids an upward slope in
forecasts, as shown in the lower panel of ﬁgure 8. But, consistent with our earlier argument,
we emphasize that reproducing the cloud-like pattern in forecasts again is only indirect
evidence in favor of this model economy, rather than providing a direct test.
In section 3, we argued that conventional measures of conditional risk-sharing — the
monotonicity-in-means test — may not be able to detect a positive correlation between
expectations of consumption growth and real exchange rates. That pitfall in the means
test creates a need for more direct measures of forecasts like those in this paper. The
simulations here provide quite stark evidence of this problem. Figure 9 illustrates the
average of ex-post growth rates under the same simulations as ﬁgure 8. There is a distinct
downward sloping relationship, for both n = 1 and n = 0.6. This illustrates the diﬃculty
with the monotonicity-in-means test in outcomes. While the case with n = 1 (by construction) implies conditional risk sharing in the sense of condition (8), the average values
of ex-post consumption growth in this sample simulation are negatively related to ex-post
real exchange rate changes. To see why the means test gives a misleading answer here,
recall the discussion in section 3. In this model, there is no diﬀerence across simulations
in the unconditional means of consumption growth or real exchange rate growth. This
corresponds to a situation where all countries have the same trend in y (x) (as before, this
is short-hand notation for consumption growth diﬀerences, and real exchange rate growth).
Moreover, the unconditional means of y and x are zero. These properties lead to a test
where the sample averages are dominated by the unexpected shocks to y and x.
This point may be illustrated more precisely. In the model described in this section
(with n = 1), we may write the equilibrium values of y and x as:
yt = δw Et−1 ln(wt ) + δv Et−1 ln(vt ) + ψw

wt

+ ψv

vt

xt = δw Et−1 ln(wt ) + δv Et−1 ln(vt ) + ωw

wt

+ ωv

vt

ln(wt ) = μw ln(wt−1 ) +
ln(vt ) = μv ln(vt−1 ) +

wt
vt

24

(29)

where

wt

(

vt )

represents the mean-zero, iid innovation to the traded (non-traded) good

endowment. For illustrative purposes here, we assume shocks only to the country i endowment, and omit the i label. Note that, as must be the case, Et−1 yt = Et−1 xt . But also,
Eyt = Ext = 0. Moreover, the structure of the model implies that ψw > 0, while ωw < 0,
as an innovation in the country i s w–endowment raises the value of home consumption,
but leads to a real appreciation.
The monotonicity-in-means test compares the following statistics across simulations
(countries):
T
T
T

1
1 
yt,s =
[δw μw ln(wt−1,s ) + δv μv ln(vt−1,s )] +
[ψw
T t=0
T t=0
t=0

wt,s

+ ψv

vt,s ]

T
T
T

1
1 
Es (x) =
xt,s =
[δw μw ln(wt−1,s ) + δv μv ln(vt−1,s )] +
[ωw
T t=0
T t=0
t=0

wt,s

+ ωv

vt,s ]

Es (y) =




,

(30)
where Es (.) denotes the sample average over simulation s. The experiment is to compare
Es (y) and Es (x) across S simulations. Imagine the extreme case where shocks are purely
transitory, and there are only shocks to the traded goods sector. Then for each simulation
s, we have:

T
1
Es (y) = ψw
T t=0

wt,s

=

ψw
Es (x).
ωw

(31)

Since ψw /ωw < 0, the sample means for y and x are negatively correlated across simulations. For all T < ∞, the scatter plot of Es (y) and Es (x) across the S simulations will
show a downward sloping line. Thus the means test for conditional risk-sharing is entirely
uninformative here.
In a less extreme case, the presence of persistent shocks and shocks to the non-traded
endowment as well as the traded good endowment will introduce a tendency towards a
positive correlation between Es (y) and Es (x), both due to the the

vt

shocks which raise

both y and x simultaneously, and to persistent shocks which have identical eﬀects on
Es (y) and Es (x). Nevertheless, for the calibration underlying ﬁgure 9, which is dominated
by shocks coming from the traded good sector, and for the given persistence parameters
(as in Benigno and Thoenissen, 2008), the means test fails to provide any evidence of
25

consumption risk sharing, despite the fact that it is built into the model (for case n =
1). This underscores the need to use an alternative approach to measuring conditional
expectations.
In summary then, the absence of a clear relationship between consumption and real exchange rates in forecasts is consistent with a general equilibrium setting where international
capital markets are restricted to a subset of households. This same setting reproduces a
negative correlation in the means of actual outcomes i.e. the Backus-Smith puzzle. But
we do not oﬀer here a deeper analysis of the sources of these capital market constraints.
7. Conclusion
A range of international macroeconomic models with incomplete asset markets predict a positive relationship between expectations of relative consumption growth and real
depreciation. We provide a direct test of this risk-sharing condition using professional
forecasts. This method avoids (a) the syndrome of weak identiﬁcation associated with
instrumental-variables estimation and (b) the pitfalls of the monotonicity-in-means test.
Compared to using unconditional means for economy pairs it also provides many more
observations. This method thus can test for trends in risk-sharing over time.
Generally there is little evidence of a positive relationship between forecasts in the
data for 1990-2008. (And a negative correlation for economy pairs is not really a stylized
fact either.) The cloud-like scatter plots cast doubt on the incomplete asset-market models.
However, when we take advantage of the high-frequency (monthly) forecasts within the
Euro area we do ﬁnd greater evidence of positive slope.
A simple endowment-economy example with a role for hand-to-mouth consumers
shows some potential for reproducing the cloud-like patterns in actual forecasts. Overall, though, the empirical results deepen the risk-sharing puzzle.

26

Appendix. Forecast Data
The data come from the three newsletters Consensus Forecasts, Latin American Consensus Forecasts, and Asia Paciﬁc Consensus Forecasts provided by Consensus Economics
Inc. Forecast nominal depreciations are calculated from the levels forecasts. It is not clear
whether the forecaster provides the forecast of the level or the growth rate, as when these
two measures are generally compatible up to a rounding error. For forecasts of the Euro
area, we use only measures relative to the US and not European countries, so as to avoid
overlap in the jurisdictions which would bias results towards ﬁnding risk sharing.
We omitted Brazil in 1993, due to its being an extreme outlier, with an inﬂation
forecast of 2241% and forecast depreciation of 55%. We omitted forecasts for Taiwan
because its corresponding realized data are not in IFS. For December 2003, the AsiaPaciﬁc spreadsheet indicates that forecasts are for 2004 and 2005 (instead of 2003 and
2004). Closer inspection — comparing the forecasts with those made one month earlier
and one month later — indicates that this is a typographical error in the spreadsheet.
Eastern European forecasts, provided in a separate newsletter, are bi-monthly until April
2007. These are excluded from our panel because they are made in November and January,
and so cannot be aligned with the calendar-year forecasts of the exchange rates.

References
Backus, David K. and Gregor W. Smith (1993) Consumption and real exchange rates in
dynamic economies with non-traded goods. Journal of International Economics 35,
297-316.
Benigno, Gianluca and Christoph Thoenissen (2008) Consumption and real exchange rates
with incomplete markets and non-traded goods. Journal of International Money and
Finance 27, 926-948.
Bodenstein, Martin (2008) International asset markets and real exchange rate volatility.
Review of Economic Dynamics 11, 688-705.
Campbell, John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw (1990) Permanent income, current income,
and consumption. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 8, 265-79.
Chari, V. V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan (2002) Can sticky price models
generate volatile and persistent real exchange rates? Review of Economic Studies 69,
533-63.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc (2008) International risk sharing and
the transmission of productivity shocks. Review of Economic Studies 75, 443-473.
Engel, Charles, and John H. Rogers (2008) Expected consumption growth from crosscountry surveys: Implications for assessing international capital markets. mimeo,
Department of Economics, University of Wisconsin Madison,IMF Staﬀ Papers forthcoming.
27

Flood, Robert, Nancy Marion, and Akito Matsumoto (2008) International risk sharing
during the globalization era. mimeo, International Monetary Fund.
Hadzi-Vaskov, Metodij (2008) Does the nominal exchange rate explain the Backus-Smith
puzzle? Evidence from the Eurozone. Tjalling C. Koopmans Research Institute
discussion paper 07-32.
Head, Allen C., Todd D. Mattina, and Gregor W. Smith (2004) Real exchange rates,
preferences, and incomplete markets: evidence, 1961–2001. Canadian Journal of
Economics 37, 782-801.
Hess, Gregory and Kwanho Shin (2006) Understanding the Backus-Smith puzzle: It’s the
(nominal) exchange rate, stupid. MPRA paper 696.
Kocherlakota, Narayana R. and Luigi Pistaferri (2007) Household heterogeneity and real
exchange rates. Economic Journal 117, C1-C25.
Kollmann, Robert (1995) Consumption, real exchange rates and the structure of international asset markets. Journal of International Money and Finance 14, 191-211.
Neely, Christopher J., Amlan Roy, and Charles H. Whiteman (2001) Risk aversion versus
intertemporal substitution: A case study of identiﬁcation failure in the intertemporal consumption capital asset pricing model. Journal of Business and Economic
Statistics 19, 395-403.
Obstfeld, Maurice (1994) Are industrial-country consumption risks globally diversiﬁed?
in Leonardo Leiderman and Assaf Razin, eds., Capital Mobility: The Impact on
Consumption, Investment and Growth. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Obstfeld, Maurice (2007) International risk sharing and the costs of trade. Ohlin Lectures.
Opazo, Luis (2006) The Backus-Smith puzzle: The role of expectations. Central Bank of
Chile working paper 395.
Selaive, Jorge D. and Vicente Tuesta (2003) Net foreign assets and imperfect pass-through:
The consumption real exchange rate anomaly. Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System International Finance Discussion Papers 764.
Smith, Gregor W. and James Yetman The curse of Irving Fisher (professional forecasters’
version). Queen’s Economics Department working paper 1144.
Stock, James H. and Jonathan H. Wright (2000) GMM with weak identiﬁcation. Econometrica 68, 1055-1096.
Yogo, Motohiro (2004) Estimating the elasticity of intertemporal substitution when instruments are weak. Review of Economics and Statistics 86, 797-810.

28

Figure 1: Test Conflict

3.5

3.0

ij

__
ij
y and y

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0
0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

__
x and xij
ij

3.5

3.0

ij

__
ij
y and y

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0
0

1

2

__
x and xij
ij

3

3.5

__
yijt and yij

-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

-60

-40

-20

__

xijt and xij

0

20

40

_____
60

Et-h y t and Et-h y

ij
ij
-12

-10

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

-20

0

_____

40

Et-h xijt and Et-h xij

20

Forecasts and Economy-Pair Means

60

_____

30

IFS Data and Economy-Pair Means

ij

ij

__

Figure 2: All Economies 1990-2008

y and Et-h y

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

-4

-2

0

2

8

_____

6

x and Et-h xij

ij

__

4

10

12

14

16

Outcome Means and Forecast Means

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

40

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

Canada-US

15

20

25

-15

-10

-5

5

10

15

20

25

-2

-4

-8

-6

-4

0

-2

-6

2

0

0

6

4

4

8

6

2

10

8

Chile-US

-30

-3

-15

-20

-15

-25

-2

-1

-10

-10

-5

0

5

-5

0

10

5

10

0

1

2

Australia-US

15

20

25

Argentina-US

-20

-40

Figure 3: IFS and Forecast Data for Economy Pairs

-10

-20

20

0

Columbia-US

0

Brazil-US

10

40

20

60

-12

-10

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

-0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

-60

-20

-40

-10

10

-20

0

Indonesia-US

0

Euro Area-US

20

20

40

30

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

-4.0

-3.5

-3.0

-2.5

-2.0

-1.5

-1.0

-0.5

0.0

-0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

Italy-Germany

1.5

2.0

-0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2

France-Germany

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

-10

-5

0

5

10

-20

-8

-15

-6

-10

-4

0

2

-5

0

Japan-US

-2

5

Hong Kong-US

4

10

6

15

8

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

-20

-10

0

10

20

-30

-40

-20

-30

-10

0

-10

0

10

New Zealand-US

-20

Malaysia-US

20

10

30

20

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

-10

-5

0

5

10

-15

-40

-10

0

20

-5

0

5

Norway-Germany

-20

Mexico-US

10

15

40

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

-6

-0.5

-10 -8

-1.0

-4

0.0

1.0

-2

0

2

Peru-US

0.5

4

1.5

6

8

2.0

Netherlands-Germany

10

2.5

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

-15

-20

-10

-15

-5

0

-5

0

5

Sweden-Germany

-10

Singapore-US

10

5

15

10

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

15

20

-8

-60

-6

-20

0

20

40

-4

-2

0

2

4

Switzerland-Germany

-40

South Korea-US

6

8

60

-10

-5

0

5

10

15

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

-60

-40

-20

0

Thailand-US

20

40

0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2

Spain-Germany

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

-30

-20

-10

0

UK-US

10

20

30

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

-40

-20

0

20

40

Venezuela-US

60

80

ij

y t and y

ij

-5

0

5

-8

-6

-4

0

__

2

xijt and xij

-2

4

6

_____
8

-4

-2

0

2

-6

-4

0

_____

2

Et-h xijt and Et-h xij

-2

4

6

ij

ij

__

ij

Et-h y t and Et-h y

ij

4

Forecasts and Economy-Pair Means

__

10

IFS Data and Economy-Pair Means

_____

Figure 4: Currency-Union Economies

y and Et-h y

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

-2

-1

_____
x and Et-h xij

ij

__

0

1

Outcome Means and Forecast Means

2

Figure 5: Euro Area Forecasts
4

_____

Et-h yijt and Et-h yij

2

0

-2

-4

-6
-2.5

-2.0

-1.5

-1.0

-0.5

0.0

_____
Et-h xijt and Et-h xij

0.5

1.0

1.5

Figure 6: Euro Area Economy Pairs

France-Germany

Italy-Germany

0.5

1.0

0.0

0.5

-0.5

0.0

-1.0

-0.5

-1.5

-1.0

-2.0

-1.5

-2.5

-2.0

-3.0

-2.5
-1.5

-1.0

-0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

-2.0

Netherlands-Germany

-1.5

-1.0

-0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

Spain-Germany

4

1

3

0

2
-1
1
-2
0
-3
-1
-4

-2
-3

-5
-2.5

-2.0

-1.5

-1.0

-0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

-2.4 -2.2 -2.0 -1.8 -1.6 -1.4 -1.2 -1.0 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2

Figure 7: Euro Area Results by Year
1999

2000

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0

-0.5

-0.5
-1.0
-1.0
-1.5
-1.5
-2.0

-2.0

-2.5

-2.5
-3.0

-3.0
-2.0

-1.5

-1.0

-0.5

0.0

0.5

-2.0

-1.5

-1.0

2001

-0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

-0.5

0.0

0.5

2002

0.5
0.0
0.0
-0.5
-0.5
-1.0
-1.0
-1.5
-1.5

-2.0

-2.0

-2.5
-2.5 -2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

-2.5

-2.0

-1.5

2003

-1.0

2004

2

2

1

1

0

0

-1

-1

-2

-2

-3

-3

-4

-4
-2.5

-2.0

-1.5

-1.0

-0.5

0.0

0.5

-2.5

-2.0

-1.5

-1.0

-0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

2005

2006

2

4

1

3
2

0

1
-1
0
-2
-1
-3

-2

-4

-3

-5

-4
-2.0

-1.5

-1.0

-0.5

0.0

0.5

-2.5

-2.0

2007

-1.5

-1.0

-0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

2008

-0.5

1.0

-1.0

0.5

-1.5

0.0

-2.0

-0.5

-2.5

-1.0

-3.0

-1.5

-3.5

-2.0
-0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

2009
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
-1.0
-1.2

-1.0

-0.8

-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0.0

0.2

-2.0

-1.5

-1.0

-0.5

0.0

0.5

Figure 8: Simulated Role of Hand-to-Mouth Households
Economy-Pair Forecast Means: n=1
0.15

0.10

____
Et-1yijt

0.05

0.00

-0.05

-0.10

-0.15

-0.20
-0.15

-0.10

-0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

____
Et-1xijt

Economy-Pair Forecast Means: n=0.6
0.3

0.2

____
Et-1yijt

0.1

0.0

-0.1

-0.2
-0.12

-0.08

-0.04

0.00

____
Et-1xijt

0.04

0.08

0.12

Figure 9: Simulated Role of Hand-to-Mouth Households
Economy-Pair Means: n=1
0.15

0.10

__
yij

0.05

0.00

-0.05

-0.10

-0.15
-0.12

-0.08

-0.04

0.00

0.04

0.08

0.12

__
xij

Economy-Pair Means: n=0.6
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04

__
yij

0.02
0.00
-0.02
-0.04
-0.06
-0.08
-0.10
-0.12

-0.08

-0.04

0.00

__
xij

0.04

0.08

0.12

