NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ANALYTICS OF THE WAGE EFFECT OF IMMIGRATION
George J. Borjas
Working Paper 14796
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14796
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2009

I am grateful to Edward Glaeser, Jeffrey Grogger, Daniel Hamermesh, Gordon Hanson, Lawrence
Katz, Dani Rodrik, and an anonymous referee for comments on earlier drafts of this paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by George J. Borjas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Analytics of the Wage Effect of Immigration
George J. Borjas
NBER Working Paper No. 14796
March 2009, Revised October 2013
JEL No. J23,J31,J61
ABSTRACT
The theory of factor demand has important implications for the study of the impact of immigration
on wages. This paper derives the theoretical implications in the context of a general equilibrium model
where the wage impact depends on the elasticity of product demand, the rate at which the consumer
base expands as immigrants enter the receiving country, the elasticity of supply of capital, and the
elasticity of substitution among inputs of production. The constraints imposed by the theory can be
used to check the plausibility of the many contradictory claims that appear throughout the immigration
literature.
George J. Borjas
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
gborjas@harvard.edu

	  

3	  

The Analytics of the Wage Effect of Immigration
	  
I. Introduction
	  

George J. Borjas	  

The	  resurgence	  of	  large-­‐scale	  immigration	  motivated	  the	  development	  of	  a	  large	  

literature	  that	  examines	  how	  labor	  markets	  in	  both	  receiving	  and	  sending	  countries	  react	  
to	  the	  immigration-­‐induced	  change	  in	  supply.	  The	  textbook	  model	  of	  a	  competitive	  labor	  
market	  suggests	  that	  higher	  levels	  of	  immigration	  should	  lower	  the	  wage	  of	  competing	  
workers	  and	  increase	  the	  wage	  of	  complementary	  workers,	  at	  least	  in	  the	  short	  run.	  
Despite	  the	  common-­‐sense	  intuition	  behind	  these	  predictions,	  the	  empirical	  literature	  
seems	  full	  of	  contradictory	  results.	  Some	  studies	  claim	  that	  immigration	  has	  a	  substantial	  
impact	  on	  wages	  in	  receiving	  and	  sending	  countries	  (e.g.,	  Borjas	  2003;	  Mishra	  2007),	  while	  
other	  studies	  claim	  the	  impact	  is	  negligible	  (Card	  2005;	  Ottaviano	  and	  Peri	  2012).	  
This	  paper	  takes	  a	  step	  back	  from	  the	  empirical	  debate	  and	  asks	  a	  simple	  question:	  
What	  does	  factor	  demand	  theory	  have	  to	  say	  about	  the	  potential	  wage	  impact	  of	  
immigration-­‐induced	  supply	  shifts?	  Since	  Marshall’s	  time,	  economists	  have	  had	  a	  good	  
understanding	  of	  the	  variables	  that	  generate	  elastic	  or	  inelastic	  labor	  demand	  curves,	  and	  
how	  the	  elasticity	  of	  labor	  demand	  is	  affected	  by	  substitution	  and	  scale	  effects.1	  
Unfortunately,	  much	  of	  the	  empirical	  literature	  on	  the	  wage	  impact	  of	  immigration	  
(particularly	  in	  the	  1990s)	  disregarded	  practically	  all	  of	  these	  insights,	  and	  instead	  took	  a	  
data-­‐mining	  approach:	  running	  regressions	  or	  estimating	  difference-­‐in-­‐differences	  models	  
to	  examine	  if	  the	  wage	  evolution	  in	  labor	  markets	  most	  affected	  by	  immigration	  differed	  
from	  that	  observed	  in	  other	  markets.	  Few	  of	  these	  studies	  were	  guided	  or	  informed	  by	  the	  
implications	  of	  factor	  demand	  theory.	  

	  

4	  
More	  recently,	  beginning	  with	  Card	  (2001)	  and	  Borjas	  (2003),	  the	  literature	  has	  

taken	  a	  turn	  and	  begun	  to	  pay	  closer	  attention	  to	  the	  underlying	  economics	  of	  the	  
problem.2	  This	  paper	  derives	  the	  implications	  of	  factor	  demand	  theory	  for	  the	  study	  of	  the	  
wage	  impact	  of	  immigration	  in	  competitive	  labor	  markets.	  Specifically,	  it	  examines	  the	  
question	  in	  the	  context	  of	  a	  general	  equilibrium	  model	  that	  explicitly	  introduces	  such	  
factors	  as	  the	  elasticity	  of	  product	  demand,	  the	  rate	  at	  which	  the	  consumer	  base	  expands	  as	  
immigrants	  enter	  the	  country,	  the	  elasticity	  of	  supply	  of	  capital,	  and	  the	  elasticity	  of	  
substitution	  across	  inputs	  of	  production.	  
The	  analysis	  makes	  two	  contributions.	  First,	  the	  model	  generates	  a	  closed-­‐form	  
solution	  of	  the	  wage	  effect	  of	  immigration,	  allowing	  us	  to	  easily	  generate	  back-­‐of-­‐the-­‐
envelope	  estimates	  under	  a	  large	  number	  of	  potential	  scenarios.	  Not	  surprisingly,	  factor	  
demand	  theory	  imposes	  severe	  constraints	  on	  the	  potential	  sign	  and	  numerical	  value	  of	  
these	  presumed	  wage	  effects.	  These	  constraints	  can	  be	  used	  to	  check	  the	  plausibility	  of	  the	  
many	  contradictory	  claims	  that	  appear	  throughout	  the	  empirical	  immigration	  literature.	  
Second,	  the	  model	  demonstrates	  that	  the	  impact	  of	  immigration	  on	  the	  wage	  level	  in	  
the	  receiving	  country	  depends	  on	  completely	  different	  parameters	  than	  its	  impact	  on	  the	  
wage	  distribution—as	  long	  as	  the	  analysis	  builds	  in	  technical	  restrictions	  that	  are	  widely	  
used	  in	  the	  empirical	  literature.	  The	  “separability”	  of	  these	  results	  again	  allows	  simple	  
back-­‐of-­‐the-­‐envelope	  calculations	  that	  suggest	  the	  possible	  range	  of	  estimates	  for	  the	  
distributional	  impact	  of	  immigration.	  
It	  is	  important	  to	  emphasize	  at	  the	  outset	  that	  by	  deriving	  the	  wage	  impact	  of	  
immigration	  in	  the	  context	  of	  a	  competitive	  labor	  market,	  the	  analysis	  may	  be	  overlooking	  
potentially	  interesting	  implications	  introduced	  by	  the	  possibility	  that	  some	  (many?)	  

	  

5	  

immigrants	  are	  employed	  by	  firms	  with	  market	  power.	  Unfortunately,	  the	  implications	  of	  
immigration-­‐induced	  supply	  shifts	  in	  the	  context	  of	  imperfectly	  competitive	  labor	  markets	  
have	  not	  yet	  been	  fully	  developed.	  
Similarly,	  the	  analysis	  uses	  the	  “standard”	  assumption	  of	  constant	  returns	  to	  scales	  
to	  derive	  the	  implications	  of	  supply	  shocks	  for	  the	  wage	  structure.	  It	  is	  obvious	  that	  the	  
implications	  could	  be	  quite	  different	  when	  there	  are	  either	  economies	  or	  diseconomies	  of	  
scale.	  The	  growing	  literature	  that	  examines	  the	  impact	  of	  high-­‐skill	  immigration	  
(Waldinger	  2010;	  Borjas	  and	  Doran	  2012)	  attempts	  to	  determine	  if	  high-­‐skill	  immigrants	  
impart	  sufficiently	  strong	  human	  capital	  externalities	  on	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  workforce	  to	  
generate	  increasing	  returns.	  In	  contrast,	  there	  has	  been	  remarkably	  little	  interest	  
(Rasmussen	  2013)	  in	  examining	  the	  impact	  of	  immigration	  in	  the	  presence	  of	  fixed	  factors	  
that	  lead	  to	  decreasing	  returns.	  
	  
II. Preliminaries: Homogeneous Labor in a One-Good Closed Economy
	  

It	  is	  instructive	  to	  begin	  with	  the	  simplest	  model	  of	  a	  competitive	  labor	  market:	  a	  

single	  aggregate	  good,	  Q,	  is	  produced	  using	  a	  production	  function	  that	  combines	  capital	  (K)	  
and	  a	  homogeneous	  labor	  input	  (L).	  The	  aggregate	  production	  function,	  Q	  =	  f(K,	  L),	  is	  
assumed	  to	  be	  linear	  homogeneous.	  The	  relevant	  derivatives	  of	  the	  production	  function	  
exist,	  with	  fK	  and	  fL	  >	  0,	  and	  fKK	  and	  fLL	  <	  0.	  Linear	  homogeneity	  implies	  that	  fKL	  >	  0.	  
The	  elasticity	  of	  complementarity	  for	  any	  input	  pair	  i	  and	  j	  is	  cij	  =	  fij	  f	  /	  fi	  fj..3	  Linear	  
homogeneity	  implies	  that	  a	  weighted	  average	  of	  these	  elasticities	  equals	  zero:	  	  
	  

	  
(1)	  

6	  
	  

∑s c

j ij

= 0, 	  

j

	  
where	  sj	  is	  the	  income	  share	  accruing	  to	  input	  j.	  
	  

The	  product	  price	  is	  fixed	  at	  p.	  In	  a	  competitive	  market,	  each	  input	  price	  is	  equal	  to	  

its	  value	  of	  marginal	  product:	  	  
	  
(2a)	   	  

r	  =	  p	  fK,	  

(2b)	   	  

w	  =	  p	  fL,	  

	  
where	  r	  is	  the	  price	  of	  capital	  and	  w	  is	  the	  wage	  rate.	  
	  

Consider	  two	  polar	  situations:	  the	  short	  run	  and	  the	  long	  run.	  By	  definition,	  the	  

capital	  stock	  is	  fixed	  in	  the	  short	  run	  and	  the	  price	  of	  capital	  is	  fixed	  in	  the	  long	  run.	  
Suppose	  an	  immigrant	  influx	  increases	  the	  size	  of	  the	  workforce.	  By	  differentiating	  
equations	  (2a)	  and	  (2b),	  it	  is	  easy	  to	  show	  that	  in	  the	  short	  run:4	  
	  
(3)	  

(4)	  

	  

	  

d log r
d log L

= sL cKL > 0. 	  
dK =0

d log w
= sL cLL < 0,
d log L dK =0

	  

	  
The	  derivative	  d	  log	  w/d	  log	  L	  will	  be	  called	  the	  “wage	  elasticity”	  of	  immigration.	  The	  short-­‐
run	  wage	  elasticity	  must	  be	  negative	  because	  cLL	  <	  0.	  As	  noted	  above,	  linear	  homogeneity	  

	  

7	  

implies	  that	  capital	  and	  labor	  are	  complements,	  hence	  cKL	  >	  0.	  This	  complementarity	  
ensures	  that	  capital	  becomes	  more	  valuable	  as	  the	  immigration-­‐induced	  supply	  shock	  
increases	  the	  size	  of	  the	  workforce.	  Immigration	  has	  a	  short-­‐run	  distributional	  impact:	  
wealth	  is	  shifted	  away	  from	  workers	  and	  towards	  those	  who	  own	  the	  productive	  resources	  
in	  the	  immigrant-­‐receiving	  country.	  
The	  distributional	  impact,	  however,	  disappears	  in	  the	  long	  run.	  Differentiating	  the	  
marginal	  productivity	  condition	  in	  equation	  (2a)	  implies	  that	  the	  immigration-­‐induced	  
change	  in	  the	  capital	  stock	  is:	  
	  
(5)	  

	  

d log K
d log L

=−
dr = 0

sL cKL
= 1, 	  
sK cKK

	  
where	  the	  last	  equality	  follows	  from	  equation	  (1).	  Linear	  homogeneity	  implies	  that	  the	  
capital	  stock	  and	  the	  size	  of	  the	  workforce	  will	  both	  grow	  (in	  percentage	  terms)	  by	  exactly	  
the	  same	  amount.	  The	  long-­‐run	  wage	  elasticity	  is	  then	  given	  by:	  
	  
(6)	  

	  

d log w
= sK cKL + sL cLL = 0, 	  
d log L dr=0

	  
where	  the	  last	  equality	  also	  follows	  from	  (1).	  In	  the	  long	  run,	  the	  receiving	  country’s	  wage	  
is	  independent	  of	  immigration.	  The	  intuition	  is	  clear:	  The	  linear	  homogeneity	  of	  the	  
production	  function	  implies	  that	  input	  prices	  depend	  only	  on	  the	  capital/labor	  ratio.	  The	  
assumption	  that	  the	  price	  of	  capital	  is	  constant	  implies	  that	  the	  capital/labor	  ratio	  is	  also	  

	  

8	  

constant.	  If	  immigrants	  increase	  the	  size	  of	  the	  workforce	  by	  10	  percent,	  the	  capital	  stock	  
must	  eventually	  also	  increase	  by	  10	  percent.	  In	  the	  end,	  the	  wage	  must	  return	  to	  its	  pre-­‐
immigration	  equilibrium.	  
	  

It	  is	  possible	  to	  obtain	  some	  insights	  into	  the	  potential	  magnitude	  of	  the	  short-­‐run	  

wage	  elasticity	  by	  specifying	  a	  functional	  form	  for	  the	  production	  function.	  Suppose,	  in	  
particular,	  that	  the	  aggregate	  production	  function	  is	  CES,	  so	  that	  Q = [αK δ + (1 − α)Lδ ]1/δ ,	  
where	  0 < α < 1, and	  δ	  ≤	  1.	  The	  elasticity	  of	  substitution	  between	  labor	  and	  capital	  is	  defined	  
as	  σ	  =	  1/(1	  −	  δ).	  The	  short-­‐run	  wage	  elasticity	  is	  then	  given	  by:5	  
	  
(7)	  

	  

d log w
= −(1 − δ) sK . 	  
d log L dK =0

	  
The	  theory	  has	  very	  specific	  implications	  about	  the	  numerical	  value	  of	  the	  short-­‐run	  wage	  
effect	  if	  the	  production	  function	  were	  Cobb-­‐Douglas	  (so	  that	  δ	  =	  0,	  or	  equivalently	  σ	  =	  1).	  
Labor’s	  share	  of	  income	  in	  the	  United	  States	  has	  hovered	  around	  0.7	  for	  some	  decades.	  
Equation	  (7)	  then	  implies	  that	  the	  short-­‐run	  wage	  elasticity	  is	  −0.3.	  One	  would	  then	  expect	  
the	  wage	  elasticity	  to	  lie	  between	  0.0	  and	  −0.3,	  depending	  on	  the	  extent	  to	  which	  capital	  
has	  adjusted	  to	  the	  presence	  of	  the	  immigrant	  influx.	  
	  
III. A Two-Good Economy with Homogeneous Labor
	  

I	  now	  expand	  the	  basic	  model	  in	  several	  ways.	  First,	  I	  assume	  that	  there	  are	  two	  

goods	  in	  the	  economy;	  one	  good	  is	  produced	  domestically	  and	  the	  other	  good	  is	  imported.6	  
Second,	  I	  allow	  for	  changes	  in	  product	  demand	  both	  because	  immigration	  may	  have	  

	  

9	  

changed	  the	  price	  of	  the	  domestically	  produced	  product	  (encouraging	  consumers	  to	  change	  
their	  quantity	  demanded)	  and	  because	  immigrants	  themselves	  will	  consume	  the	  product.	  
Finally,	  I	  explicitly	  introduce	  a	  supply	  curve	  of	  domestic	  capital.	  The	  resulting	  general	  
equilibrium	  model	  has	  much	  in	  common	  with	  derivations	  of	  Marshall’s	  rules	  of	  derived	  
demand.	  The	  technical	  details	  are	  summarized	  in	  the	  Mathematical	  Appendix.	  
	  

Two	  goods	  are	  consumed	  in	  a	  large	  economy:	  good	  q	  is	  produced	  domestically	  and	  

good	  y	  is	  imported.7	  To	  fix	  ideas,	  I	  initially	  assume	  that	  the	  price	  of	  the	  imported	  good	  y	  is	  
set	  in	  the	  global	  marketplace	  (or,	  alternatively,	  that	  it	  is	  produced	  at	  constant	  marginal	  
cost).	  In	  this	  context,	  the	  price	  of	  y	  is	  the	  numeraire	  and	  set	  to	  unity.	  I	  will	  relax	  this	  
assumption	  below	  and	  introduce	  an	  upward-­‐sloping	  foreign	  export	  supply	  curve	  for	  y.	  
Each	  consumer	  j	  has	  the	  quasilinear	  utility	  function:	  
	  
(8)	  

	  

U(y, q) = y + g*j

qξ − 1
, 	  
ξ

	  
where	  the	  weight	  g*	  reflects	  the	  consumer’s	  relative	  preference	  for	  the	  domestic	  good	  and	  
may	  be	  different	  for	  different	  consumers.	  I	  assume	  that	  the	  utility	  function	  is	  quasiconcave,	  
so	  that	  ξ	  <	  1.	  Let	  Z	  be	  the	  consumer’s	  income.	  The	  budget	  constraint	  is	  given	  by:	  
	  
(9)	  

	  

Z	  =	  y	  +	  pq.	  

	  
Utility	  maximization	  implies	  that	  the	  product	  demand	  function	  for	  the	  domestic	  good	  is:	  
	  

	  

10	  

(10)	   	  

q j = g j p −1/(1−ξ ) , 	  

	  
where	  qj	  is	  the	  amount	  of	  the	  good	  consumed	  by	  consumer	  j;	  and	  gj	  is	  the	  rescaled	  person-­‐
specific	  weight.	  The	  quasilinear	  functional	  form	  for	  the	  utility	  function	  implies	  that	  the	  
consumer’s	  demand	  for	  the	  domestic	  product	  does	  not	  depend	  on	  his	  income.	  The	  
assumption	  that	  there	  are	  no	  wealth	  effects	  will	  also	  be	  relaxed	  below.	  
Three	  types	  of	  persons	  consume	  good	  q:	  domestic	  workers,	  domestic	  capitalists,	  and	  
consumers	  in	  other	  countries.	  Let	  CL	  be	  the	  number	  of	  domestic	  workers,	  CK	  be	  the	  number	  
of	  domestic	  capitalists,	  and	  CX	  be	  the	  number	  of	  consumers	  in	  the	  “rest	  of	  the	  world.”8	  I	  
assume	  that	  all	  consumers	  have	  the	  same	  quasilinear	  utility	  function	  in	  (8),	  but	  that	  the	  
weighting	  factor	  g	  may	  differ	  among	  the	  various	  types	  of	  consumers.	  The	  total	  quantity	  
demanded	  by	  domestic	  consumers	  (QD)	  and	  foreign	  consumers	  (QX)	  is	  then	  given	  by:	  
	  
(11a)	   	  

QD = (gL C L + gK CK )p −1/(1−ξ ) , 	  

(11b)	  	   	  

QX = g X C X p −1/(1−ξ ) . 	  

	  
	  

Balanced	  trade	  requires	  that	  expenditures	  on	  the	  imported	  good	  y	  equal	  the	  value	  of	  

the	  exports	  of	  good	  q:	  
	  
(12)	   	  
	  

wL + rK − (gL C L + gK CK )p − ξ/(1−ξ ) = g X C X p − ξ/(1−ξ ) , 	  

	  

11	  

where	  (wL	  +	  rK)	  gives	  the	  total	  payment	  to	  domestic	  factors	  of	  production	  L	  and	  K.	  In	  a	  
competitive	  market,	  the	  payment	  to	  each	  factor	  of	  production	  equals	  its	  value	  of	  marginal	  
product.	  If	  the	  production	  function	  is	  linear	  homogeneous,	  Euler’s	  theorem	  implies	  that	  the	  
expression	  in	  (12)	  can	  be	  rewritten	  as:	  
	  
(13)	   	  

wL + rK = p( fL L + fK K ) = pQ = [ gL C L + gK CK + g X C X ] p − ξ/(1−ξ ) . 	  

	  
where	  fi	  is	  the	  marginal	  product	  of	  factor	  i.	  It	  follows	  that	  aggregate	  market	  demand	  for	  the	  
domestic	  good	  is	  given	  by:	  
	  
(14)	   	  

Q = C p −1/(1−ξ ) , 	  	  

	  
where	  C	  =	  gLCL	  +	  gKCK	  +	  gxCX	  ,	  the	  (weighted)	  number	  of	  consumers.	  
	  

An	  important	  question	  arises:	  How	  does	  an	  immigration-­‐induced	  increase	  in	  the	  

size	  of	  the	  workforce	  affect	  the	  size	  of	  the	  consumer	  base	  for	  the	  domestic	  product?9	  Let	  
C(L)	  be	  the	  function	  that	  relates	  the	  number	  of	  consumers	  to	  the	  number	  of	  workers,	  and	  
let	  φ	  =	  d	  log	  C/d	  log	  L.	  An	  important	  special	  case	  occurs	  when	  the	  elasticity	  φ	  =	  1,	  so	  that	  the	  
immigrant	  influx	  leads	  to	  a	  proportionately	  equal	  increase	  in	  the	  (weighted)	  number	  of	  
consumers	  and	  the	  number	  of	  workers.	  I	  will	  refer	  to	  the	  assumption	  that	  φ	  =	  1	  as	  the	  case	  
of	  product	  market	  neutrality.	  The	  “neutrality,”	  of	  course,	  refers	  to	  the	  fact	  that	  the	  
immigration-­‐induced	  supply	  shift	  leads	  to	  the	  same	  relative	  increase	  in	  the	  size	  of	  the	  
consumer	  base	  and	  in	  the	  size	  of	  the	  workforce.	  

	  

12	  
It	  is	  easy	  to	  allow	  for	  different	  product	  demand	  preferences	  between	  immigrants	  

and	  natives	  by	  allowing	  for	  non-­‐neutrality,	  i.e.,	  by	  allowing	  for	  deviations	  from	  unity	  in	  the	  
elasticity	  φ.	  For	  example,	  if	  immigrants	  prefer	  consuming	  the	  imported	  good,	  an	  immigrant	  
influx	  that	  increases	  the	  size	  of	  the	  workforce	  by	  x	  percent	  may	  lead	  to	  a	  smaller	  percent	  
increase	  in	  the	  number	  of	  “effective”	  consumers	  for	  the	  domestic	  good.	  
Equation	  (14)	  shows	  that	  an	  immigration-­‐induced	  supply	  shift	  will	  have	  two	  distinct	  
effects	  in	  the	  domestic	  labor	  market	  through	  product	  demand:	  First,	  the	  price	  of	  the	  
domestic	  good	  might	  change,	  moving	  current	  consumers	  along	  the	  existing	  product	  
demand	  curve;	  second,	  because	  immigrants	  are	  themselves	  “new”	  consumers,	  the	  market	  
product	  demand	  curve	  will	  shift	  out	  and	  the	  magnitude	  of	  this	  shift	  will	  depend	  on	  φ.10	  
	  

It	  is	  analytically	  convenient	  to	  solve	  the	  model	  by	  using	  the	  inverse	  product	  demand	  

function:	  
	  
(15)	   	  

p = C η Q − η , 	  

	  
where	  η	  is	  the	  inverse	  price	  elasticity	  of	  demand,	  with	  η	  =	  1	  −	  ξ	  >	  0,	  where	  the	  strict	  
inequality	  follows	  from	  the	  assumed	  quasiconcavity	  of	  the	  utility	  function	  in	  (8).	  
The	  production	  technology	  for	  the	  domestic	  product	  is	  given	  by	  the	  CES	  production	  
function:	  
	  
(16)	   	  
	  

Q = [αK δ + (1 − α)Lδ ]1/δ , 	  

	  	  

where	  the	  elasticity	  of	  substitution	  between	  labor	  and	  capital	  is	  σ	  =	  1/(1	  −	  δ).	  

	  

13	  

	  

Finally,	  the	  supply	  of	  domestic	  capital	  is	  given	  by	  the	  inverse	  supply	  function:	  

	  
(17)	   	  

r = K λ , 	  

	  
where	  λ	  ≥	  0,	  and	  is	  the	  inverse	  elasticity	  of	  supply	  of	  capital.	  The	  two	  special	  cases	  
introduced	  in	  the	  previous	  section	  for	  the	  short	  run	  and	  the	  long	  run	  correspond	  to	  λ	  =	  ∞	  
and	  λ	  =	  0,	  respectively.	  
	  

In	  a	  competitive	  market,	  input	  prices	  equal	  the	  value	  of	  marginal	  product:	  

	  
(18a)	   	  

r = α C η Q1−δ− η K δ−1 . 	  

(18b)	   	  

w = (1 − α)C η Q1−δ−η Lδ−1 . 	  

	  
	  

Let	  d	  log	  L	  represent	  the	  immigration-­‐induced	  percent	  change	  in	  the	  size	  of	  the	  

workforce.	  By	  differentiating	  equations	  (18a)	  and	  (18b),	  and	  allowing	  for	  the	  fact	  that	  the	  
supply	  of	  capital	  is	  given	  by	  equation	  (17),	  it	  can	  be	  shown	  that:11	  
	  
(19)	   	  

d log w
−λ (1 − δ − η) sK
(1 + λ − δ) η(1 − φ)
=
−
. 	  
d log L (1 + λ − δ) − (1 − δ − η) sK (1 + λ − δ) − (1 − δ − η)sK

	  	  
Consider	  initially	  the	  special	  case	  of	  product	  market	  neutrality	  (i.e.,	  φ	  =	  1),	  so	  that	  
immigration	  expands	  the	  size	  of	  the	  consumer	  pool	  by	  the	  same	  proportion	  as	  its	  
expansion	  of	  the	  workforce.	  The	  wage	  elasticity	  then	  reduces	  to:	  
	  

	  

14	  

(19a)	   	  

d log w
−λ (1 − δ − η) sK
=
. 	  
d log L φ=1 (1 + λ − δ) − (1 − δ − η) sK

	  
In	  the	  long	  run,	  λ	  =	  0	  and	  the	  wage	  elasticity	  goes	  to	  zero.	  Note	  also	  that	  the	  denominator	  of	  
equation	  (19a)	  is	  unambiguously	  positive.12	  As	  long	  as	  there	  is	  incomplete	  capital	  
adjustment	  (λ	  >	  0),	  therefore,	  the	  wage	  elasticity	  will	  be	  negative	  if	  (1	  −	  δ	  −	  η)	  >	  0.	  Define	  η*	  
to	  be	  the	  elasticity	  of	  product	  demand	  (i.e.,	  η*	  =	  1/η).	  It	  is	  then	  easy	  to	  show	  that	  (1	  −	  δ	  −	  η)	  
>	  0	  implies	  that:	  
	  
(20)	   	  

η*	  >	  σ.	  

	  
In	  other	  words,	  even	  after	  allowing	  for	  a	  full	  response	  by	  all	  consumers	  in	  the	  product	  
market,	  the	  wage	  effect	  of	  immigration	  will	  be	  negative	  if	  there	  is	  incomplete	  capital	  
adjustment	  and	  if	  it	  is	  easier	  for	  consumers	  to	  substitute	  among	  the	  available	  goods	  than	  it	  
is	  for	  producers	  to	  substitute	  between	  labor	  and	  capital.	  This	  latter	  condition,	  of	  course,	  
has	  a	  familiar	  ring	  in	  labor	  economics—as	  it	  happens	  to	  be	  identical	  to	  the	  condition	  that	  
validates	  Marshall’s	  second	  rule	  of	  derived	  demand:	  An	  increase	  in	  labor’s	  share	  of	  income	  
leads	  to	  more	  elastic	  demand	  “only	  when	  the	  consumer	  can	  substitute	  more	  easily	  than	  the	  
entrepreneur”	  (Hicks,	  1932,	  p.	  246).	  
	  

It	  turns	  out,	  however,	  that	  the	  condition	  in	  equation	  (20)	  arises	  independently	  in	  a	  

political	  economy	  model	  of	  immigration.	  In	  particular,	  the	  restriction	  that	  η*	  >	  σ	  is	  a	  
second-­‐order	  condition	  to	  the	  problem	  faced	  by	  a	  social	  planner	  trying	  to	  determine	  the	  
optimal	  amount	  of	  immigration	  in	  the	  context	  of	  the	  current	  model.	  One	  important	  feature	  

	  

15	  

of	  the	  competitive	  market	  model	  presented	  in	  this	  section	  is	  that	  the	  wage-­‐setting	  rule	  
ignores	  the	  fact	  that	  an	  additional	  immigrant	  affects	  product	  demand,	  so	  that	  the	  marginal	  
revenue	  product	  of	  an	  immigrant	  is	  not	  equal	  to	  his	  value	  of	  marginal	  product.	  Suppose	  a	  
social	  planner	  internalizes	  this	  externality	  and	  wishes	  to	  admit	  the	  immigrant	  influx	  that	  
maximizes	  gross	  domestic	  product	  net	  of	  any	  costs	  imposed	  by	  immigration.13	  More	  
precisely,	  the	  social	  planner	  wishes	  to	  maximize:	  
	  
(21)	   	  

Ω = pQ − Fh = C η Q1−η − Fh, 	  

	  
where	  F	  gives	  the	  number	  of	  immigrants	  and	  h	  gives	  the	  (constant)	  cost	  of	  admitting	  an	  
additional	  immigrant	  (perhaps	  in	  terms	  of	  providing	  social	  services,	  etc.).	  For	  simplicity,	  
consider	  the	  case	  with	  product	  market	  neutrality.	  In	  the	  Mathematical	  Appendix,	  I	  show	  
that	  the	  second-­‐order	  conditions	  for	  this	  maximization	  problem	  are	  satisfied	  if:14	  
	  
(22)	   	  

	  (1	  −	  η)	  >	  0,	  	   	  

and	  

	  

(1	  −	  δ	  −	  η)	  >	  0.	  

	  
In	  short,	  as	  long	  as	  the	  size	  of	  the	  immigrant	  influx	  is	  optimal,	  the	  wage	  elasticity	  in	  
equation	  (19a)	  must	  be	  negative.	  In	  that	  case,	  the	  scale	  effect	  resulting	  from	  immigration—
regardless	  of	  whether	  it	  occurs	  through	  an	  expansion	  of	  the	  capital	  stock	  or	  through	  an	  
expansion	  in	  product	  demand—can	  never	  be	  sufficiently	  strong	  to	  lead	  to	  a	  wage	  increase.	  
	  

It	  is	  easy	  to	  measure	  the	  size	  of	  the	  scale	  effect	  triggered	  by	  immigration	  by	  

considering	  the	  simple	  case	  of	  a	  Cobb-­‐Douglas	  economy	  in	  the	  short	  run.	  The	  wage	  
elasticity	  in	  (19a)	  then	  collapses	  to:	  

	  

16	  

	  
(23)	   	  

d log w
= − (1− η)sK . 	  
d log L φ=1
δ=0
λ=∞

	  
By	  contrasting	  this	  elasticity	  with	  the	  analogous	  effect	  in	  the	  one-­‐good	  model	  presented	  in	  
equation	  (7),	  it	  is	  easy	  to	  see	  that	  the	  scale	  effect	  of	  immigration	  equals	  ηsK.	  In	  the	  absence	  
of	  the	  scale	  effect,	  the	  wage	  elasticity	  would	  equal	  −0.3.	  If	  the	  inverse	  elasticity	  of	  product	  
demand	  is	  0.5	  (implying	  a	  product	  demand	  elasticity	  of	  2.0),	  the	  wage	  elasticity	  would	  fall	  
to	  −0.15.	  In	  other	  words,	  the	  short-­‐run	  adverse	  effect	  of	  immigration	  on	  the	  wage	  can	  be	  
greatly	  alleviated	  through	  increased	  product	  demand—as	  long	  as	  the	  product	  demand	  
elasticity	  is	  sizable.	  
	  

It	  is	  important	  to	  emphasize	  that	  the	  wage	  effect	  will	  not	  disappear	  in	  the	  long	  run	  if	  

the	  product	  market	  neutrality	  assumption	  does	  not	  hold.	  Consider,	  for	  example,	  the	  case	  
where	  immigration	  does	  not	  expand	  the	  size	  of	  the	  consumer	  base	  as	  rapidly	  as	  it	  expands	  
the	  size	  of	  the	  workforce	  (i.e.,	  φ	  <	  1).	  The	  second	  term	  in	  (19)	  is	  then	  negative	  and	  does	  not	  
vanish	  as	  λ	  goes	  to	  zero.	  In	  other	  words,	  there	  is	  a	  permanent	  wage	  reduction	  because	  
there	  are	  “too	  many”	  workers	  and	  “too	  few”	  consumers.	  This	  result	  has	  interesting	  
implications	  for	  the	  study	  of	  immigration	  when	  immigrants	  send	  a	  large	  fraction	  of	  their	  
earnings	  to	  the	  sending	  country	  in	  the	  form	  of	  remittances.	  The	  negative	  effect	  of	  
remittances	  on	  wages	  in	  the	  receiving	  country	  is	  permanent;	  it	  does	  not	  disappear	  even	  
after	  capital	  has	  fully	  adjusted	  to	  the	  immigrant	  influx.	  Note,	  however,	  that	  it	  is	  also	  
possible	  for	  immigration	  to	  generate	  permanent	  wage	  gains	  if	  φ	  >	  1	  and	  the	  immigrants	  are	  
“conspicuous	  consumers”	  of	  the	  domestic	  product.15	  

	  
	  

17	  
The	  wage	  consequences	  of	  even	  slight	  deviations	  from	  product	  market	  neutrality	  

can	  be	  sizable.	  As	  an	  illustration,	  consider	  the	  long	  run	  effect	  in	  a	  Cobb-­‐Douglas	  economy.	  
The	  first	  term	  in	  equation	  (19)	  vanishes	  and	  the	  wage	  elasticity	  reduces	  to:	  
	  
(24)	   	  

d log w
−η(1 − φ)
=
.
d log L δ=0 1 − (1 − η) sK
λ=0

	  

	  
Suppose	  that	  φ	  =	  0.8,	  so	  that	  an	  immigration-­‐induced	  doubling	  of	  the	  workforce	  increases	  
the	  size	  of	  the	  consumer	  pool	  by	  80	  percent.	  Suppose	  again	  that	  the	  inverse	  elasticity	  of	  
product	  demand	  η	  is	  0.5.	  Equation	  (24)	  then	  predicts	  that	  the	  long-­‐run	  wage	  elasticity	  of	  
immigration	  will	  equal	  −0.12.	  
	  
Immigration	  and	  Prices	  
The	  wage	  elasticity	  in	  equation	  (19)	  gives	  the	  wage	  impact	  of	  immigration	  in	  terms	  
of	  the	  price	  of	  the	  imported	  product	  (i.e.,	  the	  numeraire).	  It	  is	  also	  of	  interest	  to	  determine	  
the	  impact	  of	  immigration	  relative	  to	  the	  price	  of	  the	  domestically	  produced	  good.	  After	  all,	  
immigration	  has	  domestic	  product	  price	  effects	  both	  because	  the	  wage	  drops	  and	  because	  
immigrants	  themselves	  shift	  the	  product	  demand	  curve	  outwards.16	  By	  differentiating	  
equation	  (15)	  with	  respect	  to	  the	  immigration-­‐induced	  supply	  shift,	  it	  can	  be	  shown	  that	  
the	  effect	  of	  immigration	  on	  the	  domestic	  price	  is:	  
	  
(25)	   	  

d log p
ληsK
η(1 − φ)[λ + (1 − δ)sL ]
=
−
. 	  
d log L (1 + λ − δ) − (1 − δ − η)sK (1 + λ − δ) − (1 − δ − η)sK

	  

18	  

	  
	  

Suppose	  there	  is	  product	  market	  neutrality.	  The	  second	  term	  of	  (25)	  then	  vanishes,	  

and	  immigration	  has	  no	  price	  effects	  in	  the	  long	  run	  (λ	  =	  0).	  However,	  equation	  (25)	  shows	  
that	  immigration	  must	  increase	  prices	  as	  long	  as	  the	  product	  demand	  curve	  is	  downward	  
sloping	  (η	  >	  0)	  and	  capital	  has	  not	  fully	  adjusted.	  The	  inflationary	  effect	  of	  immigration	  is	  
attenuated	  (and	  potentially	  reversed)	  if	  φ	  <	  1	  and	  product	  demand	  does	  not	  rise	  
proportionately	  with	  the	  size	  of	  the	  immigrant	  influx.	  
The	  prediction	  that	  domestic	  prices	  rise	  at	  the	  same	  time	  that	  wages	  fall	  seems	  
counterintuitive.	  However,	  it	  is	  easy	  to	  understand	  the	  economic	  factors	  underlying	  this	  
result	  by	  noting	  that	  the	  derivative	  in	  (25)	  can	  also	  be	  expressed	  as:	  
	  
	  (26)	   	  

⎛
d log p
d log K ⎞
= ηsK ⎜ 1 −
− η(1 − φ). 	  
⎝
d log L
d log L ⎟⎠

	  
As	  long	  as	  there	  is	  product	  market	  neutrality,	  the	  price	  of	  the	  domestic	  good	  must	  rise	  
whenever	  capital	  adjusts	  by	  less	  than	  the	  immigration-­‐induced	  percent	  shift	  in	  supply.	  The	  
intuition	  is	  clear:	  In	  the	  absence	  of	  full	  capital	  adjustment,	  the	  immigration-­‐induced	  
increase	  in	  domestic	  product	  demand	  cannot	  be	  easily	  met	  by	  the	  existing	  mix	  of	  inputs,	  
raising	  the	  price	  of	  the	  domestic	  product.17	  
An	  important	  question,	  of	  course,	  is:	  what	  happens	  to	  the	  real	  wage	  defined	  in	  terms	  
of	  the	  price	  of	  the	  domestic	  product	  (or	  w/p)?	  By	  combining	  results	  from	  equations	  (19)	  
and	  (25),	  it	  is	  easy	  to	  show	  that:	  
	  

	  

19	  

(27)	   	  

w =

−λ (1 − δ) sK
η(1 − φ)(1 − δ) sK
d log(w / p)
=
−
. 	  
d log L
(1 + λ − δ) − (1 − δ − η)sK (1 + λ − δ) − (1 − δ − η)sK

	  
Note	  that	  if	  the	  product	  market	  neutrality	  assumption	  holds,	  the	  second	  term	  in	  (27)	  
vanishes	  and	  immigration	  must	  reduce	  the	  real	  wage	  as	  long	  as	  capital	  does	  not	  fully	  adjust.	  
This	  result	  does	  not	  depend	  on	  the	  relative	  magnitudes	  of	  the	  elasticities	  of	  substitution	  
and	  product	  demand.	  The	  negative	  impact	  of	  immigration	  on	  the	  real	  wage	  is	  not	  
surprising.	  After	  all,	  immigration	  reduces	  the	  nominal	  wage	  and	  increases	  the	  domestic	  
price	  simultaneously.	  To	  simplify	  the	  discussion,	  I	  will	  refer	  to	  the	  elasticity	  in	  (27)	  as	  the	  
real	  wage	  elasticity	  of	  immigration.	  
In	  order	  to	  get	  a	  sense	  of	  the	  magnitude	  of	  the	  real	  wage	  elasticity,	  it	  is	  instructive	  to	  
refer	  back	  to	  the	  simplest	  example:	  a	  Cobb-­‐Douglas	  economy	  in	  the	  short	  run.	  Equation	  
(27)	  collapses	  to:	  
	  
(28)	   	  

d log(w / p)
= −sK . 	  
d log L δ=0
λ=∞

	  
The	  short-­‐run	  real	  wage	  elasticity	  is	  identical	  to	  that	  implied	  by	  the	  simplest	  one-­‐good	  
Cobb-­‐Douglas	  model	  in	  equation	  (7).	  Even	  after	  the	  model	  accounts	  for	  the	  fact	  that	  
immigrants	  increase	  the	  size	  of	  the	  consumption	  base	  proportionately	  and	  that	  
immigration-­‐induced	  price	  changes	  move	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  consumers	  along	  their	  product	  
demand	  curve,	  the	  short-­‐run	  real	  wage	  elasticity	  is	  still	  −0.3.	  

	  

20	  
The	  theory	  of	  factor	  demand	  clarifies	  an	  important	  misunderstanding:	  the	  often-­‐

heard	  argument	  that	  the	  outward	  shift	  in	  product	  demand	  induced	  by	  immigration	  will	  
somehow	  return	  the	  economy	  to	  its	  pre-­‐immigration	  equilibrium	  does	  not	  have	  any	  
theoretical	  support.	  Instead,	  the	  theory	  reveals	  that	  immigration	  has	  an	  adverse	  effect	  on	  
the	  real	  wage.18	  Put	  differently,	  the	  number	  of	  domestically	  produced	  widgets	  that	  the	  
typical	  worker	  in	  the	  receiving	  country	  can	  potentially	  buy	  will	  decline	  as	  the	  result	  of	  the	  
immigrant	  influx—even	  after	  one	  accounts	  for	  the	  fact	  that	  immigrants	  themselves	  will	  
increase	  the	  demand	  for	  widgets.	  And,	  under	  some	  conditions,	  the	  decline	  in	  the	  number	  of	  
widgets	  that	  can	  be	  purchased	  is	  exactly	  the	  same	  as	  the	  decline	  found	  in	  the	  simplest	  
factor	  demand	  model	  that	  ignores	  the	  role	  of	  immigrants	  in	  the	  widget	  product	  market.	  	  
	  
IV.	  Extensions of the Homogeneous Labor Model	  
The	  model	  summarized	  in	  the	  previous	  section	  incorporates	  two	  important	  
restrictions.	  First,	  the	  product	  demand	  function	  for	  the	  domestic	  good	  q	  does	  not	  depend	  
on	  the	  consumer’s	  income;	  second,	  the	  price	  of	  good	  y	  is	  fixed	  (so	  that	  the	  foreign	  export	  
supply	  curve	  for	  y	  is	  perfectly	  elastic).	  I	  now	  extend	  the	  framework	  by	  relaxing	  both	  of	  
these	  assumptions	  simultaneously.	  It	  is	  convenient	  to	  begin	  by	  modeling	  consumer	  demand	  
for	  good	  y.	  Suppose	  the	  typical	  consumer’s	  demand	  function	  for	  the	  imported	  good	  can	  be	  
written	  as:	  
	  
(29)	   	  
	  

−

1

1

−1

y j = h j py τ p τ Z j , 	  

	  

21	  

where	  hj	  is	  a	  person-­‐specific	  shifter	  detailing	  a	  consumer’s	  relative	  preference	  for	  good	  y;	  
py	  is	  the	  price	  of	  good	  y;	  p	  continues	  to	  be	  the	  price	  of	  good	  q;	  and	  Zj	  is	  the	  consumer’s	  
income.	  The	  consumer’s	  income	  is	  equal	  to	  w	  if	  he	  is	  a	  worker	  in	  the	  domestic	  economy;	  r	  is	  
he	  is	  a	  capitalist	  in	  the	  domestic	  economy;	  and	  x	  if	  he	  is	  a	  consumer	  in	  the	  “rest	  of	  the	  
world.”	  The	  weight	  h	  may	  differ	  among	  the	  various	  types	  of	  consumers.	  
The	  parameter	  τ	  is	  positive	  and	  is	  the	  inverse	  price	  elasticity	  of	  demand	  for	  good	  y.19	  
The	  demand	  function	  in	  (29)	  builds	  in	  two	  properties.	  First,	  consumers	  have	  homothetic	  
preferences	  (implying	  that	  the	  income	  elasticity	  is	  unity).	  Second,	  the	  demand	  function	  is	  
homogeneous	  of	  degree	  zero,	  so	  that	  the	  three	  elasticities	  defined	  in	  (29)	  add	  up	  to	  zero.	  
The	  aggregate	  demand	  for	  the	  imported	  good	  is	  given	  by:	  
	  
(30)	   	  

−

1
τ

Y = py p

1
−1
τ

( hL CL w + hK CK r + hX C X x ). 	  

	  
Let	  Vy	  =	  hL	  CL	  w	  +	  hK	  CK	  r	  +	  hX	  CX	  x,	  the	  “effective”	  wealth	  that	  determines	  aggregate	  demand	  
for	  the	  imported	  good.20	  The	  inverse	  demand	  function	  for	  Y	  can	  then	  be	  written	  as:	  
	  
(31)	   	  

py = Y − τ p1−τ Vyτ . 	  

	  
The	  aggregate	  supply	  curve	  for	  Y	  is	  given	  by:	  
	  
(32)	   	  
	  

py = Y ϕ , 	  

	  

22	  

where	  ϕ	  is	  the	  inverse	  elasticity	  of	  supply.	  The	  equilibrium	  price	  of	  good	  y	  is	  determined	  by	  
the	  simultaneous	  solution	  of	  equations	  (31)	  and	  (32).	  	  
	  

The	  aggregate	  demand	  curve	  for	  the	  domestic	  good	  Q	  when	  there	  are	  wealth	  effects	  

can	  be	  derived	  in	  an	  analogous	  fashion	  and	  is	  given	  by:	  
	  
(33)	   	  

Q= p

−

1
η

1
−1
η
y
q

p V , 	  

	  
where	  Vq	  =	  gLCL	  w	  +	  gK	  CK	  r	  +	  gX	  CX	  x,	  and	  measures	  the	  effective	  wealth	  that	  determines	  
aggregate	  demand	  for	  the	  domestic	  good.21	  The	  demand	  function	  in	  (33)	  is	  also	  derived	  
from	  homothetic	  preferences	  and	  is	  homogeneous	  of	  degree	  zero.	  By	  substituting	  in	  the	  
expression	  for	  the	  equilibrium	  price	  of	  good	  y,	  it	  is	  possible	  to	  solve	  for	  the	  inverse	  
aggregate	  demand	  function	  for	  the	  domestic	  good:	  
	  	  
(34)	   	  

p = Q − η̂ Vqη̂ Vyϕ̂ , 	  

	  
where	   η̂ 	  and	   ϕ̂ 	  are	  rescaled	  values	  of	  the	  parameters	  η	  and	  ϕ,	  respectively.22	  Analogous	  to	  
the	  restrictions	  in	  equation	  (22),	  the	  second-­‐order	  conditions	  for	  the	  social	  planner	  
problem	  now	  imply	  that	   η̂ 	  <	  1	  (which,	  in	  turn,	  implies	  that	  η	  <	  1).	  It	  then	  follows	  that	   ϕ̂ 	  
must	  also	  lie	  between	  zero	  and	  one.	  Note	  that	   η̂ 	  =	  η	  and	   ϕ̂ 	  =	  0	  when	  the	  supply	  curve	  for	  
the	  imported	  good	  is	  perfectly	  elastic.	  
	  

It	  is	  instructive	  to	  compare	  equation	  (34)	  with	  equation	  (15),	  the	  aggregate	  demand	  

function	  in	  the	  model	  that	  ignored	  wealth	  effects	  and	  assumed	  that	  the	  supply	  of	  Y	  was	  

	  

23	  

perfectly	  elastic.	  In	  the	  simpler	  model,	  the	  inverse	  demand	  function	  for	  Q	  was	   p = Q − η C η , 	  
and	  the	  shifter	  was	  simply	  the	  (weighted)	  number	  of	  consumers	  who	  purchased	  the	  
domestic	  good.	  Even	  if	  the	  supply	  curve	  of	  Y	  were	  perfectly	  elastic	  (implying	   ϕ̂ 	  =	  0),	  the	  
shifter	  in	  equation	  (34)	  differs	  because	  it	  depends	  not	  only	  on	  the	  number	  of	  consumers,	  
but	  also	  on	  their	  wealth.	  
	  

The	  presence	  of	  wealth	  effects	  implies	  that	  the	  impact	  of	  immigration	  on	  wages	  in	  

the	  domestic	  labor	  market	  now	  depends	  on:	  (a)	  how	  immigration	  changes	  the	  size	  of	  the	  
consumer	  base	  for	  each	  of	  the	  two	  goods;	  and	  (b)	  how	  immigration	  changes	  the	  average	  
income	  of	  the	  consumer	  base.	  The	  first	  of	  these	  effects,	  of	  course,	  is	  related	  to	  the	  product	  
market	  neutrality	  assumption.	  Suppose	  that	  the	  pay	  rate	  to	  each	  of	  the	  groups	  that	  make	  up	  
the	  consumer	  base	  (i.e.,	  w,	  r,	  and	  x)	  is	  held	  constant.	  The	  immigration-­‐induced	  percent	  
change	  in	  the	  size	  of	  the	  consumer	  base	  for	  the	  domestic	  good	  is	  given	  by:	  
	  
(35)	   	  

φq =

d logVq
d log L

= ε qD sL
w,r,x

d logC L
d logCK
d logC X
+ ε qD sK
+ (1− ε qD )
, 	  
d log L
d log L
d log L

	  
where	   ε qD = 1− (g X C X x / Vq ), 	  the	  share	  of	  total	  expenditures	  in	  good	  q	  that	  is	  attributable	  to	  
domestic	  consumers.	  The	  elasticity	  φq,	  of	  course,	  is	  the	  counterpart	  of	  the	  elasticity	  φ	  in	  the	  
simpler	  model	  above.	  
The	  impact	  of	  immigration	  on	  the	  size	  of	  the	  consumer	  base	  for	  the	  imported	  good	  
is:	  
	  

	  

24	  

(36)	   	  

φy =

d logVy
d log L

= ε yD sL
w,r,x

d logC L
d logCK
d logC X
+ ε yD sK
+ (1− ε yD )
, 	  
d log L
d log L
d log L

	  
where	   ε yD = 1− (hX C X x / Vy ), 	  the	  share	  of	  total	  expenditures	  in	  good	  y	  that	  is	  attributable	  to	  
domestic	  consumers.	  If	  much	  of	  the	  output	  of	  the	  domestic	  good	  is	  consumed	  domestically,	  
while	  much	  of	  the	  output	  of	  the	  imported	  good	  is	  consumed	  abroad,	  it	  would	  be	  reasonable	  
to	  expect	  that	  the	  elasticity	  φq	  would	  be	  relatively	  large	  (perhaps	  nearing	  one),	  while	  the	  
elasticity	  φy	  would	  be	  relatively	  small.	  
	  

One	  final	  issue	  needs	  to	  be	  addressed	  before	  I	  can	  calculate	  the	  wage	  elasticity	  in	  the	  

domestic	  labor	  market.	  It	  is	  clear	  from	  the	  definitions	  of	  Vq	  and	  Vy	  that	  the	  immigration-­‐
induced	  wealth	  effect	  will	  also	  depend	  on	  what	  happens	  to	  x,	  the	  pay	  rate	  in	  the	  foreign	  
economy.	  For	  simplicity,	  I	  assume	  that	  immigration	  (though	  it	  may	  be	  large	  relative	  to	  the	  
size	  of	  the	  domestic	  workforce)	  is	  small	  relative	  to	  the	  size	  of	  the	  workforce	  in	  the	  rest	  of	  
the	  world.	  Hence	  I	  ignore	  any	  potential	  effects	  on	  consumer	  demand	  (and	  the	  domestic	  
labor	  market)	  through	  the	  change	  in	  the	  level	  of	  foreign	  income	  x.	  
	  

The	  mathematical	  appendix	  describes	  the	  solution	  of	  this	  model.	  The	  resulting	  

expressions	  are	  more	  complex	  because	  of	  the	  rapidly	  exploding	  number	  of	  elasticities	  (and	  
income	  shares)	  required	  to	  describe	  all	  the	  feedback	  effects	  in	  the	  model.	  To	  simplify,	  I	  
consider	  the	  case	  of	  a	  Cobb-­‐Douglas	  production	  function.	  Further,	  I	  restrict	  the	  discussion	  
to	  the	  impact	  of	  immigration	  on	  the	  real	  wage	  defined	  by	  w/p.	  The	  real	  wage	  elasticity	  in	  
the	  expanded	  model	  is	  then	  given	  by:	  
	  

	  

25	  

(37)	   	  

d log (w / p)
−λ (1 − η̂ε qD − ϕ̂ ε yD ) sK η̂(φq − 1) + ϕ̂ φ y
=
+
, 	  
d log L δ=0
Δ
Δ

	  
where	   Δ = (1 + λ)[1 − η̂ε qD sL − ϕ̂ ε yD sL ] − [(1 − η̂) + η̂λ ε qD + ϕ̂ λ ε yD ]sK .	  	  
	  

It	  is	  instructive	  to	  compare	  the	  real	  wage	  elasticity	  in	  equation	  (37)	  with	  the	  

analogous	  expression	  in	  (27),	  which	  ignored	  wealth	  effects	  and	  assumed	  the	  supply	  of	  the	  
imported	  good	  y	  was	  perfectly	  elastic.23	  For	  simplicity,	  suppose	  that	  “generalized”	  product	  
market	  neutrality	  holds,	  so	  that	  the	  second	  term	  in	  both	  equation	  (27)	  and	  equation	  (37)	  
vanishes.24	  It	  is	  easy	  to	  see	  that	  the	  numerator	  of	  (37)	  contains	  the	  additional	  term	  
λ ( η̂ε qLD + ϕ̂ ε yLD ) sK .	  This	  additional	  term	  represents	  two	  distinct	  scale	  effects	  induced	  by	  the	  
changing	  wealth	  of	  consumers.	  Both	  of	  these	  scale	  effects	  are	  positive,	  so	  that	  they	  weaken	  
the	  adverse	  labor	  market	  impact	  of	  immigration	  as	  long	  as	  capital	  has	  not	  fully	  adjusted.	  
The	  first	  wealth	  effect	  (the	  term	  multiplied	  by	   η̂ )	  arises	  because	  immigration	  
necessarily	  increases	  average	  income	  in	  the	  domestic	  economy.	  In	  other	  words,	  as	  is	  typical	  
in	  this	  type	  of	  model,	  the	  losses	  incurred	  by	  workers	  are	  more	  than	  made	  up	  by	  the	  gains	  
accruing	  to	  capitalists	  (Borjas	  1995).	  The	  wealth	  effect	  generated	  by	  the	  higher	  average	  
income	  increases	  demand	  for	  the	  domestically	  produced	  good,	  increases	  the	  demand	  for	  
labor,	  and	  helps	  to	  attenuate	  the	  adverse	  labor	  market	  impact	  of	  immigration.	  The	  second	  
wealth	  effect	  (the	  term	  multiplied	  by	   ϕ̂ )	  arises	  because	  immigration	  also	  generates	  
increased	  demand	  for	  the	  imported	  good	  y.	  If	  the	  supply	  curve	  of	  the	  imported	  good	  is	  not	  
perfectly	  elastic,	  however,	  the	  wealth	  effect	  increases	  the	  price	  of	  the	  imported	  good,	  
encouraging	  consumers	  to	  switch	  back	  to	  the	  domestic	  good,	  further	  attenuating	  the	  
adverse	  impact	  of	  immigration	  on	  the	  domestic	  wage.	  

	  
	  

26	  
Despite	  the	  additional	  complexity,	  equation	  (37)	  yields	  three	  unambiguous	  results	  

as	  long	  as	  there	  is	  generalized	  product	  market	  neutrality:	  
1.	  The	  real	  wage	  elasticity	  is	  zero	  in	  the	  long	  run	  (i.e.,	  when	  λ	  =	  0).	  
2.	  As	  shown	  in	  the	  mathematical	  appendix,	  the	  real	  wage	  elasticity	  in	  (37)	  must	  be	  
negative	  as	  long	  as	  there	  is	  incomplete	  capital	  adjustment.25	  In	  other	  words,	  the	  scale	  
effects	  generated	  by	  the	  immigration-­‐induced	  changes	  in	  consumer	  demand	  can	  never	  be	  
sufficiently	  strong	  to	  reverse	  the	  direct	  adverse	  impact	  of	  immigration	  in	  the	  domestic	  
labor	  market.	  
3.	  The	  short-­‐run	  effect	  of	  immigration	  is	  given	  by:	  
	  
(38)	   	  

d log(w / p)
= −sK .
d log L δ=0
λ=∞

	  

	  
Remarkably,	  we	  have	  come	  full	  circle	  to	  the	  beginning	  of	  the	  analysis	  (see	  equation	  (7)).	  
The	  short-­‐run	  real	  wage	  elasticity	  of	  immigration	  is	  still	  −0.3,	  even	  after	  the	  model	  
accounts	  for	  all	  the	  feedback	  possibilities	  introduced	  by	  wealth	  effects	  in	  the	  product	  
market	  and	  inelastic	  supply	  of	  the	  imported	  good.26	  
	  
V. Heterogeneous Labor
	  

The	  presence	  of	  heterogeneous	  labor	  implies	  that	  the	  impact	  of	  immigration	  on	  the	  

wage	  of	  any	  single	  group	  of	  workers	  depends	  on	  how	  immigration	  affects	  the	  supply	  of	  
every	  group	  of	  workers.	  In	  both	  theoretical	  and	  empirical	  work,	  therefore,	  the	  need	  arises	  
to	  reduce	  the	  dimensionality	  of	  the	  problem,	  typically	  by	  limiting	  the	  types	  of	  permissible	  

	  

27	  

cross-­‐effects	  among	  inputs.	  The	  need	  for	  tractability	  becomes	  more	  acute	  if	  one	  wishes	  to	  
allow	  for	  the	  presence	  of	  heterogeneous	  labor	  in	  the	  general	  equilibrium	  model	  presented	  
in	  the	  previous	  sections.	  
	  

The	  nested	  CES	  framework	  is	  relatively	  tractable	  and	  has	  become	  popular	  in	  the	  

immigration	  literature.27	  In	  particular,	  think	  of	  the	  labor	  input	  L	  as	  a	  labor	  aggregate—an	  
agglomeration	  of	  workers	  belonging	  to	  different	  skill	  groups.	  The	  Armington	  aggregator	  
that	  combines	  different	  labor	  inputs	  is	  given	  by:	  
	  
(39)	   	  

L = [θ1 Lβ1 + θ2 Lβ2 ]1/β , 	  

	  
where	  Li	  gives	  the	  number	  of	  workers	  in	  group	  i;	  the	  elasticity	  of	  substitution	  between	  
groups	  1	  and	  2	  is	  defined	  by	  σ12	  =	  1/(1	  −	  β),	  with	  β	  ≤	  1;	  and	  θ1	  +	  θ2	  =	  1.	  Although	  the	  
exposition	  uses	  two	  different	  labor	  inputs,	  it	  will	  be	  evident	  that	  all	  of	  the	  results	  extend	  to	  
any	  number	  of	  inputs.	  
Immigrants	  can	  shift	  the	  supply	  of	  either	  of	  the	  two	  groups.	  Let	  mi	  =	  dLi/Li	  give	  the	  
immigration-­‐induced	  percent	  supply	  shift	  for	  group	  i.	  It	  is	  easy	  to	  show	  that	  the	  percent	  
shift	  in	  the	  aggregate	  labor	  input	  is	  given	  by:	  
	  
(40)	   	  

d log L =

s1
s
m1 + 2 m2 = m, 	  
sL
sL

	  
where	  si	  is	  the	  share	  of	  income	  accruing	  to	  group	  i,	  and	  sL	  =	  s1	  +	  s2.	  Equation	  (40)	  reveals	  an	  
interesting	  property	  of	  the	  nested	  CES	  framework:	  It	  is	  not	  necessary	  to	  know	  the	  value	  of	  

	  

28	  

the	  elasticity	  of	  substitution	  σ12	  to	  calculate	  the	  size	  of	  the	  immigration-­‐induced	  shift	  in	  the	  
labor	  aggregate	  L.	  All	  of	  the	  pertinent	  information	  is	  contained	  in	  the	  income	  shares	  
accruing	  to	  the	  various	  skill	  groups.	  
	  

The	  modeling	  of	  product	  demand	  in	  a	  market	  with	  heterogeneous	  labor	  requires	  

particular	  attention	  as	  workers	  differ	  in	  their	  productivity	  and	  inevitably	  have	  different	  
resources	  when	  they	  enter	  the	  product	  market.	  It	  is	  easier	  to	  grasp	  the	  intuition	  by	  
considering	  the	  simpler	  version	  of	  the	  general	  equilibrium	  model	  presented	  in	  Section	  III	  
that	  ignores	  wealth	  effects	  and	  assumes	  that	  the	  supply	  of	  the	  imported	  good	  is	  perfectly	  
elastic.28	  
In	  that	  framework,	  the	  inverse	  product	  demand	  function	  was	  given	  by	   p = C ηQ − η , 	  
where	  the	  effective	  number	  of	  consumers	  for	  the	  domestic	  good	  is	  C	  =	  gLCL	  +	  gKCK	  +	  gxCX.	  I	  
use	  the	  same	  market	  demand	  function	  in	  the	  heterogeneous	  labor	  model.	  The	  fact	  that	  
workers	  are	  heterogeneous—and	  that	  this	  heterogeneity	  affects	  aggregate	  demand—can	  
be	  easily	  captured	  by	  positing	  that	  CL	  =	  ƒ(L).	  Hence	  the	  shifter	  in	  the	  inverse	  product	  
demand	  function	  depends	  on	  the	  efficiency	  units-­‐adjusted	  number	  of	  workers.	  Those	  
workers	  who	  are	  more	  productive	  and	  have	  higher	  wages	  “count”	  proportionately	  more	  in	  
the	  aggregation.	  
	  

The	  model,	  therefore,	  consists	  of	  the	  inverse	  product	  market	  demand	  function	  in	  

equation	  (15),	  the	  aggregate	  production	  function	  in	  equation	  (16),	  the	  inverse	  supply	  curve	  
of	  capital	  in	  equation	  (17),	  and	  the	  Armington	  aggregator	  in	  equation	  (39).	  The	  condition	  
that	  the	  wage	  of	  input	  i	  equals	  the	  group’s	  value	  of	  marginal	  product	  is:	  
	  

	  

29	  

(41)	   	  

wi = ⎡⎣(1 − α)C η Q1−δ−η Lδ−1 ⎤⎦ θi L1−β Lβ−1
i . 	  

	  
	  

It	  is	  obvious	  that	  the	  marginal	  productivity	  condition	  for	  the	  price	  of	  capital	  is	  

identical	  to	  that	  found	  in	  the	  homogeneous	  labor	  model	  in	  equation	  (18a).	  Equally	  
important,	  the	  marginal	  productivity	  condition	  for	  skill	  group	  i	  in	  equation	  (41)	  is	  very	  
similar	  to	  that	  obtained	  in	  the	  homogeneous	  labor	  model	  in	  equation	  (18b).	  In	  fact,	  the	  
bracketed	  term	  in	  (41)	  is	  identical	  to	  the	  value	  of	  marginal	  product	  of	  labor	  in	  the	  
homogeneous	  labor	  case.	  The	  fact	  that	  there	  are	  now	  two	  different	  skill	  groups	  simply	  adds	  
the	  multiplicative	  term	  that	  appears	  to	  the	  right	  of	  the	  bracket.	  
	  

Define	  w	  to	  be	  equal	  to	  the	  bracketed	  term	  in	  (41).	  By	  differentiating	  equation	  (41)	  

and	  using	  the	  supply	  shift	  defined	  in	  (40),	  it	  is	  easy	  to	  show	  that	  the	  effect	  of	  immigration	  
on	  the	  wage	  of	  group	  i	  is	  given	  by:	  
	  
(42)	   	  

d log wi = d log w + (1 − β)d log L + (β − 1)d log Li ,
	  
= d log w + (1 − β)(m − mi ).

	  
	  

Equation	  (42)	  has	  a	  number	  of	  important	  properties.	  Suppose,	  for	  instance,	  that	  we	  

are	  interested	  in	  the	  impact	  of	  immigration	  on	  the	  relative	  wage	  of	  the	  two	  skill	  groups.	  
The	  distributional	  effect	  is	  given	  by:	  
	  
(43)	   	  
	  

d log w1 − d log w2 = −

1
(m1 − m2 ). 	  
σ12

	  

30	  

Equation	  (43)	  establishes	  an	  important	  property	  of	  the	  nested	  CES	  framework:	  the	  impact	  
of	  immigration	  on	  relative	  wages	  depends	  only	  on	  the	  elasticity	  of	  substitution	  between	  the	  
two	  groups	  and	  is	  proportional	  to	  the	  relative	  supply	  shift.	  If	  the	  two	  groups	  are	  perfect	  
substitutes,	  immigration	  has	  no	  relative	  wage	  effect.	  If	  the	  two	  groups	  are	  imperfect	  
substitutes,	  the	  group	  that	  experiences	  the	  larger	  supply	  shock	  will	  always	  experience	  a	  
decline	  in	  its	  relative	  wage.29	  None	  of	  the	  “fundamentals”	  that	  play	  a	  role	  in	  the	  
homogeneous	  labor	  model	  (i.e.,	  η,	  λ,	  σ,	  and	  φ)	  help	  determine	  the	  distributional	  impact.	  For	  
instance,	  the	  relative	  wage	  effect	  does	  not	  depend	  on	  the	  extent	  to	  which	  capital	  adjusts	  to	  
the	  immigrant	  influx.30	  
In	  addition	  to	  any	  distributional	  effects,	  immigration	  also	  has	  an	  impact	  on	  the	  
aggregate	  wage	  level,	  where	   d log w = (s1 d log w1 + s2 d log w2 ) / sL . 	  Equation	  (42)	  implies	  
that:	  
	  
(44)	   	  

d log w = d log w. 	  

	  
In	  short,	  the	  impact	  of	  immigration	  on	  the	  average	  wage	  in	  a	  model	  with	  heterogeneous	  
labor	  is	  identical	  to	  the	  impact	  of	  immigration	  on	  the	  wage	  in	  a	  model	  with	  homogeneous	  
labor,	  as	  given	  by	  equation	  (19).31	  For	  instance,	  in	  a	  Cobb-­‐Douglas	  world	  with	  perfectly	  
elastic	  product	  demand,	  the	  homogeneous	  labor	  model	  predicts	  that	  the	  wage	  elasticity	  of	  
immigration	  will	  lie	  between	  −0.3	  (in	  the	  short	  run)	  and	  0.0	  (in	  the	  long	  run).	  Even	  with	  
heterogeneous	  labor,	  it	  must	  still	  be	  the	  case	  that	  the	  wage	  elasticity	  of	  immigration	  is	  
between	  −0.3	  and	  0.0.	  In	  an	  important	  sense,	  the	  average	  wage	  effect	  has	  been	  “pre-­‐
determined”	  (by	  the	  values	  of	  the	  fundamentals	  η,	  λ,	  σ,	  and	  φ),	  and	  is	  independent	  of	  

	  

31	  

whatever	  complementarities	  may	  or	  may	  not	  exist	  among	  labor	  inputs	  in	  the	  production	  
process.	  
The	  imperfect	  substitution	  among	  skill	  groups	  helps	  to	  position	  the	  wage	  effect	  for	  
each	  of	  the	  groups	  around	  this	  pre-­‐determined	  average	  wage	  effect.	  Suppose,	  for	  instance,	  
that	  an	  immigrant	  influx	  doubles	  the	  size	  of	  the	  (efficiency-­‐units	  adjusted)	  workforce.	  In	  a	  
Cobb-­‐Douglas	  world,	  the	  short-­‐run	  wage	  impact	  on	  one	  group	  will	  typically	  be	  larger	  than	  
−0.3,	  while	  the	  wage	  impact	  on	  the	  other	  group	  will	  typically	  be	  smaller	  than	  −0.3.	  For	  a	  
given	  σ12,	  the	  specific	  deviations	  from	  −0.3	  will	  depend	  on:	  a)	  the	  disparity	  in	  the	  supply	  
shocks	  experienced	  by	  the	  two	  groups;	  and	  b)	  the	  income	  shares	  of	  the	  groups,	  since	  the	  
weighted	  average	  of	  the	  two	  wage	  effects	  has	  to	  be	  identically	  equal	  to	  −0.3.	  Put	  differently,	  
the	  constraints	  imposed	  by	  factor	  demand	  theory	  and	  by	  the	  functional	  form	  of	  the	  nested	  
CES	  framework	  greatly	  restrain	  the	  structure	  of	  immigration	  wage	  effects	  that	  can	  possibly	  
be	  estimated	  by	  any	  data.	  
Moreover,	  even	  a	  generalization	  of	  the	  model	  that	  would	  instead	  specify	  a	  linear	  
homogenous	  production	  function	  at	  the	  top	  level	  of	  the	  nesting	  introduces	  equally	  
arbitrary	  numerical	  restrictions.	  The	  linear	  homogeneity	  assumption	  implies	  that	  the	  long-­‐
run	  average	  wage	  impact	  must	  be	  zero,	  so	  that	  one	  group	  will	  typically	  gain	  slightly	  and	  the	  
other	  group	  will	  typically	  lose.	  
It	  is	  worth	  emphasizing	  these	  insights	  in	  a	  different	  way.	  Numerous	  published	  
simulations	  claim	  that	  data	  analysis	  based	  on	  structural	  factor	  demand	  models	  implies	  that	  
the	  impact	  of	  immigration	  on	  the	  wage	  of	  the	  average	  worker	  is	  x	  percent,	  or	  that	  the	  
impact	  on	  the	  wage	  of	  the	  average	  worker	  in	  a	  particular	  skill	  group	  is	  y	  percent.	  These	  
simulations	  uniformly	  use	  a	  linear	  homogeneous	  (and	  often	  a	  Cobb-­‐Douglas)	  aggregate	  

	  

32	  

production	  function.	  As	  we	  have	  seen,	  these	  functional	  form	  assumptions	  build	  in	  
numerically	  what	  the	  mean	  wage	  effect	  of	  immigration	  must	  have	  been.	  The	  (absolute)	  
long-­‐run	  wage	  effects	  reported	  by	  these	  studies	  have	  nothing	  to	  do	  with	  the	  underlying	  
data;	  they	  are	  simply	  regurgitating	  the	  constraints	  imposed	  by	  factor	  demand	  theory	  (i.e.,	  
the	  average	  wage	  effect	  must	  be	  zero).	  And	  even	  the	  short-­‐run	  wage	  effects	  are	  simply	  
spewing	  out	  the	  numerical	  implications	  of	  the	  presumed	  Cobb-­‐Douglas	  technology.	  
	  	  
Imperfect	  Substitution	  Between	  Immigrants	  and	  Natives	  
	  

Some	  recent	  studies	  (Card	  2009;	  Ottaviano	  and	  Peri	  2012;	  Manacorda,	  Manning,	  and	  

Wadsworth	  2012)	  argue	  that	  immigrants	  and	  natives	  within	  a	  skill	  group	  are	  imperfect	  
substitutes—and	  that	  the	  resulting	  complementarities	  may	  greatly	  attenuate	  the	  adverse	  
wage	  impact	  of	  immigration	  on	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  workforce.32	  These	  models	  typically	  
expand	  the	  nested	  CES	  framework	  by	  adding	  yet	  another	  level	  that	  aggregates	  the	  
contribution	  of	  immigrants	  and	  natives	  in	  skill	  group	  i:	  
	  
(45)	   	  
	  

Li = [ρN N iγ + ρF Fi γ ]1/γ , 	  

	  

where	  Ni	  and	  Fi	  give	  the	  number	  of	  native	  and	  foreign-­‐born	  workers	  in	  skill	  group	  i,	  
respectively;	  the	  elasticity	  of	  substitution	  between	  native	  and	  immigrant	  workers	  is	  σNF	  =	  
1/(1	  −	  γ),	  with	  γ	  ≤	  1;	  and	  ρN	  +	  ρF	  =	  1.	  
	  

There	  are	  now	  separate	  marginal	  productivity	  conditions	  for	  native	  and	  immigrant	  

workers.	  For	  skill	  group	  i,	  these	  conditions	  are:	  
	  

	  

33	  

(46a)	   	  

1−γ
γ −1
wiN = ⎡⎣(1 − α)C η Q1−δ−η Lδ−1 ⎤⎦ (θi L1−β Lβ−1
), 	  
i )(ρ N Li N i

(46b)	   	  

1−γ γ −1
wiF = ⎡⎣(1− α)C η Q1−δ−η Lδ−1 ⎤⎦ (θi L1−β Lβ−1
), 	  
i )(ρF Li Fi

	  
where	   wiN and	   wiF give	  the	  wage	  of	  native	  and	  immigrant	  workers	  in	  group	  i,	  respectively.	  	  
By	  comparing	  equations	  (46a)	  and	  (46b)	  with	  equation	  (41),	  it	  is	  obvious	  that	  the	  
presence	  of	  within-­‐group	  imperfect	  substitution	  simply	  adds	  yet	  another	  multiplicative	  
term	  to	  the	  marginal	  productivity	  conditions.	  The	  bracketed	  term	  still	  represents	  the	  
“average”	  wage	  in	  the	  economy,	  aggregated	  across	  all	  skill	  groups.	  This	  is	  the	  wage	  level	  
determined	  by	  the	  factor	  demand	  theory	  parameters	  discussed	  in	  Section	  III.	  The	  product	  
of	  this	  bracketed	  term	  and	   θi L1−β Lβ−1
	  gives	  equation	  (41),	  the	  mean	  wage	  for	  group	  i.	  
i
	  

	  The	  multiplicative	  separability	  property	  allows	  us	  to	  easily	  assess	  the	  potential	  

importance	  of	  immigrant-­‐native	  complementarities	  in	  the	  evolution	  of	  the	  wage	  structure.	  
Differentiating	  equations	  (46a)	  and	  (46b)	  gives	  the	  impact	  of	  a	  supply	  shift	  on	  the	  wage	  of	  
native	  and	  immigrant	  workers	  in	  group	  i:	  
	  
(47)	   	  

d log wiN = d log w + (1 − β)[d log L − d log Li ] + (1 − γ )[d log Li − d log N i ]. 	  

(48)	   	  

d log wiF = d log w + (1− β)[d log L − d log Li ] + (1− γ )[d log Li − d log Fi ]. 	  

	  
Suppose	  a	  supply	  shock	  changes	  the	  number	  of	  immigrants	  in	  each	  of	  the	  skill	  
groups,	  but	  leaves	  the	  number	  of	  native	  workers	  unchanged.	  Let	   m 	  be	  the	  immigration-­‐
induced	  percent	  change	  in	  the	  efficiency	  units-­‐adjusted	  size	  of	  the	  workforce,	  and	  mi	  be	  the	  

	  

34	  

percent	  change	  in	  the	  size	  of	  the	  efficiency	  units-­‐adjusted	  workforce	  in	  skill	  group	  i.	  The	  
“averaging	  property”	  in	  equation	  (40)	  implies	  that	  these	  supply	  shifts	  are	  given	  by:	  
	  

s1
s
m1 + 2 m2 , 	  
sL
sL

(49)	   	  

d log L = m =

(50)	   	  

d log Li = mi =

siF
fi , 	  
si

	  
where	   siF 	  is	  the	  share	  of	  income	  accruing	  to	  immigrants	  in	  group	  i	  (with	   siF + siN = si );	  and	  fi	  
=	  dFi/Fi,	  the	  percent	  increase	  in	  the	  size	  of	  the	  foreign-­‐born	  workforce	  in	  that	  group.	  
The	  presence	  of	  within-­‐group	  imperfect	  substitution	  can	  have	  important	  
consequences	  for	  within-­‐group	  inequality.	  The	  relative	  wage	  effect	  is:	  
	  
(51)	   	  

d log wiF − d log wiN = −

1
fi . 	  
σ NF

	  
The	  distributional	  effect	  in	  (51)	  depends	  only	  on	  the	  elasticity	  of	  substitution	  between	  
immigrants	  and	  natives	  and	  on	  the	  size	  of	  the	  increase	  in	  group	  i’s	  foreign-­‐born	  workforce.	  
In	  the	  nested	  CES	  framework,	  the	  value	  of	  the	  elasticity	  σNF	  does	  not	  have	  any	  other	  
implications.	  For	  instance,	  consider	  the	  impact	  of	  immigration	  on	  the	  average	  wage	  of	  pre-­‐
existing	  workers	  in	  group	  i,	  where	   d log wi = (siN d log wiN + siF d log wiF ) / si .	  It	  is	  easy	  to	  show	  
that:	  
	  

	  

35	  

(52)	   	  

d log wi = d log w + (1 − β)(m − mi ), 	  

	  
which	  is	  identical	  to	  equation	  (42),	  the	  implied	  wage	  effect	  in	  the	  simpler	  model	  that	  
assumed	  that	  immigrants	  and	  natives	  in	  a	  skill	  group	  were	  perfect	  substitutes.	  Put	  
differently,	  the	  value	  of	  σNF	  does	  not	  influence	  the	  shape	  of	  the	  wage	  distribution	  across	  
skill	  groups.	  It	  is	  trivial	  to	  move	  up	  yet	  another	  level	  in	  the	  CES	  nesting	  and	  calculate	  the	  
average	  wage	  effect	  across	  skill	  groups.	  This	  exercise	  would	  again	  yield	  equation	  (44),	  so	  
that	  the	  average	  wage	  effect	  would	  be	  independent	  from	  both	  σ12	  and	  σNF.	  
	  

The	  nested	  CES	  framework,	  therefore,	  imposes	  an	  important	  restriction	  on	  any	  

study	  of	  the	  distributional	  impact	  of	  immigration:	  The	  wage	  impact	  at	  a	  particular	  level	  of	  
the	  nesting	  depends	  only	  on	  the	  elasticities	  that	  enter	  the	  model	  at	  or	  above	  that	  level,	  and	  
does	  not	  depend	  on	  any	  of	  the	  elasticities	  that	  enter	  the	  model	  below	  that	  level.	  Hence	  the	  
impact	  of	  immigration	  on	  the	  aggregate	  wage	  does	  not	  depend	  on	  the	  value	  of	  the	  elasticity	  
of	  substitution	  across	  skill	  groups	  or	  on	  the	  presence	  or	  absence	  of	  within-­‐group	  
complementarities.	  Similarly,	  the	  impact	  of	  immigration	  on	  the	  wage	  of	  a	  particular	  skill	  
group	  is	  unaffected	  by	  within-­‐group	  complementarities	  between	  immigrants	  and	  natives.	  
	  
VI. Summary
	  

This	  paper	  presents	  the	  analytics	  that	  underlie	  the	  study	  of	  the	  wage	  effects	  of	  

immigration.	  The	  general	  equilibrium	  framework	  reveals	  that	  the	  effect	  of	  immigration	  on	  
the	  mean	  wage	  depends	  on	  the	  parameters	  that	  Marshall	  first	  identified	  in	  his	  famous	  rules	  
of	  derived	  demand	  (i.e.,	  the	  elasticity	  of	  substitution	  between	  labor	  and	  capital,	  the	  supply	  
elasticity	  of	  capital,	  the	  elasticity	  of	  product	  demand,	  and	  labor’s	  share	  of	  income).	  The	  

	  

36	  

immigration	  context	  also	  shows	  the	  importance	  of	  an	  additional	  parameter:	  the	  impact	  of	  
immigration	  on	  the	  size	  of	  the	  consumer	  base	  relative	  to	  its	  impact	  on	  the	  size	  of	  the	  
workforce.	  The	  analysis	  reveals	  that	  the	  short-­‐run	  wage	  effect	  of	  immigration	  can	  be	  
negative	  in	  a	  wide	  array	  of	  possible	  scenarios,	  and	  that	  even	  the	  long	  run	  effect	  of	  
immigration	  may	  be	  negative	  if	  the	  impact	  of	  immigration	  on	  the	  potential	  size	  of	  the	  
consumer	  base	  is	  smaller	  than	  its	  impact	  on	  the	  size	  of	  the	  workforce.	  Interestingly,	  
however,	  the	  analysis	  also	  demonstrates	  that	  both	  the	  short-­‐	  and	  long-­‐run	  effects	  could	  be	  
positive	  if	  immigration	  increases	  the	  size	  of	  the	  consumer	  base	  for	  the	  domestic	  product	  
dramatically.	  
The	  simplicity	  of	  the	  factor	  demand	  framework	  (combined	  with	  specification	  
restrictions	  on	  the	  production	  technology)	  also	  leads	  to	  closed-­‐form	  solutions	  of	  the	  wage	  
effect	  of	  immigration.	  As	  a	  result,	  it	  is	  easy	  to	  conduct	  back-­‐of-­‐the-­‐envelope	  calculations	  of	  
the	  predicted	  wage	  effect.	  The	  constraints	  imposed	  by	  the	  theory	  of	  labor	  demand	  can	  then	  
be	  used	  to	  assess	  the	  plausibility	  of	  the	  many	  contradictory	  claims	  that	  are	  often	  made	  
about	  how	  immigration	  affects	  the	  wage	  structure	  in	  sending	  and	  receiving	  countries.	  
The	  theoretical	  framework	  presented	  in	  this	  paper	  can	  be	  extended	  in	  a	  number	  of	  
ways.	  For	  instance,	  the	  domestic	  economy	  can	  produce	  different	  types	  of	  goods	  (some	  may	  
be	  labor-­‐intensive	  and	  some	  may	  be	  capital-­‐intensive;	  some	  may	  be	  traded	  and	  others	  non-­‐
traded).	  An	  immigration-­‐induced	  supply	  shift	  would	  induce	  flows	  of	  resources	  among	  the	  
various	  sectors.	  It	  would	  be	  of	  interest	  to	  determine	  whether	  the	  aggregate	  wage	  impact	  of	  
immigration	  (i.e.,	  the	  impact	  that	  averages	  out	  the	  wage	  effect	  across	  sectors)	  is	  affected	  by	  
the	  leveraging	  possibilities	  introduced	  by	  the	  multi-­‐sector	  framework.	  

	  

37	  
The	  paper	  also	  points	  to	  a	  new	  direction	  for	  empirical	  research.	  The	  theoretical	  

framework,	  after	  all,	  highlights	  the	  importance	  of	  determining	  how	  immigration	  changes	  
the	  relative	  number	  (and	  wealth)	  of	  consumers	  in	  the	  receiving	  country.	  The	  theory	  clearly	  
demonstrates	  that	  an	  imbalance	  between	  the	  impact	  of	  immigration	  on	  the	  size	  of	  the	  
consumer	  base	  and	  its	  impact	  on	  the	  size	  of	  the	  workforce	  can	  generate	  permanent	  wage	  
effects.	  It	  seems,	  therefore,	  that	  the	  consumption	  behavior	  of	  immigrants	  is	  a	  topic	  ripe	  for	  
empirical	  investigation.	  

	  

	  

38	  

ENDNOTES:
	  
1	  Hicks	  (1932)	  gives	  the	  classic	  presentation	  of	  Marshall’s	  rules	  of	  derived	  demand.	  
Ewerhart	  (2003)	  and	  Kennan	  (1998)	  provide	  much	  simpler	  (and	  clearer)	  derivations.	  
2	  For	  instance,	  Wagner	  (2009)	  represents	  the	  first	  to	  attempt	  to	  isolate	  empirically	  the	  

substitution	  and	  scale	  effects	  of	  an	  immigration-­‐induced	  supply	  shift.	  
3	  The	  elasticity	  of	  complementarity	  is	  the	  dual	  of	  the	  elasticity	  of	  substitution.	  Hamermesh	  

(1993)	  presents	  a	  detailed	  discussion	  of	  the	  properties	  of	  the	  elasticity	  of	  complementarity;	  
see	  also	  Hicks	  (1970)	  and	  Sato	  and	  Koizumi	  (1973).	  
4	  The	  labor	  supply	  of	  the	  pre-­‐existing	  workforce	  is	  assumed	  to	  be	  perfectly	  inelastic.	  The	  

immigration-­‐induced	  supply	  shift	  can	  then	  be	  illustrated	  as	  an	  outward	  shift	  of	  a	  vertical	  
supply	  curve.	  
5	  The	  elasticities	  of	  complementarity	  implied	  by	  the	  CES	  function	  are	  c

KL	  =	  (1	  −	  δ)	  and	  cLL	  =	  

−(1	  −	  δ)(sK/sL).	  
6	  The	  introduction	  of	  a	  second	  good	  is	  crucial	  if	  one	  wishes	  to	  examine	  how	  immigration	  

affects	  aggregate	  product	  demand	  and	  prices.	  If	  there	  were	  only	  one	  good	  in	  the	  economy,	  
all	  units	  of	  that	  good	  are	  sold	  regardless	  of	  the	  price.	  The	  framework	  developed	  below	  is	  
related	  to	  the	  standard	  2×2×2	  model	  in	  international	  trade	  (Dixit	  and	  Norman	  1980).	  
7	  The	  definition	  of	  the	  goods	  implies	  that	  immigration	  and	  trade	  are	  complements	  since	  

there	  is	  complete	  specialization	  of	  goods	  production.	  If	  immigration	  and	  trade	  were	  
substitutes,	  as	  in	  Mundell’s	  (1957)	  classic	  analysis,	  there	  may	  then	  be	  factor	  price	  
equalization	  across	  countries.	  Immigration	  would	  have	  no	  wage	  effects	  and	  would	  only	  
alter	  the	  distribution	  of	  outputs	  as	  described	  by	  the	  Rybczynski	  Theorem.	  I	  do	  not	  address	  
the	  long-­‐running	  debate	  over	  whether	  immigration	  and	  trade	  are	  complements	  or	  

	  

39	  

	  
substitutes.	  The	  model	  presented	  below	  is	  instead	  designed	  to	  depict	  an	  economic	  
environment	  where	  wage	  differences	  exist	  and	  induce	  labor	  to	  migrate	  internationally.	  See	  
Kennan	  (2013)	  for	  an	  alternative	  approach	  that	  allows	  for	  factor	  price	  equalization.	  
8	  Since	  there	  are	  no	  wealth	  effects,	  it	  is	  not	  necessary	  to	  specify	  what	  income	  Z	  is	  for	  each	  of	  

the	  groups.	  I	  will	  give	  a	  precise	  definition	  when	  I	  introduce	  wealth	  effects	  below.	  	  
9	  As	  will	  be	  shown	  below,	  the	  answer	  to	  this	  question	  plays	  a	  crucial	  role	  in	  determining	  the	  

wage	  impact	  of	  immigration.	  Nevertheless,	  it	  has	  only	  been	  addressed	  empirically	  by	  the	  
pioneering	  work	  in	  Olney	  (2013).	  
10	  The	  issue	  of	  whether	  immigrants	  are	  “new”	  consumers	  can	  be	  approached	  in	  a	  number	  

of	  ways.	  It	  could	  be	  argued,	  for	  instance,	  that	  immigration	  substantially	  increases	  the	  
number	  of	  domestic	  consumers	  (through	  the	  increase	  in	  CL),	  and	  leads	  only	  to	  a	  trivial	  
decline	  in	  the	  relative	  number	  of	  consumers	  from	  abroad.	  Alternatively,	  it	  may	  be	  that	  
immigrants	  change	  their	  preferences	  for	  the	  domestic	  good	  once	  they	  reside	  in	  their	  new	  
home.	  Even	  though	  the	  increase	  in	  CL	  may	  be	  completely	  offset	  by	  the	  decline	  in	  CX,	  the	  
weight	  determining	  the	  post-­‐migration	  demand	  of	  the	  immigrants	  for	  the	  domestic	  good	  
increases	  from	  gX	  to	  gL.	  Moreover,	  immigration	  will	  also	  change	  the	  number	  of	  capitalist-­‐
consumers.	  The	  value	  of	  the	  elasticity	  φ	  gives	  the	  net	  impact	  of	  all	  the	  possible	  
immigration-­‐induced	  changes	  in	  the	  size	  of	  the	  consumer	  base.	  
11	  It	  is	  interesting	  to	  note	  that	  the	  expression	  in	  equation	  (19),	  when	  evaluated	  at	  φ	  =	  0,	  is	  

equal	  to	  the	  reciprocal	  of	  the	  Hicks-­‐Marshall	  formula	  that	  defines	  the	  labor	  demand	  
elasticity	  (d	  log	  L/d	  log	  w)	  in	  the	  generic	  derivation	  of	  Marshall’s	  rules;	  see,	  for	  example,	  
Kennan	  (1998,	  p.	  6).	  

	  

40	  

	  
12	  In	  particular,	  (1	  +	  λ	  −	  δ)	  –	  (1	  −	  δ	  −	  η)s

K	  =	  λ	  +	  (1	  −	  δ)sL	  +	  ηsK.	  The	  denominator	  is	  strictly	  

positive	  since	  η	  >	  0.	  
13	  Benhabib	  (1996)	  models	  the	  political	  economy	  tradeoffs	  that	  determine	  the	  optimal	  

choice	  of	  an	  immigration	  policy.	  
14	  The	  second-­‐order	  conditions	  would	  also	  be	  satisfied	  if	  cost	  h	  was	  not	  constant,	  but	  

increased	  with	  the	  number	  of	  immigrants.	  Note	  also	  that	  the	  second-­‐order	  conditions	  in	  
(22)	  imply	  that	  the	  social	  planner	  (like	  a	  monopolist)	  chooses	  an	  equilibrium	  point	  where	  
product	  demand	  is	  elastic.	  
15	  These	  conclusions,	  of	  course,	  require	  that	  the	  deviation	  from	  product	  market	  neutrality	  

continue	  indefinitely,	  regardless	  of	  how	  long	  immigrants	  have	  been	  in	  the	  receiving	  
country.	  	  
16	  Recent	  studies	  of	  the	  price	  effect	  of	  immigration	  include	  Lach	  (2007),	  Cortes	  (2008),	  and	  

Saiz	  (2007).	  	  
17	  The	  response	  of	  the	  capital	  stock	  to	  the	  immigrant	  influx	  is:	  

	  

d log K
(1− δ) − (1− δ − η)sK K
η(1− φ)
=
−
.
d log L (1+ λ − δ) − (1− δ − η)sK (1+ λ − δ) − (1− δ − η)sK 	  

	  

Note	  that	  if	  the	  product	  market	  neutrality	  assumption	  holds,	  the	  percent	  shift	  in	  the	  capital	  
stock	  will	  be	  a	  fraction	  (between	  0	  and	  1)	  of	  the	  immigration-­‐induced	  percent	  shift	  in	  the	  
size	  of	  the	  workforce.	  
18	  There	  are	  alternative	  ways	  of	  defining	  the	  real	  wage.	  For	  instance,	  one	  can	  define	  a	  price	  

1−µ D µ D

index	   p = py

p

, 	  where	  py	  is	  the	  price	  of	  good	  y	  (which	  is	  fixed	  at	  1),	  and	  µD	  is	  the	  share	  

	  

41	  

	  
of	  income	  that	  is	  spent	  in	  good	  y	  in	  the	  domestic	  economy.	  Holding	  constant	  the	  share	  µD,	  
the	  resulting	  real	  wage	  elasticity	  in	  the	  case	  of	  product	  market	  neutrality	  is:	  
	  

	  

d log(w / p) −λ[1− δ − η(1− µ D )]sK
=
,
d log L
(1+ λ − δ) − (1− δ − η)sK 	  
	  

which	  must	  be	  negative	  if	  the	  second-­‐order	  conditions	  in	  equation	  (22)	  hold.
19	  Goods	  q	  and	  y	  are	  gross	  substitutes	  or	  gross	  complements	  depending	  on	  whether	  τ	  is	  less	  

than	  or	  greater	  than	  1,	  respectively.	  
20	  The	  simplifying	  assumption	  that	  a	  domestic	  consumer’s	  wealth	  equals	  his	  income	  (i.e.,	  w	  

or	  r)	  implies	  that	  the	  number	  of	  worker-­‐consumers	  CL	  must	  equal	  the	  number	  of	  workers	  L,	  
and	  that	  the	  number	  of	  capitalist	  consumers	  CK	  equals	  the	  capital	  stock	  K,	  so	  that	  each	  
capitalist-­‐consumer	  owns	  one	  unit	  of	  capital.	  
21	  The	  solution	  of	  the	  model	  is	  greatly	  simplified	  if	  there	  is	  a	  proportional	  relation	  between	  

the	  weighting	  factors	  for	  the	  domestic	  and	  imported	  goods	  for	  both	  workers	  and	  
capitalists.	  In	  particular,	  I	  assume	  that	  hL	  =	  υgL	  and	  hK	  =	  υgK.	  The	  proportionality	  property	  
allows	  expressing	  the	  various	  elasticities	  in	  terms	  of	  labor’s	  share	  of	  income,	  sL.	  
22	  The	  rescaled	  elasticities	  are	  defined	  as η̂ =

where	   ϕ* =

η
ϕ*τ(1− η)
, 	  
ϕ̂
=
	  
a
nd	  
1− ϕ* (1− τ)(1− η)
1− ϕ* (1− τ)(1− η)

ϕ
. 	  
ϕ+τ

23	  In	  the	  special	  case	  where	  there	  are	  no	  wealth	  effects	  and	  the	  supply	  curve	  of	  the	  

imported	  good	  is	  not	  perfectly	  elastic,	  all	  the	  terms	  involving	  the	  share	  ε	  in	  equation	  (37)	  
would	  drop	  out.	  	  

	  

42	  

	  
24	  The	  “generalized”	  form	  of	  product	  market	  neutrality	  required	  in	  equation	  (37)	  is	  

η̂(φq − 1) + ϕ̂φ y = 0. 	  
25	  The	  proof	  uses	  the	  fact	  that	  the	  rescaled	  elasticities	   η̂

and ϕ̂ 	  are	  both	  positive	  and	  less	  

than	  one.	  It	  is	  easy	  to	  verify	  that	  their	  sum	  is	  also	  less	  than	  one.	  To	  show	  that	  the	  sign	  of	  the	  
numerator	  in	  (37)	  must	  be	  negative,	  simply	  evaluate	  the	  numerator	  at	  the	  point	  where	  the	  
income	  shares	  in	  the	  expression	  take	  on	  the	  value	  of	  one,	  so	  that	  the	  scale	  effects	  are	  at	  
their	  maximum	  value.	  Using	  the	  same	  numerical	  properties	  of	  the	  rescaled	  elasticities,	  it	  
can	  also	  be	  shown	  that	  the	  denominator	  must	  be	  positive.	  	  
26	  The	  real	  wage	  can	  also	  be	  defined	  as	  the	  ratio	  of	  w	  to	  a	  price	  index	  

q
1−ε D

p = py

p

εqD

,	  where	  

the	  consumption	  shares	  in	  the	  exponents	  are	  treated	  as	  constants.	  A	  sufficient	  condition	  for	  
the	  short-­‐run	  real	  wage	  elasticity	  to	  be	  negative	  is	  that	  goods	  q	  and	  y	  be	  gross	  substitutes	  
(i.e.,	  τ	  <	  1).	  
27	  Bowles	  (1970)	  introduced	  the	  nested	  CES	  framework	  into	  the	  labor	  demand	  literature.	  

More	  recently,	  it	  was	  used	  by	  Card	  and	  Lemieux	  (2001)	  to	  analyze	  the	  evolution	  of	  the	  
wage	  structure,	  and	  by	  Borjas	  (2003)	  to	  estimate	  the	  wage	  impact	  of	  immigration.	  As	  an	  
example	  of	  the	  extreme	  restrictions	  that	  the	  nested	  CES	  framework	  imposes	  on	  the	  number	  
of	  “permissible”	  cross-­‐effects,	  consider	  the	  empirical	  analysis	  in	  the	  Borjas	  (2003)	  study.	  It	  
uses	  32	  distinct	  skill	  groups	  in	  the	  workforce	  (4	  education	  groups	  and	  8	  age	  groups),	  and	  
capital.	  There	  are	  then	  a	  total	  of	  1,089	  own-­‐	  and	  cross-­‐group	  effects	  to	  estimate.	  The	  
symmetry	  restrictions	  implied	  by	  factor	  demand	  theory	  reduce	  this	  number	  to	  561.	  The	  
nested	  CES	  framework	  assumes	  that	  all	  of	  these	  cross-­‐effects	  can	  be	  described	  in	  terms	  of	  
three	  elasticities	  of	  substitution.	  

	  

43	  

	  
28	  It	  is	  worth	  emphasizing,	  however,	  that	  all	  of	  the	  results	  presented	  below	  carry	  through	  to	  

the	  more	  general	  model	  with	  wealth	  effects	  and	  an	  upward	  sloping	  foreign	  export	  supply	  
curve.	  
29	  The	  implication	  that	  relative	  wage	  effects	  are	  proportional	  to	  relative	  supply	  shifts	  

suggests	  that	  one	  should	  be	  skeptical	  when	  evaluating	  the	  empirical	  evidence	  reported	  in	  
the	  literature.	  After	  all,	  it	  is	  easy	  to	  manipulate	  results	  by	  defining	  skill	  groups	  in	  ways	  that	  
either	  accentuate	  the	  relative	  supply	  shift	  or	  that	  mask	  it.	  This	  point	  was	  first	  illustrated	  in	  
Borjas,	  Freeman,	  and	  Katz	  (1997).	  Their	  simulations	  show	  that	  the	  wage	  effect	  of	  
immigration	  in	  the	  United	  States	  is	  much	  greater	  when	  one	  compares	  high	  school	  dropouts	  
to	  the	  rest	  of	  the	  workforce	  than	  when	  one	  compares	  high	  school	  “equivalents”	  to	  the	  rest	  
of	  the	  workforce.	  The	  difference	  arises	  because	  “high	  school	  equivalents”	  typically	  include	  
both	  high	  school	  dropouts	  and	  high	  school	  graduates.	  Although	  there	  has	  been	  a	  
substantial	  influx	  of	  foreign-­‐born	  high	  school	  dropouts,	  their	  numerical	  importance	  is	  
obviously	  very	  different	  if	  the	  competing	  group	  consists	  only	  of	  native	  high	  school	  dropouts	  
or	  if	  it	  also	  includes	  the	  millions	  of	  native	  high	  school	  graduates.	  
30	  This	  implication	  of	  the	  model,	  of	  course,	  is	  a	  direct	  consequence	  of	  the	  assumed	  nested	  

CES	  technology.	  
31	  Note,	  however,	  that	  the	  definition	  of	  the	  supply	  shift	  is	  slightly	  different.	  In	  the	  

homogeneous	  labor	  context,	  the	  supply	  shift	  is	  measured	  by	  the	  percent	  increase	  in	  the	  size	  
of	  the	  workforce,	  while	  in	  the	  nested	  CES	  framework	  it	  is	  measured	  by	  the	  percent	  increase	  
in	  the	  efficiency	  units-­‐adjusted	  size	  of	  the	  workforce.	  
32	  As	  pointed	  out	  by	  Borjas,	  Grogger,	  and	  Hanson	  (2008,	  2012),	  however,	  the	  original	  

Ottaviano-­‐Peri	  (2005)	  study	  made	  sampling	  decisions	  that	  contaminated	  the	  analysis.	  Most	  

	  

44	  

	  
conspicuous,	  Ottaviano	  and	  Peri	  classified	  millions	  of	  native-­‐born	  currently	  enrolled	  high	  
school	  juniors	  and	  seniors	  as	  “high	  school	  dropouts.”	  The	  simple	  exclusion	  of	  these	  
students	  turns	  their	  estimate	  of	  the	  elasticity	  of	  substitution	  from	  about	  20	  to	  near	  infinity.	  
In	  the	  published	  version	  of	  their	  paper,	  Ottaviano	  and	  Peri	  (2012)	  report	  a	  far	  higher	  value	  
of	  the	  relevant	  elasticity	  of	  substitution	  than	  in	  their	  initial	  working	  paper.	  
	  
	  

Mathematical Appendix
1.	  Derivation	  of	  Equation	  (19)	  
	  

The	  mathematical	  derivation	  is	  greatly	  simplified	  by	  following	  the	  approach	  in	  

Kennan	  (1998).	  First,	  note	  that	  the	  value	  of	  marginal	  product	  condition	  for	  labor	  can	  be	  
written	  as:	  
	  
(A1)	   	  

w
= (1 − α)Q1−δ Lδ−1 . 	  
p

	  
By	  substituting	  the	  inverse	  product	  demand	  curve	  into	  (A1),	  it	  is	  easy	  to	  show	  that:	  
	  
(A2)	   	  

log	  w	  =	  η	  log	  C	  +	  log	  (1	  -­‐	  α)	  +	  (1	  -­‐	  η	  -­‐	  δ)	  log	  Q	  +	  (δ	  -­‐	  1)	  log	  L.	  

	  
Differentiating	  with	  respect	  to	  the	  immigrant	  supply	  shift	  yields:	  
	  
(A3)
	  	   	  

d log w
d logQ
= ηφ + (1 − η − δ)
+ (δ − 1). 	  
d log L
d log L

	  
Note	  that	  the	  ratio	  of	  input	  prices	  in	  a	  CES	  technology	  can	  be	  written	  as	  a	  simple	  function	  of	  
the	  ratio	  of	  input	  quantities.	  In	  particular:	  
	  
(A4)	   	  
	  

w (1 − α)Lδ−1
=
. 	  
r
αK δ−1

	  

46	  

Differentiating	  this	  expression,	  while	  accounting	  for	  the	  fact	  that	  r	  =	  Kλ,	  yields:	  
	  
(A5)	   	  

⎛ d log w
⎞
d log K
1
=
+ (1 − δ)⎟ . 	  
⎜
⎠
d log L 1 + λ − δ ⎝ d log L

	  
Finally,	  the	  CES	  production	  function	  implies	  that:	  
	  
(A6)	   	  

d logQ
d log K
= sK
+ sL . 	  
d log L
d log L

	  
Equation	  (19)	  can	  be	  derived	  by	  substituting	  equations	  (A5)	  and	  (A6)	  into	  (A3).

	  

	  	  
2.	  The	  Social	  Planner	  Problem	  
	  

The	  maximization	  problem	  faced	  by	  the	  social	  planner	  is:	  

	  
(A7)	   	  

Max	   Ω = pQ − Fh = C η Q1−η − Fh. 	  

	  
	  

Suppose	  that	  there	  is	  product	  market	  neutrality.	  Without	  loss	  of	  generality,	  let	  C	  =	  L.	  

The	  first-­‐order	  condition	  that	  determines	  the	  optimal	  number	  of	  immigrants	  is:	  
	  
(A8)	   	  
	  

∂Ω
= ηLη−1Q1−η + (1− α)(1− η)L−(1−δ−η)Q1−δ−η − h = 0. 	  
∂F

	  

47	  

The	  second	  order	  condition	  is	  given	  by:	  
	  
(A9)	   	  

∂2 Ω
= −η(1− η)Lη−2Q1−ηsK − (1− η)(1− δ − η)(1− α)Lδ+η−2Q1−δ−ηsK < 0. 	  
2
∂F

	  
Sufficient	  conditions	  for	  (A9)	  to	  hold	  are	  (1	  −	  η)	  >	  0	  and	  (1	  −	  δ	  −	  η)	  >	  0.	  
	  
3.	  The	  Extended	  Model	  
	  

Equation	  (34)	  in	  the	  text	  shows	  that	  the	  aggregate	  demand	  function	  for	  the	  

domestic	  good	  (after	  solving	  out	  the	  equilibrium	  price	  of	  good	  y)	  is:	  
	  
(A10)	   	  

p = Q − η̂ Vqη̂ Vyϕ̂ , 	  	  

	  
where	  Vq	  =	  gLCL	  w	  +	  	  gKCK	  r	  +	  gX	  CX	  x,	  and	  Vy	  =	  hLCL	  w	  +	  hK	  CK	  r	  +	  hX	  CX	  x.	  The	  weights	  for	  
domestic	  consumers	  in	  the	  demand	  for	  the	  imported	  and	  domestic	  goods	  are	  assumed	  to	  
be	  proportional,	  so	  that	  hL	  =	  υgL	  and	  hK	  =	  υgK.	  The	  rescaled	  elasticities	  in	  this	  aggregate	  
demand	  function	  are	  defined	  by:	  
	  
(A11)	   	  

η̂ =

η
, 	  
1 − ϕ (1 − τ)(1 − η)

(A12)	   	  

ϕ̂ =

ϕ*τ(1 − η)
, 	  
1 − ϕ* (1 − τ)(1 − η)

(A13)	   	  

ϕ* =

*

ϕ
. 	  
ϕ+τ

	  

48	  

	  
The	  inverse	  demand	  function	  in	  equation	  (A10)	  only	  makes	  economic	  sense	  (i.e.,	  price	  
depends	  negatively	  on	  quantity	  and	  positively	  on	  income)	  if	   η̂ 	  >	  0.	  As	  a	  result,	  the	  
denominator	  of	  (A11)	  must	  be	  positive.	  The	  second-­‐order	  conditions	  for	  the	  social	  planner	  
problem	  in	  this	  extended	  model	  will	  be	  satisfied	  if	   η̂ 	  <	  1.	  By	  using	  the	  definition	  in	  (A11),	  it	  
is	  easy	  to	  demonstrate	  that	  the	  restriction	  that	   η̂ 	  <	  1	  also	  implies	  that	  η	  is	  less	  than	  1.	  
Using	  these	  properties,	  it	  then	  follows	  that	   ϕ̂ 	  must	  also	  lie	  between	  0	  and	  1.	  These	  
numerical	  restrictions	  will	  be	  used	  below.	  
	  

Suppose	  the	  production	  function	  is	  Cobb-­‐Douglas,	  with	  Q = K α L1−α .	  Using	  (A10),	  one	  

can	  then	  differentiate	  the	  marginal	  productivity	  condition	  to	  obtain:	  
	  
(A14)	   	  

d logVq
d logVy
d log w
d logQ
d log K
= − η̂
+ η̂
+ ϕ̂
+α
− α.
d log L
d log L
d log L
d log L
d log L
	  

	  
The	  wage	  elasticity	  depends	  on	  how	  the	  effective	  wealth	  variables	  Vq	  and	  Vy	  change	  as	  a	  
result	  of	  the	  immigration-­‐induced	  supply	  shift.	  It	  is	  easy	  to	  show	  that:	  
	  

(A15)	   	  

d logVq gL C L w d logC L gK CK r d logCK g X C X x d logC X
=
+
+
Vq
Vq
Vq
d log L
d log L
d log L
d log L
+

	  

gL C L w d log w gK CK r d log r
+
,
Vq d log L
Vq d log L

	  

	  

49	  

where	  I	  assume	  that	  immigration	  is	  sufficiently	  “small”	  to	  leave	  x	  (i.e.,	  average	  income	  in	  
the	  “rest	  of	  the	  world”)	  unchanged.	  The	  share	  of	  total	  consumption	  attributable	  to	  domestic	  
labor	  or	  capital	  must	  equal	  the	  respective	  income	  share.	  Further,	  the	  proportionality	  
property	  between	  the	  weights	  g	  and	  h	  for	  domestic	  consumers	  implies	  that	  equation	  (A15)	  
can	  be	  rewritten	  as:	  
	  
d logWq

(A16)	   	  

d log C L
d log CK
d log C X
+ ε qD sK
+ (1 − ε qD )
d log L
d log L
d log L
d log L
	  
d log w q
d log r
q
+ε D sL
+ ε D sK
.
d log L
d log L
= ε qD sL

	  
Note	  that	  the	  first	  three	  terms	  of	  (A16)	  define	  the	  elasticity	  φq	  in	  equation	  (35).	  
Using	  an	  analogous	  strategy,	  it	  can	  be	  shown	  that	  the	  change	  in	  the	  effective	  wealth	  
determining	  aggregate	  demand	  for	  good	  y	  is:	  
	  

(A17)	   	  

d logVy
d logC L
d logCK
d logC X
= ε yD sL
+ ε yD sK
+ (1− ε yD )
d log L
d log L
d log L
d log L
	  
d log w y
d log r
y
+ε D sL
+ ε D sK
.
d log L
d log L

	  
The	  first	  three	  terms	  of	  (A17)	  define	  the	  elasticity	  φy	  in	  equation	  (36).	  
	  

The	  substitution	  of	  equations	  (A5),	  (A6),	  (A16)	  and	  (A17)	  into	  equation	  (A14)	  

yields:	  
	  

	  

50	  

(A18)	   	  

q
y
d log w −λ (1 − η̂) sk + η̂λ ε D sK + ϕ̂ λ ε D sK + (1 + λ)[ η̂(φq − 1) + ϕ̂ φ y ]
=
. 	  
d log L
(1 + λ)[1 − η̂ε qD sL − ϕ̂ ε yD sL ]−[(1 − η̂) + η̂λ ε qD + ϕ̂ λ ε yD ]sK

	  
	  

The	  Cobb-­‐Douglas	  production	  function	  implies	  that	  the	  real	  wage	  equals	  

(w / p) = (1− α)K α L−α .	  Using	  equation	  (A5),	  the	  real	  wage	  elasticity	  can	  then	  be	  written	  as:	  
	  

(A19)	   	  

d log w
+1
d log(w / p)
d log K
d log L
=α
−α =α
− α, 	  
d log L
d log L
1+ λ

	  
The	  expression	  for	  the	  real	  wage	  elasticity	  is	  obtained	  by	  substituting	  (A18)	  into	  (A19).	  
This	  step	  yields:	  
	  
(A20)	   	  

−λ sK + η̂λ ε qD sK + ϕ̂ λ ε yD sK + [ η̂(φq − 1) + ϕ̂ φ y ]
d log (w / p)
=
. 	  
d log L
(1 + λ)[1 − η̂ε qD sL − ϕ̂ ε yD sL ]−[(1 − η̂) + η̂λ ε qD + ϕ̂ λ ε yD ]sK

	  
Suppose	  that	  “generalized”	  product	  market	  neutrality	  holds.	  The	  bracketed	  term	  in	  the	  
numerator	  of	  (A20)	  vanishes.	  	  
	  

To	  show	  that	  the	  real	  wage	  elasticity	  must	  then	  be	  negative,	  recall	  that	  the	  rescaled	  

elasticities	   η̂ 	  and	   ϕ̂ 	  defined	  in	  (A11)	  and	  (A12)	  are	  both	  greater	  than	  zero	  and	  less	  than	  
one.	  It	  is	  straightforward	  to	  verify	  that	  the	  sum	  of	  these	  two	  elasticities	  is	  also	  less	  than	  
one.	  The	  fact	  that	   η̂ + ϕ̂ 	  <	  1	  can	  be	  used	  to	  prove	  that	  the	  numerator	  of	  (A20)	  must	  be	  
negative.	  In	  particular,	  the	  numerator	  equals	   −λ sK (1 − η̂ε qD − ϕ̂ ε yD ) .	  The	  maximum	  value	  
that	  the	  income	  shares	  in	  this	  expression	  can	  attain	  is	  1.	  In	  that	  case,	  the	  numerator	  equals	  

	  

51	  

−λsK [1 − ( η̂ + ϕ̂)] .	  But	  the	  sum	  of	  the	  two	  elasticities	   η̂ 	  and	   ϕ̂ 	  must	  be	  less	  than	  one,	  hence	  
the	  numerator	  is	  negative.	  
By	  using	  analogous	  arguments	  it	  is	  possible	  to	  show	  that	  the	  denominator	  of	  (A20)	  
is	  positive.	  In	  particular,	  evaluate	  the	  denominator	  at	  λ	  =	  0.	  Using	  the	  properties	  of	  the	  
rescaled	  elasticities	  noted	  above,	  it	  is	  easy	  to	  show	  that	  the	  denominator	  is	  positive	  at	  the	  
lowest	  possible	  value	  of	  λ.	  By	  differentiating	  the	  denominator	  with	  respect	  to	  λ,	  it	  is	  also	  
possible	  to	  show	  that	  the	  denominator	  is	  a	  monotonically	  increasing	  function	  of	  λ.	  
	  

	  

	  

52	  
References	  

	  
	  
Benhabib	  J	  (1996)	  On	  the	  Political	  Economy	  of	  Immigration.	  European	  Economic	  
Review	  40(9):1737-­‐1744.	  
	  
	  
Borjas	  GJ	  (1995)	  The	  Economic	  Benefits	  from	  Immigration.	  Journal	  of	  Economic	  
Perspectives	  9(2):3-­‐22.	  
	  
Borjas	  GJ	  (2003)	  The	  Labor	  Demand	  Curve	  Is	  Downward	  Sloping:	  Reexamining	  the	  
Impact	  of	  Immigration	  on	  the	  Labor	  Market.	  Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics	  118(4):1335-­‐
1374.	  
	  
Borjas	  GJ,	  Doran	  KB	  (2012)	  The	  Collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  and	  the	  Productivity	  of	  
American	  Mathematicians.	  Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics	  127(3):1143-­‐1203.	  
	  
Borjas	  GJ,	  Freeman	  RB,	  Katz	  LF	  (1997)	  How	  Much	  Do	  Immigration	  and	  Trade	  Affect	  
Labor	  Market	  Outcomes?	  Brookings	  Papers	  on	  Economic	  Activity	  1:1-­‐67.	  
	  
	  
Borjas	  GJ,	  Grogger	  J,	  Hanson	  GH	  (2008)	  Imperfect	  Substitution	  between	  Immigrants	  
and	  Natives:	  A	  Reappraisal.	  NBER	  Working	  Paper	  No.	  13887.	  
	  
	  
Borjas	  GJ,	  Grogger	  J,	  Hanson	  GH	  (2012)	  On	  Estimating	  Elasticities	  of	  Substitution.	  
Journal	  of	  the	  European	  Economic	  Association	  10(1):198-­‐210.	  
	  
	  
Bowles	  S	  (1970)	  Aggregation	  of	  Labor	  Inputs	  in	  the	  Economics	  of	  Growth	  and	  
Planning:	  Experiments	  with	  a	  Two-­‐Level	  CES	  Function.	  Journal	  of	  Political	  Economy	  
78(1):68-­‐81.	  
	  
Card	  D	  (2001)	  Immigrant	  Inflows,	  Native	  Outflows,	  and	  the	  Local	  Labor	  Market	  
Impacts	  of	  Higher	  Immigration.	  Journal	  of	  Labor	  Economics	  19(1):22-­‐64.	  
	  
Card	  D	  (2005)	  Is	  the	  New	  Immigration	  Really	  So	  Bad?	  Economic	  Journal	  
115(4):F300-­‐F323.	  
	  
Card	  D	  (2009)	  Immigration	  and	  Inequality.	  American	  Economic	  Review	  99(2):1-­‐21.	  
	  
Card	  D,	  Lemieux	  T	  (2001)	  Can	  Falling	  Supply	  Explain	  the	  Rising	  Return	  to	  College	  
for	  Younger	  Men?	  A	  Cohort-­‐Based	  Analysis.	  Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics	  116(2):705-­‐
746.	  
	  
Cortes	  P	  (2008)	  The	  Effect	  of	  Low-­‐Skilled	  Immigration	  on	  US	  Prices:	  Evidence	  from	  
CPI	  Data.	  Journal	  of	  Political	  Economy	  116(3):381-­‐422.	  
	  
Dixit	  A,	  Norman	  V	  (1980)	  The	  Theory	  of	  International	  Trade:	  A	  Dual,	  General	  
Equilibrium	  Approach.	  Cambridge	  University	  Press,	  New	  York.	  
	  

	  

53	  

	  
Ewerhart	  C	  (2003)	  A	  Short	  and	  Intuitive	  Proof	  of	  Marshall’s	  Rule.	  Economic	  Theory	  
22(2):415-­‐418.	  
	  
Hamermesh	  D	  (1993)	  Labor	  Demand.	  Princeton	  University	  Press,	  Princeton.	  
	  
Hicks,	  JR	  (1932)	  The	  Theory	  of	  Wages.	  Macmillan,	  London.	  
	  
Hicks	  JR	  (1970)	  Elasticity	  of	  Substitution	  Again:	  Substitutes	  and	  Complements.	  
Oxford	  Economic	  Papers	  22(3):289-­‐296.	  
	  
	  
Kennan	  J	  (1998)	  The	  Hicks-­‐Marshall	  Rules	  of	  Derived	  Demand:	  An	  Expository	  Note.	  
Working	  Paper,	  University	  of	  Wisconsin,	  Madison.	  
	  
Kennan	  J	  (2013)	  Open	  Borders.	  Review	  of	  Economic	  Dynamics	  16:L1-­‐L13.	  
	  

Lach	  S	  (2007)	  Immigration	  and	  Prices.	  Journal	  of	  Political	  Economy	  115(4):548-­‐587.	  

	  

Manacorda	  M,	  Manning	  A,	  Wadsworth	  J	  (2012)	  The	  Impact	  of	  Immigration	  on	  the	  
Structure	  of	  Wages:	  Theory	  and	  Evidence	  from	  Britain.	  Journal	  of	  the	  European	  Economic	  
Association	  10(1):120–151.	  
	  
Mishra	  P	  (2007)	  Emigration	  and	  Wages	  in	  Source	  Countries:	  Evidence	  from	  Mexico.	  
Journal	  of	  Development	  Economics	  82(1):180-­‐199.	  
	  
Mundell	  RA	  (1957)	  International	  Trade	  and	  Factor	  Mobility.	  American	  Economic	  
Review	  47(3):321-­‐335.	  
	  
Olney	  W	  (2013)	  Remittances	  and	  the	  Wage	  Impact	  of	  Immigration.	  Working	  Paper,	  
Williams	  College.	  
	  
	  
Ottaviano,	  GIP,	  Peri	  G	  (2005)	  Rethinking	  the	  Gains	  from	  Immigration:	  Theory	  and	  
Evidence	  from	  the	  U.S.	  NBER	  Working	  Paper	  No.	  11672.	  
	  
	  
Ottaviano,	  GIP,	  Peri	  G	  (2012)	  Rethinking	  the	  Effect	  of	  Immigration	  on	  Wages.	  
Journal	  of	  the	  European	  Economic	  Association	  10(1):152-­‐197.	  
	  
	  
Pemberton	  J	  (1989)	  Marshall’s	  Rules	  for	  Derived	  Demand:	  A	  Critique	  and	  
Generalisation.	  Scottish	  Journal	  of	  Economics	  36(4):396-­‐405.	  
	  
	  
Rasmussen	  E	  (2013)	  How	  Immigration	  Can	  Hurt	  a	  Country.	  Working	  Paper,	  Indiana	  
University.	  
	  
	  
Saiz	  A	  (2007)	  Immigration	  and	  Housing	  Rents	  in	  American	  Cities.	  Journal	  of	  Urban	  
Economics	  61(2):345–371.	  
	  

	  

54	  

Sato	  R,	  Tetsunori	  K	  (1973)	  On	  the	  Elasticities	  of	  Substitution	  and	  Complementarity.	  
Oxford	  Economic	  Papers	  25(1):44-­‐56.	  
	  
	  
Wagner	  M	  (2009)	  Understanding	  the	  Labor	  Market	  Impact	  of	  Immigration.	  Working	  
Paper,	  University	  of	  Chicago.	  
	  
Waldinger	  F	  (2010)	  Quality	  Matters:	  The	  Expulsion	  of	  Professors	  and	  the	  
Consequences	  for	  PhD	  Student	  Outcomes	  in	  Nazi	  Germany.	  Journal	  of	  Political	  Economy	  
118(4):	  787-­‐831.	  
	  
	  
	  

