                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           CENTRAL BANK TRANSPARENCY:
                         CAUSES, CONSEQUENCES AND UPDATES

                                           Nergiz Dincer
                                         Barry Eichengreen

                                        Working Paper 14791
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14791


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2009




State Planning Organization, Ankara, and University of California, Berkeley, respectively. An earlier
version of this paper was presented to the conference on Money Matters: The Law, Politics and Economics
of Currency, held at Tel Aviv University on 7-9 January 2009. We are grateful to Tal Sadeh and other
conference participants for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Nergiz Dincer and Barry Eichengreen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Central Bank Transparency: Causes, Consequences and Updates
Nergiz Dincer and Barry Eichengreen
NBER Working Paper No. 14791
March 2009
JEL No. E0,E58

                                            ABSTRACT

We present updated estimates of central bank for 100 countries up through 2006 and use them to analyze
both the determinants and consequences of monetary policy transparency in an integrated econometric
framework. We establish that there has been significant movement in the direction of greater central
bank transparency in recent years. Transparent monetary policy arrangements are more likely in countries
with strong and stable political institutions. They are more likely in democracies, with their culture
of transparency. Using these political determinants as instruments for transparency, we show that
more transparency monetary policy operating procedures is associated with less inflation variability
though not also with less inflation persistence.


Nergiz Dincer
State Planning Organization
Ankara
Turkey
nergiz.dincer@gmail.com

Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.Berkeley.edu
           Central Bank Transparency: Causes, Consequences and Updates1
                        Nergiz Dincer and Barry Eichengreen
                                   February 2009




1. Introduction

        Commenting on British monetary policy in 1929, Otto Niemeyer, director of

financial inquiries at H.M. Treasury, observed that “In prewar days a change in bank rate

was no more regarded as the business of the Treasury than the colour which the Bank

painted its front door.”2 In 1987 William Greider entitled his expose of the Federal

Reserve Secrets of the Temple.3 Since then the world of monetary policy has changed.

Transparency now is a byword. Central banks are supposed to be open about their

objectives, outlooks, policy strategies, and even their mistakes. The days when monetary

policy deliberations were regarded as no more the business of outsiders than the color

than the central bank chose to paint its door are now firmly in the past.

        Or so it might seem. Assessing whether this move in the direction of policy

transparency is permanent – and if so how far it might go – or whether it might be

reversed requires understanding what lies behind the trend in the first place. One view is

that transparency enhances the effectiveness of monetary policy. Transparency about

monetary policy objectives, outlooks and strategies is necessary for effective

communication with the markets, and effective communication is necessary for monetary

1
  State Planning Organization, Ankara, and University of California, Berkeley, respectively. An earlier
version of this paper was presented to the conference on Money Matters: The Law, Politics and Economics
of Currency, held at Tel Aviv University on 7-9 January 2009. We are grateful to Tal Sadeh and other
conference participants for helpful comments.
2
  Cited in Eichengreen, Watson and Grossman (1985).
3
  See Greider (1987).


                                                   1
policy to have stabilizing effects. Policy transparency makes it easier for observers to

anticipate central bank actions and minimizes disruptions when policies change. It

enhances the ability of policy makers to manage expectations, which is a key channel

through which monetary policy affects outcomes. Transparency about not just current

but also expected future policy gives the central bank leverage over long-term interest

rates (which depend on expectations) and thus provides an important mechanism for

influencing consumption and investment.

         The seminal research on this subject built on the Barro-Gordon (1983) model in

which wages are set now on the basis of expected future monetary policy.4 Imagine, for

example, that inflationary pressures are building and unions contemplate raising their

wage demands. If the central bank is transparent about the priority it attaches to price

stability, the risk it perceives that inflation will exceed its target, and the likelihood of

having to respond by raising interest rates, then wage setters will have reason to

anticipate that inflationary pressures will subside. They will be less likely to demand

higher wages now that would, require costly and difficult wage reductions in the future.

The disruptions to the economy from policies to contain inflation would be less. And

monetary policy makers are less likely to fall prey to an expectations trap in which

expectations drift off in ways that force them into unpalatable policy choices.5

         Transparency thus allows the central bank to more effectively communicate with

the markets. It helps it to credibly commit. It is a way for monetary policy makers to

communicate the importance they attach to price stability.6 This in turn enables them to


4
  See for example Geraats (2002a,b).
5
  See Clarida, Gali and Gertler (2000) and Christiano and Gust (2000).
6
  Faust and Svensson (2001) consider a model in which the public attempts to infer whether or not the
central bank is serious about limiting inflation from information on policy outcomes. Its inferences are


                                                     2
respond flexibly to disturbances without undermining confidence in their commitment to

their long-term target.

         A second view is that transparency is a mechanism for democratic accountability

in a world of policy discretion and central bank independence. Once upon a time central

bank policy was constrained by rules like those of the gold standard, if not absolutely

then at least more tightly than today. Central banks may have had statutory independence

– many of them were in fact still private banks – but they did not have policy

independence.7 The demise of the gold standard was associated with the spread of

modern central banking but also with increasing central bank dependence on the

government (as alluded to in Niemeyer’s quote above). At this stage there was no

question about the political accountability of the central bank. More recently has there

been recognition of the efficiency advantages of delegating the conduct of monetary

policy to an independent entity. Moreover, with the move away from pegged exchange

rates, central banks have acquired greater discretion over the stance of policy. But with

the growth of independent powers comes a need for democratic accountability, for

assurance that the independent technocrats now with discretion over monetary policy



imperfect because of unanticipated policy-implementation errors that the public is incompletely able to
observe. Greater transparency about economic conditions thus enables agents to infer the central bank’s
preferences more accurately. In turn this gives the monetary authority an incentive to build a reputation for
valuing price stability. The private sector becomes more sensitive to unanticipated policy responses and
actions, attenuating the incentive for the central bank to engage in them. The result is thus greater
sensitivity of inflation expectations to policy actions, the less benefit to the central bank of inflating, and
less inflationary bias. In this way increased transparency about control errors improves social welfare.
Greater transparency about the central bank’s objectives may be more of a mixed blessing in this
framework. Transparency about objectives, in addition to reducing uncertainty about future inflation and
output, which will be welfare improving other things equal, removes the central bank’s incentive to curtail
inflation in order to signal its type, which can be welfare reducing.
7
  Moreover, the influence of monetary policy over economic and financial conditions, while never
something about which observers were exactly ignorant, was less fully appreciated than today, when
traders hold their breath on the days when the central bank announces its interest-rate decision. And where
the extent of the franchise and of political contestability were limited, there was no more need for the
central bank to be democratically accountable than any other branch of government.


                                                      3
decisions take those decisions in a manner consistent with the public interest and will be

taken to task for failing to do so. This mechanism for democratic accountability will be

effective only if the central bank is transparent about its decisions – only if those deciding

monetary policy cannot claim that their policy decisions are, in fact, in the public interest

for reasons that only they understand. In the absence of adequate transparency, suspicion

about central bank motives may develop, and pressures to curb the institution’s

independence may be irresistible.

         Both rationales have been questioned. If asymmetric information is a distortion,

then the theory of the second best suggests that removing one distortion in the presence

of another may not be welfare improving. It is not hard to construct scenarios in which

additional transparency destabilizes expectations and accentuates financial market

volatility.8 Similarly, there are critics of the view that transparency can substitute

adequately for direct political sanctions as a mechanism for holding monetary policy

makers accountable.9

         In addition, even those who embrace these efficiency- and accountability-based

arguments wonder whether central bank transparency can go too far. The European

Central Bank has justified its refusal to publish the minutes and voting records of its

board on the grounds that individual members would then be subject to pressure from
8
  Morris and Shin (2002, 2005) illustrate the point in a model in which individual welfare depends not just
on the state of the world but on the actions of other individuals (there exists a coordination externality).
Starting from a position where both private and public information are imperfect, they show that greater
precision of public information can lead individuals to attach inadequate weight to private information. In
the absence of coordination motives, the precision attached to the public and private signals will be
commensurate with their relative precision. When coordination motives are present, however, agents
attach greater weight to the public signal, since they know this to be common information. But since the
public signal is noisy, this weight on the public signal may be suboptimal from a social-welfare point of
view; agents may be led to coordinate on an inefficient equilibrium. This adverse outcome is more likely
the more precise is private information.
9
  Thus, some critics of the European Central Bank, whose transnational status, embedded in an
international treaty, makes it difficult for national politicians to sanction those responsible for its policy,
question whether policy transparency provides adequate political accountability.


                                                       4
special interests (national interests, in its context) that compromised their independence

and led to inefficient policy decisions.10 Clare and Courtenay (2001) argue that minutes

describing contentious discussion among central bank board members can heighten asset-

price volatility, suggesting that copious information only confuses investors. More

generally, van der Cruijsen, Eijffinger and Hoogduin (2008) suggest that agents may be

confused by the large and increasing amount of information with which they are

bombarded in a highly transparent regime. They suggest that excessive transparency may

cause agents to realize how uncertain the central bank is about economic conditions and

the efficacy of policy, in turn heightening volatility. Others ask whether requiring the

central bank to provide detailed information about its intermediate targets, only to miss

them, might similarly confuse and raise questions about the competence of policy

makers. Thus Goodhart (2001) questions the efficacy of requiring the central bank to

provide information on not just, inter alia, inflation forecasts but also its forecasts for the

future path of the monetary policy instrument, on the grounds that this would so

complicate decision making (board members would have to agree on an entire trajectory

for their policy instrument at each decision point) as to potentially undermine effective

decision making.11 Mishkin (2004) warns that a high degree of transparency might

disrupt communication with the public, which would not easily understand that forecasts

for the policy instrument are conditional on the future state of the economy, and which

might misinterpret changes in the forecast (or deviations between forecast and realized

rates) as the central bank reneging on its commitments.


10
  See Hamalainen (2001) for an early statement to this effect.
11
  Some central banks go part way toward indicating the prospective future path of interest rates; the
Federal Reserve, for example, regularly signals its “bias” toward future interest-rate increases or reductions
by issuing a “balance of risks” statement.


                                                      5
           We cannot resolve these debates here, but the evidence we present speaks to

them. Specifically, in this paper, which is the latest in a series we have writing on the

subject of central bank transparency, we undertake three tasks.12 First, we document

changes in the prevalence of central bank transparency, updating our measures through

2006. Second, we analyze the determinants of the degree of transparency, focusing here

on the role of political variables. Third, we examine the consequences for monetary-

policy outcomes such as inflation variability and inflation persistence. Here we probe for

nonlinear effects of transparency on policy outcomes as a way of providing a provisional

answer to Mishkin’s (2004) question of whether “transparency can go too far.” A

methodologically significant aspect of our work is that we consider the determinants of

transparency and the effects using a unified analytical framework. This means that we

can use our analysis of the determinants to identify instrumental variables that address the

concern that an observed correlation between outcomes and transparency reflects the

impact of the former on the latter, rather than the other way around.



2. Data

           Our indices of central bank transparency follow the work of Eijffinger and

Geraats (2006). In contrast to earlier studies, most of which focused on particular aspects

of transparency (for example, whether the central bank announced an explicit target for

inflation), Eijffinger and Geraats acknowledged that transparency has multiple

dimensions. The result is 15 subindices (detailed in the appendix) designed to capture the

political, economic, procedural, policy and operational aspects of monetary policy



12
     See also Dincer and Eichengreen (2007).


                                               6
transparency.13 Political transparency denotes openness about policy objectives;

economic transparency openness about data, models and forecasts; procedural

transparency openness about the way decisions are taken; policy transparency openness

about the policy implications; and operational transparency openness about the

implementation of those decisions.

          We draw our data from information on central banks’ websites and in their

statutes, annual reports, and other published documents. We gather this information for as

large a number of central banks as possible (where Eijiffinger and Geraats looked at just

nine central banks).14 In addition, we gather the same information for every year from

1998 through 2006. Where there was a change in some aspect of transparency over the

course of a calendar year, we take the value that prevailed for the largest portion of the

year.15

          We were able to assemble this information for 100 central banks.16 Most of the

omissions are central banks of micro-states: our sample includes the central banks of all

large, systemically significant countries.17


13
   The overall index thus runs from 0 to 15. Adopting the same criteria used by these previous investigators
has the advantage of facilitating comparisons across studies and frees us of suspicions that we have
constructed our measures so as to maximize or minimize the impact of transparency.
14
   An earlier study by Bini-Smaghi and Gros (2001) also considered 15 aspects of central bank
transparency, although they considered only four central banks. De Haan, Amtembrink and Waller (2004)
developed a similar index for six countries, while De Haan and Amtembrink (2003) apply a similar
approach to 15 countries. Siklos (2002) expands coverage to 20 central banks, all from advanced industrial
countries. The most comprehensive previous study in terms of country coverage is Fry et al. (2000),
although they construct indices only for 1998.
15
   Adding this time dimension was particularly challenging, since many central bank websites describe
current practice but not that of prior years. For this we had to rely mainly on published documents. We
were able to access a relatively complete run of these on the basis of holdings in the University of
California and Joint IMF-World Bank libraries. We are grateful to the staff of the Joint Bank-Fund library
for granting us access to their collection.
16
   This is the vast majority of central banks in the world (recall that there are more countries than there are
central banks, given the existence of monetary unions, countries that have unilaterally adopted the
currencies of other countries, etc.). A subsequent study by Crowe and Meade (2008) constructs measures
of transparency very similar to our own but only since 2000 and for a much smaller (37 country) sample
(their purpose being to compare measure of central bank transparency and independence).


                                                      7
        Table 1 shows the results by country and region. The most transparent central

banks in 2006, according to our coding, were the Swedish Riksbank, the Reserve Bank of

New Zealand, the Bank of England, the Bank of Canada, the Czech National Bank, the

ECB, and the Central Bank of Hungary. We see here a number of countries that received

high marks for transparency in previous studies (Sweden, New Zealand, the UK, Canada)

but also others (the Czech Republic, Hungary), which is a reminder of the advantages of

broad country coverage and of the fact that a number of countries with relatively opaque

central banking practices have been moving in the direction of greater transparency. The

six least transparent central banks were those of Aruba, Bermuda, Ethiopia, Libya, Saudi

Arabia and Yemen. Table 2 shows our coding of the 15 individual components for these

13 countries as of 2006.

        More generally, we can compare different dimensions of central bank

transparency. In 2006, 65 central banks received scores of 2 or more for political

transparency (inter alia, providing a quantitative definition of their objectives to the

public).18 Economic transparency (disclosing data, the policy model and forecasts) is

less; only 5 central banks receive the highest possible rating. The picture is similar for

procedural transparency (the release of minutes and votes), where only four central banks

receive the highest possible score. And again for policy transparency (prompt

announcement and comprehensive explanation of policy decisions), where only the

Reserve Bank of New Zealand and the Swedish Riksbank receives the full score and the



17
   Among the omissions are Bolivia, Ecuador, Chad, Iran, and Afghanistan We are aware that this creates
a form of sampling bias: we tend to oversample more transparent central banks. There exist econometric
corrections for this bias (involving strong assumptions), although we have not implemented these yet. Our
defense is that the number of consequential omissions is relatively slight.
18
   Up from 47 in 1998.
20
   2006 being the most recent year for which all the ancillary variables are currently available.


                                                    8
Fed receive a score of 2.5. The only central bank receiving a perfect score of 3 for

operational transparency (release of information about disturbances, control errors, etc.)

is the Swedish Riksbank.

            Taking unweighted averages of the countries making up a region (as in Table 1),

we see the highest level of transparency in Australia-New Zealand, followed by Western

Europe, Northern Europe, South East Asia, Southern Africa, and North America. That

South East Asia and Southern Africa are scored as more transparent than North America

is a figment of the unweighted averages. When we instead take GDP-weighted averages,

as in Table 3, the most transparent regions as of 2006, in descending order, are Europe

(led by Northern Europe), North America, Oceania and Southern Africa (dominated by

South Africa); lower weights on its relatively transparent small economies causes South

East Asia to drop down. Either way, the lowest levels of transparency, starting from the

bottom, are those of Northern Africa, Southern Asia, Eastern Africa and Western Africa –

no surprises here.

            Turning to trends over time, the average transparency score in our sample rose

from 3.4 in 1998 and 5.4 in 2006. Strikingly, none of our 100 countries moved in the

direction of less transparency. Figure 1 compares our measure of transparency in 1998

and 2006 (with 2006 on the vertical axis). There are only 10 countries on the diagonal,

indicating no increase in transparency, while the remaining 90 cases are all above and to

its left.

            Figure 2 shows transparency by level of economic development (again, using

weighted averages). Consistent with the preceding discussion, central banks in the

advanced countries are more transparent than central banks in emerging markets (defined




                                                9
as middle-income countries with significant links to international financial markets),

which in turn are more transparent than central banks in developing countries. Consistent

with the implication of Figure 2 above, there have been increases in central bank

transparency in all three country groups. Perhaps most strikingly, the increase among

emerging markets is, on average, as large in absolute value as the increase among

advanced countries; the corresponding increase among developing countries is smaller.

Much of the increase in emerging markets is centered in the period following the Asian

crisis and again in the early parts of the present decade.



3. Determinants

       We now use regression analysis to further characterize differences in central bank

transparency across countries and over time. Our goals here are to work toward an

explanation for these variations and also to identify instruments for our analysis of the

consequences of transparency. We proceed in two stages, first updating our previous

findings and then pursuing a more detailed political-economy analysis.

       We start with the 1998-2006 cross section, with all variables averaged over the

period.20 We regress transparency on a vector of economic determinants: per capita

income, inflation history (defined as the lagged log first difference of the consumer price

index), the de facto exchange rate regime (the Reinhart-Rogoff 2003 version as updated

by Eichengreen and Razo-Garcia 2006), and financial depth (defined as the ratio of M2 to

GDP). In addition we include a range of potential political determinants: rule of law,

political stability, voice and accountability, and government efficiency (all taken from

Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastruzzi, 2007), together with a number of measures of




                                             10
democratic orientation (democracy and autocracy dummies and overall polity score)

taken from the Polity IV data base.21 Variable definitions and sources are described in

Appendix A.

         Since the political variables are strongly correlated with one another, we include

them one at a time. (This can be seen from the variance-covariance matrix presented in

Appendix B.) The results (Table 4) suggest that per capita GDP is a robust determinant

of overall transparency. There is good reason to think that that transparency should rise

with the general level of economic and institutional development, for which per capita

income proxies; this is also the measure of Figure 2 above. In addition, countries with

more flexible exchange rates (where a larger value of the index denotes greater

flexibility) tend to be more transparent in the conduct of monetary policy, as anticipated

by our introduction – the absence of an exchange rate peg eliminating one traditional

device for monitoring central bank actions.22 Finally, most of the political variables are

significant and affect central bank transparency in plausible ways.23 Greater transparency

characterizes central bank operations in countries that rank higher in terms of rule of law,

that have more stable political systems, that have higher ratings in terms of voice and

accountability, and that are more favorably regarded in terms of government efficiency.24

Countries with more open (democratic) political systems are also more likely to have


21
   Where we use variables from the Polity data base, we are forced to end the analysis in 2004.
22
   Readers may be concerned that the exchange rate regime is endogenous – that countries with experience
with monetary policy transparency may be better able to operate regimes of grater flexibility. In the event,
dropping the exchange-rate regime leaves the other results unchanged.
23
   The other variables do not approach statistical significance at conventional confidence levels. For what
they are worth, the point estimates suggest that central banks of countries with better developed financial
markets tend to be more transparent. Similarly, central banks of countries with a history of inflation tend to
be more transparent, presumably as part of a credibility-building strategy. This is not something that would
have been anticipated from the contrast between transparency in advanced and developing countries.
24
   When we include multiple political variables, it is voice and accountability and government efficiency
that are most often significant at standard confidence levels.


                                                     11
transparent central banks; it can be argued that the demand for political accountability is

strong in such settings and that transparency is an important mechanism for

accountability.25

         As a form of sensitivity analysis, we interacted the exchange rate regime with

openness (exports as a share of GDP) and added openness as an additional regressor. The

results (available from the authors on request) suggest that greater openness is associated

with greater transparency if the country in question has a relatively flexible exchange rate

but with less transparency if the country has a relatively rigid currency. This accords

with intuition and casual observation.

         Next we analyzed the determinants of the individual components of the

transparency index to gain further insight into exactly how practice responds to these

same economic and political factors. In Appendix C we report analogous regressions for

each component of the transparency index. As can be seen there, per capita income and

exchange rate flexibility are positively associated with each of the five components of the

overall index. But the different components show different degrees of responsiveness to

the various political factors. Political transparency is a positive function of political

development as measured by voice and accountability.26 Economic transparency (the

public disclosure of data, the policy model and forecasts), procedural transparency (the

release of minutes and votes) and operational transparency (release of information about

disturbances, control errors, etc.) are, in contrast, positively associated with a range of

political factors (voice and accountability, government efficiency, democracy versus

25
   Note that the “polity” variable in the final column is the difference between “democracy” and
“autocracy.”
26
   Political transparency also appears to decline with financial depth, which is not a pattern for which we
have an immediate explanation. Interestingly, other components such as economic and procedural
transparency are positively associated with financial depth, as can be seen from the corresponding tables.


                                                     12
autocracy, and the Polity score). related to a wide range of political factors. Policy

transparency (prompt announcement and comprehensive explanation of policy decisions)

stands out for being significantly related to each and every one of our measures of

policies and institutions, not just those that affect economic, procedural and operational

transparency but also political stability and rule of law. Thus, there are some subtle

differences here in terms of which components of the transparency index are driving the

observed correlation with political and institutional factors – the correlation appears to be

weakest in the case of political transparency – but the results for the different measures

are broadly consistent overall.

         We can also use this specification to consider factors influencing trends in

transparency. In Tables 5 and 6 we pool the annual observations and estimate fixed-

effects models (including separate intercepts for each country).27 The estimates are now

driven by the time series variation in the data; they thus tell us something about why

central bank practice is evolving in the direction of greater transparency. The move to

more flexible exchange rates (especially in open economies), per capita GDP (as a

measure of general economic and social capability), rule of law and government

efficiency appear to be the main variables driving the increase in transparency over time.

While the democratic/autocratic nature of the political system helped to explain cross

country patterns above, the spread of democracy does not appear to have much power for

explaining within-country changes in monetary policy over time.




27
   The standard Hausman and Breusch-Pagan tests reject random effects and simple pooling in favor of
fixed effects (the Hausman test statistic is reported at the foot of the tables). See also the further discussion
below.
29
   But not between the level of inflation and transparency.


                                                       13
        The correlation of some of these political variables with central bank

transparency—rule of law and government efficiency, in particular—will be useful when

we consider the impact of transparency on economic and financial variables below. That

is, while it is not hard to come up with an argument for why the transparency of monetary

policy should affect inflation, financial markets, or the development of trade, it is harder

to concoct a story for why it should have a first-order effect on, say, rule of law, which

depends on the larger political and social setting and is the product of a country’s history.

It can thus be argued that such political variables satisfy the two criteria for a valid

instrument: exogeneity and correlation with the explanatory variable of interest.

        The fact that we will be relying on these measures as instruments also makes it

important that we consider their correlation with the different components of the

transparency index, as we did with the simple cross section above. There are some

suggestive variations here. (See Appendix D.) When we focus on trends over time,

policy transparency displays a correlation only with rule of law. Economic transparency

appears to be affected only by political stability and rule of law. Procedural transparency

responds only to government efficiency, voice and accountability and rule of law,

operational transparency to government efficiency, political stability and rule of law.

Political stability, in contrast, does not display a correlation with either rule of law or

political stability, but it is moves in the expected manner with most of the other political

and institutional variables.




                                              14
       7. Effects

       We now explore the effects of monetary policy transparency. Some previous

studies (viz. Mishkin 2004) suggest that greater transparency should be associated with a

reduction in uncertainty about future policy actions and thus with a reduction in inflation

volatility. Consistent with the hypothesis, Demertzis and Hughes Hallett (2003),

employing the Eijffinger-Geraats index for 2001, find a negative relationship between

inflation variability and central bank transparency.29 Other studies (viz. Mankiw, Reis

and Wolfers 2004; Levin, Natalucci and Piger 2004) suggest that there is less variability

and dispersion in inflation expectations when central banks publish numerical targets for

inflation. Still others suggest that greater transparency should be associated with lower

inflation persistence, insofar as the credibility of monetary policy is enhanced and market

participants do not extrapolate future inflation from current inflation. A study of the

U.S., Sweden and the UK by Gurkaynak, Levin and Swanson (2005) provides indirect

evidence on this question; it shows that in the U.S., where the authorities do not publish a

target for inflation, there is a greater tendency for market participants to extrapolate

inflation expectations from the recent behavior of inflation.

       These studies are subject to important limitations. Most compare a relatively

small set of not-obviously-representative central banks. In other words, central banks that

are transparent about their policies are not likely to be selected randomly from the larger

population. They focus on specific dimensions of transparency (publication of an

inflation forecast, for example) in lieu of comprehensive measures. Others utilize

indicators of transparency that are available only for one year. Virtually none of them




                                              15
acknowledge that central bank transparency is a choice variable than may itself be

affected by the economic, financial and political environment.

        Here we consider the impact on inflation variability and inflation persistence. In

contrast to previous studies we acknowledge the endogeneity of monetary policy

transparency by using the political variables utilized to explain the degree of transparency

in Section 3 as instruments for transparency in this section’s (second-stage) regressions.30

These second-stage coefficients are estimated using GMM to correct for

heteroscedasticity and serial correlation in our panel-data set-up.

        Table 7 reports the estimates for inflation variability. In each column we report

the sum of squared residuals comparing the change in the point estimates with the loss of

efficiency when instrumental variables are used; the change in the point estimates being

relatively large, this supports our use of instrumental variables. In addition to the level of

past inflation, which is positively related to inflation variability, the most important

determinant is the (fitted value of the) central bank transparency index. This variable is

negative and always significant at conventional confidence levels.31 This is consistent

with theories suggesting that greater monetary-policy transparency allows the public to

respond more quickly to policy actions, in turn discouraging the authorities from

attempting to manipulate inflation in the pursuit of other objectives.

          Table 8 considers inflation persistence. Transparency enters negatively and

significantly when it is interested on its own (column 1), consistent with the notion that

greater policy transparency allows the public to adjust more quickly, in turn limiting the

incentive for the central bank to run inflationary policies in the effort to achieve

30
   Results using alternative instrument lists are discussed below and are available from the authors on
request.
31
   Though the confidence level in question depends on which specific controls are included or excluded.


                                                   16
objectives other than the maintenance of price stability. This result is also consistent with

theories suggesting that greater monetary-policy transparency is a source of policy

credibility, allowing the authorities to respond to events without exciting expectations of

chronic inflation. However, the coefficient in question loses its significance as soon as

other plausible determinants of inflation persistence are added to the specification. The

relationship of transparency to inflation persistence is not as robust, in other words, as its

relationship to inflation variability.

         By adding a squared term in transparency we can also ask whether there are

diminishing returns to central bank transparency (“whether transparency can go too

far”).33 In the equation for inflation variability, transparency continues to enter with a

significant negative coefficient as before, but transparency squared enters positively and

also significantly. (See Table 9.) This suggests that increased transparency has the

strongest effect on inflation variability for the most opaque central banks.34 The same

broad pattern is evident in the regressions for inflation persistence, which show

persistence declining with increased transparency but at a decelerating rate. In this case,

however, the coefficients on the squared term designed to capture nonlinearities are not

significantly different from zero at standard confidence levels. Again, the relationship

between transparency and inflation persistence does not appear to be as robust as that

between transparency and inflation variability.



33
   The squared term, like the level, is constructed from the fitted value of transparency derived from the
first-stage regression.
34
   If the coefficients are taken literally they suggest that the benefits in terms of reducing inflation
variability dissipate and inflation variability begins to rise with transparency when the index for the latter
exceeds five, a suspiciously low threshold. Thus we do not want to push these particular point estimates
too far.




                                                      17
        We explored the sensitivity of these results using alternative instrument lists, for

example instrumenting transparency with rule of law alone instead of the entire vector of

political and institutional measures The results were very similar, with stronger effects of

transparency on inflation variability than inflation persistence and evidence of

diminishing returns once transparency reached a certain threshold.

        Since completing the first draft of this paper, we have seen the analysis of van der

Cruijsen, Eijffinger and Hoogduin (2008), who similarly ask whether there are nonlinear

effects of transparency on inflation persistence, with persistence declining initially as

transparency rises, implying an optimal degree of central bank transparency. They

estimate their model using our data and find significant coefficients on both the level and

squared terms in transparency. They model persistence differently, using current

inflation as the dependent variable and including the lagged inflation term interacted with

transparency (and transparency squared) as an independent variable. They also include a

different set of controls.

        In fact, the consequential difference between their approach and ours is now how

persistence is measured or what controls are included but simply whether or not the

potential endogeneity of transparency (our key point) is taken into account. In column a

of Table 11 we show our replication of their result. But when, as in column b, we use our

instruments for transparency, the significance of the key coefficients dissolves.35 In

columns c and d we substitute our version of the dependent variable, running OLS in

column c and instrumenting transparency in column d. In neither case is there evidence

of a significant impact of transparency on inflation persistence.


35
  The versions of the equation run with instruments are again estimated by GMM. The two-stage least
squares version simply applying the instruments to transparency yields the same results.


                                                  18
         We also explored more closely which component or components of the

transparency index mainly drive the negative association with inflation variability and

persistence. (Results are not reported to avoid a proliferation of tables but are available

from the authors on request.) All five components continue to be associated with lower

inflation variability and (less robustly) with lower inflation persistence when they are

included one at a time (in each case being instrumented by rule of law). When we include

all five simultaneously (employing a longer list of political instruments: rule of law,

political stability, democratic accountability, government efficiency, and regulatory

quality), there is an obvious multicolinearity problem. For what it is worth, these results

suggest that operational transparency (openness about the implementation of those

decisions), is mainly driving the reduction in inflation variability. This component enters

negatively, and its coefficient differs from zero at the 99 percent confidence level. None

of the other components have coefficients that differ from zero at standard confidence

levels. 36

         An alternative is to test whether the five dimensions of transparency matter as a

group. To this end we constructed the principal components of our measures of the five

dimensions of transparency. We entered into the equation the first and second principal

components (where the first explains 34 per cent of the variation in the group, the second

12 per cent). When substituted for the various individual measures of transparency, the

two principal components enter negatively and significantly in the equation for inflation

variability (they are significant as a pair and the second principal component is




36
   The coefficient on the fifth component enters with a t-statistic of 4.2. None of the other coefficients have
t’s in excess of one.


                                                      19
significant individually), but they enter insignificantly in the equation for inflation

persistence, consistent with the results we report above.



8. Conclusion

       Greater transparency of central bank operations is the most dramatic recent

change in the conduct of monetary policy. We understand this as a response to changes

in the monetary policy environment. It is a way of ensuring the accountability of policy

makers when the traditional mechanisms for doing so – public monitoring of compliance

with an exchange rate commitment and direct oversight by a government with formal

control – are in decline, reflecting the shift to flexible exchange rates and central bank

independence.

       In this paper we have presented new data on the extent of the trend and its effects.

The trend is general – a large number of central banks have moved in the direction of

greater transparency in recent years. The question is whether it will prove durable or be a

passing phase. In part, the answer depends on the consequences. Our preliminary

analysis suggests broadly favorable impacts on inflation variability, but less evidence of

an impact on inflation persistence. Still, if institutional arrangements that produce

favorable results retain public support, then this suggests that the trend toward greater

monetary policy transparency is here to stay.

       The other way of approaching this question is to ask whether the changes in the

policy environment that precipitated the move toward greater transparency might

themselves be rolled back. We see the abandonment of pegged exchange rates as a

response to financial liberalization and greater central bank independence as a way of




                                              20
insulating the conduct of monetary policy from short-term political pressures in

democracies. If financial globalization and political democratization are here to stay, as

we suspect, then so too is greater transparency in the conduct of monetary policy.




                                            21
                                     Data Appendix

This appendix describes the construction of the transparency index. The index is the sum

of the scores for answers to the fifteen questions below (min = 0, max = 15).

       1. Political Transparency

       Political transparency refers to openness about policy objectives. This comprises a

formal statement of objectives, including an explicit prioritization in case of multiple

goals, a quantification of the primary objective(s), and explicit institutional arrangements.

(a) Is there a formal statement of the objective(s) of monetary policy, with an explicit

prioritization in case of multiple objectives?

       No formal objective(s) = 0.

       Multiple objectives without prioritization = 1/2.

       One primary objective, or multiple objectives with explicit priority = 1.

(b) Is there a quantification of the primary objective(s)?

       No = 0.

       Yes = 1.

(c) Are there explicit contacts or other similar institutional arrangements between the

monetary authorities and the government?

       No central bank contracts or other institutional arrangements = 0.

       Central bank without explicit instrument independence or contract = 1/2.

       Central bank with explicit instrument independence or central bank contract

although possibly subject to an explicit override procedure = 1.




                                             22
       2. Economic Transparency

       Economic transparency focuses on the economic information that is used for

monetary policy. This includes economic data, the model of the economy that the central

bank employs to construct forecasts or evaluate the impact of its decisions, and the

internal forecasts (model based or judgmental) that the central bank relies on.

(a) Is the basic economic data relevant for the conduct of monetary policy publicly

available? (The focus is on the following five variables: money supply, inflation, GDP,

unemployment rate and capacity utilization.)

       Quarterly time series for at most two out of the five variables = 0.

       Quarterly time series for three or four out of the five variables = 1/2.

       Quarterly time series for all five variables = 1.

(b) Does the central bank disclose the macroeconomic model(s) it uses for policy

analysis?

       No = 0.

       Yes = 1.

(c) Does the central bank regularly publish its own macroeconomic forecasts?

       No numerical central bank forecasts for inflation and output = 0.

       Numerical central bank forecasts for inflation and/or output published at less than

quarterly frequency = 1/2.

       Quarterly numerical central bank forecasts for inflation and output for the

medium term (one to two years ahead), specifying the assumptions about the policy

instrument (conditional or unconditional forecasts) = 1.

       3. Procedural Transparency



                                             23
       Procedural transparency is about the way monetary policy decisions are taken.

(a) Does the central bank provide an explicit policy rule or strategy that describes its

monetary policy framework?

       No = 0.

       Yes = 1.

(b) Does the central bank give a comprehensive account of policy deliberations (or

explanations in case of a single central banker) within a reasonable amount of time?

       No or only after a substantial lag (more than eight weeks) = 0.

       Yes, comprehensive minutes (although not necessarily verbatim or attributed) or

explanations (in case of a single central banker), including a discussion of backward and

forward-looking arguments = 1.

(c) Does the central bank disclose how each decision on the level of its main operating

instrument or target was reached?

       No voting records, or only after substantial lag (more than eight weeks) = 0.

       Non-attributed voting records = 1/2.

       Individual voting records, or decision by single central banker = 1.

       4. Policy Transparency

       Policy transparency means prompt disclosure of policy decisions, together with an

explanation of the decision, and an explicit policy inclination or indication of likely

future policy actions.

(a) Are decisions about adjustments to the main operating instrument or target announced

promptly?




                                              24
        No or only after the day of implementation = 0.

        Yes, on the day of implementation = 1.

(b) Does the central bank provide an explanation when it announces policy decisions?

        No = 0.

        Yes, when policy decisions change, or only superficially = 1/2.

        Yes, always and including forwarding-looking assessments = 1.

(c) Does the central bank disclose an explicit policy inclination after every policy

meeting or an explicit indication of likely future policy actions (at least quarterly)?

        No = 0.

        Yes = 1.



5. Operational Transparency

        Operational transparency concerns the implementation of the central bank’s

policy actions. It involves a discussion of control errors in achieving operating targets and

(unanticipated) macroeconomic disturbances that affect the transmission of monetary

policy. Furthermore, the evaluation of the macroeconomic outcomes of monetary policy

in light of its objectives is included here as well.

(a) Does the central bank regularly evaluate to what extent its main policy operating

targets (if any) have been achieved?

        No or not very often (at less than annual frequency) = 0.

        Yes but without providing explanations for significant deviations = 1/2.

        Yes, accounting for significant deviations from target (if any); or, (nearly) perfect

control over main operating instrument/target = 1.


                                               25
(b) Does the central bank regularly provide information on (unanticipated)

macroeconomic disturbances that affect the policy transmission process?

       No or not very often = 0.

       Yes but only through short-term forecasts or analysis of current macroeconomic

developments (at least quarterly) = 1/2.

       Yes including a discussion of past forecast errors (at least annually) = 1.

(c) Does the central bank regularly provide an evaluation of the policy outcome in light

of its macroeconomic objectives?

       No or not very often (at less than annual frequency) = 0.

       Yes but superficially = 1/2.

       Yes, with an explicit account of the contribution of monetary policy in meeting

the objectives = 1.




                                            26
                                     References

Ball, Lawrence and Niamh Sheridan (2005), “Does Inflation Targeting Matter?” in Ben
Bernanke and Michael Woodford (eds), The Inflation-Targeting Debate, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, pp.249-278.

Barro, Robert and Roger Gordon (1983), “A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a
Natural Rate Model,” Journal of Political Economy 91, pp. 589-610.

Bini-Smaghi, Lorenzo and Daniel Gros (2001), “Is the ECB Sufficiently Accountable and
Transparent?” European Network of Economic Policy Research Institutes Working Paper
no. 7 (September).

Carpenter, Seth (2004), “Transparency and Monetary Policy: What does the Academic
Literature tell Policymakers?,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2004-35.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Cecchetti, Steven and Stefan Krause (2001), “Central Bank Structure, Policy Efficiency
and Macroeconomic Performance: Exploring the Empirical Relationships,” NBER
Working Paper no. 8354 (July).

Chadha, Jagjit and Charles Nolan (2001), “Inflation Targeting, Transparency and Interest
Rate Volaility: Ditching ‘Monetary Mystique’ in the UK,” Journal of Macroeconomics
23, pp. 349-366.

Chortareas, Georgios, David Stasavage and Gabriel Sterne (2001), “Does It Pay to be
Transparent? International Evidence from Central Bank Forecasts,” Bank of England
Working Paper no. 143.

Christiano, Larence J. and Christopher Gust (2000), “The Expectations Trap,” Economic
Perspectives of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, issue Q II, pp.21-39.

Clare, A. and R. Courtenay (2001), “Assessing the Impact of Macroeconomic News
Announcements on Securities Prices Under Different Monetary Policy Regimes,” Bank
of England Working Paper no. 125 (March).

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler (2000), “Monetary Policy Rules and
Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
115, pp.147-180.

Crowe, Christopher and Ellen Meade (2008), “Central Bank Independence and
Transparency: Evolution and Effectiveness,” IMF Working Paper 08/119 (May).




                                           27
De Haan, Jakob and Fabian Amtenbrink (2002), “A Non-Transparent European Central
Bank: Who is to Blame?” Paper presented to the conference on Monetary Policy
Transparency, London: Bank of England (May).

De Haan, Jakob, Fabian Amtenbrink and Sandra Waller (2004), “The Transparency and
Credibility of the European Central Bank,” Journal of Common Market Studies 42, pp.
775-794.

Demertzis, Maria and Andrew Hughes Hallett (2003), “Central Bank Transparency in
Theory and Practice,” unpublished manuscript, Netherlands Bank and Vanderbilt
University (January).

Dincer, Nergiz and Barry Eichengreen (2007), “Central Bank Transparency: Where, Why
and With What Effects?” NBER Working Paper no.13003.

Eichengreen, Barry, Mark Watson and Richard Grossman (1985), “Bank Rate Policy
Under the Interwar Gold Standard: A Dynamic Probit Model,” Economic Journal 95,
pp.725-745.

Eijffinger, Sylvester and Petra Geraats (2006), “How Transparent are Central Banks?”
European Journal of Political Economy 22, pp.1-22.

Eijffinger, Sylvester, Marco Hoeberichts and Eric Schaling (2000), “A Theory of Central
Bank Accountability,” CEPR Discussion Paper no. 2354 (January).

Faust, Jon and Lars Svensson (2001), “Transparency and Credibility: Monetary Policy
with Unobservable Goals,” International Economic Review 42, pp. 369-397.

Fry, M, D. Julius, L. Mahadeva , S. Roger and G. Sterne (2000), “Key Issues in the
Choice of a Monetary Policy Framework,” in L. Mahadeva and G. Sterne (eds),
Monetary Policy Frameworks in a Global Context, London: Routledge, pp. 1-216.

Geraats, Petra M. (2002a), “Why Adopt Transparency? The Publication of Central Bank
Forecasts,” unpublished manuscript, University of Cambridge (July).

Geraats, Petra M. (2002b), “Central Bank Transparency,” Economic Journal 112, pp.
F532-565.

Geraats, Petra M. (2005), “Political Pressures and Monetary Mystique,” Cambridge
Working Papers in Economics no. 0557 (December).

Geraats, Petra M. (2006), “Transparency of Monetary Policy: Theory and Practice,”
CESifo Economic Studies 52, pp.111-152.

Gersbach, Hans (1998), “Financial Intermediation with Market Side Switching,”
unpublished manuscript, University of Heidelberg.



                                           28
Goodhart, Charles (2001), “Monetary Transmission Lags and the Formulation of the
Policy Decision on Interest Rates,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review
(July/August), pp.165-181.

Greider, William (1987), Secrets of the Temple: How the Federal Reserve Runs the
Country, New York: Simon & Schuster.

Gruner, H. P. (2002), “How Much Should Central Banks Talk? - A New Argument,”
Economics Letters 77, pp. 195-198.

Gurkaynak, Refet, Andrew Levin and Eric Swanson (2005), “Inflation Targeting and the
Anchoring of Long-Run Inflation Expectations: International Evidence from Daily Bond
Yield Data,” Paper prepared for the Riksbank Workshop on Inflation Targeting,
Stockholm (June).

Haldane, Andrew and Vicky Read (2000), “Monetary Policy Surprises and the Yield
Curve,” Bank of England Working Paper no. 106.

Hamalainen, Sirkka (2001), “The ECB’s Monetary Policy – Accountability,
Transparency and Communication,” Speech delivered to the conference on “Old Age,
New Economy, and Central Banking,” www.ecb.org (14 September).

Jensen, Henrik (2002), “Optimal Degrees of Transparency in Monetary Policymaking,”
Scandinavian Journal of Economics 104, pp.399-424.

Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi (2007), “Governance Matters
VI: Governance Indicators for 1996-2006,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper,
No. 4280, the World Bank (July).

Kuttner, Kenneth and Adam Posen (2000), “Inflation, Monetary Transparency, and G3
Exchange Rate Volatility,” Working Paper 00-6, Washington, D.C.: Institute for
International Economics (July).

Levin, Andrew, Fabio Natalucci and Jeremy Piger (2004), “Explicit Inflation Objectives
and Macroeconomic Outcomes,” ECB Working Paper no.383 (August).

Mankiw, Gregory, Ricardo Reis and Justin Wolfers (2004), “Disagreement About
Inflation Expectations,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003, pp.209-247.

Mishkin, Frederic (2004a), “Can Central Bank Transparency Go Too Far?” NBER
Working Paper no.10829 (October).

Mishkin, Frederic (2004b), “Why the Fed Should Adopt Inflation Targeting,”
International Finance 7, pp.117-127.




                                          29
Morris, Stephen and Hyun Shin (2002), “The Social Value of Public Information,”
American Economic Review 92, pp.1521-1534.

Morris, Stephen and Hyun Shin (2005), “Central Bank Transparency and the Signal
Value of Prices,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, pp.1-66.

Muller, Philippe and Murray Zelmer (1999), “Greater Transparency in Monetary Policy:
Impact on Financial Markets,” Bank of Canada Technical Report 86, Ottawa: Bank of
Canada (August).

Reinhart, Carmen, Kenneth Rogoff and Miguel Savastano (2003), “Debt Intolerance,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, pp.1-74.

Shaling, Eric and Charles Nolan (1998), “Monetary Policy Uncertainty and Inflation: The
Role of Central Bank Accountability,” De Economist 146, pp. 585-602.

Siklos, Pierre (2002), The Changing Face of Central Banking: Evolutionary Trends Since
World War II, New York: Cambridge University Press.

Sørensen J.R. (1991) "Political Uncertainty and Macroeconomic Performance,"
Economics Letters 37, 4377–381

Van der Cruijsen, Carin A.B., Sylvester C.W. Eijffinger and Lex H. Hoogduin (2008),
“Optimal Central Bank Transparency,” unpublished manuscript, De Nederlandsche Bank,
Tilberg University and University of Amsterdam (June).

Walsh, C. E. (1999), “Announcements, Inflation Targeting and Central Bank
Incentives,”Economica 66, pp. 255-69.




                                          30
                Figure 1. Comparison of Transparency in 1998 and 2006

       15




       12




       9
2006




       6




       3




       0
            0         3             6              9            12      15
                                           1998




                                         31
Figure 2. Trends in Transparency by Level of Economic Development: Weighted
Averages


                      15




                      12
 Transparency Index




                      9




                      6




                      3




                      0
                           1998   1999     2000         2001        2002            2003            2004          2005   2006

                                         Developed Countries   Emerging Economies          Developing Countries




                                                                 32
Table 2. Components of the Index for the 13 countries with extreme values

                  TI    1a     1b    1c     2a     2b     2c     3a    3b   3c    4a   4b    4c   5a    5b    5c
Sweden           14.5   0.5     1     1      1      1     1      1      1    1    1     1    1     1     1     1
New Zealand       14     1      1     1      1      1     1      1      1    1    1     1    1     1    0.5   0.5
UK               12.5    1      1     1     0.5     1     1      1      1    1    1    0.5   0     1     1    0.5
Canada            11     1      1     1      1      1     1      1      0    0    1     1    0     1    0.5   0.5
Czech Republic    11     1      1     1     0.5     1     1      1      1   0.5   1    0.5   0     0    0.5    1
Euro area         11     1      1     1      1      1     1      1      0    0    1     1    0     1    0.5   0.5
Hungary          10.5    1      1     1     0.5     0     1      1      1    1    1    0.5   0    0.5   0.5   0.5
Bermuda            1    0.5     0    0.5     0      0     0      0      0    0    0     0    0     0     0     0
Ethiopia           1    0.5     0    0.5     0      0      0      0     0    0     0    0     0    0     0     0
Libya              1    0.5     0    0.5     0      0     0      0      0    0    0     0    0     0     0     0
Saudi Arabia       1    0.5     0    0.5     0      0     0      0      0    0    0     0    0     0     0     0
Yemen              1    0.5     0    0.5     0      0     0      0      0    0    0     0    0     0     0     0
Aruba             0.5    0      0    0.5     0      0     0      0      0    0    0     0    0     0     0     0




                                                                  38
Table 3. Regional Transparency Index (Weighted)

                     1998    1999    2000    2001    2002     2003       2004    2005    2006

Africa               2.77    2.74    3.09    4.26    4.47         5.14   5.41    5.44    5.31

Eastern Africa       1.88    1.97    2.14    2.74    2.93         2.97   2.94    2.91    3.25
Northern Africa      1.21    1.20    1.25    1.27    1.55         1.90   1.91    2.32    2.35
Southern Africa      4.47    4.46    5.45    8.84    8.86         8.87   8.90    8.95    8.95
Western Africa       3.37    3.38    3.43    3.86    3.96         4.13   4.13    4.12    4.12

Americas             7.76    8.80    8.98    9.00    9.11         9.17   9.27    9.25    9.15

Latin America and
Caribbean            2.84    2.88    3.14    4.62    4.99         5.18   5.60    5.59    5.50
Central America      3.84    3.86    3.88    3.90    3.89         4.35   5.40    5.41    5.47
South America        3.39    4.51    6.68    6.62    7.58         7.85   7.99    8.05    7.04
North America        8.63    9.57    9.57    9.57    9.57         9.57   9.62    9.62    9.63

Oceania              8.22    8.53    8.50    8.54    9.50         9.52   9.54    9.53    9.54

Australia and New
Zealand              8.32    8.61    8.58    8.61    9.56         9.58   9.59    9.58    9.60
Melanesia            1.21    1.71    1.66    3.22    3.50         3.51   4.41    4.46    4.48

Asia                 5.59    5.74    6.19    5.81    5.91         6.49   7.16    7.01    6.88

Central Asia         3.36    3.35    3.37    3.44    3.44         3.38   3.48    5.33    5.35
Eastern Asia         6.48    6.58    7.02    6.45    6.46         7.16   8.04    7.89    7.69
Southern Asia        1.98    1.98    1.99    2.02    2.06         2.23   2.38    2.37    2.43
South-East Asia      2.97    3.88    4.99    5.48    6.15         7.13   7.46    7.62    7.84
Western Asia         2.72    2.59    3.20    3.68    4.50         4.63   4.71    4.64    5.03

Europe               8.27    8.57    8.58    9.60    9.70         9.74   10.10   10.02   9.96

Eastern Europe       2.78    3.68     3.63   3.99     4.51    4.54        5.03   5.21    5.30
Northern Europe      9.78    10.49   10.62   10.74   11.06    11.11      11.17   11.11   11.12
Southern Europe      3.42    3.53     3.58   3.95     4.96    5.17        5.22   5.19    4.95
Western Europe       8.41    8.44     8.46   9.92     9.92    9.96       10.46   10.46   10.47




                                                             39
Table 4. Determinants of Transparency, 1998-2006 Averages†

                                    I         II        III        IV            V          VI        VII
Constant                        -9.11*    -11.83*    -8.07*      -5.92       -11.18*    -12.17*    -11.49*
                                (-3.33)    (-5.37)   (-3.84)    (-1.93)       (-5.93)    (-6.67)    (-6.20)
Past inflation                    3.42       2.25      3.21       4.21          1.59       1.93       1.73
                                 (1.48)     (0.99)    (1.52)     (1.85)        (0.72)     (0.87)     (0.79)
ER Dummy                         0.31*      0.34*     0.29*      0.29*         0.26*      0.27*       0.26
                                 (6.57)     (6.92)    (6.41)     (5.96)        (5.00)     (5.12)     (5.00)
Financial Depth                   0.00       0.00      0.01       0.00          0.00       0.00       0.00
                                 (0.49)     (0.84)    (1.25)     (0.63)        (0.61)     (0.59)     (0.62)
GDP per Capita                   1.15*      1.44*     1.03*      0.78*         1.29*      1.61*      1.42*
                                 (3.79)     (5.75)    (4.42)     (2.28)        (5.88)     (8.21)     (6.91)
Rule of Law                      0.79*
                                 (2.15)
Political Stability                        0.41
                                          (1.40)
Voice and Accountability                             1.10*
                                                     (4.17)
Government Efficiency                                               1.27*
                                                                    (3.03)
Democracy                                                                    0.24*
                                                                             (4.04)
Autocracy                                                                               -0.30*
                                                                                        (-3.88)
Polity                                                                                             0.14*
                                                                                                   (4.07)

Number of Observations            88        88         88            88        81         81         81
R-Squared                        0.64      0.63       0.68          0.65      0.68       0.67       0.68


* Denotes significance at 5%.

† t-statistics in parentheses



                                                               40
Table 5. Determinants of Transparency, Fixed Effects Models

                                     I       II        III        IV         V         VI       VII
Constant                        -32.07    -31.90    -31.53     -32.55     -36.91    -37.14    -36.84
                                (-0.10)   (-0.10)   (-0.09)    (-0.10)    (-0.11)   (-0.11)   (-0.11)
Past inflation                    -0.19    -0.19     -0.18      -0.18       0.19      0.18      0.18
                                (-0.58)   (-0.57)   (-0.54)    (-0.53)     (0.53)    (0.51)    (0.51)
ER Dummy                         0.09*     0.09*     0.09*      0.09*      0.10*     0.10*     0.10*
                                 (4.22)    (3.91)    (4.04)     (3.88)     (3.56)    (3.64)    (3.58)
Financial Depth                    0.00    -0.00     -0.00      -0.00      -0.00     -0.00     -0.00
                                 (0.13)   (-0.26)   (-0.24)    (-0.03)    (-0.02)   (-0.05)   (-0.03)
GDP per Capita                   4.09*     4.08*     4.03*      4.16*      4.61*     4.68*     4.62*
                                (15.96)   (15.96)   (15.62)    (15.88)    (11.11)   (11.39)   (11.11)
Rule of Law                     -1.09*
                                (-3.63)
Political Stability                       -0.57*
                                          (-3.80)
Voice and Accountability                             -0.05
                                                    (-0.21)
Government Efficiency                                          -0.67*
                                                               (-2.51)
Democracy                                                                  0.06
                                                                          (1.14)
Autocracy                                                                            -0.05
                                                                                    (-0.50)
Polity                                                                                         0.03
                                                                                              (0.97)

Haussman test                   32.78*    35.55*    40.92*     36.86*     31.48*    30.81*    31.09*

R-Squared                        0.97      0.97      0.97          0.97    0.97      0.97      0.97


* Denotes significance at 5%.

† t-statistics in parentheses


                                                              41
Table 6. Determinants of Transparency, Fixed Effects Models

                                     I       II        III        IV          V        VI        VII
Constant                        -30.20    -30.40    -29.75     -30.93     -36.81    -37.02    -36.69
                                (-0.10)   (-0.10)   (-0.09)    (-0.10)    (-0.11)   (-0.11)   (-0.11)
Past inflation                    -0.19    -0.18     -0.18      -0.18       0.11      0.10      0.10
                                (-0.58)   (-0.55)   (-0.54)    (-0.53)     (0.30)    (0.29)    (0.29)
ER Dummy                           0.00    -0.00     -0.00       0.00      0.15*     0.15*     0.15*
                                 (0.31)   (-0.17)   (-0.24)     (0.00)     (3.77)    (3.73)    (3.76)
Openness*ER Dummy                0.00*      0.00      0.00       0.00       -0.00     -0.00    -0.00
                                 (1.99)    (1.74)    (1.79)     (1.72)    (-1.70)   (-1.56)   (-1.65)
Financial Depth                    0.00    -0.00     -0.00       0.00       -0.00     -0.00     -0.00
                                 (0.12)   (-0.20)   (-0.14)     (0.00)    (-0.57)   (-0.60)   (-0.59)
GDP per Capita                   3.92*     3.97*     3.90*      4.04*      4.61*     4.69*     4.62*
                                (13.72)   (13.83)   (13.44)    (13.73)    (11.04)   (11.25)   (11.02)
Rule of Law                     -1.36*
                                (-4.02)
Political Stability                       -0.58*
                                          (-3.75)
Voice and Accountability                             -0.00
                                                    (-0.01)
Government Efficiency                                          -0.70*
                                                               (-2.44)
Democracy                                                                  0.07
                                                                          (1.41)
Autocracy                                                                            -0.05
                                                                                    (-0.58)
Polity                                                                                         0.04
                                                                                              (1.21)

Haussman test                   29.35*    29.92*    36.09*     32.76*     29.89*    29.37*    29.53*

R-Squared                        0.97      0.97      0.97          0.97    0.97      0.97      0.97
* Denotes significance at 5%.

† t-statistics in parentheses


                                                              42
Table 7. Effect of Transparency on Inflation Variability (instrumental variables
pooled regressions, GMM)

                                      I           II          III          IV          V            VI
Constant                           5.02*       6.96*        5.74*        1.66*        2.05       -4.60*
                                   (9.27)      (4.84)       (9.45)       (1.67)      (0.86)      (-1.67)
Transparency Index                -0.61*      -0.47*       -0.87*       -0.22*      -0.37*       -0.81*
                                  (-5.58)     (-3.01)      (-1.94)      (-1.80)     (-1.85)      (-2.33)
Openness*ER Dummy                               -0.00                                 0.01        0.01*
                                              (-1.44)                                (1.54)       (1.96)
Financial Depth                                             0.01                    -0.07*         0.02
                                                           (0.26)                   (-2.56)       (0.91)
Past Inflation                                                          21.33*                   38.40*
                                                                        (3.46)                    (3.78)

Durbin-Watson stat                 0.77         0.71        0.76         0.96         0.54        0.54
J-statistics                       7.13         3.37       12.29         3.17         9.02        2.18
Number of observations             745          683         707          743          663         511
Sum of Sq. Res.                   20187        20004       21979        19964        19665       18785

* Denotes significance at 10%.

† t-statistics in parentheses

Note: Dependent variable is inflation variability, which is the standard deviation of the inflation rate for 12 months.
Transparency is the fitted value of transparency from the first stage regression on constant, rule of law,
political stability, accountability, government efficiency and regulatory quality.




                                                                            43
Table 8. Effect of Transparency on Inflation Persistence (instrumental variables pooled regressions, GMM)
                                     I           II           III         IV            V            VI
Constant                          0.76*        0.77*        0.74*       1.01*        0.72*        0.66*
                                 (22.57)      (10.29)      (23.05)      (2.79)       (9.78)       (4.32)
Transparency Index                -0.01*       -0.00         0.01        -0.04         0.01         0.02
                                 (-1.91)      (-0.48)       (1.15)     (-0.92)       (0.49)       (1.13)
Openness*ER Dummy                              -0.00                                   0.00         0.00
                                              (-0.44)                                (0.34)       (0.54)
Financial Depth                                            -0.00*                     -0.00        -0.00
                                                           (-2.71)                  (-1.63)      (-1.55)
Past Inflation                                                          -1.41                       0.15
                                                                       (-0.74)                    (0.13)


Durbin-Watson stat                 1.57         1.52        1.58         1.13         1.53        1.46
J-statistics                       0.24         1.27        0.29         1.50         0.20        0.19
Number of observations             729          675         692          728          655         507
Sum of Sq. Res.                     62           57          59           62           55          43

* Denotes significance at 10%

† t-statistics in parentheses

Note: Dependent variable is inflation persistence, which is the estimated coefficient of the regression
where monthly inflation data is used and inflation is regressed on the inflation in the previous month.
Transparency is the fitted value of transparency from the first stage regression on constant, rule of law,
political stability, accountability, government efficiency and regulatory quality.




                                                                            44
Table 9. Effect of Transparency on Inflation Variability (instrumental variables
pooled regressions, GMM)

                                      I           II           III          IV           V            VI
Constant                          13.20*       13.20*       15.39*        3.55*       16.45*       21.40*
                                   (5.33)       (4.82)       (5.11)       (2.34)       (5.04)       (3.06)
Transparency Index (TI)           -4.38*       -3.33*       -4.73*       -1.95*       -5.18*       -8.08*
                                  (-3.79)      (-2.81)      (-3.55)      (-2.95)      (-3.43)      (-3.07)
TI*TI                              0.37*        0.30*        0.50*        0.20*        0.55*         0.91
                                   (3.18)       (2.42)       (3.39)       (2.97)       (3.21)       (3.00)
Openness                                       -0.03*                                  -0.00        -0.01
                                               (-3.78)                                (-0.24)      (-0.66)
Financial Depth                                              -0.07                    -0.06*       -0.08*
                                                            (-4.18)                   (-2.78)      (-2.28)
Past Inflation                                                           35.25                     19.46*
                                                                         (6.70)                     (1.90)

Durbin-Watson stat                  0.73        0.67         0.63         0.56         0.63         0.52
J-statistics                        2.51        5.56         0.03         7.08         0.18         0.13
Number of observations              745         688          707          743          668          516
Sum of Sq. Res.                    19549       19510        19396        19531        19300        18747

* Denotes significance at 10%

† t-statistics in parentheses

Note: Dependent variable is inflation variability, which is the standard deviation of the inflation rate for 12 months.
Transparency is the fitted value of transparency from the first stage regression on constant, rule of law, political stability,
accountability, government efficiency and regulatory quality.




                                                                             45
Table 10. Effect of Transparency on Inflation Persistence (instrumental variables pooled regressions, GMM)
                                      I           II           III          IV            V            VI
Constant                           0.62*        0.59*        0.64*        0.42*        0.71*        0.69*
                                   (4.58)       (4.83)       (3.72)       (1.96)       (4.74)       (2.06)
Transparency Index (TI)             0.05         0.08         0.06         0.10          0.02         0.01
                                   (0.73)       (1.58)       (0.74)       (1.53)       (0.31)       (0.05)
TI*TI                              -0.01        -0.01        -0.01        -0.01        -0.00          0.00
                                  (-0.87)      (-1.54)      (-0.62)      (-1.62)      (-0.14)       (0.17)
Openness                                        -0.00                                    0.00         0.00
                                               (-1.30)                                 (0.36)       (0.62)
Financial Depth                                              -0.00                      -0.00        -0.00
                                                            (-1.27)                  (-1.59)       (-1.39)
Past Inflation                                                            0.63                        0.38
                                                                         (0.98)                     (0.38)

Durbin-Watson stat                  1.57        1.53         1.59         1.57         1.53         1.50
J-statistics                        0.79        1.42         0.11         0.98         0.13         0.16
Number of observations              729         675          692          728          655          654
Sum of Sq. Res.                      62          56           59           61           55           55

* Denotes significance at 10%.

† t-statistics in parentheses.

Note: Dependent variable is inflation persistence, which is the estimated coefficient of the regression where
monthly inflation data is used and inflation is regressed on the inflation in the previous month. Transparency
is the fitted value of transparency from the first stage regression on constant, rule of law, political stability,
accountability, government efficiency and regulatory quality.




                                                                             46
Table 11. Further results, alternative measures of persistence

                                                    Eijffinger
                                   Eijffinger      measure, two                           Our measure,
                                                                                      b
                                   measure            stagea          Our measure          two stagea, b
Constant                             0.01*             0.02*              0.67*               0.76*
                                     (7.05)           (1.24)            (41.52)              (2.62)
Inft-1                               0.50*              0.31              -0.10               30.19
                                     (6.16)           (0.09)             (-0.13)             (0.52)
Inft-1*transparency                 -0.15*             -0.08              -0.42               -6.46
                                    (-5.09)          (-0.10)             (-1.34)             (-0.46)
Inft-1*transparency2                 0.01*              0.03               0.05                1.36
                                     (3.24)           (0.25)             (1.35)               (0.59)
Political Stability                   -0.00             0.01              -0.02                0.18
                                    (-1.94)           (0.38)             (-1.26)             (0.58)
Regulatory Quality                   -0.00             -0.03              0.01                -0.28
                                     (0.29)          (-0.83)             (0.68)              (-0.60)
Inft-1*Financial Depth                -0.00            -0.00              0.01                -0.25
                                    (-1.05)          (-0.11)             (0.65)              (-0.78)
Inft-1*Openness*ER                   0.00*             -0.00              0.00*               -0.02
Dummy
                                    (13.12)            (-0.06)             (3.68)             (-0.55)

Total Obs.                           699                545                 654                 507
R2                                   0.58               0.21                0.04                0.04

    t-statistics in parentheses.

* Denotes significance at 5%
a
    Transparency is measured as the fitted value from the first stage regression on the constant and rule of law.
b
    Dependent variable is inflation persistence, which is the estimated coefficient of the regression where monthly
    inflation data is used and inflation is regressed on the inflation in the previous month.

Source: See text.


                                                                              47
                                               Appendix A
                                            Variable Definitions



Definition of Inflation persistence: We take the 12 months of inflation data for the current year
and regress inflation on inflation in the previous month. The estimated coefficient is the measure
of inflation persistence in the regression equation.

Source for Political Indicators data and detailed country ratings:

'Governance Matters VII: Aggregate and Individual Governance Indicators for 1996-2007’, by D.
Kaufmann, A.Kraay and M. Mastruzzi, www.worldbank.org/wbi/governance

1. Voice and Accountability (VA) – measuring perceptions of the extent to which a country's
citizens are able to participate in selecting their government, as well as freedom of expression,
freedom of association, and a free media.

2. Political Stability and Absence of Violence (PV) – measuring perceptions of the likelihood that
the government will be destabilized or overthrown by unconstitutional or violent means, including
politically-motivated violence and terrorism.

3. Government Effectiveness (GE) – measuring perceptions of the quality of public services, the
quality of the civil service and the degree of its independence from political pressures, the quality
of policy formulation and implementation, and the credibility of the government's commitment to
such policies.

4. Regulatory Quality (RQ) – measuring perceptions of the ability of the government to formulate
and implement sound policies and regulations that permit and promote private sector
development.

5. Rule of Law (RL) – measuring perceptions of the extent to which agents have confidence in and
abide by the rules of society, and in particular the quality of contract enforcement, property rights,
the   police,    and   the   courts,   as    well   as   the   likelihood   of   crime   and   violence.




                                                    48
                                             Appendix B. Variance-Covariance Matrix
               ACC     POL_STA   RULE_LAW   REG_QUA   GOV_EFF   M2_GDP    OPEN     TI     TI_1    TI_2    TI_3    TI_4    TI_5    LGDPPC   PCPI
ACC             0.7      0.6         0.6       0.6       0.6      12.2      6.6    1.5     0.2     0.4     0.3     0.3     0.3       0.6     0.0
POL_STA         0.6      0.8         0.7       0.5       0.6      16.5     19.4    1.0     0.1     0.3     0.2     0.3     0.1       0.7     0.0
RULE_LAW        0.6      0.7         0.9       0.7       0.8      21.8     14.3    1.5     0.2     0.4     0.3     0.4     0.2       0.8     0.0
REG_QUA         0.6      0.5         0.7       0.7       0.7      17.3     14.3    1.5     0.2     0.4     0.3     0.3     0.2       0.7     0.0
GOV_EFF         0.6      0.6         0.8       0.7       0.8      19.7     14.5    1.6     0.2     0.4     0.3     0.4     0.2       0.8     0.0
M2_GDP         12.2      16.5       21.8      17.3      19.7     1727.0    924.2   35.7   -1.0    12.7     7.4     9.0     7.8      22.7    -1.4
OPEN            6.6      19.4       14.3      14.3      14.5     924.2    3325.9   3.9    -0.3     1.8     2.6     0.5    -0.5      14.8    -0.4
TI              1.5      1.0         1.5       1.5       1.6      35.7      3.9    6.7     1.1     1.7     1.4     1.4     1.1       1.8     0.0
TI_1            0.2      0.1         0.2       0.2       0.2      -1.0      -0.3   1.1     0.5     0.2     0.2     0.1     0.1       0.3     0.0
TI_2            0.4      0.3         0.4       0.4       0.4      12.7      1.8    1.7     0.2     0.5     0.3     0.4     0.3       0.5     0.0
TI_3            0.3      0.2         0.3       0.3       0.3      7.4       2.6    1.4     0.2     0.3     0.4     0.3     0.2       0.3     0.0
TI_4            0.3      0.3         0.4       0.3       0.4      9.0       0.5    1.4     0.1     0.4     0.3     0.4     0.2       0.4     0.0
TI_5            0.3      0.1         0.2       0.2       0.2      7.8       -0.5   1.1     0.1     0.3     0.2     0.2     0.3       0.3     0.0
LGDPPC          0.6      0.7         0.8       0.7       0.8      22.7     14.8    1.8     0.3     0.5     0.3     0.4     0.3       1.1     0.0
PCPI            0.0      0.0         0.0       0.0       0.0      -1.4      -0.4   0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0       0.0     0.0


Correlations

               ACC     POL_STA   RULE_LAW   REG_QUA   GOV_EFF   M2_GDP    OPEN     TI     TI_1    TI_2    TI_3    TI_4    TI_5    LGDPPC   PCPI
ACC            1.00      0.74       0.76      0.78      0.78     0.34       0.13   0.69   0.40    0.65    0.53    0.61    0.54      0.69   -0.27
POL_STA        0.74      1.00       0.81      0.71      0.77     0.45       0.38   0.45   0.21    0.42    0.36    0.48    0.31      0.71   -0.25
RULE_LAW       0.76      0.81       1.00      0.90      0.96     0.57       0.27   0.62   0.25    0.63    0.48    0.67    0.46      0.84   -0.41
REG_QUA        0.78      0.71       0.90      1.00      0.94     0.51       0.30   0.69   0.41    0.65    0.55    0.63    0.49      0.83   -0.42
GOV_EFF        0.78      0.77       0.96      0.94      1.00     0.53       0.28   0.69   0.32    0.67    0.53    0.70    0.52      0.87   -0.41
M2_GDP         0.34      0.45       0.57      0.51      0.53     1.00       0.39   0.33   -0.04   0.42    0.28    0.33    0.35      0.51   -0.40
OPEN           0.13      0.38       0.27      0.30      0.28     0.39       1.00   0.03   -0.01   0.04    0.07    0.01    -0.02     0.24   -0.09
TI             0.69      0.45       0.62      0.69      0.69     0.33       0.03   1.00    0.61   0.89    0.86    0.82    0.83      0.64   -0.13
TI_1           0.40      0.21       0.25      0.41      0.32     -0.04     -0.01   0.61    1.00   0.37    0.45    0.23    0.32      0.37    0.05
TI_2           0.65      0.42       0.63      0.65      0.67     0.42       0.04   0.89    0.37   1.00    0.68    0.76     0.72     0.61   -0.20
TI_3           0.53      0.36       0.48      0.55      0.53     0.28       0.07   0.86    0.45   0.68    1.00    0.63     0.69     0.50   -0.08
TI_4           0.61      0.48       0.67      0.63      0.70     0.33       0.01   0.82    0.23   0.76    0.63    1.00     0.64     0.58   -0.23
TI_5           0.54      0.31       0.46      0.49      0.52      0.35     -0.02   0.83    0.32   0.72    0.69    0.64    1.00      0.47   -0.03
LGDPPC         0.69      0.71       0.84      0.83      0.87      0.51      0.24   0.64    0.37   0.61    0.50    0.58     0.47     1.00   -0.30
                                                                                     -
PCPI           -0.27    -0.25      -0.41      -0.42    -0.41     -0.40    -0.09    0.13   0.05    -0.20   -0.08   -0.23   -0.03    -0.30   1.00




                                                                49
Appendix B, continued:


ACC: Accountability
POL_STA: Political Stability
RULE_LAW: Rule of Law
REG_QUA: Regulation Quality
GOV_EFF: Government Effectiveness
M2_GDP: Ratio of M2 to GDP
OPEN: Openness
TI: Transparency Index
TI_1: Political Transparency
TI_2: Economic Transparency
TI_3: Procedural Transparency
TI_4: Policy Transparency
TI_5: Operational Transparency
LGDPPC: Logarithm of GDP per capita
PCPI: Past inflation




                                      50
               Appendix C. Economic and Political Determinants of the Components of Transparency

Table C-1. Determinants of Political Transparency, 1998-2006 Averages†

                            I       II         III       IV            V         VI       VII
 Constant              -1.79*    -1.43*      -0.60     -1.32        -1.32*    -1.46*    -1.37*
                       (-1.71)   (-1.73)   (-0.72)   (-1.10)        (-1.86)   (-2.13)   (-1.95)
 Past inflation           0.71     0.78       0.94      0.84          0.52      0.57      0.54
                        (0.81)    (0.91)    (1.12)    (0.94)         (0.63)    (0.69)   (0.65)
 ER Dummy               0.04*     0.04*     0.04*     0.04*          0.04*     0.04*     0.04*
                        (2.42)    (2.41)    (2.06)    (2.25)         (1.99)    (2.04)   (1.98)
 Financial Depth       -0.00*    -0.00*    -0.01*    -0.00*         -0.01*    -0.01*    -0.01*
                       (-2.06)   (-2.20)   (-2.16)   (-2.20)        (-3.00)   (-3.01)   (-3.00)
 GDP per Capita         0.40*     0.36*     0.27*     0.35*          0.34*     0.39*     0.36*
                        (3.45)    (3.81)    (2.85)    (2.58)         (4.10)    (5.26)   (4.61)
 Rule of Law             -0.04
                       (-0.30)
 Political Stability              0.03
                                 (0.25)
 Voice & Acc                               0.19*
                                           (1.75)
 Gov Efficiency                                       0.04
                                                     (0.23)
 Democracy                                                           0.04
                                                                    (1.58)
 Autocracy                                                                     -0.05
                                                                              (-1.57)
 Polity                                                                                  0.02
                                                                                        (1.61)

 Durbin Watson          1.82      1.82      1.87      1.81           1.99      1.96      1.98
 Serial Correlation     0.95      0.96      0.91      0.93           0.78      0.82      0.80
 F-test
 Heteroscedasticity     0.85      0.89      0.84      0.88           0.32      0.37      0.34
 # Observations          88        88        88        88             81        81        81


                                                               51
 R-Squared                0.27          0.27          0.30         0.27          0.33         0.33          0.33

* Denotes significance at 10%

† t-statistics in parentheses. Serial correlation LM-test is used for capturing serial correlation and Breusch-Godfrey Test is used for
heteroscedasticity.




                                                                          52
Table C-2. Determinants of Economic Transparency, 1998-2006 Averages†

                              I             II            III           IV             V             VI           VII
 Constant                 -2.43*         -3.50*        -2.43*        -1.81*         -3.12*        -3.36*        -3.19*
                          (-2.89)        (-5.13)       (-3.63)       (-1.90)        (-5.25)       (-5.87)       (-5.47)
 Past inflation             0.51           0.15          0.39          0.66           0.05          0.13          0.08
                           (0.72)         (0.22)        (0.58)        (0.93)         (0.07)        (0.19)       (0.12)
 ER Dummy                  0.08*          0.09*         0.08*         0.08*          0.07*         0.07*         0.07*
                           (5.70)         (5.90)        (5.45)        (5.14)         (4.03)        (4.14)       (4.02)
 Financial Depth           0.00*          0.00*         0.00*         0.00*          0.00*         0.00*         0.01*
                           (1.68)         (2.08)        (2.43)        (1.90)         (2.26)        (2.24)       (2.27)
 GDP per Capita            0.23*          0.35*         0.23*          0.16          0.29*         0.37*         0.32*
                           (2.52)         (4.54)        (3.15)        (1.53)         (4.18)        (5.98)       (4.95)
 Rule of Law                0.24
                           (2.13)
 Political Stability                      0.07
                                         (0.78)
 Voice & Acc                                           0.27*
                                                       (3.24)
 Gov Efficiency                                                       0.33*
                                                                      (2.51)
 Democracy                                                                          0.06*
                                                                                    (3.19)
 Autocracy                                                                                        -0.07*
                                                                                                  (-3.08)
 Polity                                                                                                          0.03*
                                                                                                                 (3.23)

 Durbin Watson             1.36           1.30           1.35          1.28         1.37           1.25          1.30
 Serial Correlation        0.05           0.04           0.07          0.07         0.12           0.04          0.07
 F-test
 Heteroscedasticity        0.38           0.28           0.31          0.44         0.23           0.10          0.15
 # Observations             88             88             88            88           81             81            81
 R-Squared                 0.58           0.56           0.60          0.59         0.61           0.60          0.61
* Denotes significances at 10%. † t-statistics in parentheses. Serial correlation LM-test is used for capturing serial correlation
and Breusch-Godfrey Test is used for heteroscedasticity



                                                                               53
Table C-3. Determinants of Procedural Transparency, 1998-2006 Averages†

                              I             II            III            IV            V             VI           VII
 Constant                 -2.06*         -2.39*        -1.63*          -1.29        -2.24*        -2.55*        -2.36*
                          (-2.34)        (-3.41)       (-2.31)       (-1.29)        (-3.82)       (-4.42)       (-4.04)
 Past inflation             0.87           0.69          0.89           1.07          0.49          0.58          0.53
                           (1.17)         (0.96)        (1.26)        (1.43)         (0.72)        (0.83)       (0.77)
 ER Dummy                  0.06*          0.06*         0.05*         0.05*          0.05*         0.05*         0.05*
                           (3.84)         (4.09)        (3.55)        (3.41)         (3.06)        (3.24)       (3.10)
 Financial Depth           0.00*           0.00          0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00*         0.00*
                           (0.68)         (0.84)        (1.08)        (0.71)         (0.13)        (0.09)       (0.12)
 GDP per Capita            0.24*          0.27*         0.19*           0.15         0.23*         0.32*         0.27*
                           (2.44)         (3.42)        (2.43)        (1.34)         (3.43)        (5.15)       (4.20)
 Rule of Law                0.12
                           (1.04)
 Political Stability                      0.08
                                         (0.91)
 Voice & Acc                                           0.23*
                                                       (2.54)
 Gov Efficiency                                                       0.24*
                                                                      (1.77)
 Democracy                                                                          0.06*
                                                                                    (3.27)
 Autocracy                                                                                        -0.07*
                                                                                                  (-2.75)
 Polity                                                                                                          0.03*
                                                                                                                 (3.10)

 Durbin Watson             1.75           1.75           1.88          1.74         1.93           1.87          1.91
 Serial Correlation        0.38           0.50           0.36          0.42         0.73           0.53          0.66
 F-test
 Heteroscedasticity        0.44           0.32           0.58          0.44         0.52           0.30          0.39
 # Observations             88             88             88            88           81             81            81
 R-Squared                 0.38           0.38           0.42          0.40         0.47           0.45          0.46
* Denotes significances at 10%. † t-statistics in parentheses. Serial correlation LM-test is used for capturing serial correlation
and Breusch-Godfrey Test is used for heteroscedasticity



                                                                               54
Table C-4. Determinants of Policy Transparency, 1998-2006 Averages†

                              I              II            III           IV             V            VI           VII
 Constant                 -1.24*         -2.44*        -2.34*          -0.61        -2.83*        -2.93*        -2.85*
                          (-1.70)        (-4.08)       (-3.77)       (-0.74)        (-5.16)       (-5.61)       (-5.31)
 Past inflation             0.11           -0.43         -0.27          0.26          -0.43         -0.38        -0.41
                           (0.18)        (-0.70)       (-0.43)        (0.42)        (-0.68)       (-0.60)       (-0.65)
 ER Dummy                  0.07*          0.09*         0.07*         0.07*          0.06*         0.06*         0.06*
                           (5.81)         (6.43)        (5.44)        (5.04)         (3.86)        (3.88)       (3.83)
 Financial Depth            0.00            0.00          0.00          0.00         0.00*         0.00*         0.00*
                           (0.05)         (0.62)        (1.01)        (0.41)         (1.88)        (1.90)       (1.90)
 GDP per Capita            0.12*          0.24*         0.24*           0.04         0.28*         0.33*         0.30*
                           (1.44)         (3.57)        (3.45)        (0.45)         (4.42)        (5.79)       (4.99)
 Rule of Law               0.37*
                           (3.77)
 Political Stability                     0.20*
                                         (2.52)
 Voice & Acc                                           0.20*
                                                       (2.54)
 Gov Efficiency                                                       0.45*
                                                                      (3.98)
 Democracy                                                                          0.03*
                                                                                    (2.00)
 Autocracy                                                                                        -0.05*
                                                                                                  (-2.21)
 Polity                                                                                                          0.02*
                                                                                                                 (2.15)

 Durbin Watson             1.75           1.58           1.62          1.81         1.66           1.66          1.65
 Serial Correlation        0.84           0.47           0.42          0.74         0.88           0.91          0.90
 F-test
 Heteroscedasticity        0.89           0.91           0.87          0.82         0.94           0.30          0.39
 # Observations             88             88             88            88           81             81            81
 R-Squared                 0.59           0.56           0.56          0.60         0.56           0.57          0.57
* Denotes significances at 10%. † t-statistics in parentheses. Serial correlation LM-test is used for capturing serial correlation
and Breusch-Godfrey Test is used for heteroscedasticity



                                                                               55
Table C-5. Determinants of Operational Transparency, 1998-2006 Averages†

                              I             II            III            IV            V             VI           VII
 Constant                 -1.53*         -2.04*        -1.03*          -0.82        -1.66*         -1.86*       -1.72*
                          (-2.12)        (-3.55)       (-1.82)       (-1.00)        (-3.36)       (-3.91)       (-3.55)
 Past inflation            1.24*          1.07*         1.27*         1.42*          0.97*          1.04*         0.99
                           (2.03)         (1.80)        (2.24)        (2.33)         (1.68)        (1.80)       (1.74)
 ER Dummy                  0.05*          0.06*         0.05*         0.05*          0.05*          0.05*        0.05*
                           (4.16)         (4.29)        (3.84)        (3.69)         (3.40)        (3.50)       (3.40)
 Financial Depth           0.00*          0.00*         0.00*         0.00*          0.00*          0.00*        0.00*
                           (2.06)         (2.32)        (2.63)        (2.14)         (1.74)       (1.73*)       (1.75)
 GDP per Capita            0.16*          0.21*          0.10           0.07         0.14*          0.21*        0.17*
                           (1.94)         (3.24)        (1.58)        (0.82)         (2.51)        (4.12)       (3.17)
 Rule of Law                0.11
                           (1.15)
 Political Stability                      0.03
                                         (0.38)
 Voice & Acc                                           0.23*
                                                       (3.17)
 Gov Efficiency                                                       0.22*
                                                                      (1.99)
 Democracy                                                                          0.05*
                                                                                    (3.18)
 Autocracy                                                                                        -0.06*
                                                                                                  (-3.15)
 Polity                                                                                                          0.03*
                                                                                                                 (3.24)

 Durbin Watson             2.18           2.16           2.10          2.20         2.15           2.09          2.12
 Serial Correlation        0.94           0.97           0.75          0.92         0.67           0.90          0.80
 F-test
 Heteroscedasticity        0.70           0.70           0.75          0.05         0.89           0.77          0.85
 # Observations             88             88             88            88           81             81            81
 R-Squared                 0.41           0.40           0.47          0.43         0.47           0.47          0.47
* Denotes significances at 10%. † t-statistics in parentheses. Serial correlation LM-test is used for capturing serial correlation
and Breusch-Godfrey Test is used for heteroscedasticity



                                                                               56
                      Appendix D. Economic and Political Determinants of Trends in Transparency

Table D-1. Determinants of Political Transparency, Fixed Effects Models

                             I        II        III       IV             V         VI      VII
Constant                  -3.27     -3.23     -3.17     -3.34          -4.38     -4.14    -4.23
                        (-0.03)   (-0.03)   (-0.03)   (-0.03)        (-0.04)   (-0.04)   (-0.04)
Past inflation          -0.18*    -0.18*    -0.17*    -0.18*           -0.04     -0.05    -0.04
                        (-1.85)   (-1.83)   (-1.69)   (-1.83)        (-0.34)   (-0.42)   (-0.37)
ER Dummy                 0.04*     0.03*     0.03*     0.03*          0.04*     0.04*     0.04*
                         (5.33)    (5.26)    (5.09)    (5.20)         (4.92)    (5.03)   (4.94)
Financial Depth            0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00           0.00      0.00     0.00
                         (0.62)    (0.38)    (0.34)    (0.47)         (0.59)    (0.55)   (0.58)
GDP per Capita           0.55*     0.55*     0.54*     0.57*          0.65*     0.65*     0.64*
                         (7.13)    (7.08)    (7.02)    (7.14)         (5.10)    (5.17)   (5.01)
Rule of Law               -0.10
                        (-1.15)
Political Stability                -0.02
                                  (-0.49)
Voice & Acc                                 0.19*
                                            (2.71)
Gov Efficiency                                         -0.09
                                                      (-1.07)
Democracy                                                            0.03*
                                                                     (1.77)
Autocracy                                                                      -0.06*
                                                                               (-2.18)
Polity                                                                                   0.02*
                                                                                         (2.04)


Haussman test            8.78     12.75*    17.53*    11.00*         14.96*    14.18*    14.47*

R-Squared                  0.88    0.98      0.98      0.98           0.98      0.98      0.98
* Denotes significance at 5%.
† t-statistics in parentheses


                                                                57
Table D-2. Determinants of Economic Transparency, Fixed Effects Models

                              I        II        III       IV             V         VI      VII
Constant                   -7.93     -7.93     -7.79     -7.63          -8.58     -8.65    -8.64
                         (-0.08)   (-0.08)   (-0.08)   (-0.08)        (-0.08)   (-0.09)   (-0.09)
Past inflation              0.10      0.10      0.10      0.10           0.08      0.08     0.08
                          (0.96)    (0.97)    (0.97)    (1.00)         (0.72)    (0.74)   (0.73)
ER Dummy                   0.02*    0.01*     0.01*     0.01*           0.01      0.01     0.01
                          (2.28)    (1.95)    (2.18)    (2.22)         (1.24)    (1.21)   (1.25)
Financial Depth             0.00     -0.00      0.00     -0.00          -0.00     -0.00    -0.00
                          (0.35)   (-0.00)    (0.02)   (-0.09)        (-0.43)   (-0.42)   (-0.43)
GDP per Capita             0.97*    0.97*     0.95*     0.93*          1.06*     1.06*     1.07*
                         (12.31)   (12.49)   (12.04)   (11.55)         (8.52)    (8.59)   (8.54)
Rule of Law               -0.30*
                         (-3.28)
Political Stability                -0.23*
                                   (-5.09)
Voice & Acc                                   -0.04
                                             (-0.57)
Gov Efficiency                                          0.10
                                                       (1.19)
Democracy                                                              -0.01
                                                                      (-0.64)
Autocracy                                                                        0.02
                                                                                (0.73)
Polity                                                                                     -0.01
                                                                                          (-0.78)


Haussman test            28.92*    26.59*    32.51*    31.08*         23.32*    22.84*    23.49*

R-Squared                 0.89      0.94      0.94      0.94           0.93      0.93      0.93

* Denotes significance at 5%.

† t-statistics in parentheses


                                                                 58
Table D-3. Determinants of Procedural Transparency, Fixed Effects Models

                             I         II       III        IV             V        VI       VII
Constant                   -4.04     -3.98     -3.98     -4.32          -3.70     -3.84    -3.80
                         (-0.04)   (-0.04)   (-0.04)   (-0.04)        (-0.04)   (-0.04)   (-0.04)
Past inflation             -0.04     -0.04     -0.06     -0.04          -0.01     -0.00    -0.00
                         (-0.42)   (-0.40)   (-0.54)   (-0.40)        (-0.06)   (-0.01)   (-0.04)
ER Dummy                  0.01*       0.01    0.01*       0.01         0.02*     0.02*     0.02*
                          (1.70)    (1.54)    (1.84)    (1.41)         (2.46)    (2.42)   (2.46)
Financial Depth            -0.00     -0.00     -0.00     -0.00          -0.00    -0.00     -0.00
                         (-0.30)   (-0.54)   (-0.49)   (-0.28)        (-0.92)   (-0.89)   (-0.91)
GDP per Capita            0.54*     0.54*     0.54*     0.58*          0.51*     0.51*     0.52*
                          (6.77)    (6.68)    (6.73)    (7.13)         (4.11)    (4.16)   (4.17)
Rule of Law              -0.21*
                         (-2.27)
Political Stability                 -0.07
                                   (-1.49)
Voice & Acc                                  -0.20*
                                             (-2.90)
Gov Efficiency                                         -0.25*
                                                       (-3.02)
Democracy                                                              -0.02
                                                                      (-1.06)
Autocracy                                                                        0.04
                                                                                (1.31)
Polity                                                                                     -0.01
                                                                                          (-1.27)


Haussman test            12.49*    11.45*    19.74*    15.89*         12.00*    10.58*    11.74*

R-Squared                 0.93      0.93      0.93      0.93           0.93      0.93      0.93

* Denotes significance at 5%.

† t-statistics in parentheses


                                                                 59
Table D-4. Determinants of Policy Transparency, Fixed Effects Models

                              I        II        III       IV            V         VI       VII
Constant                  -10.11    -10.01    -9.98    -10.21         -12.68    -13.34    -12.87
                         (-0.08)   (-0.08)   (-0.08)   (-0.08)        (-0.09)   (-0.10)   (-0.10)
Past inflation              0.00      0.00      0.00      0.01          0.12      0.13      0.12
                          (0.02)    (0.04)    (0.00)    (0.04)         (0.82)    (0.88)   (0.82)
ER Dummy                   -0.00     -0.00     -0.00     -0.00          0.00      0.01     0.00*
                         (-0.03)   (-0.16)   (-0.06)   (-0.21)         (0.34)    (0.46)   (0.41)
Financial Depth             0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00          0.00      0.00      0.00
                          (1.02)    (0.78)    (0.80)    (0.90)         (1.15)    (1.11)   (1.12)
GDP per Capita             1.21*     1.20*    1.19*     1.22*          1.49*     1.57*     1.52*
                         (11.54)   (11.42)   (11.39)   (11.45)         (8.99)    (9.59)   (9.16)
Rule of Law               -0.28*
                         (-2.27)
Political Stability                 -0.06
                                   (-1.04)
Voice & Acc                                   -0.07
                                             (-0.78)
Gov Efficiency                                          -0.16
                                                       (-1.45)
Democracy                                                              0.02
                                                                      (0.93)
Autocracy                                                                        0.05
                                                                                (1.40)
Polity                                                                                     0.00
                                                                                          (0.06)


Haussman test            37.17*    38.49*    39.00*    39.17*         31.38*    32.80*    31.54*

R-Squared                 0.86      0.86      0.86      0.86           0.86      0.86      0.86

* Denotes significance at 5%.

† t-statistics in parentheses


                                                                 60
Table D-5. Determinants of Operational Transparency, Fixed Effects Models

                             I         II       III       IV              V         VI      VII
Constant                   -6.89     -6.90     -6.77     -7.20          -7.81     -7.41    -7.54
                         (-0.07)   (-0.07)   (-0.06)   (-0.07)        (-0.07)   (-0.07)   (-0.07)
Past inflation             -0.05     -0.05     -0.04     -0.05           0.05      0.04     0.04
                         (-0.49)   (-0.50)   (-0.40)   (-0.47)         (0.43)    (0.31)   (0.38)
ER Dummy                  0.03*     0.03*     0.03*     0.03*          0.03*     0.03*     0.03*
                          (4.57)    (4.35)    (4.37)    (4.28)         (2.85)    (2.96)   (2.85)
Financial Depth            -0.00     -0.00     -0.00     -0.00          -0.00     -0.00    -0.00
                         (-1.27)   (-1.52)   (-1.51)   (-1.23)        (-0.70)   (-0.76)   (-0.71)
GDP per Capita            0.83*     0.84*     0.82*     0.88*          0.92*     0.91*     0.90*
                          (9.95)   (10.04)    (9.77)   (10.30)         (6.81)    (6.86)   (6.64)
Rule of Law              -0.21*
                         (-2.11)
Political Stability                -0.17*
                                   (-3.50)
Voice & Acc                                   0.09
                                             (1.17)
Gov Efficiency                                         -0.27*
                                                       (-3.11)
Democracy                                                              0.03
                                                                      (2.16)
Autocracy                                                                        -0.09
                                                                                (-3.02)
Polity                                                                                     0.03
                                                                                          (2.80)


Haussman test            21.92*    23.84*    29.00*    24.89*         20.96*    19.38*    19.94*

R-Squared                 0.89      0.89      0.89      0.90           0.88      0.88      0.88

* Denotes significance at 5%.

† t-statistics in parentheses


                                                                 61
62
