NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

VALUATION EFFECTS AND THE DYNAMICS OF NET EXTERNAL ASSETS
Michael B. Devereux
Alan Sutherland
Working Paper 14794
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14794

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2009

We thank participants in the April 2008 IMF-ESRC-WEF conference, IEA Istanbul 2008, HEC Montreal,
SNB Zurich, Harris Dellas, and Helene Rey for comments, and Hung Nguyen for research assistance.
Thanks also go for support from ESRC World Economy and Finance Programme, award 156-25-0027,
SSHRC, the Bank of Canada, and Royal Bank of Canada. The views here are the authors' own and
they do not represent the view of the Bank of Canada. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Michael B. Devereux and Alan Sutherland. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Valuation Effects and the Dynamics of Net External Assets
Michael B. Devereux and Alan Sutherland
NBER Working Paper No. 14794
March 2009
JEL No. F32,F37,F41
ABSTRACT
The traditional current account can be an inaccurate measure of the change in the net foreign asset
(NFA) position. Using gross asset and liability positions at the country level, a number of 'valuation
effects' have been identified which contribute to changes in NFA but do not enter the reported current
account. This paper uses new developments in the analysis of portfolio allocation in general equilibrium
to investigate valuation effects in a two-country model. The model can be used to analyze both qualitatively
and quantitatively the role of valuation effects. Broadly speaking, the valuation effects in the model
correspond to those in the data, and have the effect of enhancing cross country risk sharing. But there
is a key distinction between "unanticipated" and "anticipated" valuation effects. Unanticipated effects
can be large, dominating the movement in NFA, but anticipated effects arise only at higher orders
of approximation and are small for reasonable parameterisations. The paper also analyses the determinants
of international portfolio positions, and their role in generating valuation effects from asset price and
terms of trade changes.

Michael B. Devereux
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, B.C.
CANADA V6T 1Z1
and NBER
mbdevereux@gmail.com
Alan Sutherland
Department of Economics
University of St. Andrews
St. Andrews, Fife KY16 9AL
UK
ajs10@st-and.ac.uk

1

Introduction

Open economy macroeconomic models typically pay close attention to the current account
as a measure of the evolution of an economy’s net external assets. The growth of current
account imbalances, and in particular the US current account deficit, has recently brought
this linkage to the forefront of economic policy discussion. Since countries must satisfy
intertemporal budget constraints, large and growing current account deficits will reduce
net external assets and should require the establishment of future trade surpluses.
This traditional view of the current account has been put into question more recently,
however. Recently constructed data suggest that traditional measures of the current
account may give an inaccurate measure of the movement of an economy’s net external
wealth (Lane and Milesi Ferretti 2001, 2006). In these studies, corrected measures of net
external assets incorporate changes in asset prices, returns, and currency exchange rates.
These adjustments change an economy’s net external wealth through separate ‘valuation
eﬀects’ on gross assets and liabilities. Moreover, since the mid 1990’s, there have been huge
increases in the scale of gross external assets and liabilities, which has led these previously
unmeasured valuation eﬀects to increase dramatically relative to the traditional measures
of the current account. A number of studies have emphasized the empirical relevance of
these valuation eﬀects (Tille 2003, Higgens et al. 2005, Lane and Milesi Ferretti, 2005,
Gourinchas, 2007).
By now, economists have recognized the importance of correctly measuring the impact
of valuation eﬀects (and more generally, diﬀerential assets returns) on net external assets.
Until recently however, there has been little impact of these new empirical findings on
the traditional modeling of the current account and net external asset movements in
open economy macro models. One of the key reasons for this is that it has proven
diﬃcult to incorporate classic principles of portfolio choice into the conventional dynamic
general equilibrium open economy model. Recent developments in the literature, however,
now provide techniques for making progress in combining portfolio choice with general
equilibrium open macro models1 . This paper makes use of these new techniques to provide
a qualitative and quantitative analysis of the ability of theoretical models to account for
valuation eﬀects in the evolution of net external assets, and to explore the interaction
1

See, for instance Coeurdacier (2005), Evans and Hnatkovska, (2005), Kollmann (2006), Engel and

Matsumoto (2006), Devereux and Sutherland (2006), (2007), Tille and Van Wincoop, (2007).

1

between valuation eﬀects and traditional measures of the current account.
We start by developing a basic framework within which to analyze valuation eﬀects
on the evolution of net foreign assets. This framework is then applied to a simple twocountry endowment economy model in which each country faces two sources of risk - one
from capital income, which is assumed to be internationally diversifiable through equity
sales, and the other from labor income, which cannot be directly diversified. Although the
model is simple, it allows us to illustrate in an analytical example the main elements of the
dichotomy between the traditionally measured current account and the valuation channel
in determining the movement of net external assets. Defining the valuation channel as
the gap between the movement of net external assets and the standard measure of the
current account, we show that the valuation eﬀect may be broken into anticipated and
unanticipated components. The anticipated component of the valuation eﬀect captures
expected excess returns on a country’s portfolio due to diﬀerences in the covariance risk
associated with each country’s traded equity.2 Such country risk premia allow, in principle, for permanent imbalances in national current accounts. In addition, there may be
time-varying anticipated excess returns that are associated with current account adjustment. The unanticipated component of the valuation eﬀect captures the way in which
national portfolios are structured so as to hedge against consumption risk. In this model,
a basic property of the unanticipated valuation component is that it should co-vary negatively with the traditional current account. The model also allows for a decomposition
of unanticipated valuation eﬀects into those coming from movements in rates of return on
assets, and those coming from movements in the portfolio holdings.
Having defined these diﬀerent components of valuation eﬀects, we go on to provide a
quantitative account of the importance of each component in the evolution of net assets.
We show that the model indicates that anticipated valuation eﬀects are very small, except
for counterfactually high values of risk aversion and diﬀerences in country endowment
volatilities. But unanticipated valuation components may represent a large fraction of
the volatility of net external assets, even when the model is calibrated to realistic sizes of
gross national portfolios. Moreover, unanticipated valuation eﬀects in the model behave
2

In our basic model, asset returns depend on dividend payments and capital gains terms. Since what

matters for portfolio choice is total asset returns rather than its components, we focus on expected excess
returns coming from both sources. The decomposition of the expected excess returns between dividend
payments and changes in asset prices will depend on the process driving the dividend stream.

2

in quite a similar fashion to those imputed from the net foreign assets (NFA) data - in
particular, they are large as compared to traditional macro shocks, they dominate the
movements in NFA, they tend to be negatively correlated with the current account, and
they are approximately i.i.d.
One aspect of the recent portfolio discussion emphasizes the diﬀerence between the
eﬀects of shocks to returns for a given portfolio, and the eﬀects of adjustment in the portfolio itself. In our model, both eﬀects form part of the dynamics of NFA. Unanticipated
valuation channels involve both shocks to returns, and movements in portfolio holdings.
But in our quantitative decomposition of the volatility of net external assets, the latter
channel plays at best a small role. The biggest driver of the volatility of net external assets
is the unanticipated movement in returns, holding the portfolio constant. Portfolio adjustment and movements in expected returns can also create anticipated valuation eﬀects.
But our analysis suggests that these eﬀects arise only at higher orders of approximation
and are quantitatively very small.
The main results of the paper are presented in the context of a one-good world economy with stochastic endowments. In a later section, we show how the decomposition
of valuation eﬀects extends to a context with diﬀerentiated home and foreign goods. In
this section, we also emphasize the important role of bonds as well as equities in risk
sharing, and both asset prices and terms of trade changes in generating unanticipated
valuation eﬀects. In this model, bond trading can achieve substantial risk sharing, even
for a very small international exposure to equities, suggesting a possible motive for ‘home
equity bias’. 3 In this case, valuation eﬀects come from movements in the real exchange
rate, as well as movements in asset prices. Moreover, valuation eﬀects in this context are
substantially larger than in the model without real exchange rate volatility.
The paper’s contribution is also pedagogical. We document how valuation eﬀects
enter in the evolution of net foreign assets, and at what order of approximation each
eﬀect is important. To this extent, the paper can be seen as a theoretical underpinning
for some traditional ‘portfolio balance’ modeling, which combined goods and asset market
modeling in one framework, but based on assumed rules of thumb behaviour with respect
to portfolio composition. At the same time, our analysis naturally places a limit on the
3

These results are similar to those in recent papers by Coeurdacier et al. (2008) and Coeurdacier and

Gourinchas (2008).

3

potential importance of each component of valuation eﬀects. In one sense, our results
suggest that in order to support the importance of some key elements of portfolio balance
models, it would be necessary to develop models of risk-bearing that diﬀer substantially
from those of the standard intertemporal stochastic model that underlies the traditional
open economy macro framework used in this paper.
There is a large and growing literature on valuation eﬀects and current account dynamics in general equilibrium models. Notable recent papers are Cavallo and Tille (2006),
Ghironi, Lee and Rebucci (2006), and Pavlova and Rigobon (2007). Cavallo and Tille
(2006) and Ghironi, Lee and Rebucci (2006) provide a careful quantitative accounting of
the impact of valuation eﬀects in models in which the portfolio structure is calibrated to
match the data.

Pavlova and Rigobon (2008) present a rich continuous time dynamic

model in which the portfolio rules can be obtained in closed form, but follow a diﬀerent
line of inquiry from that considered here.
The paper is structured as follows. The next section discusses some properties of the
data on the current account and net external assets. We then set out a simple model
of the current account in the face of capital and labour income risk. Following this, we
discuss the properties of the solution method for portfolio choice. We then explore some
analytical results on valuation eﬀects. After this, we present quantitative results on the
importance of anticipated and unanticipated valuation eﬀects. The main sections of the
paper are based on a simple single-good model with trade in equities. In the last section
of the paper we extend the analysis to a two-good model with trade in both equities and
bonds.

2

Stylised Facts

Here, we provide a brief description of the evolution of net external assets and their
decomposition in terms of the conventional measure of the current account, and those
driven by valuation eﬀects4 . We focus on a subset of OECD countries. Start with a
simple decomposition of net external assets into the conventional current account, as
measured in balance of payments accounting, and valuation terms. Thus, for country i
4

Similar discussion is provided in Kollmann (2006), Gourinchas (2007), Lane and Milesi Ferretti (2006)

among others.

4

at time t, we have:
NF Ait − NF Ait−1 = CAit + V ALit

(1)

We compute these using the IMF/Lane-Milesi-Ferretti External Wealth of Nations (EWN)
dataset on international investment positions, and from balance of payments data on
the current account. As discussed in Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006), Tille (2003), and
Gourinchas (2007), movements in V ALit are driven by asset price and exchange rate
changes which cause revisions in the value of gross external assets and liabilities, but
are not incorporated in the income account as returns paid or received on gross external
liabilities or assets.
We derive V ALit indirectly, since NF Ait is reported in the EWN data-base (and
updated using the IMF IIP), and CAit is observable from Balance of Payments data. To
make the V ALit variable comparable with our model, we scale by GDP. Thus, we define
valit =

(NF Ait − NF Ait−1 )
CAit
−
≡ ∆nxit − cait ,
GDPit
GDPit

(2)

Since NF Ait and CAit are reported in US dollars, we use US dollar GDPit from the
OECD database. The variable valit is constructed for a sample of 23 OECD countries
for the period 1980-2006. Table 1 describes the characteristics of valit . The first column
of the table reports the standard deviation of valit for each country. As noted in Lane
and Milesi-Ferretti (2006), the valuation term is highly volatile, with an average standard
deviation of 0.07 across countries. The second column illustrates the fraction of the total
variation in ∆nxit accounted for by valuation eﬀects; V Ri =var(vali )/var(∆nxi ) over the
sample. For most countries, this is well above 50 percent. The average value is 0.90, and
the US is highest at 1.39. In terms of accounting for the variation in net external assets,
for most countries the valuation eﬀects completely dominate the share attributable to the
current account in the variation of net external assets.
The valuation term is of course not independent of the current account itself. The
third column of Table 1 reports the correlation coeﬃcient between valit and cait for each
country. In the endowment economies explored below, this correlation is negative. The
results in the data are mixed. For 14 of the 23 countries in the sample, corr(cai , vali ) is
negative, with the highest negative correlation being for the US.
Kollmann (2006) finds that NFA is mostly negatively correlated with the current
account. He also notes ∆nxit is approximately i.i.d. for most countries, while the current
5

account displays substantial persistence. Here, when we impute the valuation eﬀect as
the diﬀerence between the two, we find that valit inherits the persistence properties of the
∆nxit series. The measured valit has no serial correlation for almost all countries. Table
1 reports the results from the AR(1) regression valit = c1 + c2 valit−1 for each country.
The AR(1) coeﬃcient is insignificant for almost all countries. Below, we show that valit
as defined in the theoretical model should be i.i.d.
The definition of VAL used in the model below includes dividend returns on equity,
which may be properly measured in the current account.

But even if we define the

valuation term using the trade account (which does not contain any asset returns), we
get similar results. Take the following decomposition
vaiit = ∆nxit − tait ,

(3)

where tait is the trade account to GDP ratio. Thus vaiit is the sum of the valuation term
to GDP ratio, plus the income account to GDP ratio. In practice, vaiit and tait behave
very similarly. Table 2 reports the identical results to Table 1 for this decomposition.
As before, the variance of the valuation term is very high relative to the variance of net
external assets - the average value is again about 0.9. Thus, a large component of nx is
driven by portfolio eﬀects, rather than trade balance eﬀects. In addition, we find that the
correlation between vai and ta is negative now for most countries. Finally, constructed in
this way, vai is transitory - the AR(1) coeﬃcient is again insignificant for most countries.
In the model below, the presence of valuation eﬀects is critically tied to the size of
a country’s gross asset and liability position. Figures 1 and 2 illustrate the relationship
between gross positions and valuation eﬀects. In the figure, gross positions are measured
by the average value of assets plus liabilities to GDP over the sample.5 Figure 1 suggests
that there is a positive relationship between the gross position and the standard deviation
of σ(V AL). Countries with higher gross positions have higher volatility of the valuation
residual. But Figure 2 indicates that this is not true for the V R measure. That is, there
is no clear relationship between the gross positions and the degree to which net foreign
asset changes are accounted for by V AL. For most countries, V R is close to 1.
These stylized facts are ‘first-order’ in nature. Interpreted this way, as we discuss
below, val and vai can thus be thought of as the result of an optimal risk-sharing port5

Clearly this is an imperfect statistic since both measures have been distinctly trending upwards over

the sample.

6

folio, because they can be interpreted as implicit insurance against business cycle shocks.
Gourinchas (2007) refers to these as ‘unpredictable’ valuation terms. But other recent
discussion of valuation eﬀects in international financial data stress the presence of ‘predictable’ valuation eﬀects at the national level, meaning that there are predictable excess
returns on some component of a country’s gross assets relative to the same component in
its gross liabilities. As a rough measure of this, Table 1 computes the average valuation
eﬀect over the sample for each country. If valuation changes were just attributable to
first-order risk-sharing, then this should be a very small number. In fact, it is negative,
and a relatively large share of GDP for many countries. For the US, it is positive and 1.4
percent of GDP.
Gourinchas and Rey (2005) estimate a substantial excess return on US assets relative
to liabilities, for all components of its international portfolio. For portfolio equity and debt
securities, Curcuru, Dvorak, and Warnock (2008) argue that the actual excess return to
the US is quite small. But for FDI, Higgins, Klitgaard and Tille (2006) find a 2-3 percent
persistently higher return on US assets abroad than foreign assets held in the US. Lane and
Milesi Ferretti (2007) provide an overview of some of the measurement problems inherent
in these estimates. Lane and Milesi Ferretti (2005) take a larger sample of countries, and
find that average rates of return on assets and liabilities have had significant diﬀerences
over substantial periods of time for many countries.
Gourinchas and Rey (2007) highlight a somewhat diﬀerent predictable valuation effect. They find that, conditional on an increase in the US trade balance deficit, the
US experiences a predictable persistent increase in the excess return on its international
investment portfolio, thereby reducing the required increase in the future trade balance
surplus required to achieve overall intertemporal budget balance.
While unpredictable valuation gains or losses are relatively easy to model, in terms
of an optimal insurance arrangement, it has proven much more diﬃcult to integrate the
findings of predictable excess returns into general equilibrium modeling. This is because
these eﬀects are of a ‘higher order’ nature. In our analysis below, we examine higher order
approximations of portfolio choice within a standard general equilibrium framework, and
explore the degree to which they give rise to predictable valuation eﬀects on the evolution
of net external assets.

7

3

Definition and Decomposition of Valuation Eﬀects:
A Simple Example Model

3.1

The Budget Constraint and the Definition of V AL

We illustrate how the measured current account and valuation eﬀects interact in a simple
two-country endowment model with two traded assets, and a single world consumption
good. In this section we focus on the definition of valuation eﬀects in the context of
a simple endowment economy. We also show how the theoretical valuation eﬀect can
be decomposed into unpredictable, predictable, constant and time varying components
using approximate solutions for portfolio behaviour. Section 4 solves explicitly for the
diﬀerent components of the valuation eﬀect and presents some numerical calculations
which illustrate some of the quantitative predictions of the model.
In order to define the valuation eﬀect in the model it is suﬃcient to focus on the
budget constraint of home households. This is given by
α1,t + α2,t = α1,t−1 r1,t + α2,t−1 r2,t + Yt − Ct

(4)

where Y is the endowment received by home agents, C is consumption of home agents,
α1,t−1 and α2,t−1 are the real holdings of the two assets (purchased at the end of period t−1
for holding into period t) and r1,t and r2,t are gross real returns. Note that α1,t−1 and α2,t−1
are external holdings of assets, i.e. home households’ claims on (or liabilities to) foreign
households. For purposes of exposition, it is easier to develop the results assuming assets
are in zero net supply and that domestic households are the default owners of domestic
equity. Thus, equity trade takes place through derivative assets α1 and α2 . This has no
bearing on the results. In the discussion below, we show the relationship between α1
and the total home country holdings of home stocks (which are not in zero net supply).
The stochastic process determining endowments and the nature of the assets and the
properties of their returns are specified in more detail below.
We define Wt = α1,t + α2,t to be the total net claims of home agents on the foreign
country at the end of period t (i.e. the net foreign assets, NF A, of home agents). Defining
rx,t = r1,t − r2,t as the "excess return" on asset 1, the budget constraint can then be re-

written as

Wt = Yt − Ct + r2,t Wt−1 + α1,t−1 rx,t .
8

(5)

Given that α1,t−1 and α2,t−1 are external holdings of assets, market clearing in asset
markets must imply α1,t−1 + α∗1,t−1 = 0 and α2,t−1 + α∗2,t−1 = 0, where asterisks indicate
foreign variables. To simplify notation in this example, we can drop the subscript from α1,t
and simply refer to αt . Note that α1,t = −α∗1,t−1 = αt , α2,t = Wt − αt and α∗2,t = Wt∗ + αt ,
where W ∗ is foreign net external assets, and Wt + Wt∗ = 0.

Now consider the definition of the current account and the valuation eﬀect. Equation
(5) can be rearranged to give a representation for the change in net external wealth as
∆Wt = Yt − Ct + (r2,t − 1)Wt−1 + αt−1 rx,t

(6)

where ∆Wt = Wt − Wt−1 .

We wish to decompose ∆Wt into current account and valuation terms in a manner

analogous to the data. The clearest approach within this model is to take the first term
Yt − Ct + (r2,t − 1)Wt−1 , as a measure of the conventional current account, and the second

term αt−1 rx,t , as a measure of valuation eﬀects which impact on net external assets,

but do not directly enter into the current account. We focus on the excess return on
the portfolio αt−1 rx,t as the principle measure of the valuation term, since the optimal
portfolio depends on the properties of total returns rather than its individual components.
However, the expression Yt − Ct + (r2,t − 1)Wt−1 diﬀers from the measured current account

in two ways. First, r2t is the return on a stock, and therefore includes both dividends

and capital gains terms. Capital gains are not usually counted as part of the measured
current account. Secondly, the current account may include dividend payments paid on
domestic and foreign portfolios that are measured in the excess return term rx,t . Because
we approximate around a symmetric steady state with W = 0 (see below), the capital gain
terms do not actually aﬀect the approximations for the current account that are reported
below.

6

In addition, we show below that for highly persistent shocks, most of the

variability in rx,t comes from capital gains terms, and not from movements in dividends.
Thus, measuring the current account as Yt − Ct + (r2,t − 1)Wt−1 and the valuation term
as αt−1 rx,t accords closely with the balance of payments accounting procedures for highly
6

We could avoid this feature by including a market in non-contingent commodity bonds, and allowing

the bond to be the reference asset.

In that case, the return in the (rt − 1)Wt−1 term would be that

on bonds, and would not contain any capital gains. In a fully symmetric environment, there would be

no trade in bonds anyway, and the results would be exactly identical to those reported below. More
generally, with highly persistent shocks, the gains from bond trade would be slight.

9

persistent shocks. More generally, section 2 above shows that in the data, the first-order
properties of the valuation term defined using the trade balance as a residual (so that the
definition of VAL in the data includes total returns, including both dividend terms and all
capital gains) behaves very similarly to that using the current account. Hence, since our
measure of the current account in the model is essentially equivalent to the trade balance,
there is little discrepancy between the treatment of model and data in this dimension.
We therefore rewrite (6) as follows
∆Wt = CAt + V ALt

(7)

CAt = Yt − Ct + (r2,t − 1)Wt−1

(8)

V ALt = αt−1 rx,t

(9)

where

Our analysis focuses on the behaviour of V AL as defined in (9). In Section 4 the
budget constraint and the corresponding definition of VAL will be embedded in a simple
DSGE model. In common with most DSGE models of portfolio allocation it will be
necessary to solve the model by approximation. The particular method we use follows
Devereux and Sutherland (2006). In order to analyse VAL it is necessary to solve for
the approximate behaviour of α and rx . In section 3.3 we therefore discuss the nature of
approximate solutions for α and rx within a DSGE model. In particular, we define some
terms relating to the true and approximated solutions for α and rx .

3.2

Other Details of the Example Model

Before considering solutions for α and rx we complete the description of the model. Agents
in the home country have a utility function of the form
Ut = Et

∞
X

θτ u(Cτ )

(10)

τ =t

where C is consumption and u(C) = (C 1−ρ )/(1−ρ). The discount factor, θτ , is determined
as follows
−η
θτ +1 = θτ βCAτ
/C̄A−η , θ0 = 1

10

(11)

where 0 < η < ρ, 0 < β < 1, CA is aggregate home consumption and C̄A is a constant.7
In what follows we assume that η > 0 is positive, which ensures strict stationarity in
the first-order approximated model and a determinate value of net foreign assets, W̄ . For
convenience we choose C̄A in (11) so that W̄ = 0. This is achieved by setting C̄A = Ȳ
where Ȳ is the level of endowment in the non-stochastic steady state (hence C̄A can be
interpreted as the non-stochastic steady state level of home consumption).

8

The budget constraint for home agents is given by (4). Foreign agents face a similar
consumption and portfolio allocation problem with an analogous utility function and
budget constraint.
It is assumed that endowments are the sum of ‘capital income’ components, YK and
‘labour income’ components YL , so that
Yt = YK,t + YL,t .

(12)

The two countries may trade assets representing claims on capital income, but labour
income is non-diversifiable. Endowments are determined by the following AR(1) stochastic
processes
log(YK,t /ȲK ) = μ log(YK,t−1 /ȲK ) + εK,t ,

log(YL,t /ȲL ) = μ log(YL,t−1 /ȲL ) + εL,t

(13)

where 0 ≤ μ ≤ 1. ȲK and ȲL are the steady state levels of capital and labour income

and εK , εL , are zero-mean i.i.d. shocks which are symmetrically distributed over the

interval [− , ] with V ar[εK ] = σ 2K , V ar[εL ] = σ 2L . In what follows, we make the further
assumption that σ 2K = σ 2L , and define ζ =corr[εK , εL ] as the correlation between capital
and labour income shocks. Foreign income processes are defined analogously, and we
assume zero covariance between home and foreign income shocks.
Equilibrium consumption plans must satisfy the resource constraint
Ct + Ct∗ = Yt + Yt∗
7

(14)

Following Schmitt Grohe and Uribe (2003), θτ is assumed to be taken as exogenous by individual

decision makers. The impact of individual consumption on the discount factor is therefore not internalized.
8
Since the algebraic expressions for optimal portfolios become very unwieldy when η > 0 , to make
the exposition easier to interpret, in the explicit expressions developed in this section, we focus on the
limiting case where η becomes infinitesimally small. Even with η = 0 , the conditional second moments
are still well defined. In order to solve the numerical impulse responses below, η is set equal to 0.001, so
that the model is strictly stationary.

11

where C ∗ is foreign consumption and Y ∗ is the foreign endowment.
The two traded assets are equity claims on the home and foreign capital income. The
real payoﬀ on a unit of home equity is YK and the real price is ZE . Thus the gross real
rate of return is
r1,t =

YK,t + ZE,t
ZE,t−1

(15)

The real return on foreign equity is defined analogously, where ZE∗ is the price of the
foreign equity.9
At the end of each period agents select the portfolio of assets to hold into the following
period. The first-order condition for the choice of α1,t can be written in the following form
Et [u0 (Ct+1 )r1,t+1 ] = Et [u0 (Ct+1 )r2,t+1 ]

(16)

and the first-order condition for home consumption is
u0 (Ct ) = βEt [u0 (Ct+1 )r2,t+1 ]

(17)

Similar conditions arise from the foreign consumption and portfolio choices.
A competitive equilibrium is defined by (5), (16) and its foreign counterpart, (15) and
the analogous equation for r2t , (17) and its foreign counterpart, and (14). These implicitly
∗
give the solutions for the equilibrium values of C, C ∗ , r1 , r2 , ZE,t , ZE,t
, Wt and αt .

3.3

Approximate Solutions for α and rx

We now discuss the nature of approximate solutions for α and rx . Approximate solutions
are defined around a non-stochastic steady state where ᾱ and Ȳ are defined to be the
equilibrium values of α and Y. It is simple to see from (16) and (17) that r1 = r2 = 1/β
9

Recall that the two assets are assumed to be in zero net external supply, i.e. α1 + α∗1 = 0 and

α2 + α∗2 = 0. It should be noted that the two assets in this model are paper claims on the endowments
streams, YK and YK∗ . It is the paper claims that are in zero net supply, not the underlying supplies of
equity. The underlying capitalised value of the endowment streams has a strictly positive net value.
Define S and S ∗ to be the capitalised value (i.e. the discounted present value or equity value) of YK
and YK∗ respectively. Given the way the budget constraint is defined, home households are the default
recipients of home capital income. They are thus the default owners of S, the capitalised value of YK .
If they additionally hold α1 of paper claims on YK , they implicitly hold S + α1 of home equity, while
foreign households hold α∗1 . So total home and foreign holdings of home equity are S + α1 + α∗1 which
equals S (given the constraint that α1 + α∗1 = 0).

12

in the non-stochastic steady state. The fact that innovations to the exogenous driving
processes are symmetrically distributed over the interval [− , ] ensures that any residual
¡
¢
in an equation approximated up to order N can be captured by a term denoted O N +1 .
Consider an approximation of α up to order N
h
i
¡
(1)
(2)
(N)
+O
αt = β Ȳ α̃ + α̂t + α̂t + ... + α̂t

N+1

¢

(18)

where α̃ = ᾱ/(β Ȳ ) and α̂t = (αt − ᾱ)/(β Ȳ ). α̂(i) is the order-i component of α̂t . In

this expression β Ȳ is a convenient normalising factor which simplifies notation in later
derivations. This normalisation also allows α̃ and α̂t to be interpreted (approximately) in
terms of GDP units.10
In what follows we confine attention to the first two terms in this approximation, α̃
(1)

and α̂t . Notice that, by definition, α̃ is constant and therefore captures the average or
steady-state element of portfolio holdings, while the (first-order) time varying element in
(1)

portfolio holdings is captured by α̂t .
Agents make their portfolio decisions at the end of each period and are free to rearrange their portfolios each period. In a recursive equilibrium the equilibrium asset
allocation will be some function of the state of the system in each period - which is
summarised by the state variables. We therefore postulate that the true portfolio (i.e.
the equilibrium portfolio in the non-approximated model) is a function of state variables,
(1)

αt = α(Zt ) where Z is the vector of state variables. We can therefore deduce that α̂t

is

a linear function of the first-order deviation of Z from Z̄, i.e.
(1)

(1)

α̂t = Ẑt
where

is a vector of coeﬃcients.

When analysing a DSGE model up to first-order accuracy, the standard solution approach is to use the non-stochastic steady-state of the model as the approximation point,
and to use a first-order approximation of the model’s equations to solve for the first-order
component of each variable. Neither of these steps can be used to solve for the equilibrium
of a portfolio problem. This is because in the non-stochastic equilibrium, the portfolio
optimality condition (16) implies that both assets pay the same rate of return. This implies that any value for α is consistent with equilibrium. A similar problem arises in a
10

Note that α may be negative so log-deviations of α are undefined.

13

first-order approximation of the model. First-order approximation of (16) implies that
the expected returns on the two assets are identical, i.e. Et [r1,t+1 ] = Et [r2,t+1 ]. Again,
any value of α is consistent with equilibrium. So neither the non-stochastic steady state
nor a first-order approximation of the model provide enough equations to tie down the
zero or first-order components of α.
The basic problem is that, in the non-approximated model, agents’ preferences across
the two assets depend on the diﬀering risk characteristics of assets, but the non-stochastic
steady state and the first order approximated model do not capture these diﬀering risk
characteristics. By definition, the non-stochastic equilibrium excludes risk, while the
first-order approximated model imposes certainty equivalence. It is clear that the risk
characteristics of assets only show up in the second-moments of model variables, and it is
only by considering higher-order approximations of the model that the eﬀects of secondmoments can be captured. In Devereux and Sutherland (2006) we show that a secondorder approximation of the portfolio optimality conditions provides a condition which
makes it possible to tie down α̃. Having established this starting point, it is relatively
straightforward to extend the procedure to higher-order components of α. In Devereux
and Sutherland (2007) we show that the solution for the first-order component of α can
be derived from third-order approximations of the portfolio optimality conditions.11 The
general solution approach is outlined in the Appendix.
Now consider equilibrium returns, r1,t and r2,t or, more specifically, the excess return,
rx,t . Consider an approximation of rx,t up to order N
rx,t

i
¡
1 h (1)
(2)
(N)
r̂x,t + r̂x,t + ... + r̂x,t + O
= r̄x +
β

N+1

¢

(19)

where r̂x,t = β(r1t − r2t ) and 1/β is the steady state equilibrium value of r1 and r2 .12

What can the solution approach tell us about equilibrium excess returns at diﬀerent

orders of approximation? First, notice that the properties of the non-stochastic steady
state tell us immediately that r̄x = 0, i.e. asset returns are equalised when there is no risk.
(1)

Second, the properties of the first-order approximated model tell us that Et [r̂x,t+1 ] = 0,
11
12

For a related treatment, see also Tille and Van Wincoop (2007).
Note that rx may be negative so log-deviations of rx are undefined. Also note that in Devereux and

Sutherland (2006, 2007) r̂x,t denotes r̂1t − r̂2t where r̂1t and r̂2t are the log deviations of r1 and r2 from

their values in the non-stochastic steady state. The definition of r̂x,t used here leads to a considerable
simplification of notation when analysing valuation terms.

14

i.e. certainty equivalence implies that expected asset returns are equalised.
(1)

The fact that the first-order expected excess return is zero, i.e. Et [r̂x,t+1 ] = 0, combined
with the nature of the exogenous driving processes ((13) and their foreign counterparts),
(1)

implies that the realised value of r̂x,t+1 will be a linear function of the realised values of
(1)

the innovations in the exogenous driving processes. Thus, r̂x,t+1 will be a linear function
(1)

of εK,t and εL,t and their foreign counterparts. In turn this implies that r̂x,t+1 will be a
zero mean i.i.d. random variable.
It follows from the above discussion that expected excess returns only deviate from
(2)

zero at orders 2 and higher. In Devereux and Sutherland (2006) we show that Et [r̂x,t+1 ]
(2)

can be solved in conjunction with α̃. Furthermore, we show that Et [r̂x,t+1 ] can be written
as a linear function of one-period-ahead conditional second moments of first-order realised
asset returns and consumption. Depending on the relative size of the covariances between
(2)

asset returns and consumption in the two countries, Et [r̂x,t+1 ] may be greater of less
than zero. However, because one-period-ahead conditional second moments are non-time(2)

varying (which in turn is because innovations to exogenous variables are i.i.d.), Et [r̂x,t+1 ]
(2)

will be non-time-varying. In fact Et [r̂x,t+1 ] can naturally be thought of as the steadystate equilibrium expected excess return which corresponds to steady-state equilibrium
asset holdings, α̃. The Appendix provides a brief demonstration of the link between the
(2)

solution for α̃ and the solution for Et [r̂x,t+1 ].
In a similar way, in Devereux and Sutherland (2007) we show that the third-order
(3)

component of excess returns, Et [r̂x,t+1 ], can be solved in conjunction with the first-order
(1)

component of asset holdings, α̂t . Again this point is briefly demonstrated in the Appen(3)

dix. Devereux and Sutherland (2007) further show that Et [r̂x,t+1 ] can be written in terms
of expected products of first and second-order realised asset returns and consumption.
(1)

(3)

Furthermore, just as α̂t is time varying, it follows that Et [r̂x,t+1 ] is also time varying and
(3)

it is possible to show that Et [r̂x,t+1 ] is a linear function of the first-order component of
state variables, i.e.
(3)

(1)

Et [r̂x,t+1 ] = δ Ẑt

where δ is a vector of coeﬃcients which are functions of one-period-ahead conditional
(3)

second moments. Et [r̂x,t+1 ] can naturally be thought of as the time varying element
of excess returns that corresponds to the first-order time varying element of portfolio
holdings.

15

(1)

The properties of rx can therefore be summarised as follows: r̄x is zero; r̂x,t+1 is a zero(2)

(3)

mean i.i.d. random variable; Et [r̂x,t+1 ] is constant and may be non-zero; and Et [r̂x,t+1 ] is
a linear function of first-order state variables and thus may be time varying.

3.4

Approximate Solutions for V AL

Our analysis of valuation eﬀects is based on an approximate solution for V AL which is
constructed using the approximate solutions for α and rx given in (18) and (19). Using
these expressions, together with the fact that r̄x = 0, it is simple to show that an expression
for V AL (up to third-order is) is given by
i
h
¡ ¢
(1)
(2)
(3)
d
d
d
V ALt = V AL + Ȳ V ALt + V ALt + V ALt + O 4

where

V AL = α̃r̄x = 0
(1)
(1)
Vd
ALt = α̃r̂x,t

(2)
(2)
(1) (1)
Vd
ALt = α̃r̂x,t + α̂t−1 r̂x,t

(3)
(3)
(1) (2)
(2) (1)
Vd
ALt = α̃r̂x,t + α̂t−1 r̂x,t + α̂t−1 r̂x,t

(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)

AL can
where Vd
ALt = (V ALt − V AL)/Ȳ . It proves convenient to normalise by Ȳ , so Vd

be interpreted in terms of GDP units.13

In Section 4 we analyse the first, second and third-order components of V AL, given

by (21), (22) and (23), in detail in the context of the simple example model. But, before
(1)
(2)
doing that, we note here that a number of important general properties of Vd
ALt , Vd
ALt

(3)
and Vd
ALt can be established without specific reference to the model. In particular, we

show how the unanticipated, anticipated, constant and time-varying components of V AL

naturally arise at diﬀerent orders of approximation. These general properties can be

established with reference to the general properties of the approximate solutions for α
and rx given in (18) and (19).
Starting with the first-order component of V AL given in (21), the most obvious feature
(1)
of Vd
ALt is that it is a zero mean i.i.d. random variable. This follows from the properties
(1)

of r̂x,t and α̃. The steady state portfolio, α̃, is a constant while the first-order component
13

Note that V AL may be negative so log-deviations of V AL are undefined.

16

(1)

of excess returns, r̂x,t , has a zero conditional expectation (because of certainty equivalence
(1)

in the first-order system). Furthermore, the one-period ahead conditional variance of r̂x,t
(1)
is constant, so V art−1 [Vd
ALt ] is constant.

Now consider the properties of the second-order component of V AL. Equation (22)
(2)
(2)
shows that Vd
ALt is the sum of two terms. Since α̃ is a constant, the first term in Vd
ALt ,
(2)

(2)

(2)

α̃r̂x,t , inherits the stochastic properties of r̂x,t . It was explained above that Et−1 [r̂x,t ] can
be solved as a function of one-period-ahead conditional second moments. Because these
(2)

one-period-ahead conditional second moments are non-time-varying, Et−1 [r̂x,t ] will also be
(2)

non-time-varying. Et−1 [r̂x,t ] can naturally be thought of as the steady-state equilibrium
(2)

expected excess return, or risk premium. It therefore follows that α̃r̂x,t will have a constant
but possibly non-zero conditional mean.
(2)
(1) (1)
The second term in Vd
ALt , α̂t−1 r̂x,t , on the other hand has a zero mean (conditional
(1)

(1)

on time t − 1 information). The conditional variance of α̂t−1 r̂x,t is however time-varying
(1)

because α̂t−1 is time varying. This term thus captures (one aspect) of the impact of

portfolio adjustment on the volatility of V AL. Notice, however, that portfolio adjustment
does not give rise to predictable time variation in V AL at the second-order level.
(2)
(2)
The properties of the two components of Vd
ALt thus imply that Et−1 [Vd
ALt ] is
(2)
constant and may be non-zero while V art−1 [Vd
ALt ] is time varying.

(1)
(2)
Notice from the discussion so far that Vd
ALt and Vd
ALt potentially capture two

of the aspects of valuation eﬀects which have been emphasised in the empirical liter(1)
ature. Vd
ALt potentially captures the large unpredictable swings in valuation eﬀects

documented in Table 1, but it has nothing to say about predictable elements of valuation
(2)
eﬀects. Vd
ALt on the other hand potentially captures the steady-state mean behaviour

of valuation eﬀects. In particular it shows that the steady-state mean valuation eﬀect
(1)
(2)
is associated with steady-state risk premia. The analysis of Vd
ALt and Vd
ALt shows
however that portfolio adjustment and predictable dynamics in excess returns plays little

or no role in valuation eﬀects up to the second-order level. At most, dynamic adjustment
(2)
of portfolios aﬀects the variance of Vd
ALt .

It is clear therefore that the predictable time-varying valuation eﬀects described by

Gourinchas and Rey (2008) do not arise at the level of second-order approximation. We

will now demonstrate that it is necessary to go to (at least) the third order level to identify
predictable time varying eﬀects. To see this, consider the third-order component of V AL.

17

(3)
In particular focus on the conditional expectation of Vd
ALt , which is given by
(3)
Et−1 [Vd
ALt ] =

(3)

α̃Et−1 [r̂ ]
| {z x,t}

(1)

time variation in E[rx ]
(2)

(2)

+ α̂t−1 Et−1 [r̂x,t ]
|
{z
}

(24)

time variation in α

(1)

(which contains just two terms because Et−1 [α̂t−1 r̂x,t ] = 0). It is clear from the proper(3)

ties of α̃ (which is constant) and Et−1 [r̂x,t ] (which is time varying) that the first term,
(3)

(1)

α̃Et−1 [r̂x,t ], is time varying. It is also clear from the properties of α̂t−1 (which is time
(2)

(1)

(2)

varying) and Et−1 [r̂x,t ] (which is constant) that the second term, α̂t−1 Et−1 [r̂x,t ], is also
time varying. In fact, (24) captures and separates the eﬀect of time varying expected re(3)

(1)

turns (i.e Et−1 [r̂x,t ]) on V AL from the eﬀect of time varying portfolio holdings (i.e. α̂t−1 ).
(3)
Vd
ALt therefore potentially captures the time-varying predictable valuation eﬀects de-

scribed by Gourinchas and Rey.14

The properties of the diﬀerent components of V AL can be summarised as follows:
(1)
(2)
ALt potentially capVd
ALt potentially captures the unpredictable element of V AL; Vd
(3)

tures the constant element of the predictable component of V AL; and Vd
ALt potentially

captures the time-varying element of the predictable component of V AL.

4

Solving for Valuation Eﬀects in the Example Model

We now derive these diﬀerent components of VAL in the simple example model.

4.1

First-order Valuation Eﬀects

(1)
In order to analyse the properties of Vd
ALt in more detail we first solve for its components
(1)

α̃ and r̂x,t . Following Devereux and Sutherland (2006), it is easy to compute the first-order
solutions for consumption, asset prices, and asset returns. Given these, we obtain α̃ as

follows

∗ 2∗
2
φ(σ 2K + σ 2∗
1
K ) + (1 − φ)(ζσ K + ζ σ K )
α̃ = −
2(1 − β)
σ 2K + σ 2∗
K
(3)

(25)

Equation (18) describes the expected behaviour of Vd
ALt conditional on information at time t −
(3)
1. More generally, the expected value of Vd
ALt+τ conditional on information at time t is given by
(3)
(3)
(1)
(2)
ALt+τ ] = α̃Et [r̂
] + Et [α̂
]Et [r̂
]. This follows because the i.i.d. nature of the exogenous
Et [Vd
14

x,t+τ

t+τ −1

x,t+τ

(1)

(2)

innovations ensures that the conditional covariance between α̂t+τ −1 and r̂x,t+τ is zero.

18

where φ = ȲK /Ȳ is the share of capital income in the total endowment in the nonstochastic steady state. (See the Appendix for an outline of the solution procedure.)
The optimal steady state portfolio, α̃, implies a positive holding of foreign equity, so
∗ 2∗
2
long as φ(σ 2K + σ 2∗
K ) + (1 − φ)(ζσ K + ζ σ K ) > 0. The total share of domestic equity

held by the home country is given by

S̄+β α̃
S̄

=

1
2

−

∗ 2∗
2
1 (1−φ)(ζσ K +ζ σK )
,
2
2∗
2
φ(σ K +σK )

where S̄ represents

the steady state domestic equity to GDP ratio, which is equal to βφ/(1 − β).15 A fully

diversified portfolio would have each country holding half of the other’s equity to GDP
φ
ratio, so that α̃ = − 2(1−β)
. From (25), this would obtain if ζ = ζ ∗ = 0. The existence

and degree of home bias in equity depends on the correlation between capital and labour

φ
income in each country. If ζ and ζ ∗ are less than zero, we have α̃ > − 2(1−β)
, and there is

home bias in equity holdings.16

The first-order behaviour of the excess return is
(1)

r̂x,t =

(1 − β)
(εk,t − ε∗k,t )
(1 − βμ)

(1)
so the first-order component of the valuation eﬀect, Vd
ALt , is given by
(1)
(1 − β)
(εk,t − ε∗k,t )
Vd
ALt = α̃
(1 − βμ)

(26)

(27)

(1)
We may compare the behaviour of Vd
ALt to the first-order behaviour of the current

account, which is given by17

i
(1)
β (1 − μ) h
(1 − β)2
∗
∗
d
φ(Ŷk,t − Ŷk,t ) + (1 − φ)(Ŷl,t − Ŷl,t ) − α̃
(εk,t − ε∗k,t ) (28)
CAt =
2 (1 − βμ)
(1 − βμ)

This expression contains two terms. The first term is the familiar textbook definition

of the current account. When there is a rise in home income relative to foreign income,
whether capital or labour income, the current account will improve, so long as μ < 1.
15

Note that αt is interpreted as the home countries external liabilities in the home equity. In the

non-stochastic steady state the total capitalised value of home equity is Z E = β ȲK /(1 − β) so the equity
to GDP ratio is Z E /Ȳ = (β ȲK /Ȳ )/(1 − β) = βφ/(1 − β). Since the home household is the default owner

of home equity, it’s total holding of home equity (expressed as a ratio to GDP) is (Z E + ᾱ)/Ȳ .
16
The potential for home bias in equity holdings arising because capital and labour income co-move
negatively has been noted in many previous papers. See for instance Bottazzi et al, Baxter and Jehrmann
(1997) (who argue against this explanation) , and Engel and Matsumoto (2008).
17
Here we approximate the current account around an initial value of NFA equal to zero.

19

The second term captures the impact of portfolio valuation eﬀects on consumption, and
therefore on the current account. The valuation term represents the income gain or loss
due to unanticipated changes in the excess return on assets. The sign and size of this will
depend on the portfolio position α̃, given in (25).
(1)
We measure both the volatility of Vd
ALt directly, and the volatility relative to the

∗
volatility of net foreign assets. Take the case where σ 2K = σ 2∗
K and ζ = ζ . In addition,

φ
to make the discussion simpler, assume that ζ > − 1−φ
. This condition ensures that no

country exhibits ‘super home-bias’, in the sense that it wishes to take a positive external
(1)
position in domestic equity.18 Then, from (25) and (27), the standard deviation of Vd
ALt
is

(1)
(1 − β)
σ t−1 (Vd
ALt ) = |α̃|
(1 − βμ)
(1)

q
φ + (1 − φ)ζ
σK
2σ 2K = √
2(1 − βμ)

(29)

The volatility of Vd
ALt depends positively on the size of the gross asset position. This is
(1)
consistent with the evidence in Figure 1. In addition σ t−1 (Vd
ALt ) is increasing in the

persistence of endowment shocks, and the volatility of shocks. A higher μ has no eﬀect
on α
e , but increases excess returns volatility.

(1)
Using (25), (27), and (28), we can define the ratio of the variance of Vd
ALt to that

of the variance in the change in net foreign assets as:
(1)

VR =

ALt )
σ2t−1 (Vd
(1)

σ 2t−1 (∆Ŵt )

=

(φ + (1 − φ)ζ)2
β 2 [(1 − μ)2 (1 − φ)2 (1 − ζ 2 ) + μ2 (φ + (1 − φ)ζ)2 ]

(30)

Theoretically, this can take any value in the range between zero and infinity. When φ = 1
or ζ = 1, there are eﬀectively complete markets, and the right hand side of (30) is 1/μ2 ,
which always exceeds unity. If shocks are quite transitory, then the optimal portfolio
keeps net external assets very stable, and the valuation ratio is very high. On the other
hand, for low or negative ζ, the optimal portfolio position is small, due to home bias, and
the valuation ratio may be very small.
To illustrate how risk sharing works in the model, take a one unit positive home endowment shock. In addition, focus on the special case where φ = 1. In the absence
of valuation eﬀects, measured income would rise by 1, while consumption would rise by
(1− β(1+μ)
)
2
(1−βμ)
18

, leading to a current account surplus equal to

0.5β(1−μ)
,
(1−βμ)

consistent with (28).

For φ = 0.36, (as assumed below), the condition requires only that ζ > −0.5625, which is always

satisfied in our computations.

20

When equities are chosen optimally however, there is a simultaneous negative payoﬀ from
the portfolio return, as the excess return on home equity is positive, and the home household holds a negative gross position in external claims on home income. Consumption is
2

(1−β)
adjusted downwards by (1 − β) times the valuation eﬀect, or α̃ (1−βμ)
. Given φ = 1,and

α̃ = 0.5/(1 −β), consumption rises only by

(1− β(1+μ)
)
2
(1−βμ)

− 0.5(1−β)
= 0.5, and the net eﬀect on
(1−βμ)

the measured current account is 0.5. Thus, the home endowment shock is shared equally
among home and foreign consumption. The sum of the measured current account and
the direct negative valuation term, then leads to a fall in net foreign assets for the home
(1−β)
0.5βμ
country equal to 0.5 − α̃ (1−βμ)
= − (1−βμ)
. In the period following the shock, the combi-

nation of higher income but lower net foreign assets leads home consumption to rise by
0.5μ, again leading to an optimal sharing across countries. In this way, the initial (unanticipated) valuation eﬀect leads to an expected evolution of net foreign assets following
the shock such that the consumption response is equalized across the home and foreign
country.
Using the solution for α̃ , we may establish that:
(1)
(φ + (1 − φ)ζ) (1 − μβ)
d(1)
corrt−1 (Vd
ALt , CA
< 0.
t ) = −q
2
2
2
2
2
2
β (1 − μ) (1 − φ) (1 − ζ ) + (1 − βμ) (φ + (1 − φ)ζ)
(31)

Hence, the theoretical correlation in this model is always negative. When either ζ = 1,
φ = 1, or μ = 1, this correlation is equal to −1. In the first and second case, this is

because equity holdings allow for eﬀectively complete markets, and the excess return on
the portfolio acts perfectly to stabilize idiosyncratic domestic income shocks. The eﬀects
of any endowment shock on the current account precipitate a movement in the valuation
term which is exactly proportional to the shock. In the case μ = 1, the correlation is
−1 because the only source of movement in the measured current account (28) is due to

movements in the portfolio itself.
4.1.1

Quantitative Implications

We set out there the main parameter values that are used both in this section, and in
the extended model evaluation in the next sections. Let the discount factor be β = 0.96.
Again, we look at a symmetric case where the countries have identical volatilities of capital
income, and ζ = ζ ∗ . The portfolio size α
e depends on the value of ζ, the correlation between
21

labour and capital income, φ, the share of capital in income, and the discount factor. For
φ we take the conventional measure for the US economy of φ = 0.36. We set μ = 0.9, with
σ 2K = 0.022 , which is approximately the volatility of annual US GDP growth. Empirical
estimates of ζ have varied quite a lot (see Bottazzi et al (1996), and Engel and Matsumoto
(2008)). The correct measure of ζ should compare the overall returns to physical capital
with those to human capital. Following this procedure, Bottazzi et al (1996) find a range
of estimates both negative and positive. In this model, to allow for home bias in equity
holdings within this example, it is necessary to have ζ < 0. In section 5 below, we show
that in the presence of endogenous terms of trade and bond holdings, we can obtain home
equity bias for any value of ζ. Here however, we simply choose a range of values of ζ which
give rise to diﬀerent values for the gross asset and liability positions α
e . For ζ = −.4375,
the home country holds a gross asset and liability position equal to about 100 percent of

GDP (approximately the liabilities of the US economy), so α
e = −1. This implies a high

degree of home bias, with 89 percent of domestic equity being held by home consumers.
(1)
(1)
d(1)
Table 3 illustrates the values of σt−1 (Vd
ALt ), V R, and corrt−1 (Vd
ALt , CA
t ) for

this model. In the Table, we allow for variation in equity holdings and α
e by allowing for
(1)
diﬀerent values of ζ. Using this calibration, at α
e = −1, we find σ t−1 (Vd
ALt ) = 0.008,
(1)
almost a quarter that in the data for the US. To match the US estimate of σ t−1 (Vd
ALt ) =

0.03, we would need α
e = −3.4, which would reduce the share of domestic equity held by
(1)
home residents to 62 percent. If shocks were much more persistent, σt−1 (Vd
ALt ) would

(1)
be higher. For μ = 0.95, for instance, we have σ t−1 (Vd
ALt ) = 0.012. Table 3 also

illustrates the values of V R for various values of equity holdings. At the baseline case
with α
e = −1, V R is 0.82, so the variance of VAL is almost as large as the variance of

NFA. As α
e rises in absolute value, V R increases, but since shocks are persistent, V R is
relatively insensitive to the size of the gross asset position, consistent with the empirical

evidence in Figure 2. Intuitively, from (27) and (28), when μ is closer to unity, both
(1)
(1)
Vd
ALt and ∆Ŵt are proportional to α̃, so that their ratio is relatively insensitive to

the size of gross positions.

This example suggests that in principle, a model of eﬃcient risk-sharing can account

for the properties of the valuation shocks, the absence of persistence in these shocks, and
their large size relative to overall fluctuations in NF A.19 Table 3 also shows the correlation
19

Our results complement those of Ghironi et al. (2006), and Kollmann (2006). Ghironi et al. discuss

22

between V AL and CA for various equity positions. The baseline correlation is −0.19.

This increases substantially (in absolute value) as the equity position becomes more and
more diversified, since intuitively, the portfolio position in that case more successfully
cushions shocks to the current account.
4.1.2

Alternative Definitions of VAL

How do the above conclusions diﬀer when an alternative definition of the valuation term
is used? When we measure valuation eﬀects as coming only from capital gains (associated
with fluctuations in equity prices), assuming that dividend payments are included directly
in the measured current account, we find that the volatility of V AL is given by
(1)

σ t−1 (Vd
ALQ ) = |α̃|

μβ(1 − β) √
2σ K
(1 − μβ)

(32)

With substantial persistence in shocks, this diﬀers only slightly from definition (29) above.
Similarly, we may show that V RQ = μ2 V R, while
(1)
d(1)
d (1) d(1)
ALQt , CA
corrt−1 (Vd
Qt ) = corrt−1 (V ALt , CAt ).

Thus, for high persistence in shocks, the valuation term under this alternative definition
is similar to the previous definition, while the correlation between the valuation ratio and
the current account under this alternative definition is the same as that of the previous
definition.

4.2

Second-order Valuation Eﬀects: Anticipated Excess Returns

Now consider the properties of the second-order component of V AL, given by expression
(2)
(22). It is useful to break the analysis of Vd
ALt into two stages. First we consider the

(2)
mean, or expected value of Vd
ALt . Later on, we consider the stochastic behaviour of
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
ALt ] = α̃Et−1 [r̂x,t ] which, given the properties of Et−1 [r̂x,t ],
Vd
ALt . Recall that Et−1 [Vd

is a constant and may be non-zero.

the way in which financial integration may enhance risk sharing using an alternative approach to portfolio
choice. Kollmann focuses on the potential for equity portfolios to facilitate risk sharing in a complete
markets environment. His model also implies a negative correlation between NFA and the conventional
measure of the current account.

23

Following Devereux and Sutherland (2006), we obtain the following expression for the
second-order component of the expected excess return
(2)

Et−1 [r̂x,t ] =

¢
ρ (1 − β) ¡
∗ 2∗
2
φ(σ 2K − σ 2∗
K ) + (1 − φ)(ζσ K − ζ σ K )
2 (1 − βμ)

(33)

The expected excess return on the home country asset is negative if the volatility of
the foreign capital income shock exceeds that of the home shock, and the covariance of
capital and labour income shocks in the foreign country exceed those in the home country.
Intuitively, if σ 2K < σ 2∗
K , then the foreign capital income shock is more responsible for world
consumption volatility than the home shock. Investors in both countries then must receive
∗
a higher expected return on the foreign asset. Even if σ 2K = σ 2∗
K , however, if ζ < ζ , then

again world consumption volatility is more correlated with the foreign asset return, and
there is a risk premium on the foreign asset.
A risk premium on the foreign asset translates into an expected long run current account imbalance in the following way. Take expectations of a second-order approximation
of (7) yields
(1)

Et−1 [∆Ŵt

(2)
(2)
d(1)
d(2)
+ ∆Ŵt ] = Et−1 [CA
t + CAt ] + α̃Et−1 [r̂x,t ]

The first term on the right hand side is the expected current account surplus, evaluated up
to second-order, while the second term is the expected excess return on the external portfolio. If a country holds an external portfolio which commands a positive risk premium, so
(2)

that α̃Et−1 [r̂x,t ] > 0, then it can sustain a permanent average current account deficit, and
(1)

(2)

∗
yet keep Et−1 [∆Ŵt +∆Ŵt ] = 0. For instance, if φ(σ 2K −σ 2∗
K )+(1−φ)(σ KL −σ KL ) < 0,

then the home country’s asset is less correlated with world consumption risk. Since α̃ < 0,
(2)

we then have α̃Et−1 [r̂x,t ] > 0, and country 1 can have a permanent current account deficit
equal to this. By acting as a ‘safe haven’, a country with a low volatility of output can on
average consume more than its income, if it is willing to hold more risky foreign assets.
How big can this safe haven eﬀect on the current account be within our simple example?
To estimate this, we must combine the solution for α̃ with the expected excess return
within the model to obtain:
∗ 2∗
∗ 2∗
2
2
2∗
2
ρ [φ(σ 2K + σ 2∗
K ) + (1 − φ)(ζσ K + ζ σ K )] [φ(σ K − σ K ) + (1 − φ)(ζσ K − ζ σ K )]
−
4
(1 − βμ)(σ2K + σ 2∗
K)

The two key parameters determining the size of this expression are the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion, and the degree of persistence in endowment shocks. Figure 3 illustrates
24

the excess return and the current account eﬀect. The figure assumes that σ 2K = 0.012 ,
2
and σ 2∗
K = 0.04 , indicating that the foreign country has a much more volatile endowment

process. The correlation between capital and labour income in each country is varied in
order to allow variation in the value of α̃. We again assume that β = 0.96, φ = 0.36,
μ = 0.9. Clearly, from (33), the excess return will be proportional to the coeﬃcient of
relative risk aversion. We allow for ρ = 1.5, a conventional value, and a higher value of
ρ = 8, indicating a high rate of risk aversion, but still well within the range used in asset
pricing studies (e.g. Bansal and Yaron, 2004). The gross portfolio position, −α̃, is on the
horizontal axis.

For values of α̃ in the range of 0 to −1, the eﬀect of diﬀerential risk on the current

account is very small. For ρ = 1.5, the eﬀect is negligible. But even at the higher value of

ρ = 8, a ‘safe haven’ country in this range could expect to have a current account deficit
(2)
of 0.014 percent of GDP. As total leverage rises, the size of Et−1 [Vd
ALt ] rises. For gross

asset positions just over 4 times GDP (which is equivalent to a 50 percent holding of total
domestic equity), the safe haven eﬀect could finance a current account deficit of 0.25 of a
percent of GDP, (with ρ = 8). For higher values of μ, this eﬀect is magnified. But even
for α̃ = −5 and μ = .95, the implied current account deficit is less than 0.5 of a percent

of GDP.20

4.3

Second-order valuation eﬀects: Portfolio Adjustment
(1)

(1)

Now let us examine the stochastic properties of V AL(2) . Recall that the term α̂t−1 r̂x,t

implies that the conditional variance of V AL(2) is time varying. How important is this
eﬀect in the determination of the variance of net external assets? That is, how much
additional risk-sharing is oﬀered by adjusting the size of the portfolio itself, as opposed
to the risk-sharing oﬀered by variable rates of returns for a given portfolio? In order to
(1)

answer this question, we have to derive a solution for α̂t , the first order component of
the portfolio. The resulting expression captures the way in which the portfolio is adjusted
in response to movements in the underlying state variables of the economy. Devereux
20

If we alter preferences to increase the eﬀective rate of risk aversion, the anticipated excess return

on the portfolio can increase substantially.
preferences, such that U =

1
1−σ (Ct

− ξC t )

1−σ

For instance, introducing external habit persistence in
, where C is aggregate consumption (where in equilibrium

C = C) increases the ef f ective rate of risk aversion. With ξ = 0.9, the value of the safe-haven eﬀect is
increased by a factor of 10 in the model with habit persistence in preferences.

25

and Sutherland (2007) show that there is an analytical solution for this, which (for this
model) can be written as:
(1)

α̂t =
where the
21

shocks.

i

(1)
1 ŶK,t

+

∗(1)
2 ŶK,t

(1)
3 ŶL,t

+

+

∗(1)
4 ŶL,t

+

(1)
5 Ŵt

(34)

coeﬃcients are complicated functions of parameters and the moments of

These portfolio adjustments will aﬀect the correct measure of valuation, eval-

uated up to a second-order. In response to movements in the conditional means of consumption and asset returns, agents desire to adjust their portfolio holdings.
How important is the time-variation in the variance of V AL(2) ? In terms of variance
decomposition, Table 4a reports the results of the valuation terms when we solve the
model up the second-order. We define the valuation ratios V R1 and V R2 respectively as
(1)

(2)

(1)

V R1 = var(α̃r̂x,t + α̃r̂x,t )/var(∆Ŵt

(2)

+ ∆Ŵt ),

and
(1)

(1)

(1)

V R2 = var(α̂t−1 r̂x,t )/var(∆Ŵt

(2)

+ ∆Ŵt ).

Thus, V R1 is a measure of the importance of movements in excess returns on the portfolio
for the volatility of net foreign assets (up to second-order approximation), holding constant
the portfolio holdings. V R2 is a measure of the volatility in ‘portfolio adjustment’ as a
share of the volatility of net foreign assets.

22

V R1 is almost the same as the first-order

solution V R from Table 3. As gross asset positions rise, the importance of movements
in excess returns on the portfolio grows larger. V R2 was not measured before. For the
baseline case, V R2 is very small relative to V R1 . In Table 4, for a very high degree of home
equity bias (and low portfolio diversification), the adjustment of portfolios contributes 3.5
percent of the variation in net external assets. Moreover, as the size of the gross asset
21

Why does α depend on the shocks and net wealth, as captured in (34)? When (16) is evaluated

up to a second-order, a constant α̃ is suﬃcient to keep the conditional one-step ahead covariance of log
consumption and excess returns equal to zero. But when we take a third-order approximation in order
(1)

to obtain α̂t , the (time-varying) conditional means of consumption and asset returns will aﬀect overall
portfolio risk, and agents will have to adjust their portfolio to hedge against this.
22
Note that this is not the same as ‘portfolio rebalancing’ (see e.g. Hau and Rey 2008). Since αt is
measured as ZE,t (ψ t − 1), where ZE,t is the real stock price, and ψ t is the total share of the home stock

held by home agents, changes in ψ t in response to changes in ZE,t can occur (portfolio rebalancing), even

if αt is held constant.

26

positions rise, this share falls. Intuitively, as the portfolio position moves towards full
risk-sharing, it becomes less necessary to adjust the portfolio in response to shocks.
For more persistent shocks however, portfolio rebalancing can represent a larger fraction of the variability of net foreign assets.

Table 4b illustrates the case of μ = 0.95.

In that case, we see that the contribution of portfolio adjustment can be as high as 20
percent, when the size of the external gross portfolio is small. Again however, this share
diminishes as average portfolios become more diversified.
Despite the small size of the portfolio adjustment term in accounting for the movement
in net external assets at the second-order level, it still exhibits the risk-sharing properties
of the first-order solution. In Table 3,
(1)
(2)
(1) (1) d(1)
d(2)
corr1 = corr(α̃r̂x,t + α̃r̂x,t + α̂t−1 r̂x,t , CA
t + CAt ),
(1)
(2) d(1)
d(2)
corr2 = corr(α̃r̂x,t + α̃r̂x,t , CA
t + CAt ),
(1)

(2)

dt + CA
dt ),
corr3 = corr(α̂t−1 r̂x,t , CA
(1)

(1)

Thus, the overall second-order valuation term, and the two subcomponents of the valuation term covary negatively with the current account. Portfolio adjustment does play a
role as part of the optimal portfolio in the sense that it acts so as to cushion shocks to
the current account, as in the case of the first-order valuation eﬀects. But relative to the
first-order eﬀect of having an optimally chosen fixed portfolio, this higher-order eﬀect has
only a minor impact on the evolution of net external assets.

4.4

Third-order Valuation Eﬀects: Portfolio Adjustment and
Time Varying Expected Excess Returns

In the previous sections we examined the terms arising in the first and second-order
approximations of V AL. When considering the third order component of V AL it is
necessary to analyse the predictable time varying behaviour of α and rx . As discussed in
section 3.3 this requires solving for higher-order components of α and rx . More specifically
it is necessary (at least) to solve for the first-order component of α and the third-order
component of rx . In the previous section we have already introduced the time-varying
(1)

(1)

solution for α̂t . In conjunction with this first-order solution for α̂t

27

we may also derive

the expected third-order component of rx as a linear function of the state variables as
follows
(3)

(1)

∗(1)

(1)

∗(1)

(1)

Et [r̂x,t+1 ] = δ 1 ŶK,t + δ 2 ŶK,t + δ 3 ŶL,t + δ4 ŶL,t + δ 5 Ŵt

(35)

where again the δ i coeﬃcients are complicated functions of parameters and the moments
of shocks.
(3)
Analysis of E[Vd
ALt ] can only be done numerically, via impulse responses. This is

reported in the next section.

Note that, while anticipated time variation only enters at a third-order approximation

of the V AL, we don’t actually need to solve the full model to the third-order to be
able to capture the third-order properties of V AL. In fact once we have obtained the
solutions of the form (34) and (35), these valuation eﬀects can be evaluated directly from
first-order impulse response of the state variables. The next section presents numerical
calculations of impulse responses for the example model. These are used to construct
numerical calculations for the two terms in (24).

4.5

Impulse Responses and Valuation Eﬀects

To illustrate the role and potential magnitude of the diﬀerent valuation eﬀects, we consider
some impulse responses following an innovation to capital income. These are shown in
∗2
2
Figure 4. Again we set σ 2K = σ 2L = σ ∗2
K = σ L = .02 , β = 0.96, φ = 0.36, and μ = 0.9

and we choose ζ = ζ ∗ so that home households hold about 90 percent of home equity.
Figure 4 shows the impact of a -1% shock to capital income in the home country (YK ) in
period 1. The impact on total income is shown in panel (a). Home country income falls
by 0.36% on impact. Panel (b) shows that consumption in the home economy falls by
approximately 0.22% in period 1. The impact eﬀect of the shock is therefore to push the
home economy into a trade deficit of approximately 0.14% of GDP. This deficit declines
to zero as the eﬀects of the shock dissipate.
While the home economy runs a trade and current account deficit following the shock,
net foreign assets rise sharply in period 1 and then decline. The sharp rise in NFA in
period 1 reflects the first-order unanticipated valuation eﬀect that arises from the eﬀects
of the shock on realised equity returns. The shock to home country capital income implies
a sharp unanticipated fall in the price of home equity so there is an unanticipated negative

28

excess return on home equity (i.e. r̂x is negative).23 Home households have a negative
external position in home equity (i.e. α̃ is negative) so the negative excess return in home
equity represents a positive valuation eﬀect. The shock to r̂x is approximately -0.3% so
this first-order valuation eﬀect is approximately 0.3% of GDP (i.e. −0.3 × −1). This is

illustrated in panel (k).
By evaluating the

i

coeﬃcients in (34) we are also able to trace out the dynamic eﬀect

of the shock on gross portfolio holdings. These are shown in panel (d) and panel (e). Here
α̂1 and α̂2 are home households’ holdings of, respectively, home and foreign equity. Panels
(d) and (e) show that, for this parameterisation of the model, the movements in gross
equity holdings are significantly larger than the movement in NFA. The shock induces
home households to increase their gross holdings of home equity by over 1% of GDP
while their holdings of foreign equity are reduced by an almost equivalent amount. As
discussed in Devereux and Sutherland (2007), the response of gross assets and liabilities
following the shock represents a combination of adjustment to overall wealth (the
coeﬃcients) and direct responses to the income shock (the

1

5

coeﬃcients).

Evaluation of the δ i coeﬃcients in (35) allows us also to plot the eﬀects of the shock
(3)

on the (third-order) expected path of the excess return (i.e. E[r̂x ]). This is illustrated in
panel (h). The shock leads to a persistent reduction in the expected excess return. The
(3)

magnitude of this eﬀect is very small however. E[r̂x ] falls by 0.000015% following the
shock and gradually returns to zero as the eﬀects of the shock fade.
(3)

The dynamic responses of α̂(1) and E[r̂x ] provide us with the information necessary
to calculate the two third-order valuation eﬀects in (23). These are illustrated in panel (l).
The plot labelled val(α) represents the value of the second term in (23) while the first term
(1)

(2)

in (23) is labelled val(rx). It can be seen from panel (l) that α̂t−1 Et−1 [r̂x,t ] is zero in this
parameterisation of the model. This reflects the symmetric nature of the parameterisation,
(2)

(1)

which implies that Et−1 [r̂x,t ] = 0. Dynamic adjustment of α̂t therefore does not generate
(3)

any predictable valuation eﬀect. Panel (l) shows however that α̃Et−1 [r̂x,t ] is positive
(3)

following the shock. This reflects the fact that E[r̂x ] is negative (see panel (h)) while α̃
23

Notice from panel (g) that the prices of both home and foreign equity fall following the shock. The

price of foreign equity falls because the expected future rate of return on all equity has to be above
its steady state value to be consistent with the rising path of consumption. The price of home equity
obviously falls more than the price of foreign equity because the persistent shock to home capital income
reduces the income stream to holders of home equity.

29

(3)

is also negative. The persistent negative value of E[r̂x ] therefore represents a positive
valuation eﬀect for home households. This eﬀect is, however, minute. At its largest it is
only 0.000015 % of GDP! This should be compared to the trade deficit, which is 0.14%
of GDP in the period of the shock.
As a further illustration of the size of the third-order valuation eﬀects consider an
2
asymmetric case where σ 2K = 0.012 and σ ∗2
K = .04 , i.e. a case where foreign capital income

is more volatile than home capital income. This implies a steady-state risk premium in
(2)

(1)

foreign equity of 0.0079% (i.e. Et−1 [r̂x,t ] = −0.0079%). In this case time variation in α̂t
(1)

(2)

generates a non-zero valuation eﬀect via the term α̂t−1 Et−1 [r̂x,t ]. Impulse responses (not
(2)

reported) show that this valuation eﬀect is negative (because Et−1 [r̂x,t ] is negative and
(1)

α̂t

is positive) and it has a maximum absolute value of 0.0001 following a -1% shock to

home capital income. Again this is minute in comparison to the trade deficit created by
the shock.
We may therefore conclude that time varying expected returns do act so as to stabilize the impact of a fall in the trade balance in the model.

24

But in practice, this

mechanism plays essentially no role at all in the adjustment process in this model. To
obtain an economically meaningful pattern of time varying expected valuation eﬀects
through movements in excess returns, we would need a model in which risk premia played
a much bigger role than they do here, as for instance, in the models of Campbell and
Cochrane (1999) or Bansal and Yaron (2004).

5

Real Exchange Rate Valuation Eﬀects

Up to now, all the valuation eﬀects we have analysed are due to changes in asset prices (and
to a minor extent, dividend payments). But Lane and Milesi Ferretti (2007) emphasize
the importance of exchange rate changes in valuation gains and losses. To do full justice
to the role of nominal exchange rate variation on the valuation of net external assets
is beyond the scope of the present paper. However, we can easily extend the model to
incorporate the impact of terms of trade and real exchange rate movements in generating
24

We experimented with a range of parameter values for the persistence of the shocks and relative risk

aversion. In all cases, the results were similar, with the eﬀects of time-varying expected returns being
very small. Note that a similar result on the stabilization features of expected returns is found in a
diﬀerent context by Pavlova and Rigobon (2008). They also found that the eﬀect is small.

30

valuation eﬀects. In this section, we do this by allowing for diﬀerentiation between home
and foreign goods, as well as introducing another shock in the form of a ‘demand shock’.
We also allow for trade in bonds whose payoﬀs are defined in terms of units of home or
foreign goods. In some cases, this simple extension has quite dramatic implications for
the structure of external portfolios, as well as the source of valuation eﬀects.
To save space, we describe the extended model in the Appendix. We assume that
agents in both countries have elasticity of substitution θ between the consumption of
home and foreign goods. In addition, the share of the home good in the home price index
is γ t . We allow for home bias in consumption, so that E(γ) > 0.5. In addition, we allow
for ‘demand shocks’, which aﬀects the intensity of preferences for the home good relative
to the foreign good. In particular, assume that
γ t = γ exp(vt )
where vt = ςvt−1 + εv,t , where εv,t , is a zero-mean i.i.d. shock which are symmetrically
distributed over the interval [− , ] with V ar[εv ] = σ 2v . The foreign household has preferences with weight γ ∗t = γ exp(−vt ) on the foreign good. This specification means that
a positive vt shock increases both home and foreign demand for the home good.

5.1

Equity Trade Only

First, look at the case of equity trade only. The solution for α̃ is then a complicated
function of parameters and shock variance and covariances. In the special case where
2
γ = 0.5 and σ ∗2
K = σ K however, we may express the solution as

(1 − βς)2 [1 − θ + (1 − φ)(1 − ζ)(θ − 2φ)]σ 2K
(θ − 1)
2(1 − β) (1 − βς)2 [(1 − θ)2 + 2(1 − φ)(1 − ζ)(θ − φ)]σ 2K + 2(1 − βμ)2 σ 2v
(1 − βμ)2 σ 2v
1
−
(36)
(1 − β) (1 − βς)2 [(1 − θ)2 + 2(1 − φ)(1 − ζ)(θ − φ)]σ 2K + 2(1 − βμ)2 σ 2v

α̃e = −

When θ → ∞, this recovers (25), the equilibrium equity holding in the one good model,

and demand shocks play no role in the demand for equity. On the other hand, when
θ = 1, endogenous movements in the terms of trade act so as to fully insure against
endowment shocks. The equity position is then designed only to hedge against demand
shocks. A positive demand shock will increase home relative to foreign consumption,
and also increase the return on home relative to foreign equity (due to a terms of trade
31

improvement). Thus, the home country will diversify out of domestic equity. In addition,
when φ = 1, we again have α̃e = −0.5/(1 − β), so there is perfect pooling, as before, since
this equity position perfectly hedges against both demand shocks and endowment shocks.

5.2

Bond and Equity Trade

Now extending the asset menu to allow for bond trading, we may solve for the equilibrium
vector of portfolio holdings of equities and bonds. First, we may show that in the special
case of no demand shocks at all (i.e. σ 2v = 0)
α̃b =

h

0 0

(1−γ)(2γ−1−ρ(2γθ−1)
ρ(1−μβ)

i

.

(37)

The striking feature of (37) is that equilibrium equity holdings are zero. Home agents
hold no foreign equity, and take no measures to diversify away their status quo holding
of all domestic equity. This means that, when agents can trade in real bonds, there is
complete home bias in the equity portfolio. This holds independently of the size of shocks,
the covariance of capital and labour income shocks ζ, the value of the elasticity θ, or any
other parameters of the model.25 Moreover, we can easily establish that (37) achieves full
cross country risk sharing (up to first-order) in the model with endogenous terms of trade
movements and σ 2v = 0. That is, an optimal bond portfolio supports complete assets
markets, with no need for any foreign equity portfolio26 .
Why do agents not wish to hold equity in portfolios in this example? The reason
is that the bond portfolio allows a claim on the terms of trade, and the deviation from
full risk-sharing across countries is also proportional to the terms of trade. Up to firstorder, the relative rate of return on bonds (i.e. foreign bonds relative to home bonds) is
equal to the movement in the terms of trade. Full risk-sharing requires that consumption
movements adjusted for real exchange rate movements are equalized across countries. But
25

To be clear, there is a singularity at the points φ = 1, and/or θ = 1, where perfect pooling of equity

would achieve the same allocation as (37).
26
In a diﬀerent context, with multiple shocks and capital accumulation, Coeurdacier et al. (2008) show
how a combination of bond holdings and equity holdings can support complete risk sharing, with equity
holding motives based on variations in income orthogonal to terms of trade movements. Coeurdacier and
Gourinchas (2008) show that such a separation in equity and bond portfolios is supported empirically.
Finally, Devereux and Saito (2007), in a very diﬀerent context, also show that bond holding may substitute
for international trade in equity.

32

departures from this are also driven by movements in the terms of trade. Hence, a bond
portfolio can ensure full cross country risk sharing.
In general, α̃b =

(1−γ)(2γ−1−ρ(2γθ−1)
ρ(1−γβ)

may be positive or negative. In the case γ = 0.5,

the sign of α̃b is determined only by the size of θ. When θ > 1, home agents hold a negative
position in foreign denominated bonds. This is because relative home consumption rises as
relative home endowments increase, when θ > 1, while simultaneously, the return on the
home bond tends to fall, as the terms of trade depreciates, so that home bonds represent
a good hedge against consumption risk.

27

In the more general case where there are both demand and endowment shocks, the
optimal portfolio will include both equity and bond holdings.

We now explore the

importance of valuation eﬀects in this setting.

5.3

Valuation Eﬀects

We may compute the analogous valuation terms that we constructed in the one-good
model above. Table 4 reports the results, using the benchmark calibration, for the economy with trade only in equities, and the case where both equities and bonds are traded.
We also report the breakdown of valuation eﬀects into dividend payments, asset price
movements, and relative price movements. In the baseline calibration, we set all parameters as in Table 3, except θ = 1.5, and γ = 0.6, which are close to standard consensus
values for these parameters in the literature. We assume that endowment shocks have
the same volatility and persistence as before. We set ζ equal to the same value as in the
baseline case of the previous model. As regards the calibration for demand shocks, there
is little empirical evidence to determine σ2v and ς. We follow Couerdacier et al. (2007) in
setting σ 2v = 0.012 , and choose the same persistence for demand shocks as for endowment
shocks. Again, we assume all shocks are independent. Finally, we set the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution, ρ= 1.5.
Table 5 shows the values for the portfolio positions and valuation eﬀects. In the equity
only economy, there is still considerable home-bias, given our calibration. Home investors
hold about 70 percent of home equity. In the equity-bond economy, home agents take a
positive position in foreign bonds, and a negative external position in domestic equity,
27

When γ > 0.5, it is no longer true that the sign of α̃b is determined only by the size of θ. But, for

reasonable values of parameters, we would anticipate that α̃b < 0, as before.

33

backed by a positive holding of foreign equity.28 Equity holdings display considerable
home bias - home agents hold 82 percent of home equity. Bond holdings carry most of the
weight in terms of cross-country risk-sharing. Gross bond holdings are about 100 percent
of GDP.
Table 5 also illustrates the details of the valuation eﬀects in this extended model. In
both the equity-only economy and the equity-bond economy, the volatility of the valuation
term is considerably higher than in the previous model, as we now have an additional
shock. In both cases, the standard deviation of the valuation term is about 3 percent. In
both cases also, the valuation ratio significantly higher than before, at the same value of
α̃.
How are the valuation eﬀects decomposed between dividend movements, asset price
movements, and terms of trade movements? Table 5 shows that in the model with only
equity trade, most of the variance of the valuation eﬀect is accounted for by movements
in asset prices. Equity price volatility accounts for about eight times as much in terms
of overall valuation movements as does dividend movements. Also, the share of volatility
accounted for by movements in the terms of trade is very small.
In the case with both equity and bond trade, the importance of terms of trade in
valuation eﬀects increases considerably. Table 5 shows that, in this case, the dividend
movements play only a tiny role in valuation eﬀects.

Asset price movements remain

important, but a significant part of the volatility of the valuation term is accounted for
by movements in the terms of trade.
These results indicate that the size and composition of first-order valuation eﬀects
may be aﬀected in important ways by the structure of the economy and the availability
of assets. Nevertheless, the valuation mechanism still operates in the same way as in the
simple model. Valuation eﬀects act so as to enhance risk sharing between countries. In all
cases, we see a negative correlation between the current account and the valuation terms.
For brevity, we do not report higher order aspects of valuation eﬀects for the extended
model. As we would expect from the results of the previous section, in the current model,
expected valuation eﬀects (evaluated up to second-order) and time varying expected valuation eﬀects (evaluated up to third-order) are very small.
28

A positive holding in foreign bonds ensures that consumption is insured against demand shocks,

which, in the absence of portfolio diversification, would both increase consumption and increase the
return on home bonds through a terms of trade appreciation.

34

6

Conclusion

This paper has shown how recent developments in the analysis of portfolio structure
in open economy models may be applied to study the role of valuation eﬀects in the
movement of net external assets. While in traditional balance of payments theory, the
change in net external assets should be equal to the current account, empirical evidence
indicates that for most countries, the evolution of net external assets is dominated by
valuation gains and losses coming from changes in asset prices and exchange rates, which
do not enter into the measured current account. This gives rise to a valuation term, which
can be measured as the gap between the change in net external assets and the current
account. The paper shows that a simple model of risk-sharing based on optimal portfolio
choice can provide a reasonable qualitative and quantitative account of the properties
of this valuation term up to the first-order, where valuation eﬀects are ‘unanticipated’.
The source of these valuation eﬀects, the degree to which they act so as to provide cross
country risk sharing, and their decomposition into asset price changes and terms of trade
changes, will depend on the structure of international goods markets and the availability
of international assets.
Recent literature has also suggested the presence of ‘anticipated’, or higher-order valuation eﬀects, giving rise to anticipated average excess returns and anticipated time-varying
excess returns. We show that these higher order eﬀects do in principle play a role in the
movement of net external assets. In practice however, for the benchmark international
macro model with standard preferences and realistically calibrated consumption risk, these
eﬀects are quantitatively very small.

References
[1] Bansal, R. and A. Yaron (2004) “Risks for the Long Run”, mimeo, University of
Pennsylvania
[2] Bottazzi, L, P. Pesenti, E. van Wincoop, (1996). “Wages, profits and the international
portfolio puzzle,” European Economic Review, 40(2), 219-254.

35

[3] Campbell J. and J. Cochrane (1999) “By Force of Habit: A Consumption based
Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behaviour”, Journal of Political Economy”,
107, 205-251.
[4] Cavallo, M. and C. Tille (2006) “Could Capital Gains Smooth a Current Account
Rebalancing?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staﬀ Report No 237.
[5] Coeurdacier, N. (2005) “Do trade costs in goods market lead to home bias in equities?”,unpublished manuscript, LBS.
[6] Coeurdacier, N. , R. Kollmann, and P. Martin (2007) “International Portfolios, Current Account Accumulation, and Capital Accumulation”, mimeo.
[7] Coeurdacier, N. and P.O. Gourinchas (2008), “When Bonds Matter: Home bias in
Goods and Equity”, mimeo, U.C. Berkeley.
[8] Curcuru, S., T. Dvorak, and F. Warnock (2008) “Cross-Border Returns Diﬀerentials” Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute,
Working Paper No. 4
[9] Devereux, M. and A. Sutherland (2006) “Solving for Country Portfolios in Open
Economy Macro Models” CEPR Discussion Paper No 5966.
[10] Devereux, M. and A. Sutherland (2007) “Country Portfolio Dynamics” CEPR Discussion Paper No 6208.
[11] Engel, C. and A. Matsumoto (2005) “Portfolio Choice in a Monetary Open-Economy
DSGE Model” mimeo, University of Wisconsin and IMF.
[12] Evans, M. and V. Hnatkovska (2005) “International Capital Flows, Returns and
World Financial Integration” NBER Working Paper 11701.
[13] Ghironi, F., J. Lee and A. Rebucci (2005) “The Valuation Channel of External
Adjustment” unpublished manuscript, Boston College.
[14] Gourinchas, P.. (2007) “Valuation Eﬀects and External Adjustment: A Review”,
unpublished manuscript, UC Berkeley.

36

[15] Gourinchas, P. and H. Rey (2007a) “International Financial Adjustment” Journal of
Political Economy, 115, 665-703.
[16] Gourinchas, P. and H. Rey (2007b), “From World Banker to World Venture Capitalist: US External Adjustment and The Exorbitant Privilege”, in G7 Current Account
Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, Richard Clarida, editor, The University
of Chicago Press, 2007, pp11-55.
[17] Hau, H. and H. Rey (2007) “Global Portfolio Rebalancing under the Microscope”
unpublished manuscript, LBS.
[18] Higgins, M., T. Klitgaard and C. Tille, (2006) “Borrowing without debt? Understanding the U.S. international investment position,” Staﬀ Reports 271, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
[19] Kollmann, R. (2006) “International Portfolio Equilibrium and the Current Account”,
mimeo.
[20] Lane, P., and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti (2001) “The External Wealth of Nations: Measures of Foreign Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Countries” Journal of International Economics 55, 263-94.
[21] Lane, P. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti (2005) “A Global Perspective on External Positions”, CEPR Discussion Paper No 5234.
[22] Lane, P, and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti (2006) “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II”
IMF Working Paper no 06-69.
[23] Pavlova, A. and R. Rigobon (2007) “An Asset Pricing View of Current Account
Adjustment”, unpublished manuscript, MIT.
[24] Samuelson, P. A. (1970) “The Fundamental Approximation Theorem of Portfolio
Analysis in terms of Means, Variances and Higher Moments” Review of Economic
Studies, 37, 537-542.
[25] Tille, C. (2003) “The Impact of Exchange Rate Movements on US Foreign Debt”,
Current Issues in Economics and Finance, 9, 1-7.

37

[26] Tille, C. and E. van Wincoop (2007) “International Capital Flows”, NBER Working
Paper No 12856.

38

Table 1: Valuation term based on Current Account data
Australia
Austria
Canada
Denmark
France
Germany
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea
Mexico
Netherlands
New Z.
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
UK
US

sd(val)

VR

corr(val,ca)

corr(val,gdp)

ar(1)

mean(val)

0.06
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.06
0.15
0.04
0.03
0.05
0.04
0.10
0.13
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.11
0.15
0.04
0.05
0.03

0.88
1.12
1.12
0.62
0.94
0.45
0.44
0.92
1.05
0.98
0.88
1.28
0.99
0.99
0.60
0.42
0.70
1.14
1.14
0.71
0.89
1.40

0.30
‐0.34
‐0.39
0.22
‐0.06
0.24
0.09
0.05
‐0.26
‐0.13
‐0.31
‐0.50
‐0.08
‐0.08
‐0.35
0.09
0.11
‐0.35
‐0.36
‐0.01
0.01
‐0.54

‐0.03
0.05
0.05
‐0.03
0.00
0.08
‐0.18
‐0.23
‐0.16
0.06
0.30
0.22
0.04
‐0.08
‐0.27
0.32
‐0.02
‐0.07
‐0.06
‐0.19
‐0.10
0.11

0.13
0.20
0.61**
‐0.08
‐0.19
‐0.13
‐0.17
‐0.08
‐0.01
‐0.39
0.07
‐0.16
‐0.21
0.39*
0.15
‐0.01
0.01
0.04
0.09
0.10
‐0.24
0.31

0.00
0.00
0.01
‐0.01
0.00
0.00
‐0.02
0.00
0.00
‐0.01
‐0.02
‐0.01
‐0.05
‐0.01
‐0.01
0.00
‐0.01
‐0.02
‐0.01
‐0.02
0.00
0.01

Sd(val) refers to the standard deviation of the VAL term, using the current account as residual, VR refers to the
variance of VAL/GDP, corr(VAL,CA) and corr(VAL,GDP) refers to the correlation of VAL with the current account
and GDP respectively. AR(1) is the estimated coefficient of VAL on its lagged value. Mean(VAL) is the average
VAL over the sample. Sample 1980‐2007.

australia
austria
canada
denmark
france
germany
iceland
ireland
italy
japan
korea
Mexico
netherlands
new zealand
norway
portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
UK
US

Table 2: Valuation term based on Trade Balance data
sd(vai)
VR
corr(vai,ca)
corr(vai,gdp)
ar(1)
0.06
0.88
0.3
-0.02
0.15
0.04
1.49
-0.58
0.13
0.38
0.04
1.07
-0.29
0.06
0.54*
0.05
0.78
0.12
-0.03
0.01
0.04
0.93
0.01
0.04
-0.2
0.03
0.57
0.33
0.21
0.12
0.06
0.55
0.35
-0.26
-0.05
0.18
1.22
-0.45
-0.16
0.14
0.07
1.05
-0.27
-0.08
-0.03
0.03
1
-0.13
-0.02
0.45*
0.05
1.02
-0.37
0.36
0.19
0.04
1.37
-0.58
0.34
-0.03
0.1
1.02
-0.14
0.07
-0.27
0.13
0.99
-0.06
-0.07
0.41*
0.05
0.57
-0.19
-0.3
0.12
0.06
0.67
0.09
0.37
0.52*
0.06
0.81
0.19
0.02
0.15
0.1
0.96
-0.01
0.01
-0.12
0.14
1
-0.1
0
0.04
0.04
0.85
-0.12
-0.28
0.15
0.05
0.86
0.05
-0.05
-0.26
0.03
1.29
-0.48
0.07
0.26

mean(vai)
-0.03
0.02
-0.04
-0.03
0
-0.02
-0.06
-0.15
-0.01
-0.01
-0.03
-0.03
-0.05
-0.08
-0.03
0.06
0.01
-0.05
0.07
0.02
0.02
0.02

Sd(val) refers to the standard deviation of the VAL term using the trade balance as residual, VR refers to the
variance of VAL/GDP, corr(VAI,CA) and corr(VAI,GDP) refers to the correlation of VAL with the current account and
GDP respectively. AR(1) is the estimated coefficient of VAI on its lagged value. Mean(VAI) is the average VAI over
the sample. Sample 1980‐2007.

Home Eq.
0.89
0.84
0.8
0.76
0.71
0.67
0.62
0.58
0.53
Home Eq.
0.89
0.84
0.8
0.76
0.71
0.67
0.62
0.58
0.53

Table 3a
Stdval
Valrat
Corr(val,CA)
0.008
0.82
0.012
1
0.015
1.1
0.018
1.17
0.022
1.21
0.025
1.23
0.028
1.26
0.032
1.27
0.035
1.28
Table 3b
Stdval
Valrat
Corr(val,CA)
0.014
1.08
0.02
1.12
0.026
1.14
0.032
1.15
0.038
1.16
0.043
1.16
0.049
1.17
0.055
1.17
0.061
1.17

‐0.19
‐0.26
‐0.32
‐0.38
‐0.43
‐0.48
‐0.52
‐0.56
‐0.6

‐0.27
‐0.36
‐0.44
‐0.51
‐0.56
‐0.61
‐0.66
‐0.7
‐0.73

Table 3a represents the case with shock persistence 0.9. Table 3b has persistence 0.95. Home
eq. represents the share of home equity held by home consumers. Stdval is the standard
deviation of the valuation term. Valrat is the ratio of the variance of VAL to the variance of
the change in NFA. Corr(Val,CA) is the correlation of VAL and the current account.

Home eq.
0.97
0.93
0.9
0.87
0.83
0.8
0.71
0.58
0.53
Home eq.
0.97
0.93
0.9
0.87
0.83
0.8
0.71
0.57
0.53

Table 4a
VR1
VR2
Corr1
Corr2
Corr3
0.18
0.035
‐0.08
‐0.06
‐0.05
0.5
0.021
‐0.13
‐0.12
‐0.04
0.75
0.01
‐0.18
‐0.18
‐0.04
0.92
0.007
‐0.23
‐0.23
‐0.04
1.03
0.004
‐0.28
‐0.28
‐0.03
1.1
0.003
‐0.33
‐0.32
‐0.03
1.21
0.001
‐0.43
‐0.43
‐0.02
1.27
0.001
‐0.57
‐0.56
‐0.02
1.28
0.001
‐0.6
‐0.6
‐0.01
Table 4b
VR1
VR2
Corr1
Corr2
Corr3
0.43
0.209
‐0.12
‐0.08
‐0.09
0.82
0.09
‐0.18
‐0.16
‐0.08
0.99
0.04
‐0.24
‐0.23
‐0.08
1.08
0.022
‐0.3
‐0.3
‐0.07
1.12
0.013
‐0.36
‐0.35
‐0.06
1.14
0.008
‐0.41
‐0.41
‐0.06
1.17
0.003
‐0.53
‐0.53
‐0.04
1.19
0.001
‐0.67
‐0.67
‐0.03
1.19
0.001
‐0.7
‐0.7
‐0.03

Table 4a represents the case with shock persistence 0.9. Table 4b has persistence 0.95. Home eq. represents the
share of home equity held by home consumers. VAR1 and VAR2 represent the share of valuation changes due to
excess returns (up to 2nd order), and portfolio re‐balancing in total net foreign asset changes. Corr1, Corr2, and
Corr3 represent correlations of valuation effects with the current account, as defined in the text.

Equity Only
Home Eq. 0.7

Equity and Bond
Trade
Home eq. 0.82
Home Bond 0.97

Table 5: Valuation effects in the Two Good Model
sd(val)
VR
0.031
1.12
sd(val_div)
sd(val_DQ)
0.003
0.022

sd(val)
0.03
sd(val_div)
0.002

VR
1.14
sd(val_DQ)
0.011

corr(val,CA)
‐0.67
sd(val_DP)
0.002

corr(val,CA)
‐0.7
sd(val_DP)
0.012

sd(val), VR, and corr(val,CA) refers to the standard deviation of the VAL term, the variance of the ratio of VAL to the CA,
and the correlation of VAL with the CA. sd(val_div), sd(val_DQ), and sd(val_DP) are the components of total valuation
volatlity coming from dividend movements, asset price movements, and terms of trade movements, respectively.

Figure 1

Figure 2

0.16

1.4
1.3

0.14

1.2
1.1
1

0.1

VR

StdVAL

0.12

0.08

0.9
0.8
0.7

0.06

0.6
0.04

0.5

0.02

0.4
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

(A+L)/GDP
Total gross assets+liabilities vs. standard
deviation of VAL

3

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

(A+L)/GDP
Total gross assets+liabilities
vs. valuation ratio

2.5

3

Figure 3
0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
0.5

1

1.5

2

α

2.5

3

3.5

4

The figure shows the expected value of the valuation term evaluated up to 2nd order, for various parameterisations

Figure 4: Impulse responses
(a) Income

(b) Consumption

0

0.1

-0.2

0

-0.4
-0.1
-0.6
-0.2

-0.8
-1

-0.3
0

5

Yk1

10

Y1

15

Y2

20

0

5

10

C1

(c) ΔNFA, CA, TB

C2

15

C1-C2

20

(d) NFA, α̂1, α̂2
1.5

0.2

1
0.1
0.5
0

0

-0.5
-0.1
-1
-0.2

-1.5
0

5

ΔNFA

10

CA

15

TB

20

0

(e) ∆NFA α̂1, α̂2

5

NFA

10

α̂1

15

α̂2

20

(f) Realised rates of return

1.5

0.2

1
0
0.5
0

-0.2

-0.5
-0.4
-1
-1.5

-0.6
0

5
ΔNFA

10

α̂1

15

α̂2

20

0

5

r1

10

r2

15

rx

20

Figure 4 continued
(g) Asset prices

-5

x 10

0

(h) Expected excess return

0
-0.2

-0.2

-0.4
-0.4
-0.6
-0.6

-0.8

-0.8

-1
0

5

10
Z1

15
Z2

20

0

5

(i) Asset price component of Δα

10

E(rx)

15

20

(j) Quantity component of Δα

0.6

1

0.4

0.5

0.2
0
0
-0.5

-0.2
-0.4

-1
0

5

pc1

10

15
pc2

20

0

5
-6

(k) 1st-order valuation effect
0.3

qc1

10

15
qc2

x 10

(l) 3rd-order valuation effects

0

5

20

10
8

0.2

6
0.1

4
2

0
0
-0.1

-2
0

5

ΔNFA-CA

10

15
ΔNFA-TB

20

val(α)

10

15
val(rx)

20

Valuation Eﬀects and the Dynamics of Net External
Assets
Michael B Devereux and Alan Sutherland
Technical Appendices (Not for Publication)
Appendix 1: Model solution
This appendix briefly outlines the solutions approach described in Devereux and Sutherland (2006, 2007).
The solution for the steady state portfolio, α̃ is based on a second-order approximation
of the portfolio optimality conditions. These are given by
h
i
(2)
(1) (1)
Et r̂x,t+1 − ρĈt+1 r̂x,t+1 = 0

h
i
(2)
∗(1) (1)
Et r̂x,t+1 − ρĈt+1 r̂x,t+1 = 0

Equations (38) and (39) can be combined to show
h
i
(1)
∗(1) (1)
Et (Ĉt+1 − Ĉt+1 )r̂x,t+1 = 0

(38)
(39)

(40)

and

h
i ρ h
i
(2)
(1)
∗(1) (1)
(41)
Et r̂x,t+1 = Et (Ĉt+1 + Ĉt+1 )r̂x,t+1
2
These two equations express the portfolio optimality conditions in a form which is particularly convenient for deriving equilibrium portfolio holdings and excess returns. Equation
(40) provides an equation which must be satisfied by equilibrium portfolio holdings, α̃.
And equation (12) shows the corresponding equilibrium expected excess return.
In order to evaluate the left hand side of equation (40) it is suﬃcient to derive expressions for the first-order behaviour of consumption and excess returns. This requires a
first-order accurate solution for the non-portfolio parts of the model. Portfolio decisions
aﬀect the first-order solution of the non-portfolio parts of the model in a particularly simple way. This is for three reasons. First, portfolio decisions only enter the non-portfolio
parts of the model via budget constraints.29 Second, the only aspect of the portfolio
29

In fact, this property is not critical for the implementation of the solution method. It is straightfor-

ward to generalise the method to handle cases where portfolio decisions aﬀect equations other than the
budget constraint.

1

decision that enters a first-order approximation of the budget constraints is α̃, the steadystate portfolio. And third, to a first-order approximation, the portfolio excess return is
a zero mean i.i.d. random variable. The fact that only the steady-state portfolio enters
the first-order model can be illustrated by considering a first-order approximation of the
home budget constraint. For period t + 1 this is given by
(1)

Ŵt+1 =

1 (1)
(1)
(1)
(1)
Ŵ + Ŷt+1 − Ĉt+1 + α̃r̂x,t+1
β t

(42)

where Ŵt = (Wt − W̄ )/Ȳ . Notice that the deviation of α from its steady-state value does

not enter this equation because excess returns are zero in the non-stochastic steady state,
i.e. r̄x = 0.
The three properties just listed imply that it is possible to combine (42) with the
(1)

∗(1)

(1)

other non-portfolio equations of a model to obtain expressions for Ĉt+1 , Ĉt+1 and r̂x,t+1
conditional on α̃. These expressions can then be substituted into (40) and the resulting
equation can be solved to yield the equilibrium value of α̃.
(1)

∗(1)

Having solved for α̃ it is simple to derive the reduced form solutions for Ĉt+1 , Ĉt+1
(1)

(2)

and r̂x,t+1 which can be substituted into (41) to obtain a solution for Et [r̂x,t+1 ]. It is in
this sense that the steady state behaviour of α can be solved in conjunction with the
expected second-order behaviour of the excess return. Notice that the resulting solution
(2)

for Et [r̂x,t+1 ] will be a function of one-period ahead conditional second moments.
The first-order behaviour of α can be obtained using a similar procedure applied
to third-order approximations of the portfolio optimality conditions and second-order
approximations to the other parts of the model. Taking a third-order approximation of
the home and foreign country portfolio first-order conditions yields
"
#
(2)
(3)
r̂x,t+1 + r̂x,t+1
=0
Et
2
(1) (1)
(1) (2)
(2) (1)
(1)2 (1)
−ρĈt+1 r̂x,t+1 − ρĈt+1 r̂x,t+1 − ρĈt+1 r̂x,t+1 + ρ2 Ĉt+1 r̂x,t+1
Et

"

(2)

(3)

r̂x,t+1 + r̂x,t+1
∗(1) (1)

∗(1) (2)

∗(2) (1)

−ρĈt+1 r̂x,t+1 − ρĈt+1 r̂x,t+1 − ρĈt+1 r̂x,t+1 +

ρ2 ∗(1)2 (1)
r̂
Ĉ
2 t+1 x,t+1

#

=0

(43)

(44)

Combining these two conditions implies that portfolio holdings must ensure that the
following holds
Et

"

(1)

∗(1)

(2)

(2)

∗(2)

(1)

−ρ(Ĉt+1 − Ĉt+1 )r̂x,t+1 − ρ(Ĉt+1 − Ĉt+1 )r̂x,t+1
2

(1)2

∗(1)2

(1)

+ ρ2 (Ĉt+1 − Ĉt+1 )r̂x,t+1
2

#

=0

(45)

while expected returns are given by
"
#
(1)
∗(1) (2)
(2)
∗(2) (1)
ρ
ρ
(
Ĉ
+
Ĉ
)r̂
+
(
Ĉ
+
Ĉ
)r̂
(3)
t+1
x,t+1
t+1
t+1
x,t+1
2
Et [r̂x,t+1 ] = Et 2 t+1
(1)2
∗(1)2 (1)
ρ2
− 4 (Ĉt+1 + Ĉt+1 )r̂x,t+1

(46)

These are the third-order equivalents of (40) and (41).
Notice that the left hand side of (45) can be evaluated using first and second order
expressions for consumption and excess returns. It is thus suﬃcient to solve a secondorder approximation to the non-portfolio parts of the model. As before, portfolio decisions
aﬀect the second-order solution of the non-portfolio parts of the model in a particularly
simple way. This is again for three reasons. First, portfolio decisions only enter the
non-portfolio parts of the model via budget constraints. Second, the only aspects of the
portfolio decision that enters a second-order approximation of the budget constraints are
(1)

α̃ and α̂t . And third, to a first-order approximation, the portfolio excess return at
the first and second orders is a zero mean i.i.d. random variable. The fact that only α̃
(1)

and α̂t

enter the second-order model can be illustrated by considering a second-order

approximation of the home budget constraint. For period t + 1 this is given by
(1+2)

Ŵt+1

=

1 (1+2)
1 (1)2
(1+2)
(1+2)
(1+2)
Ŵt
+ Ŷt+1 − Ĉt+1 + α̃r̂x,t+1 + Ŷt+1
β
2
1 (1)2
1
(1) (1)
(1) (1)
− Ĉt+1 + α̂t r̂x,t+1 + Ŵt r̂2,t+1
2
β

(47)

where, to simplify notation, for variable X the sum of the first and second-order components is denoted X̂ (1+2) , i.e. X̂ (1+2) = X̂ (1) + X̂ (2) .
Equation (47) can be used in conjunction with the other non-portfolio equations of
(2)

∗(2)

(2)

the model to obtain solutions for Ĉt+1 , Ĉt+1 and r̂x,t+1 . These can be substituted into
(1)

(45) and the resulting equation can be solved to yield a solution for α̂t .
(1)

(2)

∗(2)

Having solved for α̂t it is simple to derive the reduced form solutions for Ĉt+1 , Ĉt+1
(2)

(3)

and r̂x,t+1 which can be substituted into (46) to obtain a solution for Et [r̂x,t+1 ]. It is in this
sense that the first-order dynamics of α can be solved in conjunction with the expected
third-order behaviour of the excess return.
Note that all the approximations here are fundamentally based on Samuelson’s (1970)
theorem on portfolio approximations. In this sense, they apply strictly for only very small
shocks around a non-stochastic steady state. Thus, the model is of limited applicability
for dealing with global shocks, in much the same way as is the solution of DSGE models
up to first or second order.
3

Appendix 2: The extended model
Here we spell out the details of the model with endogenous terms of trade, preference
shocks, and trade in bonds and equity. Again, agents in the home country have utility
functions of the form given by (10).

Now however, C is a consumption index defined

across all home and foreign goods, given by:
θ
h 1 θ−1
θ−1 i θ−1
1
Ct = γ tθ CHtθ + (1 − γ t ) θ CF tθ

(48)

where CH and CF are aggregators over individual home and foreign produced goods. The
parameter θ in (48) is the Armington elasticity of substitution between home and foreign
goods. The parameter γ t measures the importance of consumption of the home good
in preferences. For γ t > 0.5, we have ‘home bias’ in preferences. We assume that γ t is
aﬀected by a stochastic ‘demand’ shock, which aﬀects the intensity of preferences for the
home good relative to the foreign good. In particular, assume that
γ t = γ exp(vt )
where vt = ςvt−1 + εv,t , where εv,t , is a zero-mean i.i.d. shock which are symmetrically distributed over the interval [− , ] with V ar[εv ] = σ 2v . The foreign consumption aggregator
analogous to (48) is defined as
Ct∗

θ
h 1 θ−1
i θ−1
1
∗θ ∗ θ
∗ θ−1
∗ θ
θ
= γ t CF t + (1 − γ t ) CHt

(49)

where γ ∗t = γ exp(−vt ). Thus, when γ > 0.5, there is on average home bias towards the
domestically produced good in both home and foreign preferences. But a positive shock
to vt will shift both home and foreign demand towards the home produced good, and
away from the foreign produced good.
Given this specification, the aggregate CPIs for home and foreign agents are therefore
1
£
¤ 1−θ
1−θ
+ (1 − γ t )PF1−θ
Pt = γ t PHt
t

1
£
¤ 1−θ
1−θ
Pt∗ = (1 − γ ∗t )PHt
+ γ ∗t PF1−θ
t

(50)
(51)

where PH and PF are the aggregate price indices for home and foreign goods.
The budget constraint of the home country agent is then
Pt Ct + Pt Wt+1 = PHt Yt + Pt

N
P

k=1

4

αk,t−1 rkt

(52)

where Wt denotes home country net external assets in terms of the home consumption
basket. The final term represents the total return on the home country portfolio. We
now allow for trade in up to N = 4 assets; home and foreign equity, as well as home and
foreign bonds. We compare an equilibrium where agents trade only in equities to one
where there is trade in both equities and bonds.
Equity prices and returns are as described above, except that home equity is now a
claim on the capital income return on the home good, YKt , and similarly for foreign equity.
Thus, the return on the home equity, in terms of the home CPI, is given by
PHt YKt /Pt + ZEt
ZEt−1

ret =

(53)

where ZE is now the price of the home equity in terms of the home consumption basket.
The return on a home country bond is written as
rbt =

PHt /Pt
ZBt−1

(54)

where ZB is the price of the home bond in terms of the home consumption basket. The
foreign equity and foreign good-denominated bond are defined analogously.
From (52), we define the evolution of net foreign assets, evaluated up to the first-order,
as

¡ ¢
1−β
(55)
Ŵt−1 + PbHt − Pbt + Ŷt − Ĉt + α̃0 r̂x,t + O 2
β
where α̃0 represents the vector of portfolio holdings. In the case of equity trade alone, as
Ŵt − Ŵt−1 =

before, α̃ is the real holding of home equity, and r̂x,t is the excess return on home equity
relative to foreign equity. When both equities and bonds can be traded, defining the home
bond as the residual asset, α̃0 is the vector of real holdings of home equity, foreign equity,
and foreign bonds, given by:
α̃0 =

h

α̃∗e

α̃e

α̃∗b

i

The excess return is then defined as:
h
i
¡ ∗
¢ ¡ ∗
¢ i h
0
= (r̂e,t − r̂b,t ) r̂e,t
= r̂x,1,t r̂x,2,t r̂x,3,t .
r̂x,t
− r̂b,t
r̂b,t − r̂b,t

The zero-order optimal portfolio may be constructed using the same procedure as
before. In equilibrium, households choose a portfolio of home and foreign equity, and
home and foreign bonds so as to satisfy a portfolio selection equation coming from a
second-order approximation of a condition akin to (16) above.
5

