NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GENERATING EVIDENCE TO GUIDE MERGER ENFORCEMENT
Orley C. Ashenfelter
Daniel Hosken
Matthew Weinberg
Working Paper 14798
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14798

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2009

We would like to thank Chris Taylor for his comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Orley C. Ashenfelter, Daniel Hosken, and Matthew Weinberg. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Generating Evidence to Guide Merger Enforcement
Orley C. Ashenfelter, Daniel Hosken, and Matthew Weinberg
NBER Working Paper No. 14798
March 2009
JEL No. K21,L1,L4
ABSTRACT
The challenge of effective merger enforcement is tremendous. U.S. antitrust agencies must, by statute,
quickly forecast the competitive effects of mergers that occur in virtually every sector of the economy
to determine if mergers can proceed. Surprisingly, given the complexity of the regulators task, there
is remarkably little empirical evidence on the effects of mergers to guide regulators. This paper describes
the necessity of retrospective analysis of past mergers in building an empirical basis for antitrust enforcement,
and provides guidance on the key measurement issues researchers confront in estimating the price
effects of mergers. We also describe how evidence from merger retrospectives can be used to evaluate
the economic models used to predict the competitive effects of mergers.

Orley C. Ashenfelter
Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Library
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
c6789@princeton.edu
Daniel Hosken
Federal Trade Commission
600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20580
dhosken@ftc.gov

Matthew Weinberg
Federal Trade Commission
Mail Stop 4264
600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington , DC 20580
mweinberg@ftc.gov

I. Introduction
The Federal Trade Commission and the Department of Justice attempt to block or
modify only those mergers that would reduce consumer welfare. The challenge of
effective enforcement is enormous. The antitrust agencies have relatively little time to
evaluate the likely impact of large changes in market structure on consumer welfare.
Further, mergers occur in virtually every sector of the economy forcing teams of
economists and lawyers to confront very different institutional details from one case to
the next. Surprisingly, given the complexity of the regulators task, there is remarkably
little empirical evidence on the effects of mergers to guide regulators.

Empirical

evidence on the price effects of consummated mergers can both determine whether past
antitrust enforcement was applied correctly, and aid regulators in developing more
effective techniques to forecast the likely effects of mergers on competition. This paper
describes the necessity of retrospective analysis of past mergers in building an empirical
basis for antitrust enforcement, and provides guidance on the key measurement issues
researchers confront in estimating the price effects of mergers. We also describe how
evidence from merger retrospectives can be used to evaluate the economic models used
to predict the competitive effects of mergers.
Determining the price effects of consummated mergers is difficult for several
reasons. First, calculating the effect of a merger on prices necessitates knowledge of
what prices would have been had the merger not occurred. These counterfactual prices
are inherently unobservable, and assumptions that may be questionable must be made in
order to identify and estimate these effects. Further, prices are often difficult to measure
in available datasets. Difficulties in measuring prices can have important consequences
on the results of merger retrospectives. Finally, and as noted by Carlton (2009) and
Ashenfelter and Hosken (2008), it is difficult to generalize from the results of even a
large number of retrospective studies because only the price effects of consummated
mergers are observed. Mergers that are consummated represent a selected sample of all
possible mergers, not a random sample. Fortunately, a well designed study can overcome
these three difficulties and much of this paper describes different approaches for doing
so.

1

In addition to identifying whether past antitrust enforcement was at its proper
level, retrospective analysis can also directly improve future antitrust decision making.
Due to the costliness of dissolving consummated mergers, U.S. antitrust policy towards
mergers is almost entirely prospective. The government must forecast how each potential
merger would affect prices and hence consumer surplus. A large number of retrospective
studies could aid government decision making by revealing what observable
characteristics of mergers are associated with price increases. Further, retrospective
evidence provides a useful method for evaluating economic models used to forecast the
competitive effects of mergers.

These methods include financial event studies,

retrospective analysis from non-merger related activity, and simulations from structural
oligopoly models (merger simulations). A chief benefit of these methods is that they
generate explicit predictions of the competitive effects of mergers, and in the case of
merger simulations an explicit prediction of the price effect. Further, the assumptions
underlying these models are explicitly stated and, thus, can be subjected to rigorous
review. In contrast, the analysis of the evidence traditionally used in merger review,
testimony of market participants and company documents, is inherently more subjective.
Because economic models generate explicit predictions of the competitive effects of
mergers, it is relatively straightforward (though resource intensive) to evaluate their
performance with retrospective evidence. If these tools are proven effective, they could
lead to a more efficient, objective, and accurate merger review process.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II describes the decision
problem of the antitrust authorities and discusses extant retrospective evidence, Section
III describes the key issues in estimating the price effects of consummated mergers, and
Section IV describes the economic models used to forecast price effects. Section V
concludes.

II. Antitrust Decision Making
The Clayton Act forbids mergers that would “substantially reduce competition”.
The U.S. Federal Trade Commission and the Antitrust Division of the U.S. Department
of Justice enforce the Clayton Act, and the protocol by which they do so is given in the
Hart-Scott-Rodino Act (HSR Act). In practice, the agencies seek to block mergers that

2

would reduce consumer surplus, primarily through higher prices. The HSR Act requires
parties engaged in commerce and acquiring assets valued at more than $65.2 million to
file an intention to merge with the FTC and DOJ before coordinating their activities. The
firms must then wait while the merger is allocated to one of the agencies and investigated
for potential anticompetitive effects.
Because it is undesirable to delay efficient mergers, the HSR effectively forces
the U.S. antitrust agencies to make decisions under strict legislated time constraints. The
HSR Act gives the government 30 days for its initial investigation. If the merger is
potentially problematic, the government issues a “second request” to the merging parties.
The second request is a detailed subpoena requesting documentary evidence (including
quantitative data) that is relevant to the government investigation. While the merging
parties do not face any formal time deadline to comply with the second request, it is in
their interests to comply quickly so as not to delay the transaction more than necessary.
After all documents are submitted for the second request, the government has a final 30
days to review the case.
The 1992 FTC/DOJ Horizontal Merger Guidelines provide the analytic
framework used in merger review. In the course of its investigation, the agencies must
define geographic and product markets, and then predict competitive effects, efficiencies
and the likelihood of entry. The information with which the government makes these
decisions is limited. Often government attorneys and economists are limited to the
information contained in company documents and the testimony of merging firms’
executives and other market participants. When the merging parties have high quality
price, quantity, and or revenue data, it is possible to use demand estimates and oligopoly
models to help define product and geographic markets and simulate the price effects of
mergers.
The sheer magnitude of the number and variety of merger filings each year
demonstrates the difficulties facing antitrust enforcers. Figure 1 plots the total number of
merger filings, measured on the left vertical-axis, and the total number of second
requests, measured on the right vertical-axis. While the vast majority of mergers are
consummated without modification or review, on average over the past decade, the
agencies conducted major investigations of mergers (that generated a second requests) 71

3

times a year.2 Further, over the past decade, these mergers took place in roughly 80
different industries, as defined by 3-digit NAICS codes.3
Figure 1: Hart Scott Rodino Filings and Second Requests,

1000

40

60

2000

HSRFilings
3000

80
100
secondnumber

4000

120

5000

1998-2007

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Year
HSRFilings

secondnumber

Thus, not only do the agencies have to review a large number of mergers in a
short time period, they often are forced to make decisions with only limited exposure to
the industry.

Industries differ dramatically in institutional detail critical for merger

analysis. Mergers take place in markets that differ in seller and buyer concentration,
substitutability of different products, and barriers to entry.
Studies of the price effects of consummated mergers provide a useful aid for
government decision making. Currently, there are about twenty published merger
retrospectives, see Pautler (2001), Hunter et al. (2008), and Weinberg (2008) and for
recent surveys.

The mergers that have been studied are not representative

of consummated mergers. Instead of estimating the average price effect of a

2

HSR filing and second request figures are taken from the Hart-Scott-Rodino Annual Reports to Congress.
The drop in the number of filings and second requests after 2001 is due to both the end of a merger wave
and also an increase in the HSR filing threshold from transactions valued at $15 million or more to $59.8
million or more.
3
3-digit NAICS codes for the merging parties are reported in HSR Premerger Notification and Report
Forms.

4

merger, most studies focus on mergers that were likely on the enforcement margin. For
example, Ashenfelter and Hosken (2008) focus on five consumer product market mergers
that took place in highly concentrated markets. Thus the results of these studies should
be interpreted as measuring the effectiveness of specific (non) enforcement decisions and
not as the average price effect caused by a consummated merger. In addition, most
existing studies have taken place in four industries where pricing data are publicly
available: airlines, banking, hospitals, and petroleum.

The vast majority of merger

retrospectives find evidence of price increases, at least in the short period they observe
post-merger pricing. However, the number of merger studies is not large, they cover a
time span of roughly 30 years, and only a handful of industries have been studied. That
being said, the main implication of this research is that mergers in concentrated markets
can lead to price increases. Given our limited knowledge it is impossible to draw broader
conclusions about the effectiveness of enforcement or specific guidance as to what
market characteristics are more likely to result in anticompetitive mergers.

III. Generating Evidence to Improve Decision Making
Merger retrospectives are useful for both evaluating past antitrust policy and in
learning what types of mergers lead to increases in consumer prices. As in all empirical
analysis, for a study to yield useful results it is critical to have a sensible design and data
sufficient to answer the question of interest. Below we highlight what we see as the key
issues in estimating the price effects of the merger. First, and of primary importance, is
developing a reasonable estimate of what prices in an industry would be had the merger
not occurred. Second, we discuss the importance of identifying a reasonable measure of
price. Finally, we discuss issues involved in identifying the time period in which we
think the price effects of the merger would manifest themselves.

Modeling the Counterfactual
The goal of a merger retrospective is straightforward: learn if prices changed as
the result of a merger. A decrease in prices implies that the merger was efficient, and an
increase in prices implies that the merger increased market power to the detriment of
consumers (assuming no coincident increase in quality). The major issue in estimating

5

the price effect of a merger, as with any evaluation of a change in a market using nonexperimental data, is the method used to control for other confounding factors that may
also have changed at the time of the event. Of especial concern in a merger setting is the
effect of possible changes in demand or costs unrelated to the merger that may cause
prices to change.
For example, suppose a merger of two large gasoline refiners operating in the
U.S. Midwest was consummated on January 1st 2008.

The antitrust agencies are

subsequently asked by the U.S. Congress to determine if that merger adversely affected
consumers. In response to this request the antitrust agencies ask their economists to
measure the price effect of this merger. The antitrust economists find that prior to the
merger gasoline prices in the Midwest were roughly $3.03 a gallon the week before the
merger was consummated, rose to $4.03 six months after the merger date, and then fell to
$1.57 at the end of 2008.4 Would it be correct to conclude from this price pattern that
directly following the merger the gasoline refiners exploited their market power causing
price to increase about $1 a gallon, however, by the end of the year (after the firms had
time to integrate their facilities) the efficiencies were so great that prices fell to nearly
50% measured relative to prices just before the merger was consummated?

This

conclusion seems unlikely. Variability in gasoline prices is largely caused by changes in
crude prices. Crude oil prices were roughly $96 a barrel on December 31, 2007, $140 a
barrel on June 30th, 2008, and $39 a barrel on December 31, 2008.5 Thus, in this
hypothetical merger retrospective relying on a simple “before and after” estimator would
yield highly misleading results about the price effects of the hypothetical merger because
the technique being used did not control for other factors (crude oil prices) that are
important inputs into the production of gasoline. While this example is highly simplified,
it illustrates why a researcher must control for factors unrelated to the merger that may
have affected prices. In most studies, these factors typically consist of shocks to supply
and demand.
In a merger retrospective, the price effect of the merger is defined as the
difference between the observed price following the merger and what prices would have

4
5

All prices are taken from the Energy Information Administration’s website, http://www.eia.doe.gov/.
Prices of West Texas Crude, the most commonly traded crude in the US.

6

been “but for” the merger. The typical merger retrospective assumes that there is a
reduced form pricing relationship similar to equation (1) below in the markets affected by
mergers.
(1) p Mt = α M 0 + γ t + α M1 Post Mergert + ε Mt
These studies assume that the price in the market affected by a merger (pMt) is a function
of costs and demand factors which vary over time (γt), and an indicator (or series of
indicators) corresponding to the post-merger period (Post Mergert). Using a reduced
form pricing equation, there are two dominant identification approaches used to estimate
the price effect of a merger. The first approach uses explicit controls for the cost and
demand factors that affect prices independent of the merger.

In these papers, the

researcher explicitly specifies both the factors that affect a product’s price and the
functional form; i.e., the researchers explicitly specify γt as a function of observed cost
and demand factors.
An example of the first approach is the Chouinard and Perloff [2007] study of
retail and wholesale gasoline price variation. The goal of this study is to determine the
relative importance of different factors that affect gasoline prices over time, including
increases in market power caused by mergers. Chouniard and Perloff use monthly state
level gasoline pricing data from the U.S. Energy Information Agency (EIA) from March
1989 through June 1997. They include a large number of variables that likely determine
the supply and demand of gasoline over time in different U.S. states (γt in equation 1
above). Specifically, Chouinard and Perloff include variables that affect the demand for
gasoline (including measures of income, weather, population, automobile ownership, and
population density), input prices (crude oil prices, taxes, and controls for the type of
pollution requirements in a given state), supply shocks (indicator variables for the first
Persian Gulf war and refinery outages), and state fixed-effects (separate indicator
variables allowing for a different price level in every state). Mergers are modeled as
affecting price as in equation (1), a series of indicator variables for each merger where the
indicator is equal to one in the post-merger time period for states affected by the merger.
For this approach to generate reliable estimates of the price effects of a merger, it
is critical that the variables included in the econometric model (the supply and demand
variables) control for all important factors that affect prices and that may be correlated

7

with the timing of the merger. If some factor that is not included in the regression causes
prices to rise (or fall) in the post-merger period, the researcher would mistakenly attribute
this unobserved factor as the price effect of the merger. The validity of this approach
depends on the application. There are many regional factors which are very difficult to
observe (much less measure) that can have a large impact on gasoline prices. Because
the supply and demand for gasoline are both very inelastic, unanticipated changes in
output can have large effects on consumer prices. For example, in the summer of 2000
unanticipated decreases in output in the Midwest (caused primarily by unanticipated
difficulties associated with meeting tighter environmental regulations) led to large price
increases in the Midwest.6 While large shocks can be controlled for by including
indicator variables in the estimating equation (as done by Chouniard and Perloff), smaller
disruptions to the gasoline distribution network (pipelines, barges) can also lead to
significant changes in regional prices which, while transitory, can last for weeks or even
months.7 Thus, during the relatively short time horizon typically used to identify the
price effect of a merger, one or two years, a cost shock could confound the ability to
measure the price effect of a merger. The validity of this modeling approach depends
critically on the ability to specify the factors that affect the prices of the products affected
by the merger.
The second approach uses some form of a difference-in-difference estimator to
identify the price effect of the merger and is the most common approach used in
estimating the price effects of mergers. Instead of explicitly specifying the factors that
change the demand and cost of a product over time (γt), these studies identify a ‘control’
group of products that face similar demand and cost conditions to those potentially
affected by a merger and then determine how those products prices change relative to the
products sold in markets affected by a merger. Specifically, assume that the process

6

Prices increased in Chicago and throughout the Midwest by nearly 60 cents a gallon in a little over a
month, while more distant regions (connected by pipeline) experienced much smaller changes in price. See
Bulow et al. [2003]. Despite facing identical input (crude oil) costs, supply shocks in gasoline markets can
lead to large changes in relative prices that can take weeks to dissipate.
7
The price effects of a number of localized supply shocks are shown in Chapter 4 of United States Federal
Trade Commission (2005).

8

causing prices to change over time in the control market is identical to that of the
treatment market but for the price effect caused by the merger as in equation (2) below.
(2) p Ct = α C 0 + γ t + ε Ct
In equation (2) prices of the control product are allowed to be different than those of the
product affected by the merger by a constant amount (αC0), however, time varying
factors affect prices in an identical manner as for the product affected by the merger.
This leads to the estimating equation (3) which is the difference of equations (1) and (2).
(3) p Mt − p Ct = (α M0 - α C0 )+ α M1 Post MergerMt + (ε Mt − ε Ct )
In equation (3) the intercept has the interpretation of being the difference in the premerger price between the product affected by the merger and the control product, and the
error term is the difference in the error terms in the two cities. Under the assumption that
the factors that causes prices to change for the two products are identical ( γ tM = γ tC = γ t ) ,
this estimating equation yields the correct estimate of the price effect of the merger, αA1.
The difficulty of the difference-in-difference approach is in identifying a good control
product (or group of products8) for the products produced by the merging firms. In an
antitrust setting, for example, there is often a tension between finding products that are in
different geographic markets and therefore not affected by the transaction, while truly
facing similar demand and cost conditions.
Kim and Singal (1995) estimate the price effects corresponding to a number of
airline mergers using a difference-in-difference approach. They define a market as a citypair combination, for example, flights from Washington, DC to Chicago, Illinois. Their
goal is to estimate the change in price on city-pairs where a merger reduced the number
of competitors. A natural control group is a market containing the same number of
competitors pre-merger with no reduction in competition post-merger. By using this
control group Kim and Singal are implicitly assuming that the factors that may cause
airline prices to change over time independent of the merger, such as jet fuel prices or
changes in wage rates, will affect merger markets and control markets similarly. In their

8

This example has been presented in terms of a single merging firm product and a single treatment product
to provide easy intuition. In most applications, researchers estimate the price effects for multiple products
using multiple controls.

9

paper the price effect of the merger is calculated as the (percentage) change in fares in
markets affected by the merger relative to the change in fares in control markets.
In many industries the approach used by Kim and Singal, of identifying a control
market as a separate region selling identical products that is unaffected by the merger is
not feasible. Ashenfelter and Hosken (2008), for example, are interested in estimating
the price effects resulting from five mergers of firms producing branded consumer
products in the motor oil, breakfast syrup, ready-to-eat cereal, feminine hygiene products,
and distilled spirits industries. They observe retail prices for each brand sold in an
industry across different regional markets before and after each merger occurred.
Because each of these products is sold nationally, they cannot use prices of the same
products sold in different regions as a control. Instead, Ashenfelter and Hosken use
private label products (products in the same industry sold under a retailer’s brand name)
as a control group. The key assumption for estimating the price effect of the merger in
this context is that the merging brands’ prices would have changed in the same way as
private label products in the absence of the merger. Private label products have nearly all
of the same production costs as branded products, except advertising. For this reason,
Ashenfelter and Hosken suggest that exogenous supply or demand shocks affecting the
industry should affect private label and branded products’ prices similarly. Further,
private label products are likely relatively distant substitutes to the branded products
produced by the merging parties. Thus, we would not expect private label products to
increase in price in response to an anticompetitive price effect generated by the merger.
However, even if private label products are important substitutes for the branded
products, the bias introduced by failure of the modeling assumption can likely be signed
if firms compete in prices. Davidson and Deneckere (1985) analyze the price effects of
mergers using the static Bertrand model which underlies most unilateral effects analysis.
They show that for most common demand systems, firms producing substitute products
to those of the merging firms will increase their prices following a price increase by the
merging firms. Thus, at worst, comparing the change in the prices of the merging firms’

10

products to the change in private label prices will underestimate the effect of the merger
if the underlying model is Bertrand.9
Whether it is best to control explicitly for supply and demand factors in
estimating equation (1) or to identify a control product and estimate the price effects of
the merger using a difference-in-difference estimator like equation (3) depends on
characteristics of the merger being studied. It is often difficult to identify variables that
measure the factors that affect a product’s price over time.

For this reason, when

analyzing mergers where a good control product is available, for example, estimating the
price effects of an airline merger, a difference-in-difference estimator is likely best. Even
in these situations, however, a researcher should consider alternative controls where
feasible to validate the assumption that the control and merger product face similar
demand and supply shocks. In industries where there is no obvious control, a researcher
must identify the price effects of the merger by explicitly controlling for those factors
affecting supply and demand in the estimating equation. For example, many mergers in
gasoline markets affect all cities in a region, and cities in regions unaffected by the
merger may have different sources of supply and face different demand shocks (for
example, weather). In this situation the best method for modeling the counterfactual
would be to specify a model like that in Chounaird and Perloff.

Price Measure
Defining relevant products and their corresponding prices is almost always an
important issue in antitrust analysis. For example, even within relatively homogenous
product categories, such as the retail sale of gasoline, prices can vary substantially within
a region. In order to describe the retail price of gasoline in a market some aggregation
over products (gasoline sold at different retail outlets) is necessary. Price measurement
too can be an important issue in merger retrospectives. Researchers are constrained by
available data. Publically available data often contains a subset of transactions in the
market. Data corresponding to that subset may (or may not) be sufficient to determine
9

The result that rivals firms’ prices increase from the pre-merger equilibrium to the post-merger
equilibrium in Bertrand models with product differentiation depends upon properties of the demand curve
and the shape of the marginal cost curve. If marginal costs are constant or increasing, a sufficient condition
is that the cross derivative of demand is small.

11

the price effects of the merger. The importance of price measurement can best be
illustrated by examining recent studies estimating the price effects of mergers in the
petroleum industry.
The U.S. petroleum industry has undergone dramatic change over the last 15
years. Many well known petroleum firms have merged, including Exxon and Mobil,
Conoco and Phillips, and Marathon and Ashland.

At the same time, many large

petroleum firms have divested a substantial number of refineries to entrants and rivals.
This merger activity in combination with dramatic volatility in the price of gasoline has
led to concerns that these mergers may have harmed consumers. A number of recent
studies have estimated the price effects of mergers affecting the gasoline industry. Some
of these studies have focused on wholesale prices (Hastings and Gilbert 2004, GAO
2004) while others have focused on retail prices (Simpson and Taylor 2008, Hastings
2004) or both retail and wholesale prices (Chouinard and Perloff 2007, Taylor and
Hosken 2007). On initial inspection, the choice of price measure might not appear
important in evaluating mergers in gasoline markets. If a merger increased market power
in the market for either the refining or distributing gasoline, then wholesale prices should
increase. The wholesale price increase, in turn, should be passed on to retail prices. If
retail markets are very competitive, we would expect something close to one-to-one pass
thru of wholesale prices to retail prices.
Some institutional factors in gasoline markets complicate this hypothesized
relationship between observed wholesale and retail prices. First, the specific wholesale
price a gasoline retailer faces is determined by the vertical relationship between the
retailer and the refiner supplying its gasoline.

There are four primary types of

arrangements between gasoline retailers and suppliers, two of which are publically
observable. Gasoline stations that are independently owned and operated typically have
the right to purchase gasoline at any wholesale distribution point. If a gasoline station of
this type sells a specific brand of gasoline, for example, Exxon, that station must
purchase that brand of gasoline. A station selling gasoline under its own name can
purchase a generic gasoline.

These prices are typically referred to as branded and

12

unbranded “rack prices”10 and are the only wholesale gasoline prices that are observable
at high frequency (daily or weekly) for relatively narrow geographic regions
(metropolitan areas). Stations that are owned by a refiner but operated by a third party
(lessee-dealer stations) also pay an unobserved wholesale price that may vary by station
within a metropolitan area (often called a DTW price).11 Finally, some gasoline stations
are owned and operated by a refiner. In this case the refiner directly determines the retail
price, and the wholesale price is inherently unobservable.

Second, these different

wholesale gasoline prices change relative to each other over time. For instance, during
supply disruptions refiners often increase the wholesale price charged to retail outlets
unaffiliated with their brand relative to the price charged to stations selling their own
brand of gasoline, see Bulow et al. (2003). Similarly, DTW prices change relative to rack
prices during supply disruptions, see Taylor and Hosken (2007). Thus, at any point in
time it is unclear which wholesale price (rack, branded rack, DTW, lessee dealer or
unobserved transfer price facing refiner owned and operated stations) is the most relevant
wholesale price in determining the retail price in a market.
The choice of price measure can lead to different conclusions about the price
effects of a merger. In 2004 the GAO issued a report analyzing the price effects of a
number of mergers in the petroleum industry. Their study examined how branded and
unbranded rack prices changed in response to mergers.

The GAO found that the

combination of Marathon and Ashland Petroleum caused a wholesale price increase.
Taylor and Hosken (2007) also analyzed the price effects of this merger and examined
both retail and rack prices. Like GAO, Taylor and Hosken found that the observed
wholesale price (rack price) increased, however, they did not find evidence of a retail
price increase. In fact, Taylor and Hosken find evidence that the observed increase in
rack prices may have reflected a change in the relative size of the different wholesale

10

These wholesale prices are referred to as rack prices in the industry because they are the price charged at
the truck rack where the gasoline is pumped into a delivery truck.
11
This is often called a dealer-tank-wagon (DTW) price because the price of gasoline typically includes a
delivery charge. Some independently owned stations enter into long term supply agreements with a refiner
and pay a DTW price for gasoline.

13

prices.12 Thus, this merger increased some, but not all wholesale prices and, on net, this
change in wholesale prices did not cause retail prices to increase.
While the above example is specific to the gasoline industry, most markets have
idiosyncratic features that complicate price measurement. In the hospital industry there
are dramatic differences in the costs of serving patients depending on the type of care
they receive.

In the retrospective analyses of hospital mergers researchers devote

substantial effort to controlling for these costs. Otherwise, they would not be able to
determine if prices increased (or decreased) following a merger as a result of an increase
in market power or a change in the composition of the patients treated by the hospital.13
Similarly, airlines charge many different prices for tickets on flights, often in response to
flight specific demand shocks. Researchers must carefully model this variation to avoid
inadvertently attributing a supply or demand shock to a merger effect.

Determining Pre and Post Merger Prices
To measure the price effects of a merger, a researcher must specify the time
periods corresponding to the pre and post merger time period. The goal is to identify a
time period sufficiently long to capture any change in price associated with the change in
market structure, but short enough to avoid any contaminating effects from other changes
in the market. The pre-merger time period corresponds to the period directly proceeding
the date at which firms change their pricing behavior. While the HSR Act requires that
the merging firms to operate independently during the government’s review of the
merger, there is empirical evidence from both the banking (Prager and Hannan, 1998)
and airline (Kim and Singal, 1993) industries that the merging firms increase their prices
before the merger is consummated. In other industries firms may be limited in their
ability to change price for a significant time period following the merger. Hospital
prices, for example, are determined by contracts negotiated between hospitals and
insurance companies for fixed time periods. Following a merger, a hospital’s price will
move to its post-merger level as its contracts with insurers are updated over time. For
12

Taylor and Hosken note that DTW prices fell relative to observed rack prices suggesting that not all
retailers felt a wholesale price increase.
13
This issues is addressed at length in three recent hospital merger retrospectives Hass-Wilson and Garmon
(2009), Tenn (2008), and Thompson (2009).

14

this reason researchers often exclude pricing for some period following a merger to
obtain a more precise measure of the post-merger price, see, for example, Tenn (2009).
In some cases where the merger leads to a discrete change in the level of prices, the event
date might be determined through conventional structural break tests with unknown break
date (see for example Andrews and Ploberger, 1994 and Bai and Perron, 2006).
Alternatively, when the date at which the merged firm begin coordinating their pricing
behavior is unknown and the researcher has a relatively long price series, observations
near the consummation date could be dropped to generate reliable estimates of pre- and
post-merger pricing, see, for example, Ashenfelter and Hosken (2008).

Selection Issues
It is impossible to obtain a representative sample of all mergers because the government
will attempt to block or modify those transactions believed to be anticompetitive. This
creates a challenge to both estimating the effects of a merger on price and evaluating
whether enforcement activity is at its proper level (Carlton, 2008). One approach to
solving this problem is to focus on mergers that appeared to be on the enforcement
margin. This is the approach of Ashenfelter and Hosken (2008). They identified five
consumer product mergers that involved large firms operating in already highly
concentrated industries. While it may be that many approved mergers result in no
competitive harm, four of the five mergers analyzed in their study resulted in moderate
but statistically significant price increases.

IV. Retrospective Studies for Merger Forecast Evaluation
Antitrust policy towards horizontal mergers in the U.S. is largely prospective:
regulators attempt to block those mergers predicted to increase price. A growing number
of papers have estimated the effects of different mergers on prices. Unfortunately, given
the heterogeneity across industries the number of merger retrospectives is far too small to
make any inference on which market characteristics are correlated with price effects. It is
currently impossible to generalize from these studies to aid decision makers in
developing current antitrust policy. Instead, antitrust economists have relied on merger
simulations, financial event studies, and retrospective studies of non-merger changes in

15

market structure to inform antitrust decisions.

All of these approaches require the

validity of some strong assumptions if they are to yield accurate predictions. Existing
retrospective merger studies, however, can be used to evaluate the predictive ability of
these different merger simulation methods. This section describes different methods used
to forecast the effects of mergers and how retrospective evidence can be used to evaluate
them.
When sufficient data is available, economists now commonly estimate static
oligopoly models and then use these models to simulate the unilateral price effects of
mergers in differentiated product markets.

These models focus on the incentive to

increase prices after a merger that results from the internalization of consumer
substitution. Each firm has beliefs about the prices its rivals will choose and picks its
own prices to maximize its profits given those beliefs, which are (in equilibrium) correct.
When considering a price increase firms balance the benefit of larger margins on each
product sold against the cost of lost consumers that switch to another product. It then
follows that if two separate firms respectively sell products that are the first and second
choice of many consumers, a merger reduces the cost of a price increase and hence
results in higher prices. Models that formalize and then quantify this argument are
known as “merger simulations”. This approach was first taken by Baker and Bresnahan
(1985) and, because the key ingredients in these models are consumer substitution
patterns, modified versions have tracked developments in the demand estimation
literature.

Key contributions to the literature include Hausman, Leonard, and Zona

(1994), Werden and Froeb (1994), and Nevo (2000).
Simulating the price effects of a merger requires several strong assumptions.
Formally, the magnitude of the price increase in a unilateral effects model depends upon
assumptions on consumer preferences and how the firms’ cost of producing a unit of its
product varies with total output.

Simulating a merger also requires statistical

assumptions that are necessary to estimate demand functions. In addition, the standard
unilateral effects model also assumes that price is the only locus of competition and that
firms’ pricing decisions are static and thus independent of time. The estimated model of
oligopoly may predict inaccurate price effects of the merger if any of these assumptions
are invalid. Despite the huge amount of resources dedicated to merger review, only two

16

papers have used retrospective evidence to evaluate methods used to simulate mergers.
Both of these papers have data covering a period before and after mergers took place.
Using only pre-merger data that would be available during merger review, the price
effects of the mergers are simulated. Direct retrospective estimates of the mergers are
obtained by adding to the sample post-merger data and the models are evaluated by
comparing the indirect, simulated price effects to the directly estimated retrospective
price effects.
Peters (2006) evaluates merger simulation techniques by comparing the simulated
and direct price changes from airline mergers. He uses two different demand systems for
fares, an assumption that the marginal cost of a fare is constant, and the assumption of
static price competition to simulate 6 airline mergers. While the direction of the bias
depends on which of the two demand systems is used, the direct and the simulated price
changes were on average 10 percentage points different from the actual price changes for
both specifications. Further, the simulations reverse the rank order of observed price
effects.

In his study the merger predicted to generate the largest price increase

(Northwest/Republic) yielded the smallest observed price increase. Similarly the merger
predicted to generate one of the smallest price effects (Continental/People’s Express)
generated the largest price increase.
Weinberg and Hosken (2008) evaluate merger simulations with retrospective
evidence using data before and after two branded consumer product mergers occurred.
They examined the merger of Pennzoil and Quaker State brand motor oils and an
acquisition that combined Log Cabin and Mrs. Butterworth brand breakfast syrups. Both
of these mergers are particularly well suited to the assumptions required by the standard
merger simulation: the products were well known to consumers, and there was no recent
entry, exit, or product repositioning of any importance in either industry. The results are
similar to those of Peters in that the simulations reverse the rank order of the price
effects.

Retrospective evidence reveals the motor oil merger was marginally

anticompetitive while the syrup merger had no impact on prices. The simulated price
changes, on the other hand, were small for the motor oil merger and quite large in many
specifications for the syrup merger.

17

Another method for forecasting the competitive effects of potential mergers is the
financial event study approach of Eckbo (1983) and Stillman (1983). The Eckbo and
Stillman financial event studies of mergers examine the abnormal stock market returns of
close competitors of the merging parties to determine if a merger is anticompetitive or
not. Assuming that financial markets are efficient so current stock prices incorporate all
available information, events that impact the probability of a potential merger occurring
will change current stock market returns in a way that identifies the competitive nature of
the merger. On one hand, an anticompetitive merger will increase rival firms future
profits’ and thus increase the value of their equity. On the other hand, a merger that
lowers the marginal cost functions of the merging firms will decrease rival firms’ future
profits and lower the value of their equity. Therefore financial event studies provide a
forecast of whether a merger will be anticompetitive or not, but do not forecast the
magnitude of the merger’s price effect.
McAfee and Williams (1988) evaluate the ability of financial event studies to
predict whether mergers are anticompetitive with a case study. They analyze the 1979
merger of two microfilm producers, Xidex Corporation and Kalvar Corporation. In an
earlier paper, Barton and Sherman (1984) found that this merger led to large price effects.
Therefore, if the predictions of financial event studies are accurate, pre-merger events
that increased (decreased) the likelihood of the merger occurring should have led to
positive (negative) abnormal returns of rival firms. However, McAfee and Williams find
that in most cases the exact opposite effects were found and that for nearly all
specifications any merger effect from the financial event study was statistically
insignificant.

They argue that financial event studies had little power because the

merging firms in this study received only a small portion (less than 8 percent) of their
total revenues from markets affected by the merger. More evaluation studies like this of
mergers of firms with overlap in product markets accounting for larger portions of their
revenue would be valuable.
In some cases past changes in market structure such as entry and exit of firms
provide an alternative to merger simulation for forecasting the price effects of a merger.
This type of analysis was presented by both parties in the proposed merger between the
office supply retailers Staples and Office Depot and is described in Ashenfelter et al.

18

(2006). The central evidence in this case was that prices were lower in geographic
markets where both Staples and Office Depot operated than in markets in which only one
of the two firms was present. While suggestive, this observation is not persuasive by
itself because whether both Staples and Office Depot or only one of the two were in a
market is likely systematically related to other unobservable determinants of price such as
costs or demand. In light of this, the government used entry and exit to identify the effect
of market structure on price. If Staples would remove Office Depot from markets in
which both firms compete after the merger was completed and there are historical
instances of Office Depot exiting local markets where Staples also competed, then data
on prices across different markets before and after exit occurred can be used to estimate
the merger effect. If entry and exit of Office Depot impact price in equal but opposite
directions, then both entry and exit events could be used. The key assumption needed to
identify the effect of market structure on prices using entry and exit is that all
unobservable determinants of price are constant over time within a market. If a firm
exiting the market affects prices differently from a merger, then entry and exit are not
symmetric, or entry and exit are driven by other unobservable changes in demand or cost
In this situation a study of entry or exit may yield biased estimates of the effect of a
merger on prices. To our knowledge no one has used post merger data to evaluate this
modeling approach.14

V. Conclusions
Effective horizontal merger policy requires antitrust agencies to forecast the
effects of mergers on consumer welfare.

Despite more than thirty years of active

horizontal merger enforcement following the passage of the Hart-Scott-Rodino act, there
is relatively little empirical evidence to guide policy makers on how mergers affect
competition. Antitrust enforcers and the courts largely rely on the testimony of economic
experts, customers, company executives and company documents to forecast the impact
of a merger on consumer welfare. We believe that this information, while extremely
useful, should be supplemented by gathering more evidence on the price effects of
14

In a recent study Manuszak and Moul (2008) also estimate a reduced form pricing equation for Staples
which allows for the endogeniety of market structure and find qualitatively similar results to Ashenfelter et
al.

19

consummated mergers. By focusing on mergers that were on the enforcement margin,
researchers can begin to develop empirical evidence on which types of mergers are likely
to be problematic and can provide useful guidance to aid merger enforcement. More
generally, economists have developed a number of models that predict the competitive
effects of mergers. Merger retrospectives can also be used to evaluate and potentially
improve these tools.

20

References
Andrews, Donald W.K. and Werner Ploberger, “Optimal Tests When a Nuisance
Parameter is Present Only Under the Alternative,” Econometrica, 1994, 62 (6),
1383–1414.
Ashenfelter, Orley C. and Daniel S. Hosken, “The Effect of Mergers on Consumer
Prices: Evidence from Five Selected Case Studies,” NBER Working Paper, 2008,
(W13859).
, David Ashmore, Jonathan Baker, Suzanne Gleason, and Daniel S.
Hosken, “Empirical Methods in Merger Analysis: Econometric Analysis of Pricing in
FTC v. Staples,” International Journal of the Economics of Business, 2006.
Bai, Jushan and Pierre Perron, “Estimating and Testing Linear Models with
Multiple Structural Changes,” Econometrica, 1996, 66 (8), 47–78.
Baker, Jonathan B. and Timothy F. Bresnahan, “The Gains from Merger or
Collusion in Product-differentiated Industries,” Journal of Industrial Economics, June
1985, 33 (4), 427–44.
Barton, David M. and Roger Sherman, “The Price and Profit Effects of Horizontal
Mergers: A Case Study,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 1984, 38 (2), 165–177.
Bulow, Jeremy I., Jeffrey H. Fischer, Jay S. Creswell Jr., and Christopher T.
Taylor, “U.S. Midwest Gasoline Pricing and the Spring 2000 Price Spike,” The
Energy Journal, 2003, 24 (3), 121–149.
Carlton, Dennis, “The Need to Measure the Effect of Merger Policy and How to Do
It,” Competition Policy International, 2009.
Chouinard, Hayley and Jeffrey M. Perloff, “Gasoline Price Differences: Taxes,
Pollution Regulations, Mergers, Market Power, and Market Conditions,” The B.E.
Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, 2009.
Deneckere, Raymond and Carl Davidson, “Incentives to Form Coalitions with
21

Bertrand Competition,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 1985, 16, 473–86.
Eckbo, B. Espen, “Horizontal Mergers, Collusion and Stockholder Wealth,” Journal
of Financial Economics, 1983, 11, 241–273.
FTC, “Gasoline Price Changes: The Dynamic of Supply, Demand, and Competition,”
Technical Report, United States Federal Trade Commission 2005.
GAO, “Effects of Mergers and Market Concentration in the U.S. Petroleum Industry,”
Report to the Ranking Minority Member, Permanent Subcommittee on
Investigations, Committee on Governmental Affairs, U.S. Senate, United States
General Accounting Office May 2004.
Hass-Wilson, Debra and Christopher Garmon, “Two Hospital Mergers on
Chicago’s North Shore: A Retrospective Study,” Bureau of Economics Working
Paper, Fedral Trade Commission 2009.
Hastings, Justine S., “Vertical Relationships and Competition in Retail Gasoline
Markets: Empirical Evidence from Contract Changes in Southern California,”
American Economic Review, March 2004, 94 (1), 317–328.
and Richard J. Gilbert, “Market Power, Vertical Integration, and the Wholesale
Price of Gasoline,” Journal of Industrial Economics, December 2005, 53 (4), 469–492.
Hausman, Jerry A., Gregory K. Leonard, and J. Douglas Zona, “Competitive
Analysis with Differentiated Products,” Annales D’Economie et de Statistique, 1994,
34 (1), 159–180.
Hunter, Graeme, Gregory K. Leonard, and Steven Olley, “Merger Retrospective
Studies: A Review,” Antitrust, 2008, 23, 34–41.
Kim, E. Han and Vijay Singal, “Mergers and Market Power: Evidence from the
U.S. Airline Industry,” American Economic Review, 1993, 83, 549–569.
Manuszak, Mark D. and Charles C. Moul, “Prices and Endogenous Market
Structure in Office Supply Superstores,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 2008, 56.

22

McAfee, R.P. and M.A. Williams, “Can Event Studies Detect Anticompetitive
Mergers?,” Economics Letters, 1988, 28, 199–203.
Nevo, Aviv, “Mergers with Differentiated Products: The Case of the Ready-to-Eat
Cereal Industry,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 2000, 31 (3), 395–421.
Pautler, Paul, “Evidence on Mergers and Acquisitions,” Antitrust Bulletin, 2003, 48
(1), 119.
Peters, Craig, “Evaluating the Performance of Merger Simulations: Evidence from the
U.S. Airline Industry,” Journal of Law and Economics, 2006, 49, 627–649.
Prager, Robin A. and Timothy H. Hannan, “Do Substantial Horizontal Mergers
Generate Significant Price Effects? Evidence from the Banking Industry,” Journal of
Industrial Economics, December 1998, 46 (4), 433–52.
Simpson, John and Christopher T. Taylor, “Do Gasoline Mergers Affect
Consumer Prices? The Marathon Ashland Petroleum and Ultramar Diamond
Shamrock Transaction,” Journal of Law and Economics, 2008, 51 (1), 135–52.
Stillman, R., “Examining Antitrust Policy Towards Horizontal Mergers,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 1983, 11, 225–240.
Taylor, Christopher T. and Daniel S. Hosken, “The Economic Effects of the
Marathon-Ashland Joint Venture: The Importance of Industry Supply Shocks and
Vertical Market Structure,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 09 2007, 55 (3), 419–451.
Tenn, Steven, “The Price Effects of Hospital Mergers: A Case Study of the
Sutter-Summit Transaction,” Bureau of Economics Working Paper, Fedral Trade
Commission 2008.
Thompson, Aileen, “The Effects of Hospital Mergers on Inpatient Prices: A Case
Study of the New Hanover Cape Fear Transaction,” Bureau of Economics Working
Paper, Fedral Trade Commission 2009.
Weinberg, Matthew C., “The Price Effects of Horizontal Mergers,” Journal of

23

Competition Law and Economics, July 2008, 4 (2), 433–47.
and Daniel Hosken, “Using Mergers to Test a Model of Oligopoly,” Working
Paper, University of Georgia 2008.
Werden, Gregory J. and Luke M. Froeb, “The Effects of Mergers in Differentiated
Products Industries: Logit Demand and Merger Policy,” Journal of Law, Economics
and Organization, October 1994, 10 (2), 407–26.

24

