NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MAXING OUT: STOCKS AS LOTTERIES AND THE CROSS-SECTION OF EXPECTED
RETURNS
Turan G. Bali
Nusret Cakici
Robert F. Whitelaw
Working Paper 14804
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14804

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2009

We would like to thank Yakov Amihud, Xavier Gabaix, Daniel Smith, Jeff Wurgler, and seminar participants
at HEC Paris, INSEAD, New York University and Simon Fraser University for helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Turan G. Bali, Nusret Cakici, and Robert F. Whitelaw. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Maxing Out: Stocks as Lotteries and the Cross-Section of Expected Returns
Turan G. Bali, Nusret Cakici, and Robert F. Whitelaw
NBER Working Paper No. 14804
March 2009
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
Motivated by existing evidence of a preference among investors for assets with lottery-like payoffs
and that many investors are poorly diversified, we investigate the significance of extreme positive
returns in the cross-sectional pricing of stocks. Portfolio-level analyses and firm-level cross-sectional
regressions indicate a negative and significant relation between the maximum daily return over the
past one month (MAX) and expected stock returns. Average raw and risk-adjusted return differences
between stocks in the lowest and highest MAX deciles exceed 1% per month. These results are robust
to controls for size, book-to-market, momentum, short-term reversals, liquidity, and skewness. Of
particular interest, including MAX reverses the puzzling negative relation between returns and idiosyncratic
volatility recently documented in Ang et al. (2006, 2008).

Turan G. Bali
Baruch College
Zicklin School of Business
One Bernard Baruch Way
Box 10-225
New York, NY 10010
turan_bali@baruch.cuny.edu
Nusret Cakici
Graduate School of Business
Fordham University
1790 Broadway
New York, NY 10019
cakici@fordham.edu

Robert F. Whitelaw
New York University
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
rwhitela@stern.nyu.edu

1

I. Introduction
What determines the cross-section of expected stock returns? This question has been central to
modern financial economics since the path breaking work of Sharpe (1964), Lintner (1965), and Mossin
(1966). Much of this work has focused on the joint distribution of individual stock returns and the market
portfolio as the determinant of expected returns. In the classic CAPM setting, i.e., with either quadratic
preferences or normally distributed returns, expected returns on individual stocks are determined by the
covariance of their returns with the market portfolio. Introducing a preference for skewness leads to the
three moment CAPM of Kraus and Litzenberger (1976), which has received empirical support in the
literature as, for example, in Harvey and Siddique (2000) and Smith (2007).
Diversification plays a critical role in these models due to the desire of investors to avoid variance
risk, i.e., to diversify away idiosyncratic volatility, yet a closer examination of the portfolios of individual
investors suggests that these investors are, in general, not well-diversified. 1 There may be plausible
explanations for this lack of diversification, 2 but nevertheless this empirical phenomenon suggests
looking more closely at the distribution of individual stock returns rather than just co-moments as
potential determinants of the cross-section of expected returns.
There is also evidence that investors have a preference for lottery-like assets, i.e., assets that have
a relatively small probability of a large payoff. Two prominent examples are the favorite-longshot bias in
horsetrack betting, i.e., the phenomenon that the expected return per dollar wagered tends to increase
monotonically with the probability of the horse winning, and the popularity of lottery games despite the
prevalence of negative expected returns.3 Interestingly, in the latter case, there is increasing evidence that
it is the degree of skewness in the payoffs that appeals to participants, although there are alternative
explanations.4
Motivated by these two literatures, we examine the role of extreme positive returns in the crosssectional pricing of stocks. Specifically, we sort stocks by their maximum daily return during the previous
month and examine the monthly returns on the resulting portfolios over the period July 1962 to December
2005. For value-weighted decile portfolios, the difference between returns on the portfolios with the

1

See, for example, Odean (1999), Mitton and Vorkink (2007), and Goetzmann and Kumar (2008) for evidence
based on the portfolios of a large sample of U.S. individual investors. Calvet, Campbell and Sodini (2007) present
evidence on the underdiversification of Swedish households, which can also be substantial, although the associated
welfare costs for the median household appear to be small.
2
See, for example, Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2008) for a model that generates under-diversification as a
result of the returns to specialization in information acquisition.
3
See Thaler and Ziemba (1988) for a survey of the literature detailing the anomalies associated with these
phenomena.
4
See, for example, Garrett and Sobel (1999) and Walker and Young (2001) on the skewness issue. As an example of
an alternative explanation, Patel and Subrahmanyam (1978) provide a model based on lumpiness in the goods
market.

2

highest and lowest maximum daily returns is –1.03%. The corresponding Fama-French-Carhart fourfactor alpha is –1.18%. Both return differences are statistically significant at all standard significance
levels. In addition, the results are robust to sorting stocks not only on the single maximum daily return
during the month, but also the average of the two, three, four or five highest daily returns within the
month. This evidence suggests that investors may be willing to pay more for stocks that exhibit extreme
positive returns, and thus these stocks exhibit lower returns in the future.
This interpretation is consistent with cumulative prospect theory (Tversky and Kahneman (1992))
as modeled in Barberis and Huang (2008). Errors in the probability weighting of investors cause them to
over-value stocks that have a small probability of a large positive return. It is also consistent with the
optimal beliefs framework of Brunnermeier, Gollier and Parker (2007). In this model, agents optimally
choose to distort their beliefs about future probabilities in order to maximize their current utility. Critical
to these interpretations of the empirical evidence, stocks with extreme positive returns in a given month
should also be more likely to exhibit this phenomenon in the future. We confirm this persistence, showing
that stocks in the top decile in one month have a 35% probability of being in the top decile in the
subsequent month and an almost 70% probability of being in one of the top three deciles. Moreover,
maximum daily returns exhibit substantial persistence in firm-level cross-sectional regressions, even after
controlling for a variety of other firm-level variables.
Not surprisingly, the stocks with the most extreme positive returns are not representative of the
full universe of equities. For example, they tend to be small, illiquid securities with high returns in the
portfolio formation month and low returns over the prior 11 months. To ensure that it is not these
characteristics, rather than the extreme returns, that are driving the documented return differences, we
perform a battery of bivariate sorts and re-examine the raw return and alpha differences. The results are
robust to sorts on size, book-to-market ratio, momentum, short-term reversals, and illiquidity. Results
from cross-sectional regressions corroborate this evidence.
Are there alternative interpretations of this apparently robust empirical phenomenon? Recent
papers by Ang et al. (2006, 2008) document the anomalous finding that stocks with high idiosyncratic
volatility have low subsequent returns. It is no surprise that the stocks with extreme positive returns also
have high idiosyncratic (and total) volatility when measured over the same time period. This positive
correlation is partially by construction, since realized monthly volatility is calculated as the sum of
squared daily returns, but even excluding the day with the largest return in the volatility calculation only
reduces this association slightly. Could the maximum return simply be proxying for idiosyncratic
volatility? We investigate this question using two methodologies, bivariate sorts on extreme returns and
idiosyncratic volatility and firm-level cross-sectional regressions. The conclusion is that not only is the
effect of extreme positive returns we document robust to controls for idiosyncratic volatility, but that this

3

effect reverses the idiosyncratic volatility effect documented in Ang et al. (2006, 2008). When sorted first
on maximum returns, the equal-weighted return difference between high and low idiosyncratic portfolios
is positive and both economically and statistically significant. In a cross-sectional regression context,
when both variables are included, the coefficient on the maximum return is negative and significant while
that on idiosyncratic volatility is positive, albeit insignificant in some specifications. These results are
consistent with our preferred explanation—poorly diversified investors dislike idiosyncratic volatility,
like lottery-like payoffs, and influence prices and hence future returns.
A slightly different interpretation of our evidence is that extreme positive returns proxy for
skewness, and investors exhibit a preference for skewness. For example, Mitton and Vorkink (2007)
develop a model of agents with heterogeneous skewness preferences and show that the result is an
equilibrium in which idiosyncratic skewness is priced. However, we show that the extreme return effect is
robust to controls for total and idiosyncratic skewness and to the inclusion of a measure of expected as in
Boyer, Mitton and Vorkink (2008). It is also unaffected by controls for co-skewness, i.e., the contribution
of an asset to the skewness of a well-diversified portfolio.
A further interesting question is whether the effect of extreme positive returns could be a result of
investor over-reaction to firm-specific good news. As this over-reaction is reversed, returns in the
subsequent month would be lower than justified by the operative model of risk and return. This
hypothesis is difficult to reject definitively, but it does seem to be inconsistent with the existing literature.
In particular, the preponderance of existing evidence indicates that stocks under-react not over-react to
firm specific news.5 One prominent and relevant example is the post-earnings announcement drift
phenomenon, wherein the stock price continues to drift in the same direction as the price move at the
earnings announcement.6 Thus, if the extreme positive returns were caused by good earnings news, we
should expect to see under-reaction not over-reaction. In fact, given that some of the firms in our high
maximum return portfolio are undoubtedly there because of price moves on earnings announcement days,
the low future returns are actually reduced in magnitude by this effect.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II provides the univariate portfolio-level analysis, and
the bivariate analyses and firm-level cross-sectional regressions that examine a comprehensive list of
control variables. Section III focuses more specifically on extreme returns and idiosyncratic volatility.
Section IV presents results for skewness and extreme returns. Section V provides further robustness
checks, and Section VI concludes.

5

See Daniel, Hirshleifer and Subrahmanyam (1998) for a survey of some of this literature. However, Chan (2003)
presents evidence that monthly returns exhibit reversals not continuation if the original price movements are not
accompanied by a public release of news.
6
See Bernard and Thomas (1989) and many subsequent papers.

4

II. Extreme Positive Returns and the Cross-Section of Expected Returns
A. Data
The first dataset includes all New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), American Stock Exchange
(AMEX), and NASDAQ financial and nonfinancial firms from the Center for Research in Security Prices
(CRSP) for the period from January 1926 through December 2005. We use daily stock returns to calculate
the maximum daily stock returns for each firm in each month as well as such variables as the market beta,
idiosyncratic volatility, and various skewness measures; we use monthly returns to calculate proxies for
intermediate-term momentum and short-term reversals; we use volume data to calculate a measure of
illiquidity; and we use share prices and shares outstanding to calculate market capitalization. The second
dataset is COMPUSTAT, which is used to obtain the equity book values for calculating the book-tomarket ratios of individual firms. These variables are defined in detail in the Appendix and are discussed
as they are used in the analysis.

B. Univariate Portfolio-Level Analysis
Table I presents the value-weighted and equal-weighted average monthly returns of decile
portfolios that are formed by sorting the NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ stocks based on the maximum daily
return within the previous month (MAX). The results are reported for the sample period July 1962 to
December 2005. We start the sample in July 1962 for the analysis because this starting point corresponds
to that used in much of the literature on the cross-section of expected returns; however, the results are
similar using the sample starting in January 1926. The results are also robust within subsamples of the
1962-2005 sample. For brevity, none of these robustness checks are reported in detail in the paper.
Portfolio 1 (low MAX) is the portfolio of stocks with the lowest maximum daily returns during
the past month, and portfolio 10 (high MAX) is the portfolio of stocks with the highest maximum daily
returns during the previous month. The value-weighted average raw return difference between decile 10
(high MAX) and decile 1 (low MAX) is –1.03% per month with a corresponding Newey-West (1987) tstatistic of –2.83. In addition to the average raw returns, Table I also presents the magnitude and statistical
significance of the difference in intercepts (Fama-French-Carhart four factor alphas) from the regression
of the value-weighted portfolio returns on a constant, the excess market return, a size factor (SMB), a
book-to-market factor (HML), and a momentum factor (MOM), following Fama and French (1993) and
Carhart (1997).7 As shown in the last row of Table I, the difference in alphas between the high MAX and
low MAX portfolios is –1.18% per month with a Newey-West t-statistic of –4.71. This difference is
economically significant and statistically significant at all conventional levels.
7

SMB (small minus big), HML (high minus low), and MOM (winner minus loser) are described in and obtained
from Kenneth French’s data library: http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/.

5

Taking a closer look at the value-weighted averages returns across deciles, it is clear that the
pattern is not one of a uniform decline as MAX increases. The average returns of deciles 1 to 7 are
approximately the same, in the range of 1.00% to 1.16% per month, but, going from decile 7 to decile 10,
average returns drop significantly, from 1.00% to 0.86%, 0.52% and then to –0.02% per month.
Interestingly, the reverse of this pattern is evident across the deciles in the average across months of the
average maximum daily return of the stocks within each decile. By definition, this average increases
monotonically from deciles 1 to 10, but this increase is far more dramatic for deciles 8, 9 and 10. These
deciles contain stocks with average maximum daily returns of 9%, 12%, and 24%, respectively. Given a
preference for upside potential, investors may be willing to pay more for, and accept lower expected
returns on, assets with these extremely high positive returns. In other words, it is conceivable that
investors view these stocks as valuable lottery-like assets, with a small chance of a large gain.
As shown in the second column of Table I, similar, although somewhat less economically and
statistically significant results, are obtained for the returns on equal-weighted portfolios. The average raw
return difference between the low MAX and high MAX portfolios is –0.65% per month with a t-statistic
of –1.83. The corresponding difference in alphas is –0.66% per month with a t-statistic of –2.31. As with
the value-weighted returns, it is the extreme deciles, in this case deciles 9 and 10, that exhibit low future
returns.
While conditioning on the single day with the maximum return is both simple and intuitive as a
proxy for extreme positive returns, it is also slightly arbitrary. As an alternative we also rank stocks by the
average of the N (N=1, 2, …, 5) highest daily returns within the month, with the results reported in Table
II. As before, we report the difference between the returns and alphas on the deciles of firms with the
highest and lowest average daily returns over the prior month. For ease of comparison we report the
results from Table I in the first column (N=1). For both the value-weighted returns (Panel A) and the
equal-weighted returns (Panel B) the returns patterns when sorting on average returns over multiple days
are similar to those when sorting on the single maximum daily return. In fact, if anything, the raw return
and alpha differences are both economically and statistically more significant as we average over more
days. For example, for value-weighted returns these differences increase in magnitude from –1.03 and
–1.18 for N=1 to –1.23 and –1.32 for N=5. However, for simplicity we focus on the single day measures
in the remainder of the paper except in cases where the multiple day averages are needed to illustrate or
illuminate a point.
Of course, the maximum daily returns documented in Table I and those underlying the portfolio
sorts in Table II are for the portfolio formation month, not for the subsequent month over which we
measure average returns. Investors may pay high prices for stocks that have exhibited extreme positive
returns in the past in the expectation that this behavior will be repeated in the future, but a natural

6

question is whether these expectations are rational. Table III investigates this issue by presenting the
average month-to-month portfolio transition matrix. Specifically, it presents the average probability that a
stock in decile i (defined by the rows) in one month will be in decile j (defined by the columns) in the
subsequent month. If maximum daily returns were completely random, then all the probabilities should be
approximately 10%, since a high or low maximum return in one month should say nothing about the
maximum return in the following month. Instead, all the diagonal elements of the transition matrix exceed
10%, illustrating that MAX is persistent. Of greater importance, this persistence is especially strong for
the extreme portfolios. Stocks in decile 10 have a 35% chance of appearing in the same decile next
month. Moreover, they have a 68% probability of being in deciles 8-10, all of which exhibit high
maximum daily returns in the portfolio formation month and low returns in the subsequent month.
A slightly different way to examine the persistence of extreme positive daily returns is to look at
firm-level cross-sectional regressions of MAX on lagged predictor variables. Specifically, for each month
in the sample we run a regression across firms of the maximum daily return within that month on the
maximum daily return from the previous month and six lagged control variables that are defined in the
Appendix and discussed in more detail later—the market beta (BETA), the market capitalization (SIZE),
the book-to-market ratio (BM), the return in the previous month (REV), the return over the 11 months
prior to that month (MOM), and a measure of illiquidity (ILLIQ). Table IV reports the average crosssectional coefficients from these regressions and the Newey-West (1987) adjusted t-statistics. In the
univariate regression of MAX on lagged MAX, the coefficient is positive, quite large, and extremely
statistically significant, and the R-squared of over 16% indicates substantial cross-sectional explanatory
power. In other words, stocks with extreme positive daily returns in one month also tend to exhibit similar
features in the following month. When the six control variables are added to the regression, the coefficient
on lagged MAX remains large and significant.
As a final check on the return characteristics of stocks with extreme positive returns, we examine
more closely the distribution of monthly returns on stocks in the high MAX and low MAX portfolios.
Tables I and II report the mean returns on these stocks, and Tables III and IV document that the presence,
or absence, of extreme positive returns is persistent, but what are the other features of the return
distribution?
Table V presents descriptive statistics for the approximately 240,000 monthly returns on stocks
within the two extreme deciles in the post-formation month. The mean returns are almost identical to
those reported in Table I for the equal-weighted portfolio. The slight difference is attributable to the fact
that Table I reports averages of returns across equal-weighted portfolios that contain slightly different
numbers of stocks, whereas Table V weights all returns equally. In addition to having a lower average
return, high MAX stocks display significantly higher volatility and more positive skewness. The

7

percentiles of the return distribution illustrate the upper tail behavior. While median returns on high MAX
stocks are lower, the returns at the 90th, 95th and 99th percentiles are more than twice as large as those for
low MAX stocks. Clearly, high MAX stocks exhibit higher probabilities of extreme positive returns in the
following month. The percentiles of the distribution are robust to outliers, but the moments are not, so in
the final two columns we report statistics for returns where the 0.5% most extreme returns in both tails
have been eliminated. While means, standard deviations and skewness for the trimmed distributions fall,
the relative ordering remains—high MAX stocks have lower means, but higher volatilities and skewness
than their low MAX counterparts in the subsequent month.
The complete distribution of returns on stocks in these portfolios is presented in Figure 1, where
the numbers on the horizontal axis give the center of the return ranges, each of which spans 5%. For
example, the columns above the number 5% represent the percentage of returns that fall between 2.5%
and 7.5% for the high MAX and low MAX portfolios. The exceptions are the columns on the far left and
far right which tabulate percentages of returns that fall within and below or above the range, respectively.
It is clear from this plot that high MAX stocks provide a greater probability of a large positive return. For
monthly returns in any range above 12.5%, high MAX stocks appear more frequently than low MAX
stocks. Moreover, the relative probability increases as the returns become more extreme. Large negative
returns are also more likely on high MAX stocks due to their higher volatility, and we will return to a
closer examination of the role of volatility in Section III.
We do not measure investor expectations directly, but the results documented in Tables III, IV
and V and Figure 1 are certainly consistent with the underlying theory about preferences for stocks with
extreme positive returns. While MAX measures the propensity for a stock to deliver lottery-like payoffs
in the portfolio formation month, these stocks continue to exhibit this behavior in the future.
To get a clearer picture of the composition of the high MAX portfolios, Table VI presents
summary statistics for the stocks in the deciles. Specifically, the table reports the average across the
months in the sample of the median values within each month of various characteristics for the stocks in
each decile. We report values for the maximum daily return (in percent), the market beta, the market
capitalization (in millions of dollars), the book-to-market (BM) ratio, a measure of illiquidity (scaled by
105), the price (in dollars), the return in the portfolio formation month (REV), and the return over the 11
months prior to portfolio formation (MOM).8 Definitions of these variables are given in the Appendix.
The portfolios exhibit some striking patterns. As we move from the low MAX to the high MAX
decile, the average across months of the median daily maximum return of stocks increases from 1.62% to

8

The qualitative results from the average statistics are very similar to those obtained from the median statistics.
Since the median is a robust measure of the center of the distribution that is less sensitive to outliers than the mean,
we choose to present the median statistics in Table VI.

8

17.77%. With the exception of decile 10, these values are similar to those reported in Table I for the
average maximum daily return. For decile 10, the average maximum return exceeds the median by
approximately 6%. The distribution of maximum daily returns is clearly right skewed, with some stocks
exhibiting very high returns. These outliers are not a problem in the portfolio-level analysis, but we will
revisit this issue in the firm-level, cross-sectional regressions.
Betas are calculated monthly using a regression of daily excess stock returns on daily excess
market returns; thus, these values are clearly noisy estimates of the true betas. Nevertheless, the
monotonic increase in beta as MAX increases does suggest that stocks with high maximum daily returns
are more exposed to market risk. To the extent that market risk explains the cross-section of expected
returns, this relation between MAX and beta serves only to emphasize the low raw returns earned by the
high MAX stocks as documented in Table I. The difference in 4-factor alphas should control for this
effect, which partially explains why this difference is larger than the difference in the raw returns.
As MAX and beta increase across the deciles, market capitalization decreases. The absolute
numbers are difficult to interpret since market capitalizations go up over time, but the relative values
indicate that the high MAX portfolios are dominated by smaller stocks. This pattern is good news for the
raw return differences documented in Table I since, as with beta, the concentration of small stocks in the
high MAX deciles would suggest that these portfolios should earn a return premium not the return
discount observed in the data. Again, this phenomenon may partially explain why the alpha difference
exceeds the difference in raw returns.
Median book-to-market ratios are similar across the portfolios, although if anything high MAX
portfolios do have a slight value tilt.
In contrast, the liquidity differences are substantial. Our measure of illiquidity is the absolute
return over the month divided by the monthly trading volume, which captures the notion of price impact,
i.e., the extent to which trading moves prices (see Amihud (2002)). We use monthly returns over monthly
trading volume, rather than a monthly average of daily values of the same quantity, because a significant
fraction of stocks have days with no trade. Eliminating these stocks from the sample reduces the sample
size with little apparent change in the empirical results. Based on this monthly measure, illiquidity
increases quite dramatically for the high MAX deciles, consistent with these portfolios containing smaller
stocks. Again, this pattern only serves to strengthen the raw return differences documented in Table I
since these stocks should earn a higher return to compensate for their illiquidity. Moreover, the 4-factor
alphas do not control for this effect except to the extent that the size and book-to-market factors also
proxy for liquidity.
The small, relatively illiquid stocks in the high MAX portfolios also tend to have low prices,
declining to a median price of $6.47 for decile 10. While this pattern is not surprising, it does suggest that

9

there may be measurement issues with some low priced stocks in the higher MAX portfolios associated
with microstructure phenomena. To eliminate the possibility that these measurement errors are driving the
results, we repeat the analysis in Table I excluding all stocks with prices below $5/share. For brevity, we
do not report these results in detail, but, not surprisingly, the value-weighted results are essentially
unchanged because the low priced stocks also tend to be those with low market capitalizations. Of greater
interest, for the equal-weighted portfolios, the raw return and alpha differences increase in magnitude to
–0.71% and –0.81% per month, respectively, with a corresponding increase in the associated t-statistics.
The final 2 columns of Table VI report median returns in the portfolio formation month (REV)
and the return over the previous 11 months (MOM). These two variables indicate the extent to which the
portfolios are subject to short-term reversal and intermediate-term momentum effects, respectively.
Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) and subsequent papers show that over intermediate horizons, stocks exhibit
a continuation pattern, i.e., past winners continue to do well and past losers continue to perform badly.
Over shorter horizons stocks exhibit return reversals, due partly to microstructure effects such as bid-ask
bounce (Jegadeesh (1990) and Lehmann (1990)).
Given that the portfolios are sorted on maximum daily returns, it is hardly surprising that median
returns in the same month are also high, i.e., stocks with a high maximum daily return also have a high
return that month. More interesting is the fact that the differences in median monthly returns for the
portfolios of interest are smaller than the differences in the median MAX. For example, the difference in
MAX between deciles 9 and 10 is 6.8% relative to a difference in monthly returns of 5.2%. In other
words, the extreme daily returns on the lottery-like stocks are offset to some extent by lower returns on
other days. This phenomenon explains why these same stocks can have lower average returns in the
subsequent month (Table I) even though they continue to exhibit a higher frequency of extreme positive
returns (Tables III, IV and V).
This lower average return is also mirrored in the returns over the prior 11 months. The high MAX
portfolios exhibit significantly lower and even negative returns over the period prior to the portfolio
formation month. The strength of this relation is perhaps surprising, but it is consistent with the fact that
stocks with extreme positive daily returns are small and have low prices.
Given these differing characteristics, there is some concern that the 4-factor model used in Table I
to calculate alphas is not adequate to capture the true difference in risk and expected returns across the
portfolios sorted on MAX. For example, the HML and SMB factors of Fama and French do not fully
explain the returns of portfolios sorted by book-to-market ratios and size. 9 Moreover, the 4-factor model
does not control explicitly for the differences in expected returns due to differences in illiquidity or other
9

Daniel and Titman (1997) attribute this failure to the fact that returns are driven by characteristics not risk. We take
no stand on this issue, but instead conduct a further battery of tests to demonstrate the robustness of our results.

10

known empirical phenomenon such as short-term reversals. With the exception of short-term reversals
and intermediate-term momentum, it seems unlikely that any of these factors can explain the return
differences in Table I because high MAX stocks have characteristics that are usually associated with high
expected returns, while these portfolios actually exhibit low returns. Nevertheless, in the following two
subsections we provide different ways of dealing with the potential interaction of the maximum daily
return with firm size, book-to-market, liquidity, and past returns. Specifically, we test whether the
negative relation between MAX and the cross-section of expected returns still holds once we control for
size, book-to-market, momentum, short-term reversal and liquidity using bivariate portfolio sorts and
Fama-MacBeth (1973) regressions.

C. Bivariate Portfolio-Level Analysis
In this section we examine the relation between maximum daily returns and future stock returns
after controlling for size, book-to-market, momentum, short-term reversals, and liquidity. For example,
we control for size by first forming decile portfolios ranked based on market capitalization. Then, within
each size decile, we sort stocks into decile portfolios ranked based on MAX so that decile 1 (decile 10)
contains stocks with the lowest (highest) MAX. For brevity, we do not report returns for all 100 (10 × 10)
portfolios. Instead, the first column of Table VII, Panel A presents returns averaged across the 10 size
deciles to produce decile portfolios with dispersion in MAX, but which contain all sizes of firms. This
procedure creates a set of MAX portfolios with very similar levels of firm size, and thus these MAX
portfolios control for differences in size. After controlling for size, the value-weighted average return
difference between the low MAX and high MAX portfolios is about –1.22% per month with a NeweyWest t-statistic of –4.49. The 10-1 difference in the 4-factor alphas is –1.19% per month with a t-statistic
of –5.98. Thus, market capitalization does not explain the high (low) returns to low (high) MAX stocks.
The fact that these results are, if anything, both economically and statistically more significant
than those presented for the univariate sort in Table I is perhaps not too surprising. As shown in Table VI,
the high MAX stocks, which have low subsequent returns, are generally small stocks. The standard size
effect would suggest that these stocks should have high returns. Thus, controlling for size should enhance
the effect on raw returns and even on 4-factor alphas to the extent that the SMB factor is an imperfect
proxy. However, there is a second effect of bivariate sorts that works in the opposite direction. Size and
MAX are correlated; hence, variation in MAX within size-sorted portfolios is smaller than in the broader
universe of stocks. That this smaller variation in MAX still generates substantial return variation is further
evidence of the significance of this phenomenon.
We control for book-to-market (BM) in a similar way, with the results reported in the second
column of Table VII, Panel A. Again the effect of MAX is preserved, with a value-weighted average raw

11

return difference between the low MAX and high MAX deciles of –0.93% per month and a corresponding
t-statistic of –3.23. The 10-1 difference in the 4-factor alphas is also negative, –1.06% per month, and
highly significant.
When controlling for momentum in column 3, the raw return and alpha differences are smaller in
magnitude, but they are still economically large and statistically significant at all conventional levels.
Again, the fact that momentum and MAX are correlated reduces the dispersion in maximum daily returns
across the MAX portfolios, but intermediate-term continuation does not explain the phenomenon we
document.
Column 4 controls for short-term reversals. Since firms with large positive daily returns also tend
to have high monthly returns, it is conceivable that MAX could be proxying for the well known reversal
phenomenon at the monthly frequency, which we do not control for in the 4-factor model in Table I.
However, this is not the case. After controlling for the magnitude of the monthly return in the portfolio
formation month, the return and alpha differences are still 81 and 98 basis points, respectively, and both
numbers exhibit strong statistical significance.
Short-term reversals are attributable, in part, to market microstructure effects such as bid-ask
bounce. It is conceivable that the monthly return reversals we control for using the variable REV do not
adequately capture these short-term effects. To verify that it is not daily or weekly microstructure effects
that are driving our results, we subdivide the high MAX portfolio according to when in the month the
maximum daily return occurs. If the effect we document is more prominent for stocks whose maximum
return occurs towards the end of the month, it would cast doubt on our interpretation of the evidence.
There is no evidence of this phenomenon. Moreover, the low returns associated with high MAX stocks
persist beyond the first month after portfolio formation. Thus, short-term reversals at the daily, weekly or
monthly frequency do not seem to explain the results.
Finally, we control for liquidity by first forming decile portfolios ranked based on the illiquidity
measure of Amihud (2002), with the results reported in final column of Table VII. Again, variation in
MAX is apparently priced in the cross-section, with large return differences and corresponding t-statistics.
Thus, liquidity does not explain the negative relation between maximum daily returns and future stock
returns.
Next, we turn to an examination of the equal-weighted average raw and risk-adjusted returns on
MAX portfolios after controlling for the same cross-sectional effects as in Table VII, Panel A. Again, to
save space, instead of presenting the returns of all 100 (10 × 10) portfolios for each control variable, we
report the average returns of the MAX portfolios, averaged across the 10 control deciles to produce decile
portfolios with dispersion in MAX but with similar levels of the control variable.

12

Table VII, Panel B shows that after controlling for size, book-to-market, momentum, short-term
reversal, and liquidity, the equal-weighted average return differences between the low MAX and high
MAX portfolios are –1.11%, –0.59%, –0.76%, –0.83%, and –0.81% per month, respectively. These
average raw return differences are both economically and statistically significant. The corresponding
values for the equal-weighted average risk-adjusted return differences are –1.06%, –0.54%, –0.88%,
–0.02%, and –0.79%, which are also highly significant.
These results indicate that for both the value-weighted and the equal-weighted portfolios, the
well-known cross-sectional effects such as size, book-to-market, momentum, short-term reversal, and
liquidity can not explain the low returns to high MAX stocks.

D. Firm-Level Cross-Sectional Regressions
So far we have tested the significance of the maximum daily return as a determinant of the crosssection of future returns at the portfolio level. This portfolio-level analysis has the advantage of being
non-parametric in the sense that we do not impose a functional form on the relation between MAX and
future returns. The portfolio-level analysis also has two potentially significant disadvantages. First, it
throws away a large amount of information in the cross-section via aggregation. Second, it is a difficult
setting in which to control for multiple effects or factors simultaneously. Consequently, we now examine
the cross-sectional relation between MAX and expected returns at the firm level using Fama and MacBeth
(1973) regressions.
We present the time-series averages of the slope coefficients from the regressions of stock returns
on maximum daily return (MAX), market beta (BETA), log market capitalization (SIZE), log book-tomarket ratio (BM), momentum (MOM), short-term reversal (REV), and illiquidity (ILLIQ). The average
slopes provide standard Fama-MacBeth tests for determining which explanatory variables on average
have non-zero premiums. Monthly cross-sectional regressions are run for the following econometric
specification and nested versions thereof:

Ri ,t +1 = λ0,t + λ1,t MAX i ,t + λ 2,t BETAi ,t + λ3,t SIZEi ,t + λ 4,t BM i ,t + λ5,t MOM i ,t
+ λ 6,t REVi ,t + λ7 ,t ILLIQi ,t + ε i ,t +1

(1)

where Ri ,t +1 is the realized return on stock i in month t+1. The predictive cross-sectional regressions are
run on the one-month lagged values of MAX, BETA, SIZE, BM, REV, and ILLIQ, and MOM is
calculated over the 11-month period ending 2 months prior to the return of interest.
Table VIII reports the time series averages of the slope coefficients λi,t (i = 1, 2, …, 7) over the
522 months from July 1962 to December 2005 for all NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ stocks. The Newey-West
adjusted t-statistics are given in parentheses. The univariate regression results show a negative and

13

statistically significant relation between the maximum daily return and the cross-section of future stock
returns. The average slope, λ1,t, from the monthly regressions of realized returns on MAX alone is
–0.0434 with a t-statistic of –2.92. The economic magnitude of the associated effect is similar to that
documented in Tables I and VII for the univariate and bivariate sorts. The spread in median maximum
daily returns between deciles 10 and 1 is approximately 16%. Multiplying this spread by the average
slope yields an estimate of the monthly risk premium of –69 basis points.
In general, the coefficients on the individual control variables are also as expected—the size
effect is negative and significant, the value effect is positive and significant, stocks exhibit intermediateterm momentum and short-term reversals, and illiquidity is priced. The average slope on BETA is
negative and statistically insignificant, which contradicts the implications of the CAPM but is consistent
with prior empirical evidence. In any case, these results should be interpreted with caution since BETA is
estimated over a month using daily data, and thus is subject to a significant amount of measurement error.
The regression with all 6 control variables shows similar results, although the size effect is weaker.
Of primary interest is the last line of Table VIII, which shows the results for the full specification
with MAX and the 6 control variables. In this specification the average slope coefficient on MAX is
–0.0662, substantially larger than in the univariate regression, with a commensurate increase in the tstatistic to –6.62. This coefficient corresponds to a 106 basis point difference in expected monthly returns
between median stocks in the high and low MAX deciles. The explanation for the increased magnitude of
the estimated effect in the full specification is straightforward. Since stocks with high maximum daily
returns tend to be small and illiquid, controlling for the increased expected return associated with these
characteristics pushes the return premium associated with extreme positive return stocks even lower.
These effects more than offset the reverse effect associated with intermediate-term momentum and shortterm reversals, which partially explain the low future returns on high MAX stocks.
The strength of the results is somewhat surprising given that there are sure to be low-priced,
thinly traded stocks within our sample whose daily returns will be exhibit noise due to microstructure and
other effects. To confirm this intuition, we re-run the cross-sectional regressions after winsorizing MAX
at the 99th and 95th percentiles to eliminate outliers. In the full specification, the average coefficient on
MAX increases to –0.0788 and –0.0902, suggesting that the true economic effect is even larger than that
documented in Table VIII. A different but related robustness check is to run the same analysis using only
NYSE stocks, which tend to be larger and more actively traded and are thus likely to have less noisy daily
returns. For this sample, the baseline coefficient of –0.066 in Table VIII increases to –0.077.
The regression in equation (1) imposes a linear relation between returns and MAX for simplicity
rather than for theoretical reasons. However, adding a quadratic term to the regression or using a
piecewise linear specification appears to add little if anything to the explanatory power. Similarly,

14

interacting MAX with contemporaneous volume, with the idea that trading volume may be related to the
informativeness of the price movements, also proved fruitless.
The clear conclusion is that cross-sectional regressions provide strong corroborating evidence for
an economically and statistically significant negative relation between extreme positive returns and future
returns, consistent with models that suggest that idiosyncratic lottery-like payoffs are priced in
equilibrium.

III. Idiosyncratic Volatility and Extreme Returns
While arguably MAX is a theoretically motivated variable, there is still a concern that it may be
proxying for a different effect. In particular, stocks with high volatility are likely to exhibit extreme
returns of both signs. Moreover, stocks with high maximum daily returns in a given month will also have
high realized volatility in the same month, measured using squared daily returns, almost by construction.
Ang et al. (2006, 2008) document that idiosyncratic volatility has a significant negative price in the crosssection, i.e., stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility have low subsequent returns;10 thus, it is plausible
that MAX is proxying for this effect. We examine this issue in detail in this section.
As preliminary evidence, Table IX provides the average monthly cross-sectional correlations
between four variables of interest—MAX (the maximum daily return within the month), MIN (the
negative of the minimum daily return within the month), TVOL (monthly realized total volatility
measured using daily returns within the month), and IVOL (monthly realized idiosyncratic volatility
measured using the residuals from a daily market model within the month). TVOL, IVOL and MIN are
defined in the Appendix. We reverse the sign on the minimum daily returns so that high values of MIN
correspond to more extreme returns. Note that idiosyncratic volatility and total volatility are essentially
identical when measured within a month due to the low explanatory power of the market model
regression. In our sample, the average cross-sectional correlation between these variables exceeds 0.98.
We choose to work with IVOL since it corresponds to the variable used by Ang et al.11
The average, cross-sectional correlations between IVOL and both MAX and MIN are
approximately 0.75, which is very high given that all three variables are calculated at the individual stock
level. Moreover, this correlation is not driven simply by the fact that a squared extreme daily return leads
to a high measured realized volatility. Even when the maximum and minimum daily returns are
eliminated prior to the calculation of volatility, volatility remains highly correlated with MAX and MIN.

10

This idiosyncratic volatility effect may not exist for all stocks. For example, Fang and Peress (2008) show that the
effect is reversed for stocks with no media coverage.
11
Measuring idiosyncratic volatility relative to a 3-factor or 4-factor model rather than the market model has little
effect on the results.

15

MAX and MIN are also quite closely related, with a correlation of 0.55. Clearly stocks with high
volatility exhibit extreme returns and vice versa.
A second important piece of preliminary evidence is to verify the relation between idiosyncratic
volatility and future returns in our sample. Table X presents the results from a univariate portfolio sort on
IVOL, similar to that given in Table I for MAX. In fact, the results look very similar to those in Table I.
For value-weighted returns, deciles 1 through 7 (lower idiosyncratic volatility) all exhibit average
monthly returns of around 1%. These returns fall dramatically for the higher volatility stocks, all the way
to 0.02% per month for decile 10. Both the return differences and the four-factor alpha differences are
economically and statistically significant. These results coincide closely with the results in Ang et al.
(2006), although they form quintiles rather than deciles and use a slightly shorter sample period. Of some
interest, there is no evidence of an idiosyncratic volatility effect in equal-weighted portfolios. This result
is documented in Bali and Cakici (2008).
Columns 3 and 4 of the table show the average across months of the average idiosyncratic
volatility and MAX within the deciles. IVOL increases across the portfolios by construction, and it rises
dramatically for the top deciles. Given the correlation documented above it is not surprising that average
maximum daily returns also increase across the IVOL-sorted portfolios. In fact, the range is not that much
smaller than in the MAX-sorted portfolios.
To examine the relation between extreme returns and volatility more closely, we first conduct
four bivariate sorts. In Table XI, Panel A we sort on both the maximum daily return (MAX) and the
average of the five highest daily returns (MAX(5)), controlling for idiosyncratic volatility. We first form
decile portfolios ranked based on idiosyncratic volatility, and within each IVOL decile we sort stocks into
decile portfolios based on MAX or MAX(5) so that decile 1 (decile 10) contains stocks with the lowest
(highest) MAX(N). Panel A shows the average of the value-weighted and equal-weighted returns across
the IVOL deciles and the associated Newey-West t-statistics. The key statistics are the return and 4-factor
alpha differences (and Newey-West t-statistics) between the low MAX(N) and high MAX(N) portfolios,
i.e., the differences between returns on portfolios that vary in MAX(N) but have approximately the same
levels of idiosyncratic volatility.
The value-weighted average raw return difference between the low MAX and high MAX deciles
is –0.35% per month with a t-statistic of –2.42. The 10-1 difference in the 4-factor alphas is also negative,
–0.34% per month, and highly significant. These magnitudes are much smaller than we have seen
previously, but this result is hardly surprising. Idiosyncratic volatility and MAX are highly correlated;
thus, after controlling for idiosyncratic volatility, the spread in maximum returns is significantly reduced.
Nevertheless, idiosyncratic volatility does not completely explain the high (low) returns to low (high)
MAX stocks. The equal-weighted average raw and risk-adjusted return differences between the low MAX

16

and high MAX portfolios are much more negative, greater than 90 basis points per month in absolute
magnitude, and highly significant with the t-statistics of –7.86 to –7.96, respectively. However, recall that
the idiosyncratic volatility effect does not exist in equal-weighted portfolios as shown in Table X.
When we sort on the average of the five highest daily returns within the month, the return and
alpha differences for both value-weighted and equal-weighted portfolios exhibit substantially greater
economic and statistical significance, consistent with the univariate results reported in Table II.
What happens if we perform the reverse sort, i.e., if we examine the explanatory power of
idiosyncratic volatility after controlling for MAX(N)? In Table XI, Panel B we first form decile portfolios
ranked based either on the maximum daily returns over the past one month (MAX) or the average of the
five highest daily returns (MAX(5)). Then, within each MAX(N) decile, we sort stocks into decile
portfolios ranked based on IVOL so that decile 1 (decile 10) contains stocks with the lowest (highest)
IVOL. When controlling for MAX, the average value-weighted raw return difference between the low
IVOL and high IVOL portfolios is –0.38% per month with a t-statistic of –1.98. The 10-1 difference in
the 4-factor alphas is also negative, –0.44% per month, and statistically significant. These magnitudes are
much smaller than those obtained from the univariate volatility portfolios; nevertheless, for the valueweighted portfolios, maximum daily return does not completely explain the idiosyncratic volatility puzzle
in a simple bivariate sort.
There are two possible explanations for this result in combination with the results of Table XI,
Panel A, and Table X. First, MAX and IVOL could be picking up separate effects, both of which exist in
the data. The absence of an idiosyncratic volatility effect in equal-weighted portfolios could be due to
measurement issues for smaller stocks. Alternatively, it could be that bivariate sorts are not powerful
enough to disentangle the true effect. While the idea of the bivariate sort is to produce portfolios with
variation in the variable of interest but similar levels of the control variable, this goal is extremely
difficult to achieve for highly correlated variables. While the stocks in the portfolios whose returns are
reported in the first column of Table XI, Panel B do vary in their levels of idiosyncratic volatility, they
also vary in their maximum daily returns. For example, the averages of the median idiosyncratic
volatilities are 1.69% and 4.57% for the low and high IVOL portfolios, respectively, but the averages of
the median MAX for these portfolios are 6.03% and 8.90%. Thus, it is difficult to know which effect is
actually producing the negative return and alpha differences between these portfolios.
Columns two through four of Panel B shed further light on this issue. In column two, we report
the results for equal-weighted portfolios, controlling for MAX. The average return difference between the
high IVOL and low IVOL portfolios is about 0.98% per month with a Newey-West t-statistic of 4.88. The
10-1 difference in the 4-factor alphas is 0.95% per month with a t-statistic of 4.76. Thus, after controlling
for MAX, we find a significant and positive relation between IVOL and the cross-section of expected

17

returns. This is the reverse of the counter-intuitive negative relation documented by Ang et al. (2006,
2008). Once we control for extreme positive returns, there appears to be a reward for holding
idiosyncratic risk. This result is consistent with a world in which risk averse and poorly diversified agents
set prices, yet these agents have a preference for lottery like assets, i.e., assets with extreme positive
returns in some states.
First, note that measurement error in idiosyncratic volatility cannot explain this positive and
significant relation between idiosyncratic volatility and returns. Measurement error in the sorting variable
will push return differences toward zero, but it cannot explain a sign reversal that is statistically
significant, especially at the levels we report. Second, the inability to adequately control for variation in
the control variable MAX is also not a viable explanation for these results. Residual variation in MAX is
generating, if anything, the opposite effect. Finally, a positive relation between idiosyncratic volatility and
returns and a negative relation between MAX and returns provides an explanation for the absence of a
univariate idiosyncratic volatility effect in equal-weighted portfolios. This particular weighting scheme
causes the IVOL and MAX effects to cancel, generating small and insignificant return differences.
To confirm these conclusions, the last two columns of Table XI, Panel B present results for
portfolios that control for our somewhat more powerful measure of extreme returns, the average of the
five highest daily returns during the month (MAX(5)). Using this control variable, the differences
between the raw and risk-adjusted returns on high IVOL and low IVOL portfolios are positive, albeit
insignificant, and the differences for equal-weighted portfolios are positive and extremely economically
and statistically significant. The evidence supports the theoretically coherent hypothesis that lottery-like
stocks command a price premium and those with high idiosyncratic risk trade at a discount.
We further examine the cross-sectional relation between IVOL and expected returns at the firm
level using Fama-MacBeth regressions, with the results reported in the top half of Table XII. In the
univariate regression the average slope coefficient on IVOL is negative, –0.05, but it is not statistically
significant (t-stat = –0.97). This lack of significance mirrors the result in Table X, where there is little or
no relation between volatility and future returns in equal-weighted portfolios. The cross-sectional
regressions put equal weight on each firm observation.
When we add MAX to the regression, the negative relation between idiosyncratic volatility and
expected returns is reversed. Specifically, the estimated average slope coefficient on IVOL is 0.39 with a
Newey-West t-statistic of 4.69. This positive relation between IVOL and expected returns remains
significant even after augmenting the regression with the 6 control variables.
Based on the bivariate equal-weighted portfolios and the firm-level cross-sectional regressions
with MAX and IVOL, our conclusion is that there is no idiosyncratic volatility puzzle as recently
documented in Ang et al. (2006, 2008). In fact, stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility have higher

18

future returns as would be expected in a world where poorly diversified and risk averse investors help
determine prices. We conclude that the reason for the presence of a negative relation between IVOL and
expected returns documented by Ang et al. is that IVOL is a proxy for MAX. Interestingly, Han and
Kumar (2008) provide evidence that the idiosyncratic volatility puzzle is concentrated in stocks
dominated by retail investors. This evidence complements our results, since it is retail investors who more
likely to suffer from under-diversification and exhibit a preference for lottery-like assets.
A slightly different way to examine the relation between extreme returns and volatility is to look
at minimum returns. If it is a volatility effect that is driving returns, then MIN (the minimum daily return
over the month), which is also highly correlated with volatility, should generate a similar effect to MAX.
On the other hand, much of the theoretical literature would predict that the effect of MIN should be the
opposite of that of MAX. For example, if investors have a skewness preference, then stocks with
negatively skewed returns should require higher returns. Similarly, under the CPT of Barberis and Huang,
small probabilities or large losses are over-weighted, and thus these stocks have lower prices and higher
expected returns.
To examine this issue we form portfolios of stocks sorted on MIN after controlling for MAX. For
brevity the result are not reported, but the return and alpha differences are positive and statistically
significant, although both the magnitudes and level of significance are lower than those for MAX. This
evidence suggests that stocks with extreme low returns have higher expected returns in the subsequent
month. The opposite effects of MAX and MIN are consistent with cumulative prospect theory and
skewness preference, but they are not consistent with the hypothesis that extreme returns are simply
proxying for idiosyncratic volatility.
In addition to the portfolio-level analyses, we run firm-level Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional
regressions with MAX, MIN and IVOL. The bottom half of Table XII presents the average slope
coefficients and the Newey-West adjusted t-statistics. For all econometric specifications, the average
slope on MAX remains negative and significant, confirming our earlier findings from the bivariate sorts.
After controlling for MIN and IVOL, as well as market beta, size, book-to-market, momentum, short-term
reversals and liquidity, the average slope on MAX is –0.090 with a t-statistic of –6.22.
For specifications with MAX and MIN, but not IVOL, the average slope on MIN is positive and
both economically and statistically significant. Note that the original minimum returns are multiplied by
–1 in constructing the variable MIN. Therefore, the positive slope coefficient means that the more a stock
fell in value the higher the future expected return. The addition of the 6 control variables clearly weakens
the estimated effect. This result is not surprising since stocks with extreme negative returns have
characteristics similar to those of firms with extreme positive returns, i.e., they tend to be small and

19

illiquid. Thus, size and illiquidity both serve to explain some of the positive returns earned by these
stocks.
For the full specification with MAX, MIN, and IVOL, the coefficients on MIN and IVOL are no
longer statistically significant. However, this result is most likely due to the multicollinearity in the
regression, i.e., the correlations between MIN and IVOL (see Table IX) and between MIN, IVOL and the
control variables. The true economic effect of extreme negative returns is still an open issue, but these
regressions provide further evidence that there is no idiosyncratic volatility puzzle.

IV. Skewness and MAX
Our final empirical exercise is to examine the link, if any, between extreme positive returns and
skewness in terms of their ability to explain the cross-section of expected returns. The investigation of the
role of higher moments in asset pricing has a long history. Arditti (1967), Kraus and Litzenberger (1976),
and Kane (1982) extend the standard mean-variance portfolio theory to incorporate the effect of skewness
on valuation. They present a three-moment asset pricing model in which investors hold concave
preferences and like positive skewness. In this framework, assets that decrease a portfolio’s skewness
(i.e., that make the portfolio returns more left-skewed) are less desirable and should command higher
expected returns. Similarly, assets that increase a portfolio’s skewness should generate lower expected
returns.12
From our perspective, the key implication of these models is that it is systematic skewness, not
idiosyncratic skewness, that explains the cross-sectional variation in stocks returns. Investors hold the
market portfolio in which idiosyncratic skewness is diversified away, and thus the appropriate measure of
risk is co-skewness—the extent to which the return on an individual asset covaries with the variance of
market returns. Harvey and Siddique (1999, 2000) and Smith (2007) measure conditional co-skewness
and find that stocks with lower co-skewness outperform stocks with higher co-skewness, consistent with
the theory, and that this premium varies significantly over time.
In contrast, the extreme daily returns measured by MAX are almost exclusively idiosyncratic in
nature, at least for the high MAX stocks, which produce the anomalous, low subsequent returns. Of
course, this does not mean that MAX is not proxying for the systematic skewness, or co-skewness, of
stocks. Thus, the first question is whether MAX, despite its idiosyncratic nature, is robust to controls for
co-skewness.
The second question is whether MAX is priced because it proxies for idiosyncratic skewness. In
other words, is MAX simply a good proxy for the third moment of returns? There is some empirical
12

Arditti (1971), Friend and Westerfield (1980), Sears and Wei (1985), Barone-Adesi (1985), and Lim (1989)
provide empirical analyses of the role of skewness.

20

evidence for a skewness effect in returns. For example, Zhang (2005) computes a measure of crosssectional skewness, e.g., the skewness of firm returns within an industry, that predicts future returns at the
portfolio level. Boyer, Mitton and Vorkink (2008) employ a measure of expected skewness, i.e., a
projection of 5-year ahead skewness on a set of pre-determined variables, including stock characteristics,
to predict portfolio returns over the subsequent month. Finally, Conrad, Dittmar and Ghysels (2008) show
that measures of risk-neutral skewness from option prices predict subsequent returns. In all three cases the
direction of the results is consistent with our evidence, i.e., more positively skewed stocks have lower
returns, but these effects are generally weaker than the economically and statistically strong evidence we
document in Section II.
Of equal importance, there is no theoretical reason to prefer return skewness to extreme returns as
a potential variable to explain the cross-section of expected returns. In the model of Barberis and Huang
(2008), based on the cumulative prospect theory of Tversky and Kahneman (1992), it is the low
probability, extreme return states that drive the results, not skewness directly. Similarly, in the optimal
beliefs model of Brunnermeier, Gollier and Parker (2007), it is again low probability states that drive the
relevant pricing effects. Only in the model of Mitton and Vorkink (2007), who assume a preference for
positive skewness, is skewness the natural measure.
To determine whether the information content of maximum daily returns and skewness are
similar, we test the significance of the cross-sectional relation between MAX and future stock returns
after controlling for total skewness (TSKEW), idiosyncratic skewness (ISKEW) and systematic skewness
(SSKEW). In contrast with our other control variables, we calculate these skewness measures primarily
over one year using daily returns. 13 A one-year horizon provides a reasonable tradeoff between having a
sufficient number of observations to estimate skewness and accommodating time-variation in skewness.
Total skewness is the natural measure of the third central moment of returns; systematic skewness, or coskewness, is the coefficient of a regression of returns on squared market returns, including the market
return as a second regressor (as in Harvey and Siddique (2000)); and idiosyncratic skewness is the
skewness of the residuals from this regression. These variables are defined in more detail in the
Appendix. Total skewness and idiosyncratic skewness are similar for most stocks due to the low
explanatory power of the regression using daily data.
We first perform bivariate sorts on MAX while controlling for skewness. We control for total
skewness by forming decile portfolios ranked based on TSKEW. Then, within each TSKEW decile, we
sort stocks into decile portfolios ranked based on MAX so that decile 1 (decile 10) contains stocks with
the lowest (highest) MAX. The first column of Table XIII shows returns averaged across the 10 TSKEW
13

We test the robustness of our conclusions to variation in the measurement horizon (1, 3, 6, and 12 months) and
find similar results.

21

deciles to produce decile portfolios with dispersion in MAX, but which contain firms with all levels of
total skewness. After controlling for total skewness, the value-weighted average return difference between
the low MAX and high MAX portfolios is about –0.94% per month with a Newey-West t-statistic of
–3.06. The 10-1 difference in the 4-factor alphas is –1.00% per month with a t-statistic of –4.34. Thus,
total skewness does not explain the high (low) returns to low (high) MAX stocks.
The last two columns of Table XIII present similar results from the bivariate sorts of portfolios
formed based on MAX after controlling for systematic and idiosyncratic skewness, respectively. After
controlling for systematic skewness, or co-skewness, the value-weighted average raw and risk-adjusted
return differences between the low MAX and high MAX portfolios are in the range of 110 to 123 basis
points per month and highly significant. After controlling for idiosyncratic skewness, the value-weighted
average raw and risk-adjusted return differences between the low MAX and high MAX portfolios are
–0.93% to –1.01% per month with the t-statistics of –2.96 and –4.34. These results indicate that
systematic and idiosyncratic skewness cannot explain the significantly negative relation between MAX
and expected stock returns.
One concern with this analysis is that lagged skewness may not be a good predictor of future
skewness, as argued by Boyer, Mitton and Vorkink (2008). In a rational market, it is expected future
skewness that matters. This issue is addressed in Table XIV, which presents results from cross-sectional,
firm-level regressions of total skewness on lagged values of total skewness and our six control variables. 14
Skewness is significantly persistent, both in a univariate and multivariate context, although the
explanatory power of the regressions is not very high. One possibility is to use the fitted values from the
month-by-month cross-sectional regressions as a measure of expected skewness (as in Boyer, Mitton and
Vorkink (2008)), and thus we include this variable in the cross-sectional return regressions that follow.
Table XV presents the cross-sectional Fama-MacBeth regression results including TSKEW,
SSKEW, ISKEW and expected total skewness (E(TSKEW)) as control variables. The table reports the
time series averages of the slope coefficients over the sample period July 1962 to December 2005, with
Newey-West adjusted t-statistics given in parentheses. The inclusion of any of the skewness measures has
only a limited effect on MAX. The average coefficients on MAX in the different specifications are all
approximately –0.54, slightly smaller in magnitude than the –0.66 reported in Table VIII, but still
economically very significant and statistically significant at all conventional levels, with t-statistics above
5 in magnitude. In all the specifications the coefficients on the skewness variables are positive, the
opposite of the sign one would expect if investors have a preference for positive skewness. However, in
the full specifications these average coefficients are statistically insignificant. The results for systematic
skewness (co-skewness) differ from the significant negative relation found in Harvey and Siddique (2000)
14

Using idiosyncratic skewness generates similar results.

22

and Smith (2007), presumably due to differences in the methodology. For idiosyncratic skewness, we
cannot replicate the negative and significant relation found in Zhang (2005) and Boyer, Mitton and
Vorkink (2008). Again differences in methodology presumably account for the discrepancy, a key
difference being that both papers predict only portfolio returns, not the returns on individual securities.
For our purposes, however, the message of Tables XIII and XV is clear. There is no evidence that
the effect of extreme positive returns that we document is subsumed by available measures of skewness.

V. Conclusion
We document a statistically and economically significant relation between lagged extreme
positive returns, as measured by the maximum daily return over the prior month or the average of the
highest daily returns within the month, and future returns. This result is robust to controls for numerous
other potential risk factors and control variables. Of particular interest, inclusion of our MAX variable
reverses the anomalous negative relation between idiosyncratic volatility and returns in Ang et al. (2006,
2008). We interpret our results in the context of a market with poorly diversified yet risk averse investors
who have a preference for lottery-like assets. In fact, it may be the preference for lottery-like payoffs that
causes under-diversification in the first place, since well-diversified equity portfolios do not exhibit this
feature. Thus the expected returns on stocks that exhibit extreme positive returns are low but, controlling
for this effect, the expected returns on stocks with high idiosyncratic risk are high.
One open question is why the effect we document is not traded away by other well-diversified
investors. However, exploiting this phenomenon would require shorting stocks with extreme positive
returns. The inability and/or unwillingness of many investors to engage in short selling has been
discussed extensively in the literature. Moreover, stocks with extreme positive returns are small and
illiquid on average, suggesting that transactions costs may be a serious impediment to implementing the
relevant trading strategy.
We also present some evidence that stocks with extreme negative returns exhibit the reverse
effect, i.e., investors find them undesirable and hence they offer higher future returns. While this
phenomenon is not robust in all our cross-sectional regression specifications, these analyses suffer from a
variety of problems. Of course, since exploiting this anomaly does not require taking a short position, one
might expect the effect to be smaller than for stocks with extreme positive returns due to the presence of
well-diversified traders.
While the extreme daily returns we exploit are clearly idiosyncratic, we make no effort to classify
them further. In other words, we do not discriminate between returns due to earnings announcements,
takeovers, other corporate events, or releases of analyst recommendations. Nor do we distinguish price
moves that occur in the absence of new public information. Given the magnitude and robustness of our

23

results, this presents a potentially fruitful avenue of further research. Investigating the time series patterns
in the return premia we document is also of interest.

24

Appendix: Variable Definitions
MAXIMUM: MAX is the maximum daily return within a month:

MAX i ,t = max( Ri ,d )

d = 1,..., Dt

(2)

where Ri , d is the return on stock i on day d and D t is the number of trading days in month t.

MINIMUM: MIN is the negative of the minimum daily return within a month:

MIN i , t = − min( R i , d )

d = 1,..., D t

(3)

where Ri , d is the return on stock i on day d and D t is the number of trading days in month t.

TOTAL VOLATILITY: The total volatility of stock i in month t is defined as the standard deviation of
daily returns within month t:

TVOLi ,t = var( Ri ,d )

(4)

BETA and IDIOSYNCRATIC VOLATILITY: To estimate the monthly beta and idiosyncratic volatility
of an individual stock, we assume a single factor return generating process:
Ri , d − r f , d = α i + β i ( Rm ,d − r f ,d ) + ε i , d ,

(5)

where Ri , d is the return on stock i on day d, Rm ,d is the market return on day d, r f , d is the risk-free rate
on day d, and ε i, d is the idiosyncratic return on day d.15 We estimate equation (5) for each stock using
daily returns within a month. The estimated slope coefficient βˆi,t is the market beta of stock i in month t.
The idiosyncratic volatility of stock i in month t is defined as the standard deviation of daily residuals in
month t:
IVOLi ,t = var(ε i , d ) .

(6)

SIZE: Following the existing literature, firm size is measured by the natural logarithm of the market value
of equity (a stock’s price times shares outstanding in millions of dollars) at the end of month t-1 for each
stock.

15

In our empirical analysis, Rm,d is measured by the CRSP daily value-weighted index and rf,d is the one-month Tbill return available at Kenneth French’s online data library.

25

BOOK-TO-MARKET: Following Fama and French (1992), we compute a firm’s book-to-market ratio in
month t using the market value of its equity at the end of December of the previous year and the book
value of common equity plus balance-sheet deferred taxes for the firm’s latest fiscal year ending in prior
calendar year.16

INTERMEDIATE-TERM MOMENTUM: Following Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), the momentum
variable for each stock in month t is defined as the cumulative return on the stock over the previous 11
months starting 2 months ago, i.e., the cumulative return from month t–12 to month t–2.

SHORT-TERM REVERSAL: Following Jegadeesh (1990) and Lehmann (1990), the reversal variable for
each stock in month t is defined as the return on the stock over the previous month, i.e., the return in
month t–1.

ILLIQUIDITY: Following Amihud (2002), we measure stock illiquidity for each stock in month t as the
ratio of the absolute monthly stock return to its dollar trading volume:
ILLIQi ,t =| Ri ,t | / VOLDi ,t ,

(7)

where Ri,t is the return on stock i in month t, and VOLDi,t is the respective monthly trading volume in
dollars.

TOTAL SKEWNESS: The total skewness of stock i for month t is computed using daily returns within
year t:
1
TSKEWi ,t =
Dt

 Ri , d − µ i

 σ
i
d =1 
Dt

∑






3

(8)

where Dt is the number of trading days in year t, Ri , d is the return on stock i on day d, µ i is the mean of
returns of stock i in year t, and σ i is the standard deviation of returns of stock i in year t.

SYSTEMATIC and IDIOSYNCRATIC SKEWNESS: Following Harvey and Siddique (2000), we
decompose total skewness into idiosyncratic and systematic components by estimating the following
regression for each stock:
Ri , d − r f , d = α i + β i ( R m , d − r f , d ) + γ i ( R m , d − r f , d ) 2 + ε i , d ,

16

(9)

To avoid issues with extreme observations, following Fama and French (1992), the book-to-market ratios are
winsorized at the 0.5% and 99.5% levels, i.e., the smallest and largest 0.5% of the observations on the book-tomarket ratio are set equal to the 0.5th and 99.5th percentiles, respectively.

26

where Ri , d is the return on stock i on day d, Rm ,d is the market return on day d, r f , d is the risk-free rate
on day d, and ε i, d is the idiosyncratic return on day d. The idiosyncratic skewness (ISKEW) of stock i in
year t is defined as the skewness of daily residuals ε i, d in year t. The systematic skewness (SSKEW) or
co-skewness of stock i in year t is the estimated slope coefficient γˆi,t in equation (9).

27

References
Amihud, Yakov, 2002, Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time-series effects, Journal of
Financial Markets 5, 31-56.
Ang, Andrew, Robert J. Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2006, The cross-section of volatility
and expected returns, Journal of Finance 61, 259-299.
Ang, Andrew, Robert J. Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2008, High idiosyncratic volatility
and low returns: International and further U.S. evidence, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Arditti, Fred D., 1967, Risk and the required return on equity, Journal of Finance 22, 19-36.
Arditti, Fred D., 1971, Another look at mutual fund performance, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 6, 909-912.
Bali, Turan G., and Nusret Cakici, 2008, Idiosyncratic volatility and the cross-section of expected returns,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43, 29-58.
Barberis, Nicholas, and Ming Huang, 2008, Stocks as lotteries: The implications of probability weighting
for security prices, American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Barone-Adesi, Giovanni, 1985, Arbitrage equilibrium with skewed asset returns, Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis 20, 299-313.
Bernard, Victor L., and Jacob K. Thomas, 1989, Post-earnings-announcement drift: Delayed price
response or risk premium? Journal of Accounting Research, Supplement 27, 1-48.
Boyer, Brian, Todd Mitton and Keith Vorkink, 2008, Expected idiosyncratic skewness, Working Paper,
Brigham Young University.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., Christian Gollier, and Jonathan A. Parker, 2007, Optimal beliefs, asset prices
and the preference for skewed returns, American Economic Review 97, 159-165.
Calvet, Laurent E., John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini, 2007, Down or out: Asssessing the welfare costs
of household investment mistakes, Journal of Political Economy 115, 707-747.
Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52, 57-82.
Chan, Wesley S., 2003, Stock price reaction to news and no-news: Drift and reversals after headlines,
Journal of Financial Economics 70, 223-260.
Conrad, Jennifer, Robert F. Dittmar, and Eric Ghysels, 2008, Skewness and the bubble, Working Paper,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1998, Investor psychology and security
market under- and overreactions, Journal of Finance 53, 1839-1885.
Daniel, Kent, and Sheridan Titman, 1997, Evidence on the characteristics of cross-sectional variation in
stock returns, Journal of Finance 52, 1-33.

28

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth French, 1992, Cross-section of expected stock returns, Journal of Finance
47, 427-465.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds,
Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
Fama, Eugene F., and James D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk and return: Some empirical tests, Journal of
Political Economy 81, 607-636.
Fang, Lily, and Joel Peress, 2008, Media coverage and the cross-section of stock returns, Journal of
Finance forthcoming.
Friend, Irwin, and Randolph Westerfield, 1980, Co-skewness and capital asset pricing, Journal of
Finance 35, 897-913.
Garrett, Thomas A., and Russell S. Sobel, 1999, Gamblers favor skewness, not risk: Further evidence
from United States’ lottery games, Economics Letters 63, 85-90.
Goetzmann, William N., and Alok Kumar, 2008, Equity portfolio diversification, Review of Finance,
forthcoming.
Han, Bing, and Alok Kumar, 2008, Retail clienteles and the idiosyncratic volatility puzzle, Working
Paper, University of Texas at Austin.
Harvey, Campbell, and Akhtar Siddique, 1999, Autoregressive conditional skewness, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 34, 465-487.
Harvey, Campbell, and Akhtar Siddique, 2000, Conditional skewness in asset pricing tests, Journal of
Finance 55, 1263-1295.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, 1990, Evidence of predictable behavior of security returns, Journal of Finance
45, 881-898.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling losers:
Implications for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65-91.
Kane, Alex, 1982, Skewness preference and portfolio choice, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 17, 15-25.
Kraus, Alan, and Robert H., Litzenberger, 1976, Skewness preference and the valuation of risk assets,
Journal of Finance 31, 1085-1100.
Lehmann, Bruce, 1990, Fads, martingales, and market efficiency, Quarterly Journal of Economics 105, 128.
Lim, Kian-Guan, 1989, A new test of the three-moment capital asset pricing model, Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis 24, 205-216.
Lintner, John, 1965, The valuation of risky assets and the selection of risky investments in stock
portfolios and capital budgets, Review of Economics and Statistics 47, 13-37.

29

Mitton, Todd, and Keith Vorkink, 2007, Equilibrium underdiversification and the preference for
skewness, Review of Financial Studies 20, 1255-1288.
Mossin, Jan, 1966, Equilibrium in a capital asset market, Econometrica 34, 768-783.
Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and
autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55, 703-708.
Odean, Terrence, 1999, Do investors trade too much? American Economic Review 89, 1279-1298.
Patel, Nitin R., and Marti G. Subrahmanyam, 1978, Utility theory and participation in unfair lotteries,
Journal of Economic Theory 19, 555-557.
Sears, R. Stephen, and K. C. John Wei, 1984, Asset pricing, higher moments, an the market risk
premium: A note, Journal of Finance 40, 1251-1253.
Sharpe, William F., 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of risk,
Journal of Finance 19, 425-442.
Smith, Daniel R., 2007, Conditional coskewness and asset pricing, Journal of Empirical Finance 14, 91119.
Thaler, Richard H., and William T. Ziemba, 1988, Parimutuel betting markets: Racetracks and lotteries,
Journal of Economic Perspectives 2, 161-174.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman, 1992, Advance in prospect theory: Cumulative representation of
uncertainty, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5, 297-323.
Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn, and Laura Veldkamp, 2008, Information acquisition and under-diversification,
Working Paper, NYU.
Walker, Ian, and Juliet Young, 2001, An economist’s guide to lottery design, Economic Journal 111,
F700-F722.
Zhang, Yijie, 2005, Individual skewness and the cross-section of expected returns, Working Paper, Yale
University.

30

Table I. Returns on Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by MAX
Decile portfolios are formed every month from July 1962 to December 2005 by sorting stocks based on
the maximum daily return (MAX) over the past one month. Portfolio 1 (10) is the portfolio of stocks with
the lowest (highest) maximum daily returns over the past one month. The table reports the value-weighted
and equal-weighted average monthly returns and the average maximum daily return of stocks within a
month. The last two rows present the differences in monthly returns and the differences in alphas with
respect to the 4-factor Fama-French-Carhart model between portfolios 10 and 1. Average raw and riskadjusted returns, and average daily maximum returns are given in percentage terms. Newey-West (1987)
adjusted t-statistics are reported in parentheses.

Decile

Value-Weighted
Average Return

Equal-Weighted
Average Return

Average MAX

Low MAX

1.01

1.29

1.30

2

1.00

1.45

2.47

3

1.00

1.55

3.26

4

1.11

1.55

4.06

5

1.02

1.49

4.93

6

1.16

1.49

5.97

7

1.00

1.37

7.27

8

0.86

1.32

9.07

9

0.52

1.04

12.09

High MAX
Return
Difference
Alpha
Difference

-0.02
-1.03
(-2.83)
-1.18
(-4.71)

0.64
-0.65
(-1.83)
-0.66
(-2.31)

23.60

31

Table II. Returns on Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by Multi-Day Maximum Returns
Decile portfolios are formed every month from July 1962 to December 2005 by sorting stocks based on
the average of the N highest daily returns (MAX(N)) over the past one month. Portfolio 1 (10) is the
portfolio of stocks with the lowest (highest) maximum multi-day returns over the past one month. The
table reports the value-weighted (Panel A) and equal-weighted (Panel B) average monthly returns for
N=1,…,5. The last two rows present the differences in monthly returns and the differences in alphas with
respect to the 4-factor Fama-French-Carhart model between portfolios 10 and 1. Average raw and riskadjusted returns are given in percentage terms. Newey-West (1987) adjusted t-statistics are reported in
parentheses.

Panel A. Value-Weighted Returns on MAX(N) Portfolios
Decile

N=1

N=2

N=3

N=4

N=5

Low MAX(N)

1.01

1.00

1.05

1.02

1.05

2

1.00

0.96

0.98

1.02

1.07

3

1.00

1.06

1.09

1.08

1.06

4

1.11

1.08

1.02

1.01

1.04

5

1.02

1.08

1.05

1.06

1.04

6

1.16

1.03

1.08

1.03

1.01

7

1.00

1.04

1.00

1.06

1.06

8

0.86

0.78

0.68

0.70

0.70

9

0.52

0.50

0.49

0.43

0.48

High MAX(N)
Return
Difference
Alpha
Difference

-0.02
-1.03
(-2.83)
-1.18
(-4.71)

-0.16
-1.16
(-2.97)
-1.29
(-4.56)

-0.13
-1.18
(-2.95)
-1.26
(-4.12)

-0.12
-1.14
(-2.74)
-1.21
(-3.71)

-0.18
-1.23
(-2.93)
-1.32
(-4.07)

32

Table II (continued)
Panel B. Equal-Weighted Returns on MAX(N) Portfolios
Decile

N=1

N=2

N=3

N=4

N=5

Low MAX(N)

1.29

1.28

1.27

1.29

1.30

2

1.45

1.45

1.48

1.49

1.54

3

1.55

1.55

1.56

1.59

1.59

4

1.55

1.58

1.61

1.62

1.60

5

1.49

1.56

1.56

1.52

1.55

6

1.49

1.45

1.49

1.53

1.52

7

1.37

1.44

1.43

1.42

1.43

8

1.32

1.28

1.27

1.28

1.26

9

1.04

1.01

1.00

0.95

0.94

High MAX(N)
Return
Difference
Alpha
Difference

0.64
-0.65
(-1.83)
-0.66
(-2.31)

0.59
-0.69
(-1.88)
-0.72
(-2.36)

0.54
-0.73
(-1.99)
-0.78
(-2.53)

0.51
-0.78
(-2.11)
-0.84
(-2.75)

0.49
-0.81
(-2.21)
-0.89
(-2.93)

33

Table III. Time-Series Average of the MAX Transition Matrix
Decile portfolios are formed every month from July 1962 to December 2005 by sorting stocks based on the maximum daily returns (MAX) over
the past one month. The table reports the average of the month-to-month transition matrices for the stocks in these portfolios, i.e., the average
probability (in percent) that a stock in decile i (as given by the rows of the matrix) in one month will be in decile j (as given by the columns of the
matrix) in the subsequent month.

Low MAX

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

High MAX

Low MAX

33.67

18.71

12.51

8.94

6.61

5.12

4.14

3.50

3.12

3.67

2

19.12

21.01

16.09

12.41

9.65

7.28

5.37

4.12

2.96

1.99

3

12.83

16.38

16.47

13.88

11.21

9.32

7.39

5.58

4.19

2.75

4

9.07

12.88

13.93

14.52

12.84

10.77

9.21

7.44

5.56

3.77

5

6.60

9.90

11.71

12.73

13.81

12.49

10.81

9.54

7.46

4.96

6

5.02

7.38

9.62

11.29

12.37

13.73

12.76

11.30

9.78

6.74

7

3.99

5.43

7.58

9.69

11.27

12.72

14.51

13.57

12.11

9.13

8

3.31

3.91

5.61

7.60

9.96

11.78

13.71

16.16

15.21

12.76

9

3.00

2.78

4.07

5.64

7.68

10.25

12.76

15.61

19.58

18.63

High MAX

3.61

1.73

2.45

3.32

4.82

6.66

9.42

13.49

19.93

34.57

34

Table IV. Cross-Sectional Predictability of MAX
Each month from July 1962 to December 2005 we run a firm-level cross-sectional regression of the maximum daily
return in that month (MAX) on subsets of lagged predictor variables including MAX in the previous month and six
control variables that are defined in the Appendix. The table reports the time series averages of the cross-sectional
regression coefficients, their associated Newey-West (1987) adjusted t-statistics (in parentheses), and the regression
R-squareds.

MAX

BETA

SIZE

BM

MOM

REV

ILLIQ

0.4054

R-squared
16.64%

(45.34)
0.2810

0.2178

–0.8416

–0.2349

–0.5805

–0.0700

0.0397

(31.20)

(10.65)

(–25.91)

(–7.42)

(–5.21)

(–19.58)

(6.91)

28.41%

35

Table V. Distribution of Monthly Returns for Stocks in the High and Low MAX Portfolios
Decile portfolios are formed every month from July 1962 to December 2005 by sorting stocks based on the
maximum daily returns (MAX) over the past one month. The table reports descriptive statistics for the
approximately 240,000 monthly returns on the individual stocks in deciles 1 (low MAX) and 10 (high MAX) in the
following month. The tails of the return distribution are trimmed by removing the 0.5% most extreme observations
in each tail prior to the calculation of the statistics in the final two columns.

Trimmed
Low MAX

High MAX

Low MAX

High MAX

Mean

1.26%

0.60%

1.04%

-0.16%

Median

0.35%

-2.50%

0.35%

-2.50%

Std Dev

12.54%

30.21%

9.70%

24.12%

Skewness

4.26

5.80

0.59

1.35

1%

-29.6%

-52.1%

5%

-14.7%

-33.8%

10%

-9.3%

-25.9%

25%

-3.4%

-14.3%

50%

0.3%

-2.5%

75%

5.1%

9.5%

90%

11.6%

28.6%

95%

17.7%

46.3%

99%

40.0%

100.0%

Percentiles

36

Table VI. Summary Statistics for Decile Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by MAX
Decile portfolios are formed every month from July 1962 to December 2005 by sorting stocks based on the maximum (MAX) daily returns over
the past one month. Portfolio 1 (10) is the portfolio of stocks with the lowest (highest) maximum daily returns over the past one month. The table
reports for each decile the average across the months in the sample of the median values within each month of various characteristics for the
stocks—the maximum daily return (in percent), the market beta, the market capitalization (in millions of dollars), the book-to-market (BM) ratio,
our measure of illiquidity (scaled by 105), the price (in dollars), the return in the portfolio formation month (labeled REV), and the cumulative
return over the 11 months prior to portfolio formation (labeled MOM). There is an average of 309 stocks per portfolio.

Decile

MAX

Market Beta

Size ($106)

BM Ratio

Illiquidity (105)

Price ($)

REV

MOM

Low MAX

1.62

0.29

316.19

0.7259

0.2842

25.44

–2.44

10.95

2

2.51

0.49

331.47

0.6809

0.1418

25.85

–0.96

11.16

3

3.22

0.60

250.98

0.6657

0.1547

23.88

–0.42

10.90

4

3.92

0.69

188.27

0.6563

0.1935

21.47

–0.01

10.25

5

4.71

0.78

142.47

0.6605

0.2456

19.27

0.43

9.77

6

5.63

0.86

108.56

0.6636

0.3242

16.95

0.82

8.62

7

6.80

0.95

80.43

0.6738

0.4501

14.53

1.48

6.71

8

8.40

1.01

58.69

0.7013

0.7067

12.21

2.34

3.75

9

11.01

1.09

39.92

0.7487

1.3002

9.57

4.01

–0.85

High MAX

17.77

1.13

21.52

0.8890

4.0015

6.47

9.18

–11.74

37

Table VII. Returns on Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by MAX
After Controlling for SIZE, BM, MOM, REV, and ILLIQ
Double-sorted, value-weighted (Panel A) and equal-weighted (Panel B) decile portfolios are formed every month
from July 1962 to December 2005 by sorting stocks based on the maximum daily returns after controlling for size,
book-to-market, intermediate-term momentum, short-term reversals and illiquidity. In each case, we first sort the
stocks into deciles using the control variable, then within each decile, we sort stocks into decile portfolios based on
the maximum daily returns over the previous month so that decile 1 (10) contains stocks with the lowest (highest)
MAX. This table presents average returns across the 10 control deciles to produce decile portfolios with dispersion
in MAX but with similar levels of the control variable. “Return Difference” is the difference in average monthly
returns between the High MAX and Low MAX portfolios. “Alpha Difference” is the difference in 4-factor alphas
on the High MAX and Low MAX portfolios. Newey-West (1987) adjusted t-statistics are reported in parentheses.

Panel A: Value-Weighted Portfolios
Decile

SIZE

BM

MOM

REV

ILLIQ

Low MAX

1.47

1.22

1.32

1.06

1.29

2

1.60

1.19

1.14

1.18

1.31

3

1.69

1.27

1.17

1.19

1.30

4

1.65

1.19

1.07

1.18

1.23

5

1.57

1.17

1.03

1.15

1.12

6

1.49

1.23

1.03

1.15

1.06

7

1.29

1.13

0.96

1.04

0.99

8

1.20

0.99

0.93

1.07

0.88

9

0.93

0.89

0.88

0.86

0.60

High MAX
Return
Difference
Alpha
Difference

0.25
-1.22
(-4.49)
-1.19
(-5.98)

0.29
-0.93
(3.23)
-1.06
(-4.87)

0.67
-0.65
(-3.18)
-0.70
(-5.30)

0.25
-0.81
(-2.70)
-0.98
(-5.37)

0.18
-1.11
(-4.07)
-1.12
(-5.74)

38

Table VII (continued)
Panel B: Equal-Weighted Portfolios
Decile

SIZE

BM

MOM

REV

ILLIQ

Low MAX

1.52

1.37

1.47

1.36

1.40

2

1.63

1.50

1.45

1.56

1.59

3

1.73

1.53

1.38

1.60

1.60

4

1.70

1.54

1.32

1.58

1.58

5

1.62

1.48

1.29

1.59

1.52

6

1.54

1.52

1.20

1.53

1.52

7

1.38

1.45

1.15

1.44

1.40

8

1.27

1.33

1.08

1.33

1.32

9

1.04

1.19

1.03

1.15

1.05

High MAX
Return
Difference
Alpha
Difference

0.41
-1.11
(-4.05)
-1.06
(-5.18)

0.78
-0.59
(-2.00)
-0.54
(-1.96)

0.71
-0.76
(-3.70)
-0.88
(-7.62)

0.52
-0.83
(-2.83)
-1.02
(-5.09)

0.59
-0.81
(-2.68)
-0.79
(-3.40)

39

Table VIII. Firm-Level Cross-Sectional Return Regressions
Each month from July 1962 to December 2005 we run a firm-level cross-sectional regression of the return in that
month on subsets of lagged predictor variables including MAX in the previous month and six control variables that
are defined in the Appendix. In each row, the table reports the time series averages of the cross-sectional regression
slope coefficients and their associated Newey-West (1987) adjusted t-statistics (in parentheses).

MAX
–0.0434
(–2.92)

BETA

SIZE

BM

MOM

REV

ILLIQ

–0.0624
(–1.18)
–0.1988
(–4.08)
0.4651
(6.73)
0.7317
(4.67)
–0.0675
(–11.24)

–0.0662
(–6.62)

–0.0190
(–0.40)
0.0607
(1.37)

–0.0845
(–1.68)
–0.1376
(–3.10)

0.3321
(4.81)
0.3195
(4.73)

0.7392
(5.28)
0.6776
(4.93)

–0.0753
(–14.12)
–0.0710
(–13.53)

0.0371
(3.87)
0.0225
(3.76)
0.0232
(3.99)

40

Table IX. Time-Series Average of Cross-Sectional Correlations
The table reports the average across months of the cross-sectional correlation of the maximum daily return (MAX),
the minimum daily return (MIN), total volatility (TVOL), and idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL) for the period July
1962 to December 2005.

MAX
MIN
TVOL
IVOL

MAX

MIN

TVOL

IVOL

1

0.5491

0.7591

0.7533

1

0.7603

0.7554

1

0.9842
1

41

Table X. Returns on Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by IVOL
Decile portfolios are formed every month from July 1962 to December 2005 by sorting stocks based on the
idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL) over the past one month. Portfolio 1 (10) is the portfolio of stocks with the lowest
(highest) volatility over the past one month. The table reports the value-weighted and equal-weighted average
monthly returns and the time series average of the average IVOL and MAX within a month. The last two rows
present the differences in monthly returns and the differences in alphas with respect to the 4-factor Fama-FrenchCarhart model, between portfolios 10 and 1. Average raw and risk-adjusted returns, average daily maximum
returns, and average volatilities are defined in percentage terms. Newey-West (1987) adjusted t-statistics are
reported in parentheses.

Decile

Value-Weighted
Average Return

Equal-Weighted
Average Return

Average
IVOL

Average
MAX

Low IVOL

0.95

1.06

0.82

1.95

2

1.05

1.21

1.16

2.84

3

1.01

1.34

1.43

3.51

4

1.05

1.39

1.71

4.15

5

1.20

1.47

2.00

4.87

6

0.97

1.42

2.34

5.70

7

0.94

1.37

2.75

6.72

8

0.76

1.37

3.31

8.15

9

0.54

1.25

4.20

10.51

High IVOL
Return
Difference
Alpha
Difference

0.02
–0.93
(–3.23)
–1.33
(–5.09)

1.43
0.37
(1.09)
–0.14
(–0.64)

6.40

17.31

42

Table XI. Returns on Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by MAX and IVOL
After Controlling for IVOL and MAX
Double-sorted, value-weighted (VW) and equal-weighted (EW) decile portfolios are formed every month from July
1962 to December 2005. In Panel A we sort stocks based on the maximum daily return (MAX) or average of the 5
highest daily returns (MAX(5)) after controlling for idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL). In Panel B we sort stocks based
on idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL) after controlling for the maximum daily return (MAX) or average of the 5
highest daily returns (MAX(5)). In both cases we first sort the stocks into deciles using the control variable, then
within each decile, we sort stocks into decile portfolios based on the variable of interest. The columns report
average returns across the 10 control deciles to produce decile portfolios with dispersion in the variable of interest
but with similar levels of the control variable. “Return Difference” is the difference in average monthly returns
between deciles 10 and 1. “Alpha Difference” is the difference in 4-factor alphas between deciles 10 and 1. NeweyWest (1987) adjusted t-statistics are reported in parentheses.

Panel A. Sorted by MAX and MAX(5) Controlling for IVOL
N=1

N=5

Decile

VW

EW

VW

EW

Low MAX(N)

1.12

2.01

1.39

2.25

2

1.09

1.65

1.18

1.81

3

0.94

1.54

1.20

1.67

4

0.93

1.41

1.11

1.51

5

0.80

1.34

0.99

1.38

6

0.77

1.22

0.84

1.21

7

0.79

1.19

0.74

1.11

8

0.82

1.23

0.79

1.06

9

0.76

1.04

0.67

0.93

High MAX(N)
Return
Difference
Alpha
Difference

0.77
-0.35
(-2.42)
-0.34
(-2.48)

1.10
-0.91
(-7.86)
-0.92
(-7.96)

0.53
-0.86
(-4.36)
-0.84
(-4.98)

0.75
-1.50
(-9.21)
-1.58
(-10.05)

43

Table XI (continued)
Panel B. Sorted by IVOL Controlling for MAX and MAX(5)
Decile

VW

MAX
EW

MAX(5)
VW
EW

Low IVOL

1.03

1.18

0.89

0.84

2

0.93

1.15

0.86

1.02

3

0.90

1.10

0.78

1.03

4

0.92

1.17

0.93

1.17

5

0.95

1.27

0.97

1.20

6

0.88

1.21

0.98

1.28

7

0.94

1.37

0.99

1.40

8

0.83

1.48

1.09

1.56

9

0.73

1.52

0.96

1.69

High IVOL
Return
Difference
Alpha
Difference

0.66
-0.38
(-1.98)
-0.44
(-3.12)

2.16
0.98
(4.88)
0.95
(4.76)

0.95
0.06
(0.29)
0.05
(0.34)

2.51
1.67
(8.04)
1.74
(7.67)

44

Table XII. Firm-Level Cross-Sectional Return Regressions with MAX, MIN and IVOL
Each month from July 1962 to December 2005 we run a firm-level cross-sectional regression of the return in that
month on subsets of lagged predictor variables including MAX, MIN and IVOL in the previous month and six
control variables that are defined in the Appendix. In each row, the table reports the time series averages of the
cross-sectional regression slope coefficients and their associated Newey-West (1987) adjusted t-statistics (in
parentheses).

MAX
–0.0434
(–2.92)

–0.1549
(–10.19)
–0.0988
(–7.69)

–0.0900
(–7.84)
–0.0769
(–8.82)
–0.1103
(–6.90)
–0.0901
(–6.22)

IVOL

MIN

–0.0530
(–0.97)
0.3857
(4.69)
0.1219
(1.95)

0.0840
(0.94)
0.0649
(0.83)

0.0593
(2.41)
0.1280
(6.21)
0.0350
(2.43)
0.1029
(5.43)
0.0174
(1.12)

BETA

SIZE

BM

MOM

REV

ILLIQ

0.0636
(1.44)

–0.1065
(–2.74)

0.3232
(4.88)

0.7185
(5.39)

–0.0715
(–14.30)

0.0241
(3.94)

0.0372
(0.89)

–0.1142
(–2.75)

0.3294
(4.96)

0.7004
(5.12)

–0.0694
(–14.30)

0.0234
(5.12)

0.0320
(0.71)

–0.1071
(–2.75)

0.3261
(4.93)

0.7100
(5.31)

–0.0709
(–14.70)

0.0238
(3.92)

45

Table XIII. Returns on Portfolios of Stocks Sorted by MAX
After Controlling for Skewness
Double-sorted, value-weighted decile portfolios are formed every month from July 1962 to December 2005 by
sorting stocks based on the maximum daily returns after controlling for total (TSKEW), systematic (SKEW), and
idiosyncratic skewness (ISKEW). In each case, we first sort the stocks into deciles using the control variable, then
within each decile, we sort stocks into decile portfolios based on the maximum daily returns over the previous
month so that decile 1 (10) contains stocks with the lowest (highest) MAX. The table reports average returns across
the 10 control deciles to produce decile portfolios with dispersion in MAX but with similar levels of the control
variable. “Return Difference” is the difference in average monthly returns between high MAX and low MAX
portfolios. “Alpha Difference” is the difference in 4-factor alphas between high MAX and low MAX portfolios.
Newey-West (1987) adjusted t-statistics are reported in parentheses.

Decile

TSKEW SSKEW ISKEW

Low MAX

1.06

1.12

1.04

2

1.11

1.06

1.14

3

1.21

1.06

1.18

4

1.07

1.10

1.08

5

1.13

1.11

1.17

6

1.14

1.10

1.10

7

0.97

0.98

0.99

8

0.87

0.89

0.91

9

0.76

0.80

0.74

High MAX
Return
Difference
Alpha
Difference

0.12
-0.94
(-3.06)
-1.00
(-4.34)

0.03
-1.10
(-3.75)
-1.23
(-5.50)

0.11
-0.93
(-2.96)
-1.01
(-4.34)

46

Table XIV. Cross-Sectional Predictability of Skewness
Each month from July 1962 to December 2005 we run a firm-level cross-sectional regression of the total skewness
measured using daily returns over the subsequent year (TSKEW) on subsets of lagged predictor variables including
TSKEW in the previous year and six control variables that are defined in the Appendix. The table reports the time
series averages of the cross-sectional regression coefficients, their associated Newey-West (1987) adjusted tstatistics (in parentheses), and the regression R-squareds.

TSKEW
0.1507
(28.38)
0.0808
(21.70)

BETA

SIZE

BM

MOM

REV

ILLIQ

R-squared
2.46%

0.0071
(2.54)

-0.1216
(-23.24)

-0.0467
(-6.24)

0.1475
(12.64)

0.0007
(3.60)

0.0282
(2.03)

9.69%

47

Table XV. Firm-Level Cross-Sectional Return Regressions with MAX and Skewness
Each month from July 1962 to December 2005 we run a firm-level cross-sectional regression of the return in that month on subsets of lagged
predictor variables including MAX in the previous month, skewness measured over the preceding year (TSKEW, SSKEW, ISKEW), fitted
expected total skewness (E(TSKEW)) based on the regression in Table XIV, and six control variables that are defined in the Appendix. In each
row, the table reports the time series averages of the cross-sectional regression slope coefficients and their associated Newey-West (1987) adjusted
t-statistics (in parentheses).

MAX

BETA

SIZE

BM

MOM

REV

ILLIQ

TSKEW
0.1330
(2.56)

SSKEW

ISKEW

E(TSKEW)

0.2436
(0.84)
0.1324
(2.53)
–0.0541
(–5.30)
–0.0534
(–5.20)
–0.0541
(–5.30)

–0.0540
(–5.30)

0.0521
(1.05)
0.0494
(1.00)
0.0522
(1.05)

0.0414
(0.83)

–0.1402
(–2.92)
–0.1422
(–2.92)
–0.1403
(–2.93)

–0.0130
(–0.11)

0.2853
(3.96)
0.2870
(3.96)
0.2853
(3.96)

0.3261
(3.59)

0.6805
(4.60)
0.6891
(4.63)
0.6801
(4.60)

0.5778
(3.39)

–0.0732
(–13.74)
–0.0733
(–13.74)
–0.0732
(–13.74)

–0.0753
(–12.42)

0.0270
(2.66)
0.0278
(2.77)
0.0270
(2.66)

0.0056
(0.32)

0.0274
(1.07)
0.2255
(0.81)
0.0274
(1.04)
1.5188
(3.92)
0.5770
(0.59)

48

Figure 1. Distribution of Monthly Returns for High and Low MAX Portfolios
Decile portfolios are formed every month from July 1962 to December 2005 by sorting stocks based on the
maximum daily returns (MAX) over the past one month. The figure shows the frequency of the approximately
240,000 monthly returns on the individual stocks in deciles 1 (low MAX) and 10 (high MAX) in the following
month. The numbers on the horizontal axis give the center of the return ranges, each of which spans 5%, e.g., the
columns above the number 5% represent the percentage of returns that fall between 2.5% and 7.5%. The exceptions
are the columns on the far left and far right which tabulate percentages of returns that fall within and below or
above the range, respectively.

