                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       DEBT LITERACY, FINANCIAL EXPERIENCES, AND OVERINDEBTEDNESS

                                          Annamaria Lusardi
                                            Peter Tufano

                                         Working Paper 14808
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14808


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2009




We would like to thank TNS Global and, in particular, George Ravich, Bob Neuhaus, and Ellen Sills-Levy
for their willingness to partner with us on this project, and Lauren Cohen, James Feigenbaum, Christopher
Malloy, Adair Morse, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, and participants of the Consumer Finance Workshop,
the NBER Summer Institute on Capital Markets and the Economy, Williams College, the European
Central Bank conference on Household Finances and Consumption, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
Symposium on Connecting Financial Education to Consumers, the Herman Colloquium at the University
of Michigan, the American Economic Association Meeting in San Francisco, the George Mason School
of Public Policy, and the George Washington School of Business for suggestions and comments. We
are grateful to Jan-Emmanuel De Neve and Vilsa Curto for excellent research assistance and to Bill
Simpson for his useful comments and advice. This paper was written while Lusardi was a Visiting
Scholar at Harvard Business School and she would like to thank Harvard Business School for its hospitality
and the FINRA Investor Education Foundation for financial support. Tufano thanks the HBS Division
of Research and Faculty Development for financial support for this work. The views expressed herein
do not reflect those of TNS Global.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Annamaria Lusardi and Peter Tufano. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Debt Literacy, Financial Experiences, and Overindebtedness
Annamaria Lusardi and Peter Tufano
NBER Working Paper No. 14808
March 2009
JEL No. D91

                                             ABSTRACT

We analyze a national sample of Americans with respect to their debt literacy, financial experiences,
and their judgments about the extent of their indebtedness. Debt literacy is measured by questions
testing knowledge of fundamental concepts related to debt and by self-assessed financial knowledge.
Financial experiences are the participants’ reported experiences with traditional borrowing, alternative
borrowing, and investing activities. Overindebtedness is a self-reported measure. Overall, we find
that debt literacy is low: only about one-third of the population seems to comprehend interest compounding
or the workings of credit cards. Even after controlling for demographics, we find a strong relationship
between debt literacy and both financial experiences and debt loads. Specifically, individuals with
lower levels of debt literacy tend to transact in high-cost manners, incurring higher fees and using
high-cost borrowing. In applying our results to credit cards, we estimate that as much as one-third
of the charges and fees paid by less knowledgeable individuals can be attributed to ignorance. The
less knowledgeable also report that their debt loads are excessive or that they are unable to judge their
debt position.


Annamaria Lusardi
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
a.lusardi@dartmouth.edu

Peter Tufano
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 359
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
ptufano@hbs.edu
       Individuals need financial skills—perhaps more now than ever before. Research in
financial literacy has typically related individuals’ knowledge of economics and finance with
their financial decisions related to savings, retirement planning, or portfolio choice. Financial
competence has become more essential as financial markets offer more complex choices and as
the responsibility for saving and investing for the future has shifted from government and
employers onto individuals. As the credit crises of the recent past show, borrowing decisions are
also critical. However, little research has been done on the relationship between financial literacy
and indebtedness. Rapid growth in household debt and its link to the current financial crisis
raises the question of whether individuals’ lack of financial knowledge led them to take out
mortgages and incur credit card debt they could not afford.
       To fill the research gap and assess how much knowledge individuals have with respect to
debt, we designed and fielded a new survey focused specifically on “debt literacy,” an important
component of overall financial literacy. Debt literacy refers to the ability to make simple
decisions regarding debt contracts, applying basic knowledge about interest compounding to
everyday financial choices. We seek to understand the relationship between debt literacy and
financial decision-making as well as how both relate to overindebtedness.
       We contribute to the existing literature in three ways. First, the questions we designed
allow us to measure financial knowledge specifically related to debt, as well as individuals’
overindebtedness. Second, unlike much of the previous work, we propose a method to consider
the entire set of financial experiences in which individuals engage: opening a checking account,
buying bonds and stocks, and borrowing from traditional and alternative credit providers. Some
transactions, such as credit card borrowing, are repeated over time; others are discrete events that
take place only once or twice over a lifetime. We translate the rich multidimensional set of
experiences into more compact consumer segments. Finally, we measure indebtedness in a new
way by asking people to assess their comfort with handling their current levels of debt.
       In our empirical work, we find strikingly low levels of debt literacy across the U.S.
population. Only one-third of respondents in the population can apply concepts of interest
compounding to everyday situations or understand the workings of credit cards. Debt illiteracy is
particularly severe among women, the elderly, minorities, and those who are divorced or
separated. We identify four different groups of individuals on the basis of common financial
experiences—pay in full, borrowers/savers, fee-payers, and alternative financial services (AFS)
users—and find that debt literacy is related to the financial experiences that people have had.


                                               1
For example, fee-payers (e.g., those who make only minimum payments on their credit card bills
and incur late and over-the-limit fees) and alternative financial services users are less debt
literate, even after controlling for many individual characteristics. Similarly, when we apply our
results to credit card behavior, we find that the less knowledgeable pay a disproportionately high
share of fees and finance charges. Specifically, the less knowledgeable cardholders pay about 50
percent higher fees than the average cardholder. Moreover, even when using very conservative
assumptions, we find that as much as one-third of the charges and fees paid by the less
knowledgeable are related to lack of knowledge versus other observable demographic factors.
           We also find a link between debt literacy and overindebtedness: those with lower levels
of debt literacy tend to judge their debt as excessive or report that they are unsure about the
appropriateness of their debt position, even after controlling for many demographic factors. Not
surprisingly, what you don’t know can hurt you. Well before the current financial crisis raged,
more than a quarter of Americans judged their debt to be excessive. We believe these results
suggest that lack of financial skills is and continues to be a cause for concern.


1.         Review of the Literature on Financial Literacy and Financial Decision-Making
           Over the last decade, several researchers have started to explore whether individuals are
well-equipped to make financial decisions. Bernheim (1995, 1998) was among the first to
document that many U.S. consumers display low levels of financial literacy. More recently,
Hilgert, Hogarth, and Beverly (2003) report that most Americans fail to understand basic
financial concepts, particularly those relating to bonds, stocks, and mutual funds.1 In a survey of
Washington state residents, Moore (2003) finds that people frequently fail to understand terms
and conditions of consumer loans and mortgages. This problem may persist for some time. The
National Council on Economic Education’s report (NCEE 2005) shows a widespread lack of
knowledge regarding fundamental economic concepts among high school students, confirming
similar findings by the Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy (Mandell, 2008).
           Low levels of financial skills is not only a U.S. problem: The 2005 report on financial
literacy by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and Smith
and Stewart (2008) document low levels of financial literacy in several countries. Similarly, the
Survey of Health, Aging and Retirement in Europe (SHARE) shows that respondents score


1
    Other surveys on smaller samples find similar results. See Agnew and Szykman, 2005.


                                                       2
poorly on financial numeracy and literacy scales (Christelis, Jappelli, and Padula, 2008).
Consistent with the findings of Moore (2003), Miles (2004) reports that UK borrowers have a
poor understanding of mortgages and interest rates.
        Lusardi and Mitchell’s (2006, 2008a) module on planning and financial literacy for the
2004 Health and Retirement Study (HRS) provides further evidence of financial illiteracy. They
find that many older (50+) individuals cannot do simple interest-rate calculations, such as
calculating how money would grow at an interest rate of 2%, and do not know about the
workings of inflation and risk diversification. Similar results are seen in a sample of early Baby
Boomers (ages 51–56): most respondents display low numeracy and a very limited knowledge of
the power of interest compounding (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007a).
        Financial literacy has been linked to saving behavior and portfolio choice, often
connecting financial knowledge to one specific type of transaction. For example, the less
financially literate are found to be less likely to plan for retirement (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2006,
2008), to accumulate wealth (Stango and Zinman, 2008), and to participate in the stock market
(van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie, 2007; Yoong 2008; Christelis, Jappelli, and Padula, 2008).
Moreover, less literate individuals are less likely to choose mutual funds with lower fees
(Hastings and Tejeda-Ashton, 2008).2 There is also some indication that literacy may affect debt
as well. Moore (2003) reports that respondents with lower levels of financial literacy are more
likely to have costly mortgages. Similarly, Campbell (2006) reports that individuals with lower
incomes and lower education levels—characteristics that are strongly related to financial
literacy—are less likely to refinance their mortgages during a period of falling interest rates.
        This previous work offers an important starting point. However, unlike these studies, we
try to relate financial capability to rich patterns of financial transactions, placing a particular
emphasis on the relationship of capability to indebtedness.

2.      Methodology and Survey Design
        We partnered with the leading commercial market research firm, Taylor Nelson Sofres
(TNS) Global, to develop and administer a survey that reports information on financial
knowledge related to debt. In addition to measuring participants’ financial skills, we collected



2
 Financial knowledge is also found to be linked to the ability to budget, save money, and control spending (Perry
and Morris, 2005).


                                                       3
demographic characteristics as well as data on individuals’ financial experiences and their
judgments about their indebtedness.
           Our approach to measuring financial literacy has two elements. First, we devised
questions to assess key debt literacy concepts, such as the power of interest compounding. Our
aim is to assess debt literacy in the population, i.e., to measure knowledge and skills closely
related to debt.3 The debt literacy questions can be solved with simple reasoning and do not
require a calculator. Second, we asked participants to judge their financial knowledge, and
related this self-assessment to their performance on the debt literacy questions. Because
individuals engage in many financial transactions that require consideration of interest rates and
comparisons of alternatives, we collected data on a rich array of financial activities, asking not
only about borrowing but also about financial investments. Finally, to evaluate the consequences
of the financial transactions in which people engage and the level of debt literacy with which
people are equipped, we examined levels of overindebtedness.
        The survey was fielded in November 2007 by the staff of TNS Global. The data were
collected via a phone interview from a sample of 1,000 U.S. residents. The survey collected
information on a number of self-reported demographic characteristics, such as age, gender, race
and ethnicity, marital status, employment, region of residence, family size and type, income, and
wealth.4

3.      Measuring Debt Literacy
        In partnership with TNS, we designed and tested questions measuring financial
knowledge related to debt. While there are a few national surveys that measure financial
knowledge in the United States, such as the HRS, the Rand American Life Panel (ALP), and the
Survey of Consumers,5 few ask questions that focus specifically on borrowing and debt behavior.
Our survey included three new questions designed to measure debt literacy. Specifically,
respondents were asked questions that assessed their knowledge about the power of interest

3
  Given the information collected in the literacy questions, we are not able to distinguish between pure financial
knowledge and ability, including numeracy and cognitive ability—an issue which can be important when
considering the elderly and those with low educational attainment. Thus, we use the terms “financial literacy” and
“debt literacy” to encompass all of these characteristics. However, in our empirical work, we always account for
income and wealth. Thus, our measures of literacy will capture knowledge and ability above and beyond what is
accounted for by income and wealth.
4
  See the description of the survey and the variables used in our work in the appendix.
5
  These surveys cover adults. Surveys of high school students include those by the Jump$tart Coalition for Personal
Financial Literacy and the National Council on Economic Education.


                                                      4
compounding and the workings of credit card debt and their ability to choose the most
advantageous means of payment, given two options.6 For each question we listed a set of answer
choices. Tallying respondents’ correct and incorrect responses allowed us to classify individuals
according to their respective levels of financial knowledge (from those who made small mistakes
to those who made large mistakes to those who admitted to not knowing the answer) and to
evaluate the link between financial knowledge and borrowing behavior.
           The first question measuring interest compounding is as follows:
           Suppose you owe $1,000 on your credit card and the interest rate you are charged is
           20% per year compounded annually. If you didn’t pay anything off, at this interest rate,
           how many years would it take for the amount you owe to double?
           (i) 2 years;
           (ii) Less than 5 years;
           (iii) 5 to 10 years;
           (iv) More than 10 years;
           (v) Do not know.
           (vi) Prefer not to answer.

           Ignoring interest compounding, borrowing at 20% per year would lead to doubling in five
years; someone who knew about interest on interest might have selected a number less than five;
someone who knows the “rule of 72” heuristic would know that it would be about 3.6 years (i.e.,
correct answer (ii) “less than 5 years”). Answers above five years reflect misunderstanding of
the concept of interest accrual and a choice of more than ten years implies a major
misunderstanding.
           Table 1, panel A, reports the responses to this question. Fewer than 36% of respondents
answered this question correctly. This is a rather low percentage given how many individuals
have credit cards and maintain revolving balances. However, this finding is consistent with the
evidence reported in Lusardi and Mitchell (2007a) that only a small fraction of respondents
between the ages of 51 and 56 can correctly perform an interest-compounding calculation when
asked to report how the amount in a savings account would grow over a two-year period at an
interest rate of 10%. The larger fraction, 43%, performed only a simple interest rate calculation,
without taking into account that interest grows on interest. What we know from psychology and
marketing is confirmed here: many people are not numerate and have difficulty grasping
percentages (Peters et al., 2007; Chen and Rao, 2007). These findings confirm evidence from the
health literature that patients have difficulty doing simple calculations (Volk, 2007).

6
    In this survey, we were limited to three questions only.


                                                           5
       The evidence reported in panel A points to two other results. First, a sizable proportion of
respondents, close to 20%, reported that they “do not know” the answer to this question. As
reported in other papers (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2006, 2007a, 2007b; and van Rooji, Lusardi, and
Alessie, 2007), “do not know” answers identify respondents with the lowest level of financial
knowledge. Second, more than 30% of respondents overestimated, sometimes by a wide margin,
the number of years it would take for debt to double when borrowing at a high rate. Overall,
while many individuals deal frequently with credit cards and credit card debt, there seems to be
limited knowledge of interest compounding.
       We find similar evidence from the second literacy question, which asks respondents to
calculate how many years it would take to pay off credit card debt when making minimum
payments equal to the interest payments on the outstanding debt. Given that one is only paying
interest, the principal balance will never decline. The exact wording of the question is as
follows:
       You owe $3,000 on your credit card. You pay a minimum payment of $30 each month. At
       an Annual Percentage Rate of 12% (or 1% per month), how many years would it take to
       eliminate your credit card debt if you made no additional new charges?
       (i) Less than 5 years;
       (ii) Between 5 and 10 years;
       (iii) Between 10 and 15 years;
       (iv) Never, you will continue to be in debt;
       (v) Do not know;
       (vi) Prefer not to answer.

       Similar to the previous question, this question assesses whether individuals can perform
simple interest-rate calculations. Our results illustrate that many respondents don’t understand
the workings of credit card interest and payments. Table 1, panel B, shows that only slightly
more than 35% of respondents appreciated that making minimum payments equal to the interest
payment on the outstanding debt will never eliminate debt. A sizable fraction heavily
underestimated the amount of time it would take to eliminate debt; more than 15% of
respondents thought it will take five to ten years to eliminate debt, and another 20% thought that
it will take ten to fifteen years to eliminate debt. A substantial fraction of respondents, about
22%, simply did not know the answer to this question.
       Not surprisingly, responses to these first two questions are highly correlated. More than
half (56%) of those who responded correctly to the first question also responded correctly to the
second question. “Do not know” responses exhibit an even higher correlation, with 80% of those


                                                6
who respond “do not know” to the first question responding similarly to the second question.
Mistakes are more scattered, but more than 36% of those who thought it will take more than 10
years for credit card debt to double also thought it will take from 10 to 15 years to eliminate
credit card debt with minimum payments. Individuals who found it difficult to perform these
calculations may not appreciate the consequences of borrowing at a high interest rate.
         The third question seeks to determine whether people understand the notion of the time
value of money and how skillful they are in comparing payment options:
         You purchase an appliance which costs $1,000. To pay for this appliance, you are given
         the following two options: a) Pay 12 monthly installments of $100 each; b) Borrow at a
         20% annual interest rate and pay back $1,200 a year from now. Which is the more
         advantageous offer?
         (i) Option (a);
         (ii) Option (b);
         (iii) They are the same;
         (iv) Do not know;
         (v) Prefer not to answer.

         By paying $100 a month (versus $1,200 at the end of the year), one foregoes interest that
could have accrued by having kept those dollars. Consistent with the findings of Stango and
Zinman (2008) that individuals are systematically biased toward underestimating the interest rate
out of a stream of payments, we find that a very small proportion of respondents—close to 7%—
responded correctly to this question (Table 1, panel C). A very high fraction of respondents,
40%, chose option (a) even though the stream of payments to finance the purchase of an
appliance at $100 per month in (a) has an APR of about 35% versus the 20% in option (b).7
About 39% thought that the two payment options were the same, failing to recognize the time
value of money. Overall, these results suggest that individuals may underestimate the interest
rate at which they are borrowing.8
         When considering the relationship between the answers to this question and the other two
questions, those who chose option (a) and, in effect, underestimated the interest rate implicit in

7
  An alternative interpretation is that this choice could reflect a willingness to pay others to enter into a “self-
control” contract that does budgeting on their behalf, even at the cost of giving up interest.
8
  Given the low correct response rate in all questions, one may wonder whether the framing of the question
influences the way individuals respond. We are not able to address this issue in this survey. However, the evidence
in other modules on financial literacy that one of the authors designed indicates that the framing of the questions
matters for questions measuring advanced rather than basic financial knowledge (see Lusardi and Mitchell 2007c,
and van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie, 2007). In this respect, framing may have influenced the responses to the third
question, which required some reasoning. When evaluating the empirical work, one has to keep in mind that
financial knowledge is measured with error.


                                                        7
the stream of payments were more likely to answer the first two questions incorrectly. However,
many of those who thought that the payment options were the same were able to answer the first
and second questions correctly.
       To summarize: debt illiteracy is widespread. Only one-third of respondents can correctly
answer a question about the power of interest compounding or about the workings of credit
cards. The fraction shrinks when faced with a comparison of two methods of payment that
requires somewhat more complex calculations. This evidence provides some reason for concern
in an economy in which consumers routinely borrow and save using debt-like instruments.


3a.    Who Is More Debt Literate?
       As we report below, illiteracy is particularly acute in specific demographic groups. First,
we report responses by age, gender, and income. Then, we use regression analysis to relate debt
literacy to a range of demographic characteristics.
       Table 1 (panels A, B, and C) reports the distribution of the responses to the first literacy
question across different demographic groups. The elderly (those older than 65) display the
lowest amount of knowledge about interest compounding. Not only were they less likely to
answer this question correctly, but they were also more likely to answer “do not know.” They
also displayed difficulty answering the second question: more than 30% of respondents older
than 65 did not know the answer to the second question. On the opposite end of the distribution,
young respondents (younger than age 30) performed best on the first question, but not as well on
the second and third questions. Thus, debt literacy is low among the young, too. While in a
single cross-section we cannot differentiate between age and cohort effects, differences in
literacy are sizable across age/generations.
       There are sharp differences between male and female debt literacy levels. In each of the
three questions, women were much less likely to respond correctly than were men, sometimes by
as much as 20 percentage points. Furthermore, many women stated they did not know the answer
to the literacy questions. Since our survey covers the entire age group, we also have investigated
gender differences among those younger than 30 and those older than 65. We find that gender
differences are significant among both the young and the old, confirming findings in other
research about the low levels of literacy of women in younger and older generations (Lusardi and
Mitchell, 2008; Lusardi, Mitchell, and Curto, 2008).



                                               8
         Debt literacy increases sharply with income. While close to 50% of respondents with
income above $75,000 answered the first question correctly and 43% answered the second
question correctly, only a little more than 25% of respondents whose income is below $30,000
answered these two questions correctly. For brevity, we do not report the figures, but we find
that financial literacy is lower among respondents with low wealth; those who are divorced,
widowed, or separated; and among African-Americans and Hispanics. We assess next which
demographic characteristics remain significant when we account for all these demographic
variables together.
         We perform a multinomial logit regression, shown in the appendix, for each of the three
debt literacy questions. We include dummies for age groups; for being female; for being African-
American and Hispanic (the reference group is white respondents); and for marital status (the
reference group is married respondents). We also add dummies for household income (the
reference group is those with annual income lower than $30,000) and household wealth (the
reference group is those with wealth greater than $250,000).9 Table A1 reports the logit
estimates for responding correctly to the debt literacy questions. (Rather than reporting the
estimates with respect to a specific reference group, we calculate the marginal effects for each set
of answers.)
         Even after accounting for all of these demographic variables simultaneously, age
continues to be statistically significant; the elderly display less understanding of interest
compounding and the workings of credit cards. Women are still found to be less knowledgeable
than men. Race and income also continue to be powerful predictors of literacy, although wealth
is not predictably related to literacy (Table A1). While debt literacy levels are low, the relatively
poorer performance by certain traditionally disadvantaged groups—women, the elderly, and
minorities—is particularly troubling.

3b.      Who Thinks They Are Financially Literate?

      In addition to asking questions about some specific concepts related to debt, we also asked
respondents to judge their financial knowledge. The wording of this self-assessment is as
follows:



9
 Although we do not have information about educational attainment in the survey, income and wealth can also
proxy for education.


                                                     9
           On a scale from 1 to 7, where 1 means very low and 7 means very high, how would you
           assess your overall financial knowledge?

We asked this question for several reasons. First, our questions on debt literacy cover specific
concepts, but they hardly exhaust the list of topics that can affect debt behavior. This question
asks about “overall financial knowledge” and thus is more expansive. Second, we can evaluate
and compare the answers to this self-reported measure of literacy with the answers to more
objective measures to determine whether people know how much they know. Third, it provides
respondents with a straightforward and easy-to-answer question.10
           Table 1, panel D, reports the answers to the self-reported literacy question across the
whole sample. Contrary to the widespread debt illiteracy we find when examining the answers to
the three questions measuring debt literacy, most respondents think they are above average in
terms of their financial knowledge. The average score in the sample is 4.88 out of 7, and more
than 50% of respondents chose a score as high as 5 or 6. Conversely, only a little more than 10%
of respondents chose a score below 4, a striking fact given the relatively poor performance of the
sample in answering simple debt questions.
           In general, the patterns of self-reported financial literacy correlate with our measures of
debt literacy, suggesting self-awareness: those who believe they are more knowledgeable
generally are more knowledgeable. For example, women’s self-reported levels of literacy are
much lower than men’s levels. African-Americans and Hispanics also report lower literacy, even
though differences in the self-reported measures across race and ethnicity are less sharp than
across the three measures of debt literacy. Self-reported literacy also increases steadily with
income.
       Nevertheless, there are some notable discrepancies between self-reported and actual
measures of debt literacy. While the elderly display very low levels of debt literacy across the
three questions, they rank themselves highest in terms of financial knowledge: the average score
among respondents older than 65 is as high as 5.33. This self-confidence combined with lack of
skill or cognition could put the elderly at risk for making financial mistakes or suffering from
scams.


4.         Measuring Financial Experiences

10
     This question was asked to respondents before the three debt literacy questions.


                                                         10
     Individuals engage in many financial transactions that require careful consideration of
interest rates and comparisons of alternatives. Those who are less knowledgeable may engage in
higher-cost borrowing, sloppier financial behaviors, or less advantageous financial contracts. If
so, we expect to see a negative relationship between financial skills and certain wealth-depleting
financial behaviors.11
         Experience measures. The TNS survey allows us to characterize a wide range of
borrowing and investing experiences and transaction patterns of respondents. While we cannot
measure their intensity or frequency, we can identify the types of transactions in which
individuals have engaged.12 This typology includes four classes of transactions: traditional
borrowing, alternative financial services borrowing, saving/investing, and credit card use. The
parenthetical text below was not part of the survey, but is provided here to organize this
information for the reader.
     (1) (Experience with traditional borrowing, excluding credit cards.) Have you ever…

             a.   Taken out a loan for student education
             b.   Taken out an auto loan
             c.   Taken out a home equity loan
             d.   Gotten (or refinanced) a mortgage

     (2) (Experience with alternative financial services borrowing.) Have you ever…

             a.   Gotten a short-term “payday” or “salary advance” loan
             b.   Gotten a “refund anticipation loan” to accelerate the receipt of your taxes
             c.   Gotten an auto title loan
             d.   Used a pawn shop
             e.   Bought goods on a lay-away plan or at a rent-to-own store

     (3) (Experience with saving/investing and payments.) Have you ever…

             a.   Opened a checking or debit card account
             b.   Opened a savings account or bought a CD
             c.   Bought a savings bond or other bonds
             d.   Invested in mutual funds
             e.   Invested in individual stocks


11
   Financial experience could also affect financial knowledge, and we will discuss this issue in more detail in the
empirical work.
12
   The failure to engage in certain transactions could, of course, also be a function of individual choice or of supply
constraints, i.e., the product was not available to the individual. For example, some may not have credit cards by
choice, while others might be unable to obtain a credit card.


                                                        11
     (4) (Typical transaction mode for credit cards.) In the last twelve months, which of the
         following describes your use of credit cards?

             a. I don’t have any credit cards or did not use them
             b. In some months, I ran an outstanding balance and paid finance charges
             c. In some months, I paid the minimum payment only
             d. In some months, I was charged a late charge for late payments
             e. In some months, I was charged an over the limit charge for charging more than
                my credit limit
             f. In some months, I used the cards for a cash advance
             g. My account was closed down by the credit card company
             h. I always paid my credit cards in full


While not exhaustive, this simple list includes many of the transactions in which a person might
have needed to make a financial calculation regarding interest or fees.13 Table 2 provides the
weighted incidences of the various transaction types for our sample population. Some activities
are quite common—91% of the population has experience with checking accounts, 81% has
experience with savings accounts or CDs, and 79% currently has credit cards. Other activities
are fairly rare. For example, in our sample only 4.4% had ever gotten a refund anticipation loan,
only 6.5% had ever had an auto title loan, and only 7.8% had ever taken out a payday loan. As
for credit cards, some (20%) do not have a card or do not use them. However, a majority of
respondents use credit cards and do not pay the balances in full each month.
         Experience segments. A number of studies look at single activities, intensively studying
consumers who use payday lending, refund anticipation lending, or credit cards. But these
single-dimensional characterizations of consumer behavior cannot capture the fact that
consumers engage in many activities simultaneously. Table 3 provides a two-way matrix of the
incidence of each experience conditional on a second characteristic. For example, while the
unconditional incidence of having used a payday loan is 7.8%, when conditioned on not having a
credit card, the incidence is nearly double (15%). Further, conditional on paying off credit card
balances on time each month, the incidence of having used a payday loan is less than half (3%).
Focusing on one transaction only gives a narrow view of individuals’ borrowing and saving
behavior. While it is possible to analyze each type of experience in Table 3 one at a time, or to
consider dyads or triads of behaviors, the large matrix contains a set of correlated activities.


13
  Because of space constraints, we could not include other choices, including the use of bank overdraft lines, car
leases, annuities, and other insurance products.


                                                       12
         To reduce the dimensionality of this matrix, we rely on techniques used in marketing and
market research. In particular, we use cluster analysis, a technique related to principal
components analysis or factor analysis in that it reduces the dimensionality of a rich data set. In
this case, the cluster analysis is used to determine which groups of individuals have had similar
financial experiences or could be considered “market segments.” This segmentation is carried
out solely on the basis of transaction activity, without referring to demographics, literacy, or self-
judged indebtedness. We first create the segments on the basis of common financial experiences,
and then relate them to the other information.
         Cluster analysis is used commonly in biology, linguistics, and marketing. It is used to
segment a heterogeneous population into groups that are more homogeneous. Essentially, it
parses the data into groups, testing for differences among groups as it divides the data into two,
three, four, or more groups.14 For our purposes, a key analytic question was which transaction
types to include in the analysis. We include all of the transaction activity listed above in
defining the cluster. The procedure groups the data into any arbitrary number of clusters. One
must use statistics, judgment, and sensitivity testing to ensure that the clustering is correct and
sensible.15
         Based on the results of the cluster analysis, we reliably identify four main segments
defined by common experiences. Table 4 identifies the transaction characteristics of the four
groups. While we “name” these clusters for the sake of exposition, these names cannot fully
characterize the range of behaviors that these groups share. Cluster 1, comprising about 26% of
the sample, are people firmly engaged in the traditional financial system. These individuals all
have credit cards but do not carry any revolving balances. This is such a distinctive characteristic


14
   Cluster analysis is related to factor analysis; the latter identifies common traits and the former identifies similar
populations of individuals on the basis of underlying factors.
15
   We used Ward’s linkage method (Ward, 1963), which is an agglomerative, hierarchical clustering method, as
implemented in Stata, to perform the cluster analysis. The procedure works as follows: The N observations in the
sample start out as N separate groups each of size one. The two closest observations are merged into one group,
producing N-1 total groups. This process continues until all of the observations are merged into one large group.
This produces a hierarchy of groupings from one group to N groups. The definition of “closest two groups” is based
on minimizing the sum of squared errors. In order to select an optimal number of clusters, we relied on both
statistical criteria and inspection of the clustering results. Our statistical criteria were the Calinski/Harabasz pseudo-
F index, and the Duda/Hart index. These results suggested that we use three, four, or five clusters. We then analyzed
the outputs for each of these possible numbers of clusters, for instance by examining the means and standard
deviations of the variables in each cluster. We chose to use four clusters because using five clusters yielded some
individual groups that were rather small for proper analysis, and using three clusters resulted in groups that were still
quite heterogeneous.



                                                         13
that, for descriptive purposes, we use the name “pay in full” to identify this cluster. These
people have relatively high (but not the highest) levels of experience with mutual funds, stocks,
and bonds. With respect to the other clusters, respondents in cluster 1 are most likely to have a
mortgage and are fairly likely to have some experience with auto loans and home equity loans.
Moreover, they have the lowest levels of alternative financial services usage (payday lending,
pawn shops, tax refund loans, etc.).
       At the other end of the spectrum (cluster 4) is the 30% of our sample that does not use
traditional financial services as often as the others. For descriptive purposes, we name them
“users of alternative financial services” or “AFS users” in brief. For example, when compared
with cluster 1, their usage of alternative financial services is considerably more frequent, using
payday loans, tax refund loans, and pawn shops 5, 16, and 9 times more frequently. Most
individuals in this cluster (68%) do not have credit cards and are more likely to be “unbanked”
(20% do not have a checking account and 38% do not have a savings account). At the same
time, the likelihood that they have ever invested in a stock, a bond, or a mutual fund—or held a
mortgage—is about one-fifth that of the pay in full group.
       In between are two groups that comprise 43% of the sample. Almost all have credit cards
and virtually all carry revolving balances most months. They are virtually all “banked,” with
checking or debit accounts. The smaller subgroup, accounting for about 12% of the sample, is
comprised of what we call the “borrowers/savers” (cluster 2). This group has the highest level
of experience with savings and investments of any of the four clusters, with 98% having
experience with savings or CD products, 83% owning mutual funds, 83% owning stocks, and
65% owning bonds or savings bonds. At the same time, this group has the highest levels of debt
exposure too, with the most frequent experience with student loans (46%), home equity loans
(54%), auto loans (94%), and virtually the same levels of mortgage loans as the pay in full group
(77%). This group seems much more extended than the pay in full group, with 95% carrying a
revolving balance on credit cards, 27% paying the minimum balance only, 12% incurring late
fees, and 6% going beyond their credit limit and incurring over-the-limit fees.
       The final 31% of the sample is what we call the “pay fees” group (cluster 3). Relative to
the three other groups, this group has the highest likelihood of paying the minimum amount due
on their credit cards (56%), running late fees on their credit cards (17%), incurring over-the-limit
fees (11.8%), and using their cards to get cash advances (16.1%). At the same time, they have
far less experience than the borrowers/savers or the pay in full group with respect to mutual


                                               14
funds, stocks, or bonds, as well as less experience than these other groups with home equity
loans, mortgages, and auto loans.


4a.    Characteristics by Experience Segment
       Our segmentation captures meaningfully different behaviors, even though the four
clusters are defined only with respect to shared experiences, not on the basis of demographics,
debt literacy, or perceived level of indebtedness. Therefore, we set out to examine whether there
is a relationship between demographics, debt literacy, and these clusters: Are those in the pay in
full group financially better off (e.g., in terms of income or wealth), more financially
knowledgeable, and/or more secure in their level of indebtedness? Are the AFS users financially
worse off, less financially literate, and/or less secure in their level of indebtedness? Finally, who
are the fee payers? Table 5 provides descriptive statistics for these four clusters with respect to
their demographics (panel A) and debt literacy (panel B). Following this discussion we report
the results of a multinomial logit analysis which examines cluster assignment as a function of all
these factors.
       With respect to demographics, the payers in full have the highest income (43% have
income over $75,000) and wealth (74% have financial assets in excess of $50,000). They are
more likely to be married and to be white than are members of the other three clusters.
Borrowers/savers have incomes almost as high as the pay in full group, similar levels of
marriage, are the second-oldest group, and tend to be men (62%). In terms of wealth, this group
is not quite as wealthy as the payers in full, with only 52% having financial assets above
$50,000. The AFS users have the lowest income (53% have income below $30,000) and are
most likely to be women (58%) and to be single or separated (47%). Finally, the fee payers look
most like the “average” American, with income distributed roughly similarly as in the overall
sample, and other demographics (age, gender, marital status, and race) roughly comparable to the
entire sample. Both the AFS users and the fee payers have considerably fewer financial assets
than do the other two groups, with only 24% and 28%, respectively, having financial assets in
excess of $50,000.
       With respect to debt literacy (panel B), the payers in full and borrowers/savers are both
more knowledgeable than the other two segments, scoring a considerably larger fraction of
correct answers on the three questions than the latter two groups. The fee payers and AFS users
are more likely to admit to not knowing the answers to the questions. These patterns are also


                                               15
reflected in measures of self-reported financial literacy; the fee payers and AFS users judge
themselves to be much less knowledgeable than do payers in full and borrowers/savers. We can
see this both in the average scores as well as in the distribution of scores. Whereas 48% and
53% of the payers in full and borrowers/savers ranked themselves in the top two scores with
respect to their financial knowledge, for fee payers and AFS users, these comparable figures are
15.3 and 23.5%, respectively. In short, from the univariate statistics, the two clusters that pay the
highest credit card fees and access the highest cost borrowing methods tend to be financially
worse off and have lower levels of debt literacy.
        Of course, all of these univariate measures are correlated, and therefore we must consider
all of the demographic variables simultaneously by using a multivariate approach to tease out the
marginal relationship between debt literacy and behavior. The dependent variable in our analysis
is an indicator for the four clusters we have identified in the data, and we use a multinomial logit
analysis.
        We have four correlated measures of financial literacy: the self-reported measure of
literacy and objective measures resulting from the answers to the three questions discussed
above. The answers to the latter questions can be more finely characterized. For example,
respondents with incorrect answers to the question about interest compounding are divided into
two groups: those who underestimated and those who overestimated how quickly debt can
double. Moreover, we add a dummy for those who did not know the answer to this question as
this is a sizable and also distinct group of respondents. We also include a dummy for those who
refused to answer the literacy questions.16
        All incorrect responses to the second literacy question were underestimates of how many
years it would take to eliminate credit card debt. We aggregate the responses into those who
made large underestimates (answered that it would take less than five years and between five and
ten years to eliminate credit card debt) versus those who chose a longer yet incorrect time period
(between ten and fifteen years). The incorrect answers to the third question characterize two
distinct types of respondents: those who failed to realize that the implicit interest rate out of a
stream of payment is higher than 20%, and those who failed to recognize that the stream of
payments has a higher present value and incorrectly stated that the two payment options are the



16
  This is a small but rather heterogeneous group of respondents. For some questions, there is a high prevalence of
African-Americans who refused to answer the literacy questions.


                                                      16
same. We keep these two groups separate. For the second and third measures of literacy we
again add dummies for those who did not know the answer or refused to answer.
        Among the demographic variables, we include age and age squared to capture the
potential nonlinear impact of age. We also include dummies for gender, race, and marital status.
We add dummies for larger household sizes, characterizing those with four members and five or
more members, and a dummy for those who are not employed; these families may be more
vulnerable to shocks. Finally, we add dummies for household income and wealth, which can
capture financial situation, skills and ability, or individual preferences such as patience and
thriftiness. To consider how these demographic variables explain the four clusters, in the
appendix we report a multinomial logit regression across the four clusters considering the
demographic variables only (Table A2), and we then add the financial literacy variables to the
set of demographics (Table 6).
        Table 6 reports the marginal effect of each variable in the multinomial logit regressions
across the four clusters. For brevity, we report the estimates of the financial literacy variables
only but we comment on the estimates of the demographic variables when appropriate.
Moreover, rather than reporting the estimates with respect to a reference group, we calculate the
marginal effects in comparison to all the other clusters. We first consider the self-reported
measure of literacy (Table 6, first set of estimates). Even after accounting for demographics,
those who display higher levels of literacy are more likely to locate in cluster 1. Levels of self-
assessed literacy above the mean score (score of higher than 4) are associated with higher
chances of being among those who pay in full, and the likelihood of being in this group is
greatest for those with high self-assessed knowledge (scores of 6 and 7). Individuals in this
cluster are also those with high incomes (income greater than $75,000) and high wealth (see also
Table A2). Note that African-Americans and Hispanics and those with large families are less
likely to be in the pay in full group.
        Self-reported financial knowledge is not related to the behavior of those in cluster 2, the
borrowers/savers.17 These individuals have relatively high income, as noted before, and they do
not display characteristics that are usually associated with debt problems (e.g., large families,
unemployed, or divorced or separated). Income and race are the only variables that characterize


17
  Note that this finding goes against the argument of “learning by experience.” Respondents in cluster 2 have the
highest experience with saving and borrowing. They own the highest percentage of assets and have used borrowing
the most. Nevertheless they carry balances on their credit cards and pay fees and finance charges.


                                                     17
those in cluster 2. While borrowers/savers do carry credit card balances and tend to pay finance
charges, this behavior seems less likely to be due to lack of knowledge, and may reflect
“inattention” as pointed out in other papers that look at credit card mistakes.18
           Those in cluster 3, the fee payers, are considerably less likely to report high levels of
financial knowledge, even after controlling for many demographic traits. These respondents are
also more likely to have lower levels of wealth, to be African-American, and to have large
families.
           Low levels of financial literacy also characterize AFS users in cluster 4. These
respondents are much less likely to report high levels of literacy and more likely to be
unemployed or to have lower incomes (income less than $30,000). We find similar patterns when
we use the three measures of debt literacy instead of the self-reported measures of financial
literacy (Table 6, last three sets of estimates). Those who overestimated how long it takes for
debt to double may be lulled into borrowing more or not paying on time. Indeed, those who are
less likely to be knowledgeable about interest compounding, both because they overestimated the
number of years it takes for debt to double or because they did not know the answer to this
question, are less likely to belong to the pay in full group and more likely to belong to the AFS
users group. As mentioned above, these two clusters characterize very different types of
borrowing behavior and debt literacy remains a predictor of these two groups even after
accounting for a rich set of characteristics, including income and wealth. Being unable to answer
the question about interest compounding also characterizes those who belong to cluster 3, the
pay fees segment, who tend to carry balances and pay finance charges and penalty fees. On the
other hand, those who did not know the answer to the question about interest compounding are
less likely to belong to cluster 2, the borrowers/savers, who are likely to carry balances and not
pay on time.
           Turning to the question about minimum credit card payments (second measure of
literacy), we find that those who make mistakes, both small and large, in answering this question
are significantly more likely to belong to the AFS users group. Those who display the lowest
level of debt literacy, i.e., responded that they do not know the answer to this question, are also
more likely to belong to this group. Conversely, those who made small mistakes or did not know
the answer to the question are less likely to belong to the pay in full or borrowers/savers clusters.


18
     See Scholnick, Massoud, and Saunders (2008).


                                                    18
         Estimates for the third debt literacy question, which was answered correctly only by a
small fraction of respondents, show similar findings: those who answered this question
incorrectly (i.e., chose option (a) or thought the two options were the same) or did not know the
answer to the question are much less likely to belong to the pay in full group. On the other hand,
those who made mistakes in answering this question are more likely to belong to the pay fees
cluster. As with other literacy questions, those who are less knowledgeable are also less likely to
belong to cluster 2, again emphasizing the differences between this cluster and clusters 3 and 4.19
         In summary, for each measure of financial literacy, there is a strong relationship between
literacy and debt behavior, even after controlling for demographics. The more financially
knowledgeable, who grasp basic concepts about debt, are much more likely to pay their credit
cards in full, while those who are less literate are more likely to pay fees or be AFS users. Our
borrowers/savers are rather knowledgeable and have high incomes, yet tend to carry credit card
balances and pay finance charges, perhaps because these charges are not particularly
consequential for this group. In the next section we try to address this issue by examining self-
reported debt loads.


5.       Overindebtedness
         According to intertemporal models, consumers borrow to smooth consumption over the
life cycle. Variations in debt over time and across individuals would not necessarily indicate that
anyone was “overlevered” or “underlevered.” Yet imperfections in financial markets and shocks
might lead individuals to conclude that their debt level was suboptimal. Some may suffer from
credit constraints and be unable to borrow as much as they would like. Others may be hit by
unexpected negative shocks and carry higher debt loads than they might otherwise prefer. The
existing literature has largely failed to consider that some may accumulate too much debt by
being unaware of the consequences of their own choices. We consider the latter possibility,
looking for links between debt levels and lack of financial knowledge.
         In the survey, we sought to understand whether people have difficulties paying off their
debt. While we recognize the potential problems with self-reported measures of debt levels,
these reports give information about credit constraints and consumers’ interest in additional
borrowing. To gauge debt levels, we asked individuals the following question:

19
  If debt literacy is measured with error and the errors are random (the classical measurement error problem), then
our estimates of debt literacy underestimate the true effect.


                                                      19
       Which of the following best describes your current debt position?
          a. I have too much debt right now and I have or may have difficulty paying it off.
          b. I have about the right amount of debt right now and I face no problems with it.
          c. I have too little debt right now. I wish I could get more.
          d. I just don’t know.

In aggregate, in November 2007, before the financial crisis hit the economy, 26.4% of
respondents in our representative sample of Americans already said they have or may have
difficulty paying off debt (have difficulty with debt). Another group, 11.1%, “just didn’t know”
their debt position (unsure). We focus primarily on these two groups.
       Paralleling our analysis in the last section, we first report on the traits of these different
groups in univariate terms (Table 7) and then provide a multinomial logit analysis of debt loads
(Table A3). Looking at Table 7, one can see that relative to those who are comfortable with
their level of debt, those experiencing difficulty with debt are younger and have fewer financial
assets and lower incomes. Note that they are disproportionately drawn from the pay fees cluster,
while almost none are part of the pay in full segment. In terms of debt literacy, they rank
themselves the lowest of the four groups.
       The “unsure,” the 11% who were unable to judge whether they have too much or too
little debt, tend to be disproportionately female (nearly 70%), African-American (18%), and
unmarried (60%): the same characteristics displayed by those with low debt literacy. With
respect to income, they are disproportionately drawn from the lowest income group (59% with
household income under $30,000 per year), and have considerably less wealth than the 60% who
categorized their debt load as “about right.” With respect to financial knowledge, their debt
literacy is considerably weaker than that of respondents who judged their debt to be either about
right or even too high. Respondents in this group were also more likely to select “do not know”
as the answer to the debt literacy questions than were the other two groups. This group is
disproportionately drawn from the AFS users segment.
       We perform a multinomial logit analysis of the three groups mentioned above: those
having difficulty with debt, the unsure, and those with the right amount of debt. As predictors
for these debt outcomes, we add dummies for the different measures of financial literacy (Table
8). Moreover, we use demographic variables, including age and age squared, and dummies for
gender, marital status, race, family size, employment status, and income and wealth. Given that




                                                20
estimates for these demographics alone are reported in the appendix (Table A3), we do not
report these estimates in the table, but we comment on them in the text when appropriate.
       We find that self-reported literacy again shows a very strong relationship to self-assessed
debt burdens. Those who reported higher levels of literacy are more likely to belong to the group
who reported having no difficulty handling their current debt. The effect is not only sizable but it
tends to increase with higher scores for self-assessed literacy. Conversely, those with lower self-
reported literacy levels are much more likely to have reported having difficulty with debt, and
again there is a monotonic (negative) relationship between financial literacy and having too
much debt. Although the estimates are less sizable than for those who have or may have
difficulty with debt, the unsure are also much less likely to display high levels of self-assessed
literacy (Table 8). Moreover, those who are employed and have higher income and higher
wealth are much more likely to have reported that they have the right amount of debt. Finally,
women, African-Americans, and those with low income and wealth are more likely to have
reported an inability to judge their debt load (see also Table A3).
       When we consider the other measures of literacy, we find similar results. Most
importantly, these results are consistent with the multinomial logit for the experience segments.
Specifically, those who overestimated the number of years it takes for debt to double (first
measure of literacy) are also more likely to have reported that they have or may have difficulty
paying off debt. On the other hand, those who made mistakes in answering this question or did
not know the answer to this question are much less likely to have reported that they have the
right amount of debt; they are more likely to belong to the unsure group.
       Knowledge about how to eliminate credit card debt (second literacy question) is also
related to self-assessed levels of debt. In this case, those who display the least knowledge, i.e.,
claimed not to know the answer to this question, are less likely to have reported having the right
amount of debt. Turning to the answer to the question about the more advantageous payment
option, we find again that those who were not able to answer this question are less likely to have
reported having the right amount of debt; they are more likely to belong to the unsure group.
       For completeness, in Table 9 we report the estimates in which we also account for the
three dummies characterizing different clusters (the first cluster is the reference group). In this
way, we can assess whether financial experiences have a direct effect on the amount of debt that
respondents have and whether the effect of debt literacy remains significant after accounting for
the behavior characterized by the four clusters. Table A4 reports the estimates excluding the


                                               21
literacy variables. As shown in Table 9, the effect of literacy weakens only for the third measure
of debt literacy; otherwise, there is still an effect even after accounting for the clusters. Thus,
financial literacy is related to debt loads above and beyond the effect it has on financial
experiences. Moreover, even after accounting for a large set of demographic characteristics,
those who belong to the three segments that do not pay credit cards in full are disproportionately
more likely to have difficulty with debt (Table A4). Similarly, members of clusters 2, 3, and 4
are much less likely to have reported that they have the right amount of debt. Note that not just
the fee payers and the AFS users reported having difficulty with debt, but those in cluster 2, who
carry some balances and pay some finance charges, also end up with too much debt (Tables 9
and A4).


6.     The Cost of Ignorance
       In this section, we offer partial estimates of what we call “the cost of ignorance,” or the
financial transaction costs incurred by less-informed Americans and the component of these
costs that is particularly related to lack of financial knowledge. For the purpose of our
calculations, we focus exclusively on credit card debt (Table 10).
       This calculation of expected costs has two components—the likelihood of and the costs
of various behaviors. First, we calculate the likelihood of engaging in various credit card
behaviors that give rise to explicit fees or finance charges: paying bills late, going over the credit
limit, using cash advances, and paying the minimum amount only. These likelihoods come
directly from empirical estimates using the data on credit card behavior, debt literacy, and
demographics. We compare consumers with higher versus lower financial knowledge, with the
least financially savvy in our population defined as those who judge their financial knowledge
equal to 4 or lower on our seven-point scale. Among cardholders, this group comprises 28.7% of
the population. As we have mentioned before, the large majority of respondents chose values
well above 4. For the less knowledgeable, we calculate both the average likelihood of engaging
in fee-inducing credit card behaviors as well as the incremental likelihood of engaging in these
behaviors as a function of having lower financial skills. The latter estimates come directly from
specifications analogous to those we employ to characterize the determination of experience
segments, where we analyze credit card behavior instead of experience segments. For example,
the unconditional likelihood that a cardholder reported incurring at least one over-the-limit
charge in the prior year was 5.6%. Our estimation, after controlling for income, demographics,


                                                22
and other factors, is that the incremental probability of incurring an over-the-limit fee for a low
literacy individual is 1.5%. Thus, the average likelihood of a less financially literate individual
(representing 28.7% of the population) incurring at least one over-the-limit fee is 7.1%.
           The second part of the calculation estimates the costs incurred by the cardholder,
conditional on engaging in the particular behavior. For late fees, over-the-limit fees, and cash
advances, we assume that the individual who admits to these activities has only one of these
events per year, which is a very conservative assumption. We estimate the cost per incidence
from industry data. For cardholders who pay only the minimum amount, we estimate the
finance charges paid for one year assuming that the cardholder’s balance equals the national
average balance (about $6,000), that stated finance charges equal the national average (14.5% in
2007), and that the cardholder makes no additional purchases during the year. Again, we select
these assumptions to be conservative. We are not attempting to measure all of the costs of
transacting, even with a credit card, as we have not included finance charges for revolvers who
pay more than the minimum, charges for insufficient funds, annual fees, or other charges.
           As Table 10 shows, these four behaviors give rise to collective fees and charges of $26.8
billion paid by cardholders, most of which are finance charges due to paying only the minimum
amount due. While the less knowledgeable account for only 28.7% of the cardholder population,
they account for 42% of these charges, because of their higher likelihood of incurring them.
Thus, they bear a disproportionate share of the fees associated with fee-inducing behaviors.
Specifically, the average fees paid by a low-knowledge individual are 50% higher than those
paid by an average cardholder. Perhaps more importantly, of these four types of charges
incurred by less-knowledgeable cardholders, one-third are incremental charges that are
empirically linked to low financial literacy after controlling for many variables, including
income, age, family structure, wealth, and other demographic factors.20 Regardless of whether
one judges these fees to be appropriate, the cost of ignorance is sizable.


7.         Implications and Conclusions
           With this work, we hope to break new ground in a few ways. First, we focus attention on
an important component of financial literacy—debt literacy. Second, we consider the rich set of
financial experiences that individuals have, rather than simply focusing on one behavior. Third,


20
     This number can be derived from table 10 by dividing $3.5 billion by $11.2 billion.


                                                         23
we take into account individuals’ assessments of their own debt levels. Finally, we design a
collaborative research project that blends scholarly research with timely market research. Our
conclusions suggest a complex set of interactions among debt literacy, financial experiences,
demographics, and debt loads.
       Low levels of debt literacy are the norm, and understanding of the basic mechanics of
debt is especially limited among the elderly, women, certain minorities, and people with lower
incomes and wealth. Particularly intriguing—and worthy of additional research—is the notion
that certain respondent groups, like the elderly, think they know considerably more than they
actually do. This disparity may help explain the incidence of financial frauds perpetrated against
the elderly. Moreover, women—both young and old—exhibit substantially lower debt literacy
than men.
       Second, people have rich sets of financial experiences. Our work collapses these
experiences into four segments and shows that the segments are closely linked with both
demographics and financial knowledge. While it may be reassuring to know that the people who
always pay credit cards in full are more financially skilled, it is troubling that the people whose
financial transaction patterns are characterized by high-cost borrowing are those who come from
vulnerable demographic groups and—even after controlling for these factors—are less debt
literate. People who make financial choices that incur avoidable fees and charges (e.g., only
paying the minimum balance on credit cards, incurring late or over-the-limit fees, using
alternative financial service credit such as payday loans, tax refund loans, or pawnshops) are
those with a weaker understanding of the implications of debt. While our sample did not
specifically study subprime mortgages, it would be useful to know if subprime borrowers were
disproportionately drawn from the low debt literacy groups.
       Finally, in November 2007, over a quarter of Americans felt overburdened with respect
to their debt loads and another 11% were unable to assess their debt position. Thus, even before
the onset of the current financial crisis, more than 40% of families had issues with their debt
position. Moreover, those facing difficulty paying off debt were drawn from certain
demographic groups, had common financial experiences characterized by costly borrowing, and
tended to have lower levels of debt literacy.
       Our empirical results suggest a sizeable cost of financial ignorance as well. Using credit
cards as an example, we find that the less financially knowledgeable pay a disproportionately
larger fraction of fees and finance charges than do the more knowledgeable. Our empirical


                                                24
 analysis suggests that about a third of the fees and charges paid by low literacy individuals are
 related to lack of knowledge, even after controlling for observable differences in income, wealth,
 family status, and other factors.
            We think there are a number of implications from our findings. If poor financial
 decisions partly result from lack of financial knowledge, then in certain circumstances, one may
 be able to design mechanisms to compensate for it. These solutions might be embodied in auto
 enrollment options, such as those studied by Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick (2003, 2004),
 and Choi, Laibson, and Madrian (2004), among others. However, once one recognizes the wide
 range of financial choices that consumers may potentially face, it becomes harder to conceive
 that poor financial decisions can be overcome in this fashion. For example, someone who needs
 additional funds will have to search for and compare alternatives ranging from extending their
 borrowing on their credit cards to taking out a home equity loan to overdrafting a bank account
 to taking out a payday loan to borrowing from a friend or going to a pawn shop. As much as we
 could try to circumscribe the choices, individuals will need to make active decisions. Our work
 suggests that financial literacy is related to the choices that people make, with less
 knowledgeable people making more costly decisions—even after controlling for a host of other
 factors. We interpret this to mean that additional research on financial literacy remains an
 important priority.


 Appendix
 Description of the survey
            The survey was fielded in November 2007 by the staff of TNS Global. TNS is the
largest custom market research provider in the United States. It is a leader in opinion polling and
political and social research. It has offices in more than eighty countries across the Americas,
Africa, Asia Pacific, Europe, and the Middle East.21
            The data were collected via a phone interview from a sample of 1,000 U.S. respondents.
Weights were constructed to make the final sample representative of the U.S. population with
respect to income, gender, age, and other observable traits such as household size, region, and
market size. The survey reports information on several demographic characteristics, such as age,
gender, race and ethnicity, marital status, employment, region of residence, family type, and


 21
      See http://www.tnsglobal.com/.


                                                 25
family size. In addition, it provides self-reported information on family income and wealth.
Respondents identified their household income category (one of four options) and the category
into which their total investable assets fall (ten brackets are provided). Total investable assets
include any sums in cash, checking or savings accounts, stocks, bonds, mutual funds, insurance
policies, and any money in IRAs. Respondents are asked to exclude primary residence, real
estate, closely-held businesses or assets in any employer-sponsored savings or retirement plans,
including a 401(k) plan, from their measure of investable assets.




                                                 26
                                           References

Bernheim, Douglas (1995), “Do households appreciate their financial vulnerabilities? An
      analysis of actions, perceptions, and public policy,” in Tax Policy and Economic Growth,
      American Council for Capital Formation, Washington, DC, pp. 1-30.
Bernheim, Douglas (1998), “Financial illiteracy, education and retirement saving,” in O.
      Mitchell and S. Schieber (eds.), Living with Defined Contribution Pensions, University of
      Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia, pp. 38-68.
Campbell, John (2006), “Household Finance,” Journal of Finance 61, pp. 1553-1604.

Chen, Haipeng, and Akshay Rao (2007), “When Two Plus Two Is Not Equal to Four: Errors in
       Processing Multiple Percentage Changes,” Journal of Consumer Research 34, pp. 327-
       340.

Choi, James, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick (2003), “Optimal Defaults,”
       American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 93, May, pp. 180-185.

Choi, James, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick (2004), “For Better or For
       Worse: Default Effects and 401(k) Savings Behavior” in David Wise (ed.), Perspectives
       in the Economics of Aging, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004, pp. 81-121.

Choi, James, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian (2004), “Plan Design and 401(k) Savings
       Outcomes,” National Tax Journal 57(2), pp. 275-98.

Christelis, Dimitris, Tullio Jappelli, and Mario Padula (2008), “Cognitive abilities and portfolio
       choice,” mimeo, University of Salerno.

Hastings, Justine, and Lydia Tejeda-Ashton (2008), “Financial Literacy, Information, and
       Demand Elasticity: Survey and Experimental Evidence from Mexico,” NBER Working
       Paper n. 14538.

Hilgert, Marianne, Jeanne Hogarth, and Sondra Beverly (2003), “Household Financial
        Management: The Connection between Knowledge and Behavior,” Federal Reserve
        Bulletin, 309-32.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell (2006), “Financial Literacy and Planning:
       Implications for Retirement Wellbeing,” MRRC Working Paper n. 2006-144.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell (2007a), “Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The
       Role of Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth,” Journal of Monetary
       Economics 54, pp. 205-224

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia Mitchell (2007b), “Financial Literacy and Retirement Planning:
       New Evidence from the Rand American Life Panel,” MRRC Working Paper n. 2007-157.




                                             27
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia Mitchell (2008), “Planning and Financial Literacy: How Do
       Women Fare?” American Economic Review 98(2), pp. 413-417.

Lusardi, Annamaria, Olivia Mitchell, and Vilsa Curto (2008), “Financial Literacy Among the
       Young,” mimeo, Dartmouth College.

Mandell, Lewis (2008), “Financial Education in High School,” in Annamaria Lusardi (ed.),
      Overcoming the Saving Slump: How to Increase the Effectiveness of Financial Education
      and Saving Programs, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 257-279.

Miles, David (2004), “The UK Mortgage Market: Taking a Longer-Term View,” Working Paper,
       UK Treasury.

Moore, Danna (2003), “Survey of Financial Literacy in Washington State: Knowledge,
      Behavior, Attitudes, and Experiences,” Technical Report n. 03-39, Social and Economic
      Sciences Research Center, Washington State University.

National Council on Economic Education (NCEE), 2005, “What American teens and adults
       know about economics,” Washington, D.C.

Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (2005), Improving Financial
      Literacy: Analysis of Issues and Policies, Paris, France.

Perry, Vanessa, and Marlene Morris (2005), “Who Is in Control? The Role of Self-Perception,
       Knowledge, and Income in Explaining Consumer Financial Behavior,” Journal of
       Consumer Affairs 39, pp. 299-313.

Peters, Ellen, Judith Hibbard, Paul Slovic, and Nathan Dieckmann (2007), “Numeracy Skills and
        the Communication, Comprehension, and Use of Risk-Benefit Information,” Health
        Affairs 26(2), pp. 741-748.

Smith, Barbara, and Fiona Stewart (2008), “Learning from the Experience of OECD Countries:
       Lessons for Policy, Programs and Evaluations,” in Annamaria Lusardi (ed.), Overcoming
       the Saving Slump: How to Increase the Effectiveness of Financial Education and Saving
       Programs, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 345-367.

van Rooij, Maarten, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie (2007), “Financial Literacy and Stock
      Market Participation,” MRRC Working Paper n. 2007-162.

Volk, Robert (2007), “Clarifying Values: Non-Numerical Approaches for Low Literacy
   Patients,” presentation to the 2007 Summer Institute on Informed Patient Choice, Center for
   the Evaluative Clinical Sciences at Dartmouth College.

Scholnick, Barry, Nadia Massoud, and Anthony Saunders (2008), “The Impact of Wealth on
       Inattention: Evidence from Credit Card Repayments,” mimeo, University of Alberta,
       Canada.



                                            28
Stango, Victor, and Jonathan Zinman (2008), “Exponential Growth Bias and Household
       Finance,” Working Paper, Dartmouth College.

Ward, Joe (1963), “Hierarchical grouping to optimize an objective function,” Journal of
       American Statistical Association 58, pp. 236-244.

Yoong, Joanne (2008), “Financial Literacy and Stock Market Participation,” mimeo, Stanford
      University.




                                             29
Table 1. TNS Survey Debt Literacy Questions: Weighted Results
Panel A: First literacy question
Suppose you owe $1,000 on your credit card and the interest rate you are charged is 20% per year compounded annually. If you didn’t pay anything off, at this interest rate, how many years would it
take for the amount you owe to double?
                                                                                     Age                                     Gender                                 Household income
                                                                                                                                                   Under          $30,000 -     $50,000 -      Above
                                        Total             < 30        31 to 40     41 to 50    51 to 65    > 65          Male        Female      $30,000           $49,999       $74,999      $75,000
2 years                                   9.6%             9.7%        13.8%         9.6%          6.7%       9.8%        8.5%        10.6%         13.6%         6.9%         10.3%          6.4%
Less than 5 years (correct)               35.9%           43.2%        33.4%        34.2%          38.0%     28.6%        46.3%       25.5%         25.6%        32.4%         38.7%          48.4%
Between 5 and 10 years                    18.8%           22.4%        20.2%        21.0%          15.7%     15.9%        16.1%       21.5%         18.2%        19.4%         20.3%          18.1%
More than 10 years                        13.1%            5.0%        10.7%        14.4%          18.1%     11.3%        14.1%       12.2%         10.3%        18.2%         17.3%          10.2%
Do not know                               18.3%           16.2%        16.1%        19.2%          16.3%     28.4%        11.4%       25.2%         26.5%        18.1%         11.4%          13.5%
Prefer not to answer                      4.3%             3.5%         5.8%         1.7%          5.1%       6.0%        3.6%         5.1%         6.0%          5.0%          2.1%          3.4%
Number of observations                    1,000             141          189          226           328        116         505          495          264          163           193            380

Panel B: Second literacy question
You owe $3,000 on your credit card. You pay a minimum payment of $30 each month. At an Annual Percentage Rate of 12% (or 1% per month), how many years would it take to eliminate your credit
card debt if you made no additional new charges?
                                                                                Age                                      Gender                          Household income
                                                                                                                                            Under      $30,000 -      $50,000 -        Above
                                          Total         < 30       31 to 40    41 to 50    51 to 65      > 65       Male       Female      $30,000      $49,999        $74,999        $75,000
Less than 5 years                         3.8%             6.8%         2.8%         4.5%          3.6%       1.1%        2.0%         5.6%         6.3%          1.3%          1.7%          4.1%
Between 5 and 10 years                    12.4%           15.9%        13.6%        11.1%          10.9%     12.9%        11.4%       13.4%         15.4%        10.8%         13.6%          9.4%
Between 10 and 15 years                   21.6%           20.5%        24.3%        23.2%          21.4%     15.3%        21.3%       21.8%         16.2%        25.5%         26.3%          21.9%
Never, continue to be in debt (correct)   35.4%           36.1%        31.5%        33.9%          39.8%     32.4%        45.0%       25.8%         28.0%        35.4%         36.6%          43.2%
Do not know                               21.7%           17.0%        20.1%        24.7%          19.3%     30.7%        15.7%       27.7%         28.1%        21.9%         19.4%          15.6%
Prefer not to answer                      5.1%             3.7%         7.8%         2.6%          4.9%       7.7%        4.6%         5.6%         6.1%          5.0%          2.5%          5.7%
Number of observations                    1,000             141          189          226           328        116         505          495          264          163           193            380

Panel C: Third literacy question
You purchase an appliance which costs $1,000. To pay for this appliance, you are given the following two options: a) Pay 12 monthly installments of $100 each b) Borrow at a 20% annual interest rate
and pay back $1200 one year from now. Which is the more advantageous offer, in other words which one will cost less?
                                                                                     Age                                       Gender                             Household income
                                                                                                                                                    Under       $30,000 -     $50,000 -       Above
                                          Total            < 30       31 to 40     41 to 50     51 to 65       > 65        Male       Female       $30,000       $49,999       $74,999       $75,000
Option (a)                                40.6%           43.0%        41.7%        40.0%          39.9%     39.0%        36.3%       45.0%         46.0%        39.7%         39.2%          36.0%
Option (b) (correct)                      6.9%             6.5%         6.2%         7.7%          7.5%       5.8%        9.3%         4.6%         3.7%          5.9%          8.9%          10.1%
They are the same                         38.8%           37.5%        41.3%        37.2%          39.5%     37.6%        44.6%       33.0%         32.8%        41.9%         41.6%          41.8%
Do not know                               9.2%             9.9%         5.0%        11.1%          9.5%      10.8%        5.3%        13.0%         12.3%         8.0%          6.6%          8.1%
Prefer not to answer                      4.5%             3.2%         5.9%         4.0%          3.6%       6.9%        4.5%         4.4%         5.2%          4.6%          3.7%          4.0%
Number of observations                    1,000             141          189          226           328        116         505          495          264          163           193            380


                                                                                              30
Panel D: Self-Assessed Financial Literacy
On a scale from 1 to 7, where 1 means very low and 7 means very high, how would you assess your overall financial knowledge?
                                                                                  Age                                        Gender                      Household income

                                                                                                                                              Under    $30,000 -   $50,000 -    Above
                                        Total             < 30      31 to 40     41 to 50       51 to 65   >65      Male        Female       $30,000    $49,999     $74,999    $75,000
1 = Very low                            2.0%             2.60%       3.00%        1.60%          1.80%      0.90%     1.80%       2.20%      4.70%      0.60%       0.90%      0.50%
2                                       2.9%             2.60%       0.70%        3.70%          3.90%      2.80%     2.50%       3.20%      4.60%      4.10%       1.40%      1.10%
3                                       7.7%             8.80%       10.50%       9.90%          5.70%      3.20%     6.60%       8.80%      10.80%     7.00%       5.50%      6.20%
4                                       19.5%           27.20%       26.70%      18.10%          15.50%    12.10%    16.70%      22.50%      24.10%    18.40%      15.40%      17.90%
5                                       31.9%           30.40%       31.20%      27.70%          36.20%    30.80%    32.30%      31.50%      26.70%    30.50%      40.30%      33.40%
6                                       18.9%           12.60%       14.80%      20.20%          19.20%    30.70%    22.60%      15.30%      12.80%    19.70%      21.80%      23.80%
7 = Very High                           10.7%            9.20%       7.70%       12.40%          9.90%     16.30%    11.50%       9.80%      8.00%      9.90%      11.10%      14.00%
Do not know                             2.3%             3.80%       0.70%        3.20%          2.20%      1.70%     1.90%       2.60%      2.50%      5.10%       1.50%      0.50%
Prefer not to answer                    3.9%             2.70%       4.70%        3.10%          5.50%      1.30%     3.80%       4.00%      5.70%      4.50%       2.10%      2.60%
Average score                           4.88              4.66        4.67         4.89           4.93       5.33      5.01           4.74    4.45       4.91         5.1       5.17
Number of observations                  1,000             141          189         226            328        116       505            495     264        163         193        380


Note: The average score excludes the survey answers "Do not know" and "Prefer not to answer."




                                                                                            31
Table 2. Financial Experience Measures, Total Sample
This table reports the mean and standard deviation of the frequencies of the various financial experiences by 1,000 survey respondents. All
frequencies are weighted. The survey was conducted in November 2007 by TNS Global.
                                                                                                                    Sample
In the last twelve months, which of the following describes your use of credit cards?        Short name              mean        Sample SD
I don’t have any credit cards or did not use them                                            CC None                 .206            .405
In some months, I ran an outstanding balance and paid finance charges                        CC Balance              .308            .462
In some months, I paid the minimum payment only                                              CC Min                  .213            .410
In some months, I was charged a late charge for late payment                                 CC Late                 .076            .265
In some months, I was charged an over the limit charge for charges exceeding my credit
line                                                                                         CC OTL                  .044            .206
In some months, I used the cards for a cash advance                                          CC Advance              .052            .223
My account was closed down by the credit card company                                        CC Closed               .015            .122
I always paid my credit cards in full                                                        CC PIF                  .368            .482

                                                                                                                    Sample
Which of the following financial transactions have you EVER done?                            Short name              mean        Sample SD
I opened a checking or debit card account                                                    Checking                .914            .280
I opened a savings account or bought a CD                                                    Savings                 .806            .395
I invested in mutual funds                                                                   Mut. Fund               .388            .488
I invested in individual stocks                                                              Stocks                  .341            .474
I bought savings bonds or other bonds                                                        Bonds                   .349            .477

I took out a loan for student education                                                      Loan: Stu               .270            .444
I took out an auto loan                                                                      Loan: Auto              .637            .481
I took out a home equity loan                                                                Loan: HE                .305            .461
I got (or refinanced) a mortgage                                                             Loan: Mort              .493            .500

I got a short term “payday” or “salary advance” loan                                         Loan: Payday            .078            .269
I got a “refund anticipation loan” to accelerate the receipt of my tax payments              Loan: Refund            .044            .204
I got an auto title loan                                                                     Loan: Title             .065            .247
I used a pawn shop                                                                           Loan: Pawn              .107            .310
I bought goods on a lay-away plan or at a rent-to-own store                                  Lay-A-Way/Rent          .191            .393

                                                                             32
Table 3. Conditional Financial Experience Measures, Total Sample
Each cell represents the fraction of individuals who have certain financial experiences, conditional on having experience with the activity listed at the top of the column. The first column reports the
unconditional probabilities. The cells in gray represent the cases where conditional values exceed unconditional values of financial experiences. The survey of 1,000 people was conducted by TNS
Global in November 2007.


                                                                                                                                                                          Conditioning Financial Experience



                                   Unconditional Probability




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lay-A-Way/Rent
                                                                                                                                 CC: Cash Adv




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Loan: Payday


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Loan: Refund
                                                                                           CC: Min Pay
                                                                            CC: Balance




                                                                                                                                                 CC: Closed




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Loan: Auto




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Loan: Mort




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Loan: Title
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mut. Fund
                                                                CC: None




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Loan: HE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Loan: Stu
                                                                                                                                                                            Checking
                                                                                                                      CC: OTL
                                                                                                          CC: Late




                                                                                                                                                               CC: PIF




                                                                                                                                                                                        Savings




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Stocks


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Bonds




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Pawn
CC: None                       37%                             1.00        0.00           0.00           0.00        0.00       0.00            0.00          0.00        0.18         0.15       0.06         0.06      0.09     0.17         0.14          0.09        0.10          0.40            0.34            0.20           0.44    0.34
CC: Balance                    31%                             0.00        1.00           0.52           0.64        0.67       0.55            0.21          0.03        0.32         0.34       0.32         0.31      0.36     0.45         0.39          0.35        0.36          0.33            0.27            0.41           0.24    0.38
CC: Minimum Pay                21%                             0.00        0.36           1.00           0.63        0.60       0.59            0.22          0.02        0.22         0.21       0.17         0.16      0.16     0.29         0.23          0.21        0.21          0.30            0.31            0.24           0.30    0.32
CC: Late                        8%                             0.00        0.16           0.23           1.00        0.60       0.25            0.31          0.02        0.08         0.08       0.06         0.06      0.05     0.12         0.08          0.05        0.06          0.12            0.14            0.09           0.08    0.10
CC: OTL                         4%                             0.00        0.09           0.12           0.35        1.00       0.21            0.27          0.00        0.04         0.05       0.03         0.04      0.04     0.07         0.05          0.03        0.03          0.09            0.08            0.06           0.02    0.04
CC: Cash Advance               31%                             0.00        0.09           0.14           0.17        0.25       1.00            0.00          0.01        0.05         0.05       0.03         0.03      0.05     0.05         0.05          0.05        0.03          0.11            0.04            0.05           0.04    0.08
CC: Closed                      2%                             0.00        0.01           0.02           0.06        0.09       0.00            1.00          0.00        0.01         0.01       0.00         0.00      0.01     0.01         0.01          0.00        0.01          0.02            0.03            0.00           0.03    0.01
CC: PIF                        37%                             0.00        0.03           0.03           0.08        0.03       0.07            0.05          1.00        0.37         0.40       0.56         0.54      0.49     0.26         0.37          0.44        0.45          0.12            0.14            0.28           0.13    0.16
Checking                       91%                             0.83        0.96           0.96           0.94        0.93       0.88            1.00          0.92        1.00         0.97       0.97         0.97      0.97     0.96         0.97          0.97        0.97          0.99            1.00            0.98           0.95    0.95
Savings                        81%                             0.59        0.89           0.81           0.83        0.93       0.78            0.67          0.89        0.85         1.00       0.95         0.96      0.96     0.88         0.90          0.91        0.92          0.82            0.79            0.96           0.74    0.83
Mut. Fund                      39%                             0.11        0.40           0.31           0.33        0.31       0.24            0.13          0.59        0.41         0.46       1.00         0.77      0.63     0.43         0.47          0.58        0.54          0.25            0.21            0.36           0.24    0.27
Stocks                         34%                             0.10        0.34           0.26           0.29        0.28       0.19            0.13          0.50        0.36         0.41       0.67         1.00      0.58     0.37         0.42          0.52        0.49          0.26            0.33            0.33           0.30    0.26
Bonds                          35%                             0.15        0.41           0.26           0.24        0.30       0.31            0.21          0.47        0.37         0.41       0.57         0.60      1.00     0.41         0.45          0.49        0.48          0.25            0.31            0.42           0.21    0.31
Loan: Stu                      27%                             0.22        0.39           0.37           0.41        0.44       0.28            0.13          0.19        0.28         0.30       0.30         0.30      0.32     1.00         0.34          0.35        0.32          0.36            0.41            0.37           0.28    0.33
Loan: Auto                     64%                             0.44        0.80           0.71           0.71        0.79       0.59            0.38          0.64        0.68         0.71       0.78         0.78      0.82     0.81         1.00          0.87        0.85          0.75            0.73            0.85           0.62    0.71
Loan: HE                       30%                             0.13        0.35           0.30           0.24        0.19       0.31            0.05          0.37        0.32         0.34       0.46         0.46      0.43     0.40         0.42          1.00        0.48          0.26            0.29            0.40           0.23    0.25
Loan: Mort                     49%                             0.24        0.58           0.49           0.38        0.32       0.31            0.19          0.60        0.53         0.56       0.69         0.71      0.67     0.58         0.66          0.77        1.00          0.44            0.38            0.62           0.38    0.44
Loan: Payday                    8%                             0.15        0.08           0.11           0.12        0.16       0.16            0.13          0.03        0.08         0.08       0.05         0.06      0.05     0.10         0.09          0.07        0.07          1.00            0.59            0.20           0.37    0.19
Loan: Refund                    4%                             0.07        0.04           0.06           0.08        0.07       0.03            0.08          0.02        0.05         0.04       0.02         0.04      0.04     0.07         0.05          0.05        0.03          0.33            1.00            0.15           0.22    0.13
Loan: Title                     7%                             0.06        0.09           0.07           0.07        0.09       0.07            0.00          0.05        0.07         0.08       0.06         0.06      0.08     0.09         0.09          0.09        0.08          0.17            0.22            1.00           0.13    0.14
Pawn                           39%                             0.23        0.08           0.15           0.12        0.05       0.07            0.21          0.04        0.11         0.10       0.07         0.09      0.06     0.11         0.10          0.08        0.08          0.51            0.53            0.21           1.00    0.30
Lay-A-Way/Rent                 19%                             0.31        0.23           0.29           0.26        0.17       0.31            0.09          0.08        0.20         0.20       0.13         0.14      0.17     0.23         0.21          0.15        0.17          0.47            0.59            0.41           0.53    1.00


                                                                                                                                                                     33
Table 4: Financial Experience Segments
This table reports the incidences of various financial experiences, conditional on assignment to one of the four experience clusters. The clusters were defined with reference to
these experiences and not on the basis of demographic or debt literacy information.
                                                                                                                              Experience Segments
                                                                                                                        2: Borrowers/
                                                                                                   1: Pay in full           Savers             3: Pay fees       4: AFS users
                                                                                                           Std.                  Std.                 Std.                 Std.
                                                                                                 Mean      Dev.      Mean        Dev.       Mean      Dev.      Mean       Dev.
In the last twelve months, which of the following describes your use
of credit cards?                                                              Short name
I don’t have any credit cards or did not use them                             CC None             0.000      0.000      0.000       0.000     0.002     0.047    0.680      0.467
In some months, I ran an outstanding balance and paid finance charges         CC Balance          0.010      0.100      0.947       0.225     0.600     0.491    0.015      0.123
In some months, I paid the minimum payment only                               CC Minimum          0.010      0.102      0.273       0.447     0.559     0.497    0.008      0.090
In some months, I was charged a late charge for late payment                  CC Late             0.019      0.137      0.115       0.321     0.174     0.380    0.009      0.093
In some months, I was charged an over the limit charge for charges
exceeding my credit line                                                      CC OTL              0.000      0.000      0.060       0.238     0.118     0.324    0.000      0.000
In some months, I used the cards for a cash advance                           CC Advance          0.000      0.000      0.015       0.120     0.161     0.368    0.000      0.000
My account was closed down by the credit card company                         CC Closed           0.005      0.067      0.007       0.084     0.042     0.201    0.000      0.000
I always paid my credit cards in full                                         CC PIF              0.988      0.111      0.037       0.188     0.036     0.186    0.296      0.457

Which of the following financial transactions have you EVER done?           Short name
I opened a checking or debit card account                                   Checking             0.977     0.151       0.991      0.095      0.939     0.241     0.805     0.397
I opened a savings account or bought a CD                                   Savings/CD           0.949     0.221       0.982      0.135      0.797     0.403     0.622     0.486
I invested in mutual funds                                                  Mutual Fund          0.723     0.448       0.839      0.369      0.156     0.363     0.156     0.364
I invested in individual stocks                                             Stocks               0.640     0.481       0.825      0.381      0.119     0.324     0.119     0.325
I bought savings bonds or other bonds                                       Bonds                0.625     0.485       0.646      0.480      0.226     0.419     0.116     0.321
I took out a loan for student education                                     Student Loan         0.201     0.402       0.462      0.500      0.334     0.473     0.189     0.393
I took out an auto loan                                                     Auto Loan            0.770     0.422       0.940      0.238      0.657     0.476     0.380     0.486
I took out a home equity loan                                               Home Equity          0.485     0.501       0.538      0.500      0.251     0.434     0.111     0.314
I got (or refinanced) a mortgage                                            Mortgage             0.798     0.402       0.774      0.420      0.444     0.498     0.166     0.373
I got a short term “payday” or “salary advance” loan                        Payday Loan          0.024     0.154       0.084      0.279      0.079     0.271     0.122     0.328
I got a “refund anticipation loan” to accelerate the receipt of my tax
payments                                                                    Refund Loan          0.004     0.067       0.047       0.213     0.049     0.216     0.071     0.258
I got an auto title loan                                                    Auto Title Loan      0.047     0.212       0.118       0.324     0.063     0.243     0.064     0.244
I used a pawn shop                                                          Pawn                 0.019     0.138       0.135       0.344     0.103     0.304     0.178     0.383
I bought goods on a lay-away plan or at a rent-to-own store                 Lay-A-Way/Rent       0.064     0.246       0.248       0.433     0.228     0.420     0.240     0.428

Weighted share of sample                                                                        26.6%                 11.8%                 31.4%               30.2%
Number of observations (unweighted)                                                               292                   130                   305                 273

                                                                                    34
Table 5: Characteristics of Financial Experience Segments
This table reports statistics on the demographic and debt literacy variables for the total sample as well as for the four
clusters defined in Table 4.
                                                                             Experience Segments
                                                                        2: Borrowers/
                                  Total Sample        1: Pay in full        Savers           3: Pay fees       4: AFS users
                                           Std.                  Std.              Std.               Std.              Std.
Panel A: Demographics             Mean     Dev.       Mean      Dev.    Mean      Dev.      Mean      Dev.     Mean     Dev.

Age                                 47.8      14.4     53.1      14.4     49.5       12.9    45.1       13.3    45.4        14.9

Female                            50.0%    50.0%     43.5%    49.7%     37.8%     48.7%     52.4%    50.0%     58.0%    49.5%

White                             85.0%    35.7%     91.1%    28.6%     87.4%     33.3%     80.8%    39.4%     83.1%    37.5%
Black                              6.4%    24.6%      2.1%    14.2%      5.2%     22.2%     10.5%    30.7%      6.6%    24.9%
Hispanic                           3.6%    18.7%      1.5%    12.3%      1.4%     11.8%      4.9%    21.5%      5.1%    22.0%

Married                           64.0%    48.0%     74.3%    43.8%     72.8%     44.7%     62.6%    48.5%     53.1%    50.0%
Single                            16.0%    36.7%      9.5%    29.4%      8.6%     28.2%     16.9%    37.6%     23.7%    42.6%
Separated                         19.9%    40.0%     16.2%    36.9%     18.6%     39.1%     20.5%    40.4%     23.2%    42.3%

Household Income:
 Under $30,000                    32.8%    47.0%     16.7%    37.3%     10.2%     30.4%     35.8%    48.0%     52.9%    50.0%
 $30,000 to $49,999               20.4%    40.3%     20.1%    40.1%     17.3%     38.0%     21.1%    40.8%     21.3%    41.0%
 $50,000 to $74,999               18.2%    38.6%     20.2%    40.3%     30.8%     46.3%     17.5%    38.0%     12.3%    32.9%
 Above $75,000                    28.5%    45.2%     43.0%    49.6%     41.7%     49.5%     25.7%    43.8%     13.6%    34.3%

Not employed                      13.9%    34.6%      7.9%    27.0%      7.0%     25.6%     12.7%    33.3%     23.2%    42.3%

Financial Assets:
 Under $50,000                    58.2%    49.3%     26.5%    44.2%     47.9%     50.1%     76.1%    42.7%     71.6%    45.2%
 $50 - $100,000                   13.1%    33.8%     18.1%    38.6%     18.9%     39.3%      9.2%    29.0%     10.4%    30.6%
 $100 - $250,000                  11.6%    32.0%     19.1%    39.3%     13.4%     34.2%      9.6%    29.5%      6.3%    24.4%
 Over $250,000                    17.1%    37.7%     36.3%    48.2%     19.8%     40.0%      5.1%    22.0%     11.6%    32.1%

Panel B: Debt Literacy
Question 1 (debt doubling)
 % correct                        35.9%    48.0%     44.7%    49.8%     46.7%     50.1%     34.9%    47.7%     24.9%    43.3%
 % do not know                    18.3%    38.7%     11.7%    32.2%     10.4%     30.7%     23.6%    42.5%     21.7%    41.3%
Question 2 (min pay)
 % correct                        35.4%    47.8%     42.0%    49.4%     46.1%     50.0%     38.2%    48.7%     22.5%    41.8%
 % do not know                    21.7%    41.2%     17.6%    38.1%     15.6%     36.4%     22.8%    42.0%     26.5%    44.2%
Question 3 (retailer)
 % correct                         6.9%    25.4%     10.6%    30.9%     13.5%     34.3%     3.7%     18.9%      4.5%    20.7%
 % do not know                     9.2%    28.9%      7.0%    25.6%      7.2%     25.9%     9.0%     28.7%     12.0%    32.6%

Average self-assessment
(1 to 7, excludes na)               4.88      1.34     5.48      1.06     5.24       1.18    4.45       1.25    4.62        1.51

Number of observations
weighted share of sample               100%              26.6%               11.8%              31.4%              30.2%
unweighted                             1000               292                 130                305                273




                                                               35
Table 6: Multinomial Logit Analyses of Characteristics of Financial Experience Segments

This table reports the logit estimates of belonging to one of four clusters on a set of financial literacy measures and demographic variables (marginal effects are reported). See Table A2 for the list of demographic variables
included in these regressions.


                                     Self-assessed literacy                             First measure of literacy                           Second measure of literacy                          Third measure of literacy
                         Cluster     Cluster     Cluster       Cluster      Cluster        Cluster      Cluster      Cluster     Cluster       Cluster      Cluster      Cluster     Cluster       Cluster     Cluster      Cluster
Variables                   1           2           3             4            1              2            3            4           1             2            3            4           1             2           3            4


Lit1
(see defn below)        0.0775       0.0662     -0.0758       -0.0679      0.00229       -0.00213      -0.0519       0.0518     0.00753       -0.0219      -0.0989**     0.113**    -0.141**     -0.0771**     0.170**      0.0481
                        (0.082)      (0.060)    (0.055)       (0.059)      (0.055)       (0.036)       (0.057)       (0.065)    (0.046)       (0.027)      (0.045)       (0.056)    (0.055)      (0.032)       (0.082)      (0.080)
Lit2
(see defn below)        0.215***     0.0543     -0.131***     -0.138***    -0.0671**     -0.0279       -0.0296       0.125***   -0.0742**     -0.0439**    -0.0603       0.178***   -0.0911*     -0.0768**     0.137*       0.0306
                        (0.077)      (0.049)    (0.050)       (0.053)      (0.033)       (0.022)       (0.040)       (0.044)    (0.036)       (0.021)      (0.043)       (0.051)    (0.055)      (0.031)       (0.083)      (0.081)
Lit3
(see defn below)        0.313***     0.0959     -0.254***     -0.155***    -0.137***     -0.0590**     0.0864*       0.110**    -0.0852**     -0.0533**    -0.0374       0.176***   -0.136***    -0.0686***    0.109        0.0965
                        (0.090)      (0.064)    (0.043)       (0.055)      (0.034)       (0.024)       (0.050)       (0.053)    (0.037)       (0.023)      (0.044)       (0.050)    (0.048)      (0.026)       (0.110)      (0.100)
Lit4
(see defn below)        0.294***     0.0735     -0.275***     -0.0925      -0.0833       -0.0887***    -0.173***     0.345***   -0.126***     -0.0903***   -0.152**      0.368***   -0.142***    -0.101***     -0.072       0.315***
                        (0.100)      (0.070)    (0.040)       (0.068)      (0.058)       (0.025)       (0.066)       (0.084)    (0.045)       (0.021)      (0.063)       (0.077)    (0.050)      (0.018)       (0.110)      (0.120)
DEMOGRAPHIC CONTROLS: YES
N. of observations      1000         1000       1000          1000         1000          1000          1000          1000       1000          1000         1000          1000       1000         1000          1000         1000
Pseudo R-squared        0.177        0.177      0.177         0.177        0.163         0.163         0.163         0.163      0.163         0.163        0.163         0.163      0.160        0.160         0.160        0.160
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


Definitions of Lit1-Lit4 variables
Self-assessed literacy: Lit1= 4, Lit2 = 5, Lit3 = 6, Lit4 = 7. Omitted class: low literacy 1-3.
First measure of literacy: Lit1 = underestimate, Lit2 = overestimate, Lit3 = do not know, Lit4 = refuse to answer. Omitted class: Correct.
Second measure of literacy: Lit1 = underestimate, Lit2 = overestimate, Lit3 = do not know, Lit4 = refuse to answer. Omitted class: Correct.
Third measure of literacy: Lit1= option a, Lit2 = same, Lit3 = do not know, Lit4 = refuse to answer. Omitted class: Correct.




                                                                                                                    36
Table 7: Characteristics by Self-Assessment of Level of Indebtedness
This table reports statistics on the demographic, debt literacy, and experience segmentation variables for the total sample as
well as for the four groups defined by their self-assessment of the level of their indebtedness.
                                                                            Indebtedness Self-Assessment
                                                       Have Difficulty                                             Just Don't
                                      Total Sample         with Debt       Right Amount          Too Little           Know
                                              Std.               Std.                Std.               Std.                Std.
Panel A: Demographics              Mean      Dev.     Mean      Dev.       Mean     Dev.      Mean     Dev.      Mean      Dev.
Age                                 47.8      14.4     44.1      12.7       49.8     14.5      43.7     16.9      46.6      15.8
Female                            50.0%     50.0%    48.4%     50.1%      47.7%    50.0%     30.7%    47.3%     69.5%     46.3%
White                             85.0%     35.7%    84.9%     35.9%      87.0%    33.7%     87.9%    33.4%     74.1%     44.0%
Black                              6.4%     24.6%     6.9%     25.4%       4.4%    20.4%      0.0%     0.0%     17.9%     38.5%
Hispanic                           3.6%     18.7%     4.1%     19.8%       3.4%    18.1%      6.1%    24.6%      3.5%     18.5%
Married                           64.0%     48.0%    62.5%     48.5%      69.2%    46.2%     59.6%    50.4%     40.0%     49.2%
Single                            16.0%     36.7%    16.1%     36.8%      12.8%    33.5%     33.6%    48.4%     30.3%     46.2%
Separated                         19.9%     40.0%    21.4%     41.1%      17.9%    38.4%      6.9%    26.0%     29.7%     45.9%
Household Income:
 Under $30,000                    32.8%     47.0%    41.0%     49.3%      24.2%    42.9%     38.0%    49.8%     59.3%     49.4%
 $30,000 to $49,999               20.4%     40.3%    21.1%     40.9%      19.9%    39.9%     13.7%    35.2%     23.1%     42.3%
 $50,000 to $74,999               18.2%     38.6%    18.3%     38.8%      20.4%    40.3%     15.0%    36.6%      6.5%     24.8%
 Above $75,000                    28.5%     45.2%    19.5%     39.7%      35.5%    47.9%     33.4%    48.4%     11.1%     31.6%
Not employed                      13.9%     34.6%    15.6%     36.3%      12.4%    33.0%     17.0%    38.5%     17.7%     38.4%
Financial Assets:
 Under $50,000                    58.2%     49.3%    82.7%     37.9%      46.5%    49.9%     30.2%    47.1%     68.8%     46.6%
 $50 - $100,000                   13.1%     33.8%    10.0%     30.0%      14.5%    35.2%      8.5%    28.7%     13.7%     34.6%
 $100 - $250,000                  11.6%     32.0%     4.5%     20.7%      15.8%    36.5%     26.8%    45.5%      2.7%     16.2%
 Over $250,000                    17.1%     37.7%     2.9%     16.8%      23.2%    42.2%     34.3%    45.7%     14.8%     35.7%

Panel B: Debt Literacy
Question 1 (debt doubling)
 % correct                        35.9%     48.0%    32.1%     46.8%      41.7%    49.3%     30.8%    47.3%     14.2%     35.1%
 % do not know                    18.3%     38.7%    19.1%     39.4%      15.5%    36.2%     37.7%    49.7%     28.4%     45.3%
Question 2 (min pay)
 % correct                        35.4%     47.8%    38.2%     48.7%      38.0%    48.6%     16.2%    37.8%     18.0%     38.6%
 % do not know                    21.7%     41.2%    21.6%     41.3%      19.5%    39.7%     37.7%    49.7%     30.9%     46.4%
Question 3 (retailer)
 % correct                         6.9%     25.4%      6.0%    23.8%       8.3%    27.6%      8.1%    28.0%      1.7%     12.9%
 % do not know                     9.2%     28.9%      8.0%    27.2%       7.9%    27.0%      6.1%    24.6%     19.1%     39.5%
Average self-assessment
(1 to 7, excludes na)               4.88      1.34     4.34        1.41    5.16       1.17    6.17       1.17    4.41       1.58

Panel C: Experience Clusters
1: Pay in full                    26.6%     44.2%     2.6%     16.1%      38.1%    48.6%     62.4%    49.7%     14.4%     35.3%
2: Borrowers/Savers               11.9%     32.3%    15.4%     36.1%      11.7%    32.1%      0.0%     0.0%      6.6%     25.0%
3: Pay fees                       31.4%     46.4%    53.3%     50.0%      25.1%    43.4%      0.0%     0.0%     18.8%     39.3%
4: AFS users                      30.2%     45.9%    28.7%     45.3%      25.1%    43.4%     37.6%    49.7%     60.2%     49.2%

Number of observations
weighted share of sample               100%               26.4%               60.5%              20.0%              11.1%
Unweighted                             1000                248                 634                 20                 98



                                                              37
Table 8: Multinomial Logit Analyses of Self-Assessed Debt Levels

This table reports the logit estimates of belonging to a specific debt group on a set of financial literacy measures and demographic variables (marginal effects are
reported). See Table A3 for the list of demographic variables included in these regressions.

                                   Self-assessed literacy             First measure of literacy          Second measure of literacy           Third measure of literacy
                             Have                                 Have                                 Have                               Have
                             difficulty   Just       Just do      difficulty   Just         Just do    difficulty   Just       Just do    difficulty   Just       Just do
Variables                    with debt    right      not know     with debt    right        not know   with debt    right      not know   with debt    right      not know

Lit1 (see defn below)        -0.107***    0.145***   -0.0375**    0.0149       -0.132**     0.117**    -0.039       -0.0347    0.0737**   0.0285       -0.115     0.0865
                             (0.037)      (0.044)    (0.019)      (0.053)      (0.066)      (0.057)    (0.039)      (0.051)    (0.037)    (0.062)      (0.079)    (0.071)
Lit2 (see defn below)        -0.135***    0.225***   -0.0902***   0.0791**     -0.127***    0.0478     -0.00288     0.0135     -0.0106    -0.0235      -0.0464    0.0699
                             (0.037)      (0.042)    (0.021)      (0.037)      (0.042)      (0.029)    (0.038)      (0.043)    (0.026)    (0.060)      (0.079)    (0.070)
Lit3 (see defn below)        -0.171***    0.228***   -0.0574***   0.0434       -0.173***    0.130***   -0.0115      -0.0788*   0.0903**   -0.0559      -0.233*    0.288*
                             (0.033)      (0.039)    (0.018)      (0.045)      (0.054)      (0.046)    (0.038)      (0.047)    (0.036)    (0.072)      (0.140)    (0.170)
Lit4 (see defn below)        -0.182***    0.217***   -0.0343      -0.162***    -0.197*      0.358***   -0.107*      -0.146     0.252***   -0.130**     -0.235     0.365*
                             (0.031)      (0.039)    (0.022)      (0.048)      (0.100)      (0.100)    (0.055)      (0.091)    (0.088)    (0.064)      (0.170)    (0.200)
DEMOGRAPHIC CONTROLS: YES
N. of observations           980          980        980          980          980          980        980          980        980        980          980        980
Pseudo R-squared             0.189        0.189      0.189        0.170        0.170        0.170      0.164        0.164      0.164      0.163        0.163      0.163
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Definitions of Lit1-Lit4 variables
Self-assessed literacy: Lit1= 4, Lit2 = 5, Lit3 = 6, Lit4 = 7. Omitted class: low literacy 1-3.
First measure of literacy: Lit1 = underestimate, Lit2 = overestimate, Lit3 = do not know, Lit4 = refuse to answer. Omitted class: Correct.
Second measure of literacy: Lit1 = underestimate, Lit2 = overestimate, Lit3 = do not know, Lit4 = refuse to answer. Omitted class: Correct.
Third measure of literacy: Lit1= option a, Lit2 = same, Lit3 = do not know, Lit4 = refuse to answer. Omitted class: Correct.




                                                                                       38
Table 9: Multinomial Logit Analyses of Self-Assessed Debt Levels, Including Experience Segments

This table reports the logit estimates of belonging to a specific debt group on a set of financial literacy measures, experience segments, and demographic variables
(marginal effects are reported). See Table A4 for the list of demographic variables included in these regressions.



                                Self-assessed literacy              First measure of literacy         Second measure of literacy            Third measure of literacy
                        Have                                  Have                                Have                                Have
                        difficulty                 Just do    difficulty                Just do   difficulty             Just do      difficulty                Just do
Variables               w/ debt       Just right not know     w/ debt      Just right not know    w/ debt    Just right not know      w/ debt      Just right not know

Lit1 (see defn below) -0.0904***     0.131***    -0.0410**    0.0326     -0.136**    0.103*       -0.0157     -0.0445     0.0602*     0.00245     -0.0972     0.0947
                      (0.031)        (0.038)     (0.018)      (0.050)    (0.066)     (0.055)      (0.037)     (0.049)     (0.035)     (0.054)     (0.080)     (0.072)
Lit2 (see defn below) -0.102***      0.193***    -0.0912***   0.0861**   -0.119***   0.0326       0.0105      0.0136      -0.0241     -0.0391     -0.0397     0.0788
                      (0.033)        (0.039)     (0.020)      (0.034)    (0.040)     (0.027)      (0.034)     (0.040)     (0.023)     (0.052)     (0.079)     (0.070)
Lit3 (see defn below) -0.125***      0.183***    -0.0572***   0.0211     -0.143***   0.122***     -0.00233    -0.0678     0.0702**    -0.0686     -0.236      0.304*
                      (0.031)        (0.037)     (0.018)      (0.038)    (0.053)     (0.046)      (0.034)     (0.045)     (0.033)     (0.053)     (0.150)     (0.170)
Lit4 (see defn below) -0.127***      0.167***    -0.0404**    -0.116**   -0.178*     0.294***     -0.072      -0.128      0.200**     -0.102*     -0.246      0.348*
                      (0.032)        (0.038)     (0.019)      (0.046)    (0.100)     (0.100)      (0.052)     (0.090)     (0.082)     (0.054)     (0.180)     (0.200)
Borrowers/Savers      0.565***       -0.535***   -0.03        0.572***   -0.537***   -0.0351      0.568***    -0.535***   -0.0327     0.568***    -0.535***   -0.0332
                      (0.082)        (0.074)     (0.023)      (0.081)    (0.073)     (0.023)      (0.081)     (0.073)     (0.023)     (0.082)     (0.073)     (0.024)
Pay fees              0.478***       -0.428***   -0.0500**    0.502***   -0.451***   -0.0512**    0.503***    -0.459***   -0.0448**   0.503***    -0.455***   -0.0481**
                      (0.070)        (0.067)     (0.021)      (0.068)    (0.065)     (0.021)      (0.068)     (0.065)     (0.020)     (0.068)     (0.064)     (0.021)
AFS users             0.334***       -0.365***   0.0313       0.342***   -0.379***   0.0373       0.349***    -0.390***   0.0412      0.350***    -0.389***   0.0395
                      (0.070)        (0.067)     (0.021)      (0.077)    (0.069)     (0.028)      (0.077)     (0.069)     (0.028)     (0.077)     (0.068)     (0.028)
DEMOGRAPHIC CONTROLS: YES
N. of observations    980            980         980          980        980         980          980         980         980         980         980         980
Pseudo R-squared      0.245          0.245       0.245        0.233      0.233       0.233        0.227       0.227       0.227       0.225       0.225       0.225
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Definitions of Lit1-Lit4 variables
Self-assessed literacy: Lit1 = 4, Lit2 = 5, Lit3 = 6, Lit4 = 7. Omitted class: low literacy 1-3.
First measure of literacy: Lit1 = underestimate, Lit2 = overestimate, Lit3 = do not know, Lit4 = refuse to answer. Omitted class: Correct.
Second measure of literacy: Lit1 = underestimate, Lit2 = overestimate, Lit3 = do not know, Lit4 = refuse to answer. Omitted class: Correct.
Third measure of literacy: Lit1 = option a, Lit2 = same, Lit3 = do not know, Lit4 = refuse to answer. Omitted class: Correct.


                                                                                     39
Table 10: Estimates of the "Cost of Ignorance" for Credit Card Holders


Number of American adults (1)                                         227,713,184
Fraction with credit cards (2)                                              79.4%
Number of Americans with credit cards                                 180,758,725


                                                                 Incidence among                      Fee or cost
                                                                                       Number of
                                                                    credit card                           per             Aggregate Fee/Cost
                                                                                       Americans
Unconditional likelihood of credit card behaviors                    holders (3)                       incidence
 ‐ incurring late fees                                                 9.5%              17,260,659    $ 35.00      (4)   $    604,123,077
 ‐ incurring over‐the‐limit fees                                       5.6%              10,064,923    $ 35.00      (5)   $    352,272,296
 ‐ paying minimum only                                                 26.8%             48,457,366    $ 532.71     (6)   $ 25,813,582,483
 ‐ use for cash advances                                               6.6%              11,909,400    $     5.00   (7)   $     59,546,998
                                                                                                      Total               $ 26,829,524,853
Fraction of cardholders who are less financially literate            28.7%   (8)




Incremental likelihood of behavior by less literate   (9)

  ‐ incurring late fees                                               1.7%                  887,110    $ 35.00            $      31,048,836
  ‐ incurring over‐the‐limit fees                                     1.5%                  772,979    $ 35.00            $      27,054,249
  ‐ paying minimum only                                               12.7%               6,567,724    $ 532.71           $   3,498,673,010
  ‐ use for cash advances                                             3.4%                1,743,093    $   5.00           $       8,715,463

                                                                                                      Total               $   3,565,491,557
Total likelihood of behavior by less literate (10)
 ‐ incurring late fees                                                11.3%            5,840,918.83    $ 35.00            $    204,432,159
 ‐ incurring over‐the‐limit fees                                       7.1%            3,661,611.36    $ 35.00            $    128,156,398
 ‐ paying minimum only                                                39.5%           20,474,987.60    $ 532.71           $ 10,907,171,183
 ‐ use for cash advances                                               9.9%            5,161,090.20    $    5.00          $     25,805,451
                                                                                                      Total               $ 11,265,565,190




Notes and Sources:
(1) U.S. Census, 2007 American Community Survey.
(2) From TNS Survey.
(3) From TNS Survey, unconditional likelihoods divided by number of respondents with active credit cards.
(4) Assumes one incidence per year. Average fee taken from Green, Jeffrey, "Exclusive BankCard Profitability Study and Annual Report
2008," Cards and Payments, May 2008.
(5) Assumes one incidence per year. Average fee taken from http://www.cardtrak.com/news/2008/12/17/fees___recession.
(6) One year of finance charges calculated using average revolver balance ($6,000) and average APR for 2007 (14.53%), assuming no
additional charges on card and payment of minimum balance (3%) per month. Average APR from Consumer Action’s 2007 Credit Card
Survey. http://www.consumer‐action.org/downloads/english/CA_News_CC_07.pdf. Average balance estimated by authors based on
numerous industry reports and surveys.
(7) "Standard" cash advance fee is $5 or 3% of the amount taken out. GAO Report, Credit Cards, September 2006.
http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d06929.pdf. Assumes one cash advance per year.
(8) Fraction of respondents who are active credit card holders and who chose 4 or lower on self‐assessment of financial literacy.
(9) dprobit coefficients, reflecting incremental probability of these behaviors associated with low financial literacy (self‐assessment of 4 or
less). Each individual behavior was analyzed using a set of regressors including age, gender, race, marital status, household size,
employment status, and income and wealth dummies.
(10) Calculated from the unconditional probabilities of behavior (x), the incremental probability conditional on being less literate (d) and
the probability of being less literate (p) given in the table above. These average conditional likelihoods equal x+d(1‐p).


                                                                      40
Table A1: Multinomial Logit Analyses for Debt Literacy Variables

This table reports the logit estimates of responding correctly to the debt literacy questions
(marginal effects are reported).

                          First measure of         Second measure of         Third measure of
                          literacy                 literacy                  literacy
Variables                 Correct answer           Correct answer            Correct answer

30 < age ≤ 40             -0.195***                -0.116**                  -0.013
                          (0.050)                  (0.055)                   (0.026)
40 < age ≤ 50             -0.204***                -0.119**                  -0.003
                          (0.050)                  (0.055)                   (0.027)
50 < age ≤ 65             -0.129**                 -0.023                    -0.006
                          (0.055)                  (0.058)                   (0.026)
Age 65+                   -0.198***                -0.086                    -0.015
                          (0.055)                  (0.068)                   (0.029)
Female                    -0.229***                -0.202***                 -0.038**
                          (0.035)                  (0.035)                   (0.017)
Never married             -0.031                   -0.038                    0.017
                          (0.052)                  (0.052)                   (0.029)
Divorced/Separated        -0.014                   -0.004                    0.010
                          (0.051)                  (0.049)                   (0.027)
African-American          -0.212***                -0.154**                  -0.031
                          (0.059)                  (0.065)                   (0.026)
Hispanic                  -0.133*                  -0.102                    -0.045*
                          (0.076)                  (0.080)                   (0.025)
30K < income ≤ 50K        -0.019                   0.003                     0.018
                          (0.051)                  (0.050)                   (0.031)
50K < income ≤ 75K        0.035                    -0.002                    0.050
                          (0.055)                  (0.054)                   (0.037)
Income > 75K              0.189***                 0.122**                   0.058*
                          (0.053)                  (0.053)                   (0.034)
Wealth < 50K              0.039                    0.048                     -0.026
                          (0.050)                  (0.049)                   (0.022)
50K < wealth ≤ 100K       0.116*                   -0.041                    -0.034*
                          (0.066)                  (0.062)                   (0.019)
100K < wealth < 250K 0.068                         0.071                     -0.013
                          (0.065)                  (0.065)                   (0.021)
N. of observations        959                      949                       957
Pseudo R-squared          0.065                    0.056                     0.041
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                    41
Table A2: Multinomial Logit Analyses of Financial Experience Segments

This table reports the logit estimates of belonging to one of four clusters (marginal effects are reported).

                                                     Cluster 2:
                                  Cluster 1:         Borrowers/         Cluster 3:         Cluster 4:
Variables                         Pay in full        Savers             Pay fees           AFS users
Age                               -0.00917           0.00294            0.00888            -0.00265
                                  (0.007)            (0.005)            (0.008)            (0.008)
Age sq. /100                      0.00015**          -0.00001           -0.00013           -0.00001
                                  (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)
Female                            -0.0291            -0.03683           0.03516            0.03078
                                  (0.033)            (0.023)            (0.036)            (0.036)
Never married                     -0.03571           -0.0152            -0.00914           0.06005
                                  (0.048)            (0.035)            (0.051)            (0.054)
Divorced/Separated                -0.05142           0.05157            -0.00478           0.00463
                                  (0.041)            (0.038)            (0.048)            (0.048)
African-American                  -0.14040***        -0.00909           0.20017***         -0.05068
                                  (0.048)            (0.043)            (0.070)            (0.062)
Hispanic                          -0.13065**         -0.07008**         0.09924            0.1015
                                  (0.059)            (0.036)            (0.089)            (0.090)
4-member household                -0.06055           0.00097            0.04105            0.01853
                                  (0.039)            (0.030)            (0.052)            (0.053)
5-member household                -0.12780***        0.00918            0.13606**          -0.01743
                                  (0.037)            (0.036)            (0.061)            (0.058)
Not employed                      -0.02599           -0.02496           -0.08849**         0.13943***
                                  (0.049)            (0.033)            (0.044)            (0.052)
30K < income < 50K                0.03729            0.11844**          -0.02353           -0.13219***
                                  (0.051)            (0.056)            (0.049)            (0.039)
50K < income < 75K                0.03114            0.26360***         -0.06622           -0.22852***
                                  (0.054)            (0.070)            (0.051)            (0.037)
Income > 75K                      0.12658**          0.24051***         -0.05283           -0.31426***
                                  (0.054)            (0.059)            (0.048)            (0.036)
Wealth < 50K                      -0.34794***        -0.00119           0.36621***         -0.01708
                                  (0.042)            (0.026)            (0.049)            (0.051)
50K < wealth < 100K               -0.08697**         0.02439            0.17453**          -0.11195*
                                  (0.039)            (0.041)            (0.086)            (0.061)
100K < wealth < 250K              -0.09410**         -0.03274           0.26629***         -0.13945**
                                  (0.038)            (0.030)            (0.085)            (0.062)
N. of observations             1000                  1000               1000               1000
Pseudo R-squared               0.149                 0.149              0.149              0.149
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


                                                         42
Table A3: Multinomial Logit Analyses of Self-Assessed Debt Levels

This table reports the logit estimates of belonging to a specific debt group (marginal effects are reported).

                                        Have difficulty
Variables                               with debt                  Just right                 Do not know
Age                                     0.01620**                  -0.01532**                 -0.00087
                                        (0.007)                    (0.008)                    (0.004)
Age sq. /100                            -0.00022***                0.00022***                 0.000
                                        (0.000)                    (0.000)                    (0.000)
Female                                  -0.03635                   -0.0084                    0.04475**
                                        (0.031)                    (0.035)                    (0.020)
Never married                           -0.02723                   0.00083                    0.0264
                                        (0.041)                    (0.050)                    (0.030)
Divorced/Separated                      0.03638                    -0.04415                   0.00778
                                        (0.044)                    (0.048)                    (0.025)
African-American                        -0.01471                   -0.13449*                  0.14920***
                                        (0.053)                    (0.073)                    (0.058)
Hispanic                                -0.03606                   0.01102                    0.02504
                                        (0.063)                    (0.082)                    (0.058)
4-member household                      0.07456                    -0.03772                   -0.03684
                                        (0.047)                    (0.051)                    (0.024)
5-member household                      0.09321                    -0.04053                   -0.05268**
                                        (0.057)                    (0.060)                    (0.023)
Not employed                            -0.04117                   0.05335                    -0.01218
                                        (0.037)                    (0.043)                    (0.022)
30K < income < 50K                      -0.04088                   0.06924*                   -0.02836
                                        (0.037)                    (0.042)                    (0.019)
50K < income < 75K                      -0.05371                   0.14087***                 -0.08716***
                                        (0.039)                    (0.042)                    (0.018)
Income > 75K                            -0.09967***                0.19949***                 -0.09981***
                                        (0.037)                    (0.040)                    (0.020)
Wealth < 50K                            0.35994***                 -0.31160***                -0.04834*
                                        (0.049)                    (0.052)                    (0.028)
50K < wealth < 100K                     0.29238***                 -0.25773***                -0.03465
                                        (0.102)                    (0.093)                    (0.025)
100K < wealth < 250K                    0.14112                    -0.06459                   -0.07653***
                                        (0.107)                    (0.104)                    (0.021)
N. of observations                      980                        980                        980
Pseudo R-squared                        0.146                      0.146                      0.146
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                          43
Table A4: Multinomial Logit Analyses of Self-Assessed Debt Levels, Including
Experience Segments
This table reports the logit estimates of belonging to a specific debt group (marginal effects are reported).

                               Have difficulty
Variables                      with debt                 Just right                 Do not know

Borrowers/Savers            0.56889***                   -0.52784***                -0.04106*
                            (0.081)                      (0.072)                    (0.024)
Pay fees                    0.50387***                   -0.45400***                -0.04987**
                            (0.067)                      (0.064)                    (0.023)
AFS users                   0.34718***                   -0.39501***                0.04783
                            (0.076)                      (0.067)                    (0.031)
Age                         0.01204*                     -0.01177*                  -0.00026
                            (0.006)                      (0.007)                    (0.004)
Age sq. /100                -0.00017**                   0.00017**                  0.000
                            (0.000)                      (0.000)                    (0.000)
Female                      -0.03535                     -0.0085                    0.04386**
                            (0.028)                      (0.033)                    (0.020)
Never married               -0.0276                      0.00946                    0.01814
                            (0.035)                      (0.046)                    (0.029)
Divorced/Separated          0.01949                      -0.02232                   0.00284
                            (0.038)                      (0.044)                    (0.024)
African-American            -0.05392                     -0.13740*                  0.19131***
                            (0.038)                      (0.074)                    (0.067)
Hispanic                    -0.04887                     0.02879                    0.02008
                            (0.048)                      (0.073)                    (0.055)
4-member household          0.05509                      -0.01629                   -0.03880*
                            (0.043)                      (0.047)                    (0.023)
5-member household          0.04475                      0.00593                    -0.05068**
                            (0.047)                      (0.052)                    (0.023)
Not employed                -0.02363                     0.05078                    -0.02715
                            (0.033)                      (0.039)                    (0.019)
30K < income < 50K          -0.04867                     0.07149*                   -0.02282
                            (0.032)                      (0.037)                    (0.019)
50K < income < 75K          -0.06791**                   0.14677***                 -0.07886***
                            (0.032)                      (0.037)                    (0.018)
Income > 75K                -0.09167***                  0.17529***                 -0.08362***
                            (0.033)                      (0.038)                    (0.021)
Wealth < 50K                0.24367***                   -0.20951***                -0.03416
                            (0.050)                      (0.053)                    (0.028)
50K < wealth < 100K         0.22250**                    -0.20284**                 -0.01966
                            (0.099)                      (0.093)                    (0.028)
100K < wealth < 250K        0.07159                      -0.00522                   -0.06636***
                            (0.091)                      (0.089)                    (0.023)
N. of observations          980                          980                        980
Pseudo R-squared            0.211                        0.211                      0.211
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                                         44
