                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              WHEN DOES LABOR SCARCITY ENCOURAGE INNOVATION?

                                           Daron Acemoglu

                                         Working Paper 14809
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14809


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2009




I thank Philippe Aghion, Dan Cao, Joshua Gans, Andres Irmen, Samuel Pienknagura, and participants
at presentations at American Economic Association 2009 meetings, Harvard and Stanford for useful
comments. Financial support from the National Science Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Daron Acemoglu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
When Does Labor Scarcity Encourage Innovation?
Daron Acemoglu
NBER Working Paper No. 14809
March 2009
JEL No. C65,O30,O31,O33

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper studies the conditions under which the scarcity of a factor (in particular, labor) encourages
technological progress and technology adoption. In standard endogenous growth models, which feature
a strong scale effect, an increase in the supply of labor encourages technological progress. In contrast,
the famous Habakkuk hypothesis in economic history claims that technological progress was more
rapid in 19th-century United States than in Britain because of labor scarcity in the former country.
Similar ideas are often suggested as possible reasons for why high wages might have encouraged rapid
adoption of certain technologies in continental Europe over the past several decades, and as a potential
reason for why environmental regulations can spur more rapid innovation. I present a general framework
for the analysis of these questions. I define technology as strongly labor saving if the aggregate production
function of the economy exhibits decreasing differences in the appropriate index of technology, theta,
and labor. Conversely, technology is strongly labor complementary if the production function exhibits
increasing differences in theta and labor. The main result of the paper shows that labor scarcity will
encourage technological advances if technology is strongly labor saving. In contrast, labor scarcity
will discourage technological advances if technology is strongly labor complementary. I provide examples
of environments in which technology can be strongly labor saving and also show that such a result
is not possible in certain canonical macroeconomic models. These results clarify the conditions under
which labor scarcity and high wages encourage technological advances and the reason why such results
were obtained or conjectured in certain settings, but do not always apply in many models used in the
growth literature.


Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-380B
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
daron@mit.edu
1        Introduction

There is widespread consensus that technological di¤erences are a central determinant of pro-
ductivity di¤erences across …rms, regions, and nations. Despite this consensus, determinants
of technological progress and adoption of new technologies are poorly understood. A basic
question concerns the relationship between factor endowments and technology, for example,
whether the scarcity of a factor, and the high factor prices that this leads to, will induce
technological progress. There is currently no comprehensive answer to this question, though
a large literature develops conjectures on this topic. In his pioneering work, The Theory of
Wages, John Hicks was one of the …rst economists to consider this possibility and argued:

             “A change in the relative prices of the factors of production is itself a spur to
         invention, and to invention of a particular kind— directed to economizing the use
         of a factor which has become relatively expensive...” (1932, p. 124).

        Similarly, the famous Habakkuk hypothesis in economic history, proposed by Habakkuk
(1962), claims that technological progress was more rapid in 19th-century United States than
in Britain because of labor scarcity in the former country, which acted as a powerful induce-
ment for mechanization, for the adoption of labor-saving technologies, and more broadly for
innovation.1 For example, Habakkuk quotes from Pelling:

             “... it was scarcity of labor ‘which laid the foundation for the future continuous
         progress of American industry, by obliging manufacturers to take every opportunity
         of installing new types of labor-saving machinery.’ ” (1962, p. 6),

and continues

             “It seems obvious— it certainly seemed so to contemporaries— that the dearness
         and inelasticity of American, compared with British, labour gave the American
         entrepreneur ... a greater inducement than his British counterpart to replace labour
         by machines.” (1962, p. 17).
    1
    See Rothbart (1946), Salter (1966), David (1975), Stewart (1977) and Mokyr (1990) for related ides and
discussions of the Habakkuk hypothesis.




                                                    1
       Mantoux’s (1961) classic history of the Industrial Revolution also echoes the same theme,
emphasizing how the changes in labor costs in spinning and weaving have been a major impetus
to innovation in these industries. Robert Allen (2008) extends and strengthens this argument,
and proposes that the relatively high wages in 18th-century Britain were the main driver of
the Industrial Revolution. Allen, for example, starts his book with a quote from T. Bentley in
1780 explaining the economic dynamism of British industrial centers:

            “... Nottingham, Leicester, Birmingham, She¢ eld etc. must long ago have given
         up all hopes of foreign commerce, if they had not been constantly counteracting
         the advancing price of manual labor, by adopting every ingenious improvement the
         human mind could invent.”

       Similar ideas are often suggested as possible reasons why high wages, for example induced
by minimum wages or other regulations, might have encouraged faster adoption of certain
technologies, particularly those complementary to unskilled labor, in continental Europe (see,
among others, Beaudry and Collard, 2002, Acemoglu 2003, Alesina and Zeira, 2006).
       More recently, these ideas have become relevant in the context of environmental regulation.
The famous Porter hypothesis applies Hicks’s (1932) ideas to the development of environmen-
tal technologies and claims that tighter environmental regulations will spur faster innovation
and increase productivity. While this hypothesis plays a major role in various discussions
of environmental policy, just like the Habakkuk hypothesis, its theoretical foundations are
unclear.2
       In contrast to these conjectures and hypotheses, most commonly-used macroeconomic mod-
els imply that labor scarcity should discourage technological progress. Neoclassical growth
models, when new technologies are embodied in capital goods, predict that labor scarcity or
high wages should discourage the adoption of new technologies.3 Endogenous growth models
also make the same prediction. These models typically have a single factor of production,
labor, and exhibit a strong scale e¤ect. An increase in the size of the labor force will induce
   2
     See Porter (1991) and Porter and van der Linde (1995) for the formulation of this hypothesis. Ja¤e, Peterson,
Portney and Stavins (1995) review early empirical evidence on this topic and Newell, Ja¤ee and Stavins (1999)
provide evidence on the e¤ects of energy prices on the direction of technological change. Recent work by Gans
(2009) provides a theoretical explanation for the Porter hypothesis using the framework presented here.
   3
     See Ricardo (1951) for an early statement of this view. In particular, with a constant returns to scale
production function F (L; K), an increase in the price of L or a reduction in its supply, will reduce equilibrium
K, and to the extent that technology is embedded in capital, it will reduce technology adoption.


                                                        2
more rapid technological progress, and either increase the growth rate (in the …rst-generation
models, such as Romer, 1986, 1990, Segerstrom, Anant and Dinopoulos, 1990, Aghion and
Howitt, 1992, Grossman and Helpman, 1991), or the level of output (in the semi-endogenous
growth models such as Jones, 1995, Young, 1998, Howitt, 1999).
       The directed technological change literature (e.g., Acemoglu, 1998, 2002, 2007) provides a
characterization of how the bias of technology will change in response to changes in the supplies
of factors. In particular, Acemoglu (2007) establishes that, under weak regularity conditions,
an increase in the supply of a factor always induces a change in technology biased towards
that factor.4 This result implies that labor scarcity will lead to technological changes biased
against labor. Nevertheless, these results do not address the question of whether the scarcity
of a factor will lead to technological advances (i.e., to changes in technology that increase
the level of output in the economy). Reviewing the intuition for previous results is useful to
explain why this is. In particular, suppose that technology can be represented by a single
variable     and suppose that       and labor, L, are complements. Then, an increase in the supply
of labor induces an increase in , and because of -L complementarity, this induced change is
biased towards labor. Conversely, if          and L are substitutes, an increase in the supply of labor
leads to a decline in , and now because of -L substitutability, the decrease in                        increases
the marginal product of labor and is again biased towards this factor. This discussion not
only illustrates the robust logic of equilibrium bias in response to changes in supply, but also
makes it clear that the induced changes in technology, though always biased towards the more
abundant factor, could take the form of more or less advanced technologies; in other words,
they may correspond to the choice of equilibrium technologies that increase or reduce output.5
       The question of whether scarcity of a particular factor of production spurs technological
advances is arguably more important than the implications of these induced changes on the bias
of technology. This paper investigates the impact of labor scarcity on technological advances
(innovation and adoption of technologies increasing output). I present a general framework
and a comprehensive answer to this question. The key is the concept of strongly factor (labor)
   4
     A change in technology is biased towards a factor if it increases the marginal product of this factor at
given factor proportions. Conversely, a change in technology is biased against a factor if it reduces its marginal
product at given factor proportions.
   5
     In a dynamic framework, changes towards less advanced technologies would typically take the form of a
slowdown in the adoption and invention of new, more productive technologies.




                                                        3
saving technology.6 Suppose aggregate output (or net output) can be expressed as a function
Y (L; Z; ), where L denotes labor, Z is a vector of other factors of production, and                is a vector
of technologies. Suppose that Y is supermodular in , so that changes in two components of
the vector       do not o¤set each other. Suppose also that an increase in (any component of)
  increases output. Then technology is strongly labor saving if Y (L; Z; ) exhibits decreasing
di¤ erences in     and L. Intuitively, this means that technological progress reduces the marginal
product of labor. Conversely, technology is strongly labor complementary if Y (L; Z; ) exhibits
increasing di¤ erences in and L. The main result of the paper shows that labor scarcity induces
technological advances if technology is strongly labor saving. In contrast, when technological
change is strongly labor complementary, then labor scarcity discourages technological advances.
       This result can be interpreted both as a positive and a negative one. On the positive side,
it characterizes a wide range of economic environments where labor scarcity can act as a force
towards innovation and technology adoption, as claimed in various previous historical and
economic analyses. On the negative side, most models used in the growth literature exhibit
increasing rather than decreasing di¤erences between technology and labor (though this is
typically an implication of functional form assumptions).7
       To highlight what decreasing di¤erences between technology and labor means in speci…c
settings, I consider several di¤erent environments and production functions, and discuss when
the decreasing di¤erences condition is satis…ed. An important class of models where techno-
logical change can be strongly labor saving is developed by Champernowne (1963) and Zeira
(1998, 2006), and is also related to the endogenous growth model of Hellwig and Irmen (2001).
In these models, technological change takes the form of machines replacing tasks previously
performed by labor. I show that there is indeed a tendency of technology to be strongly labor
saving in these models.
       Most of the analysis in this paper focuses on the implications of labor scarcity on technology
choices. Nevertheless, these results are also directly applicable to the question of the impact
of wage push on technology choices in the context of a competitive labor market because, in
   6
      The adjective “strongly” is added here, since the term “labor saving” is often used in several di¤erent
contexts, and in most of these cases, the “decreasing di¤erences” conditions here are not satis…ed.
    7
      The fact that technological change has been the key driving force of the secular increase in wages also
suggests that increasing di¤erences may be more likely than decreasing di¤erences. Nevertheless, it should be
noted that in the context of a dynamic model, it is possible for the past technological changes to increase wage
levels, while current technology adoption decisions, at the margin, reduce the marginal product of labor. This
is illustrated by the dynamic model presented in subsection 5.1.



                                                       4
this context, a minimum wage above the equilibrium wage is equivalent to a decline in labor
supply.8 However, I also show the conditions under which the implications of labor scarcity and
wage push can be very di¤erent— particularly because the long-run relationship between labor
supply and wages could be upward sloping owing to general equilibrium technology e¤ects.
    Even though the investigation here is motivated by technological change and the study
of economic growth, the economic environment I use is static. A static framework is useful
because it enables us to remove functional form restrictions that would be necessary to generate
endogenous growth; it thus allows the appropriate level of generality to clarify the conditions
for labor scarcity to encourage innovation and technology adoption. This framework is based
on Acemoglu (2007). Section 2 adapts this framework for the current paper and also contains
a review of the results on equilibrium bias that are useful for later sections. The main results
are contained in Section 3. These results are applied to a number of familiar models in Section
4. Section 5 discusses various extensions. Section 6 concludes.


2     The Basic Environments and Review

This section is based on, reviews, and extends some of the results in Acemoglu (2007). Its
inclusion is necessary for the development of the main results in Section 3, but since many of
the results are already present in previous work, I provide only a brief review. Consider a static
economy consisting of a unique …nal good and N + 1 factors of production. The …rst factor
of production is labor, denoted by L, and the rest are denoted by the vector Z= (Z1 ; :::; ZN )
and stand for land, capital, and other human or nonhuman factors. All agents’preferences are
de…ned over the consumption of the …nal good. To start with, let us assume that all factors
are supplied inelastically, with supplies denoted by L 2 R+ and Z 2 RN
                                                                     + . Throughout I will

focus on comparative statics with respect to changes in the supply of labor, while holding the
supply of other factors, Z, constant at some level Z (though, clearly, mathematically there
is nothing special about labor).9 The economy consists of a continuum of …rms (…nal good
producers) denoted by the set F, each with an identical production function. Without loss of
   8
     The implications of “wage push” in noncompetitive labor markets are more complex and depend on the
speci…c aspects of labor market imperfections and institutions. For example, Acemoglu (2003) shows that wage
push resulting from a minimum wage or other labor market regulations can encourage technology adoption when
there is wage bargaining and rent sharing.
   9
     Endogenous responses of the supply of labor and other factors, such as capital, are discussed in subsections
5.2 and 5.3.



                                                       5
any generality let us normalize the measure of F, jFj, to 1. The price of the …nal good is also
normalized to 1.
   I …rst describe technology choice in four di¤erent economic environments. These are:

   1. Economy D (for decentralized ) is a decentralized competitive economy in which technolo-
      gies are chosen by …rms themselves. In this economy, technology choice can be interpreted
      as choice of just another set of factors and the entire analysis can be conducted in terms
      of technology adoption.

   2. Economy E (for externality) is identical to Economy D, except for a technological exter-
      nality as in Romer (1986).

   3. Economy M (for monopoly) will be the main environment used for much of the analysis
      in the remainder of the paper. In this economy, technologies are created and supplied by
      a pro…t-maximizing monopolist. In this environment, technological progress enables the
      creation of “better machines,” which can then be sold to several …rms in the …nal good
      sector. Thus, Economy M incorporates Romer’s (1990) insight that the central aspect
      distinguishing “technology” from other factors of production is the non-rivalry of ideas.

   4. Economy O (for oligopoly) generalizes Economy M to an environment including oligopolis-
      tically (or monopolistically) competitive …rms supplying technologies to the rest of the
      economy. The main results for Economy M are then extended to this environment.

2.1    Economy D— Decentralized Equilibrium

In the …rst environment, Economy D, all markets are competitive and technology is decided
by each …rm separately. This environment is introduced as a benchmark.
   Each …rm i 2 F has access to a production function

                                          y i = G(Li ; Z i ; i );                                 (1)

                                  i
where Li 2 R+ , Z i 2 RN
                       + , and        2       RK is the measure of technology. I use lower case y i to
denote output, since Y will be de…ned as net aggregate output below. I simplify the exposition
by assuming, throughout, that the production function G is twice continuously di¤erentiable
in (Li ; Z i ). The cost of technology    2     in terms of …nal goods is C ( ).



                                                    6
    Each …nal good producer maximizes pro…ts; thus, it solves the following problem:
                                                                                  N
                                                                                  X
                  max         (Li ; Z i ; i ) = G(Li ; Z i ; i )         wL Li          wZj Zji   C   i
                                                                                                          ,                   (2)
                Li ;Z i ; i
                                                                                  j=1

where wL is the wage rate and wZj is the price of factor Zj for j = 1; :::; N , all taken as given
by the …rm. The vector of prices for factors Z is denoted by wZ . Since there is a total supply
L of labor and a total supply Zj of Zj , market clearing requires
                     Z                    Z
                            i
                          L di L and          Zji di Zj for j = 1; :::; N .                                                   (3)
                              i2F                             i2F

                                                                                                      i
De…nition 1 An equilibrium in Economy D is a set of decisions Li ; Z i ;                                  i2F
                                                                                                                   and factor
                                               i
prices (wL ;wZ ) such that Li ; Z i ;              i2F
                                                          solve (2) given prices (wL ; wZ ) and (3) holds.

                       i                                                                                      i
    I refer to any         that is part of the set of equilibrium allocations, Li ; Z i ;                         i2F
                                                                                                                        , as equi-
librium technology. For notational convenience let us de…ne the “net production function”:

                                      F (Li ; Z i ; i )        G(Li ; Z i ; i )   C     i
                                                                                            :                                 (4)

Assumption 1 F (Li ; Z i ; i ) is concave in (Li ; Z i ; i ).

    Assumption 1 is restrictive, since it requires concavity (strict concavity or constant returns
to scale) jointly in the factors of production and technology. Such an assumption is necessary for
a competitive equilibrium in Economy D to exist; the other economic environments considered
below will relax this assumption.

Proposition 1 Suppose Assumption 1 holds. Then any equilibrium technology                                         in Economy
D is a solution to
                                                    max
                                                     0
                                                        F (L; Z; 0 );                                                         (5)
                                                          2

and any solution to this problem is an equilibrium technology.

    Proposition 1 implies that to analyze equilibrium technology choices, we can simply focus
on a simple maximization problem. An important implication of this proposition is that the
equilibrium is a Pareto optimum (and vice versa) and corresponds to a maximum of F in the
                              i
entire vector Li ; Z i ;          .
    It is also straightforward to see that equilibrium factor prices are equal to the marginal
products of the G or the F functions. That is, the wage rate is wL = @G(L; Z; )=@L =

                                                                    7
@F (L; Z; )=@L and the prices of other factors are given by wZj = @G(L; Z; )=@Zj = @F (L; Z; )=@Zj
for j = 1; :::; N , where   is the equilibrium technology choice (and where the second set of
equalities follow in view of equation (4)).
     An important implication of (5) should be emphasized at this point. Since equilibrium
technology is a maximizer of F (L; Z; ), this implies that any induced small change in tech-
nology, , cannot be construed as “technological advance,” since it will have no e¤ect on net
output at the starting factor proportions. In particular, for future use, let us introduce the
notation Y L; Z;      to denote net output in the economy with factor supplies given by L and
Z. Clearly, in Economy D, Y L; Z;               F L; Z;              G L; Z;       C ( ). Then, assuming
that Y is di¤erentiable in L and        and that the equilibrium technology            is di¤erentiable in
L, the change in net output in response to a change in the supply of labor, L, can be written
as
                        dY (L; Z;   )       @Y (L; Z;    )       @Y (L; Z;     )d
                                        =                    +                     ;                  (6)
                            dL                  @L                    @         dL
where the second term is the induced technology e¤ect. When this term is strictly negative,
then a decrease in labor supply (labor scarcity) will have induced a change in technology that
increases output— that is, a “technological advance”. However, by the envelope theorem, this
second term is equal to zero, since          is a solution to (5). Therefore, there is no e¤ect on
net output through induced technological changes and no possibility of induced technological
advances because of labor scarcity in this environment.

2.2     Economy E— Decentralized Equilibrium with Externalities

The discussion at the end of the previous subsection indicated why Economy D does not enable
a systematic study of the relationship between labor scarcity and technological advances (and
in fact, why there is no distinction between technology and other factors of production in this
economy). A …rst approach to deal with this problem is to follow Romer (1986) and suppose
that technology choices generate knowledge and thus create positive externalities on other
…rms. In particular, suppose that output of producer i is now given by

                                         y i = G(Li ; Z i ; i ; );                                    (7)

where     is some aggregate of the technology choices of all other …rms in the economy. For
simplicity, we can take     to be the sum of all …rms’ technologies. In particular, if                is a


                                                    8
                                                        R         i
K-dimensional vector, then                  k   =           i2F   k di        for each component of the vector (i.e., for k =
1; 2; :::; K). The remaining assumptions are the same as before (in particular, with G being
                                        i
jointly concave in Li ; Z i and             ) and a slightly modi…ed version of Proposition 1 can be obtained.
Let us …rst note that the maximization problem of each …rm now becomes
                                                                                                      N
                                                                                                      X
                                i   i   i                         i       i    i              i
                max           (L ; Z ; ; ) = G(L ; Z ; ; )                             wL L                 wZj Zji   C   i
                                                                                                                              ,      (8)
             Z i ;Z i ;   i
                                                                                                      j=1

and under the same assumptions as above, each …rm will hire the same amount of all factors, so
in equilibrium, Li = L and Z i = Z for all i 2 F. Then the following proposition characterizes
equilibrium technology.

Proposition 2 Equilibrium technology in Economy E is a solution to the following …xed point
problem:
                                        2 arg max
                                               0
                                                  G(L; Z; 0 ; = )                                 C     0
                                                                                                            :                        (9)
                                                            2

    Even though this is a …xed point problem, its structure is very similar to (5) and it can be
used in the same way for our analysis. However, crucially, the envelope theorem type reasoning
no longer applies to the equivalent of equation (6). In particular, let us de…ne net output again
as Y (L; Z; )       G(L; Z; ; )              C ( ). Then once again assuming di¤erentiability, we have

                               dY (L; Z;            )           @Y (L; Z;          )       @Y (L; Z;        )d
                                                        =                              +                        ;
                                   dL                               @L                          @            dL

but now the second term is not equal to zero. In particular, if C ( ) is increasing in                                            and if
externalities are positive (that is, if G is increasing in the vector ), then @Y =@ will be positive
and induced increases in                will raise output and thus correspond to induced technological
advances.

2.3    Economy M— Monopoly Equilibrium

The main environment used for the analysis in this paper features a monopolist supplying
technologies to …nal good producers. There is a unique …nal good and each …rm has access to
the production function

                                                                          1
                                    yi =                (1            )       G(Li ; Z i ; ) q i ( )1           ;                  (10)




                                                                               9
with         2 (0; 1). This is similar to (1), except that G(Li ; Z i ; ) is now a subcomponent of the
production function, which depends on technology . The subcomponent G needs to be com-
bined with an intermediate good embodying technology . The quantity of this intermediate
used by …rm i is denoted by q i ( )— conditioned on                          to emphasize that it embodies technology
                                                                                                                 1
  . This intermediate good is supplied by the monopolist. The term                                   (1     )        is included
as a convenient normalization. The more important role of the parameter                                     is to determine
the elasticity of aggregate output with respect to the quantity of the intermediate q i ( ) and
the subcomponent G. In particular, the higher is , the more responsive is output to G (and
the less responsive it is to q i ( )).
      This production structure is similar to models of endogenous technology (e.g., Romer, 1990,
Grossman and Helpman, 1991, Aghion and Howitt, 1992), but is somewhat more general since
it does not impose that technology necessarily takes a factor-augmenting form. Let us also
focus on the case where C ( ) is increasing in                       (that is, it is increasing in each component of
the vector ), so that greater                corresponds to “more advanced” technology.
      The monopolist can create (a single) technology                           2     at cost C ( ) from the technology
menu. Once               is created, it can produce the intermediate good embodying technology                               at
constant per unit cost normalized to 1                          unit of the …nal good (this is also a convenient
normalization). It can then set a (linear) price per unit of the intermediate good of type ,
denoted by . The fact that the monopolist chooses the technology                                   and sells intermediates
embodying this technology to all …nal good producers explains why                                  was not indexed by i in
(10).
      All factor markets are again competitive, and each …rm takes the available technology, ,
and the price of the intermediate good embodying this technology, , as given and maximizes
                                                                                                           N
                                                                                                           X
                                                                1
    max            (Li ; Z i ; q i ( ) j ; ) =       (1     )       G(Li ; Z i ; ) q i ( )1        wL Li         wZj Zji    qi ( ) ;
Li ;Z i ;q i ( )
                                                                                                           j=1
                                                                                                                           (11)
which gives the following simple inverse demand for intermediates of type                                  as a function of
its price, , and the factor employment levels of the …rm as

                                       qi    ; Li ; Z i j   =        1
                                                                         G(Li ; Z i ; )   1=
                                                                                               :                           (12)




                                                                10
   The problem of the monopolist is to maximize its pro…ts:
                                               Z
                  max          =(      (1   ))      q i ; Li ; Z i j                   di       C( )                      (13)
                ; ;[q i ( ;Li ;Z i j )]i2F                   i2F

subject to (12). Therefore, an equilibrium in this economy can be de…ned as:

De…nition 2 An equilibrium in Economy M is a set of …rm decisions Li ; Z i ; q i                           ; Li ; Z i j      i2F
                                                                                                                                   ,
technology choice , and factor prices (wL ; wZ ) such that Li ; Z i ; q i                   ; Li ; Z i j        i2F
                                                                                                                      solve
(11) given (wL ; wZ ) and technology ; (3) holds; and the technology choice and pricing deci-
sions for the monopolist, ( ; ), maximize (13) subject to (12).

   This de…nition emphasizes that factor demands and technology are decided by di¤erent
agents (the former by the …nal good producers, the latter by the technology monopolist).
This is an important feature both theoretically and as a representation of how technology is
determined in practice. Since factor demands and technology are decided by di¤erent agents,
Assumption 1 can now be relaxed and replaced by the following.

Assumption 2 G(Li ; Z i ; ) is concave in (Li ; Z i ) (for all         2       ).

   To characterize the equilibrium, note that (12) de…nes a constant elasticity demand curve,
so the pro…t-maximizing price of the monopolist is given by the standard monopoly markup
over marginal cost and is equal to                = 1. Consequently, q i ( ) = q i                 = 1; L; Z j              =
   1 G(L; Z;   ) for all i 2 F. Substituting this into (13), the pro…ts and the maximization
problem of the monopolist can be expressed as max               2     ( ) = G(L; Z; )               C ( ). Thus we
have established the following proposition:

Proposition 3 Suppose Assumption 2 holds. Then any equilibrium technology                                   in Economy
M is a solution to
                                     max
                                      0
                                         F (L; Z; 0 )   G(L; Z; 0 )   C    0
                                                                                ;                                         (14)
                                       2

and any solution to this problem is an equilibrium technology.

   This proposition shows that equilibrium technology in Economy M is a solution to a problem
identical to that in Economy D, that of maximizing F (L; Z; )                       G(L; Z; )        C ( ) as in (4).
Naturally, the presence of the monopoly markup introduces distortions in the equilibrium.
These distortions are important in ensuring that equilibrium technology is not at the level that

                                                        11
maximizes net output. In particular, let us use the fact that the pro…t-maximizing monopoly
price is        = 1 and substitute (12) into the production function (10), and then subtract the cost
of technology choice, C ( ), and the cost of production of the machines, (1                                                   )   1 G(Li ; Z i ;   ),
from gross output. This gives net output in this economy as

                                                                    2
                                       Y L; Z;                                  G L; Z;                   C ( ):                              (15)
                                                                    1

Clearly, since the coe¢ cient in front of G L; Z;                                           is strictly greater than 1, as in Economy E,
Y L; Z;          will be increasing in                 in the neighborhood of                              that is a solution to (14) (recall
that C ( ) is increasing in ).
       Finally, it can be veri…ed that in this economy, equilibrium factor prices are given by
                        1                                                                    1
wL = (1             )       @G(L; Z; )=@L and wZj = (1                                  )        @G(L; Z; )=@Zj , which are proportional
to the derivatives of the G or the F function de…ned in (4) as well as the derivatives of the net
output function Y de…ned in (15). In what follows, I take Economy M as the baseline.

2.4       Economy O— Oligopoly Equilibrium

It is also straightforward to extend the environment in the previous subsection so that tech-
nologies are supplied by a number of competing (oligopolistic) …rms rather than a monopolist.
Let      be the vector             ( 1 ; :::;    S ),      and suppose that output is now given by
                                                                                                   S
                                                                                                   X
                                                                    1
                                  yi =            (1            )       G(Li ; Z i ; )                   qsi ( s )1       ;                   (16)
                                                                                                   s=1

where       s   2       s      RKs is a technology supplied by technology producer s = 1; :::; S, and
qsi ( s ) is the quantity of intermediate good (or machine) embodying technology                                                     s,   supplied
by technology producer s, used by …nal good …rm producer i.10 Factor markets are again
competitive, and a maximization problem similar to (11) gives the inverse demand functions
for intermediates as
                                      qsi       s; L
                                                       i
                                                           ; Zi j       =           1
                                                                                        G(Li ; Z i ; )       s
                                                                                                                 1=
                                                                                                                      ;                       (17)
  10
       Equation (16) implicitly imposes that technology                     will impact productivity even if …rm i chooses qsi ( ) = 0.
                                                                            s
                                                                                     i  PS                      i
This can be relaxed by writing y =     i
                                         (1    )                    1
                                                                        G(L ; Z i ; ~ )
                                                                                i             i
                                                                                         s=1 qs ( s )
                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                       , where ~     ~1 ; :::; ~S , with
~s       i
      1 qs ( s > 0) s , so that the …rm does not bene…t from the technologies that it does not purchase. Let
~ s be equal to with the sth element set equal to 0. Then, provided that G(L; Z; ) G(L; Z; ~ s ) is not
too large, in particular, if G(L; Z; ) G(L; Z; ~ s )      (1     ) G(L; Z; )= (S 1), then the analysis in the
text applies. This latter condition ensures that no oligopolist would like to deviate and “hold up” …nal good
producers by charging a very high price.



                                                                            12
where     s   is the price charged for intermediate good embodying technology                                 s   by oligopolist
s = 1; :::; S.
    Let the cost of creating technology                   s    be Cs ( s ) for s = 1; :::; S. The cost of producing
each unit of any intermediate good is again normalized to 1                                  .

De…nition 3 An equilibrium in Economy O is a set of …rm decisions
n                                 o
                               S
 Li ; Z i ; qsi s ; Li ; Z i j s=1 i2F
                                        , technology choices ( 1 ; :::; S ), and factor prices (wL ; wZ )
               n                               o
                                           S
such that Li ; Z i ; qsi s ; Li ; Z i j    s=1
                                                    maximize …rm pro…ts given (wL ; wZ ) and the
                                                              i2F
technology vector ( 1 ; :::;      S ); (3) holds; and the technology choice and pricing decisions for

technology producer s = 1; :::; S, ( s ;           s ),   maximize its pro…ts subject to (17).

    The pro…t maximization problem of each technology producer is similar to (13) and implies
a pro…t-maximizing price for intermediate goods equal to                                s   = 1 for any   s   2     s   and each
s = 1; :::; S. Consequently, with the same steps as in the previous subsection, each technology
producer will solve the problem:

                            max       s ( s)   = G(L; Z;            1 ; :::; s ; :::; S )   Cs ( s ) :
                            s2   s


This argument establishes the following proposition:

Proposition 4 Suppose Assumption 2 holds. Then any equilibrium technology in Economy
O is a vector ( 1 ; :::;   S)   such that      s   is solution to

                                     max G(L; Z;              1 ; :::; s ; :::; S )   Cs ( s )
                                     s2   s


for each s = 1; :::; S, and any such vector gives an equilibrium technology.

    This proposition shows that the equilibrium corresponds to a Nash equilibrium and thus,
as in Economy E, it is given by a …xed point problem. Nevertheless, this has little e¤ect on the
results below and all of the results stated in this paper hold for this oligopolistic environment.11
   11
      It is also worth noting that the special case where @ 2 G=@ s @ s0 = 0 for all s and s0 is identical to the
product variety models of Romer (1990) and Grossman and Helpman (1991), and in this case, the equi-
librium can again be represented
                              PS     as a solution to a unique maximization problem, i.e., that of maximizing
G(L; Z; 1 ; :::; s ; :::; S )  s=1 Cs ( s ). Finally, note also that, with a slight modi…cation, this environment
can also embed monopolistic competition, where the number of …rms is endogenous and determined by zero
pro…t condition (the technology choice of non-active …rms will be equal to zero in this case, and the equilibrium
problem will be max s 2 s G(L; Z; 1 ; :::; s ; :::; S 0 ; 0; :::; 0) Cs ( s ) for 1 s S 0 , with S 0 being determined
endogenously in equilibrium.


                                                                    13
2.5      Review of Previous Results on Equilibrium Bias

I now brie‡y review the previous results concerning the bias of technology in response to
changes in factor supplies. These results apply to all of the environments discussed so far,
though for concreteness, the reader may wish to consider Economy M. Further details and the
proofs of these results can be found in Acemoglu (2007). Recall that                         is a K-dimensional
vector and let us denote the equilibrium technology at factor supplies L; Z by                        L; Z . To
simplify the discussion here, I also impose the following assumption, which will be relaxed for
some of the results in the next section.12

Assumption 3 Let              = RK
                                 + . C ( ) is twice continuously di¤erentiable and strictly convex in

 2      , and for each k = 1; 2; :::; K, we have

           @C ( k ;    k)                @C ( k ;    k)                     @C ( k ;   k)
                            > 0, lim                      = 0 and    lim                    = 1 for all .
               @ k                k !0       @ k                     k !1       @ k

Moreover, G L; Z;            is continuously di¤erentiable in            and L, and concave in        2     , and
satis…es
                             @G L; Z; k ;      k
                                                    2 (0; +1) for all , L, and Z.
                                   @ k

      The most important part of this assumption, that C is increasing, was already mentioned
above and will ensure that we can think of higher                    as corresponding to “more advanced”
technology.
      Assumption 3 enables us to use the inverse function theorem and ensures that @                        k =@L

exists (for k = 1; :::; K). We say that there is weak (absolute) equilibrium bias at L; Z if

                                               K
                                               X @wL @          k
                                                                    0:
                                                     @    k   @L
                                               k=1

In other words, there is weak equilibrium bias if the combined e¤ect of induced changes in
technology resulting from an increase in labor supply is to raise the marginal product of labor
at the starting factor proportions (i.e., it “shifts out” the demand for labor). The next result
shows that an increase in labor supply (or the supply of any other factor) will always induce
weak equilibrium bias. Conversely, it also shows that labor scarcity (here corresponding to a
decline in the supply of labor) will induce technological changes that are biased against labor.
 12
      See Acemoglu (2007) for versions of the results in this subsection without this assumption.



                                                           14
Theorem 1 Suppose that Assumption 3 holds and let the equilibrium technology at factor
supplies L; Z be        L; Z . Then, there is weak absolute equilibrium bias at all L; Z , i.e.,
                                  K
                                  X @wL @          k
                                                            0 for all L; Z ,
                                         @   k   @L
                                  k=1

with strict inequality if @   k =@L   6= 0 for some k = 1; :::; K.

   Note also that while this result and all of the other theorems below are stated for changes
in L, these changes are also equivalent to changes in factor proportions provided that the G
function (or equivalently the F function) is homothetic in L and Z and, as assumed here, the
supplies of the other factors are held constant. The case in which some of these supplies may
also endogenously respond to the change in L or to wage push is discussed in subsection 5.2.
   Finally, the next theorem shows how general equilibrium technology choices can lead to an
increasing long-run relationship between the supply of a factor and its price. In the context of
our analysis, this theorem clari…es the conditions under which labor scarcity and wage push can
be analyzed in a uni…ed manner (see, in particular, Corollary 3 and the analysis in subsection
5.3).
   We say that there is strong (absolute) equilibrium bias at L; Z if
                                                            K
                                  dwL   @wL X @wL @ k
                                      =     +         > 0:
                                   dL    @L   @ k @L
                                                            k=1

Clearly, here dwL =dL denotes the total derivative, while @wL =@L denotes the partial derivative
holding    =     L; Z . Recall also that if F is jointly concave in (L; ) at L;                L; Z , its
Hessian with respect to (L; ), r2 F(L;           )(L; ) ,   is negative semi-de…nite at this point (though
negative semi-de…niteness is not su¢ cient for local joint concavity).

Theorem 2 Suppose that Assumption 3 holds and let                      L; Z be the equilibrium technology
at factor supplies L; Z . Then there is strong absolute equilibrium bias at L; Z if and only
if F (L; Z; )’s Hessian in (L; ), r2 F(L;         )(L; )    (evaluated at L; Z;    L; Z , is not negative
semi-de…nite at L; Z .

   A number of implications of this theorem are worth noting. First, in contrast to basic
producer theory, where all demand curves are downward sloping, this result shows that en-
dogenous technology choices in general equilibrium can easily lead to upward sloping demand

                                                            15
curves for factors. In particular, the condition that r2 F(L;   )(L; )   is not negative semi-de…nite
is not very restrictive, since technology and factors are being chosen by di¤erent agents (mo-
nopolists or oligopolists on the one hand and …nal good producers on the other). However, this
result also highlights that there cannot be strong bias in a fully competitive economy such as
Economy D, because equilibrium existence in Economy D imposes convexity of the aggregate
production possibilities set and thus ensures that r2 F(L;   )(L; )   must be negative semi-de…nite.
Most importantly for our purposes here, this theorem implies that when r2 F(L;          )(L; )   is neg-
ative semi-de…nite, then the equilibrium relationship (taking into account the endogeneity of
technology) between wage and labor supply can be expressed by a diminishing function wL (L).
We will make use of this feature in the next section.
    What do the results presented in this subsection imply about the impact of labor scarcity
on technological progress? The answer is almost nothing. These results imply that when labor
becomes more scarce, either because labor supply declines or because some regulation increases
wages above market clearing and we move along the curve wL (L) to an employment level below
L, technology will change in a way that is biased against labor. But as already discussed in the
Introduction, this can take the form of “technological regress”(meaning technology is now less
of a contributing factor to output) or “technological advance”(change in technology increasing
output further). In a dynamic framework, these changes could take the form of the economy
foregoing some of the technological advances that it would have made otherwise or making
further advances, contributing to growth (see Acemoglu, 2002). Therefore, these results are
not informative on the question motivating the current paper. Answers to this question are
developed in the next section.


3      Labor Scarcity and Technological Progress

In this section, I present the main results of the current paper as well as a number of relevant
extensions.

3.1    Main Result

Let us focus on Economy M in this subsection and suppose that Assumption 3 holds. Recall
that    = RK
           + , so that   is a K-dimensional vector and equilibrium technology choice is given
by the solution to the maximization problem in (14). Assumption 3 also ensures equilibrium


                                               16
technology        L; Z is uniquely determined and

                              @F L; Z;        L; Z
                                                      = 0 for k = 1; 2; :::; K:
                                     @    k

Recall also that net output Y L; Z;             is given by (15), which, together with the fact that
C ( ) is strictly increasing, implies that
                              @Y L; Z;        L; Z
                                                      > 0 for k = 1; 2; :::; K:                         (18)
                                     @    k

In light of this, we say that there are technological advances if            increases (meaning that each
component of the vector        increases or remains constant).
     The key concepts of strongly labor (or more generally factor) saving technology and strongly
labor complementary technology are introduced in the next de…nition. Recall that given a
vector x = (x 1 ; :::; xn ) in Rn , a twice continuously di¤erentiable function f (x) is supermodular
on X if and only if @ 2 f (x) =@xi @xi0       0 for all x 2 X and for all i 6= i0 . In addition, a function
f (x; t) de…ned on X         T (where X          Rn and T           Rm ) has increasing di¤ erences (strict
increasing di¤erences) in (x; t), if for all t00 > t, f (x; t00 )     f (x; t) is nondecreasing (increasing)
in x. The concept of decreasing di¤ erences is de…ned similarly and requires f (x; t00 ) f (x; t) to
be nonincreasing. If f is di¤erentiable and T              R, then increasing di¤erences is equivalent to
@ 2 f (x; t) =@xi @t   0 for each i and decreasing di¤erences is equivalent to @ 2 f (x; t) =@xi @t       0
for each i.

De…nition 4 Technology is strongly labor saving at L,Z if there exist neighborhoods BL and
BZ of L and Z such that G (L; Z; ) exhibits decreasing di¤erences in (L; ) on BL                   BZ      .
Conversely, technology is strongly labor complementary at L,Z if there exist neighborhoods
BL and BZ of L and Z such that G (L; Z; ) exhibits increasing di¤erences in (L; ) on BL
BZ       . We say that technology is strongly labor saving (labor complementary) globally if it
is strongly labor saving (labor complementary) for all L, Z and                2   .

Theorem 3 Consider Economy M and suppose that Assumption 3 holds and G (L; Z; ) is
supermodular in . Let the equilibrium technology be denoted by                         L,Z . Then labor
scarcity will induce technological advances (increase ), in the sense that @              k   L,Z =@ L < 0
for each k = 1,...,K, if technology is strongly labor saving, and will discourage technological
advances, in the sense that @      k   L,Z =@ L > 0 for each k = 1,...,K, if technology is strongly
labor complementary.

                                                      17
   Proof. From Assumption 3, C ( ) is strictly increasing in . This together with equation
                                                                                       0            00     0
(18) implies that technological advances correspond to a change in technology from         to                  .
The function G is supermodular in      by assumption. Moreover, again from Assumption 3, (14)
is strictly concave and the solution        L,Z is di¤erentiable in L by the implicit function
theorem. Therefore, a small change in L will lead to a small change in each of                  k        L,Z
(k = 1,...,K), and comparative statics are determined by whether G exhibits decreasing or
increasing di¤erences in L and in the neighborhood of L, Z, and        L,Z . When technology is
strongly labor saving, G exhibits decreasing di¤erences in L and , and thus @    k   L,Z =@ L < 0
for each k = 1,...,K. This yields the …rst part of the desired result. Conversely, when G exhibits
increasing di¤erences in L and , @     k   L,Z =@ L > 0 for each k = 1,...,K, and labor scarcity
reduces . This gives the second part of the desired result.
   Though simple, this theorem provides a fairly complete characterization of the conditions
under which labor scarcity and wage push (in competitive factor markets) will lead to tech-
nological advances (technology adoption or progress due to innovation). The only cases that
are not covered by the theorem are those where G is not supermodular in         and those where
G exhibits neither increasing di¤erences nor decreasing di¤erences in L and . Without su-
permodularity, the “direct e¤ect” of labor scarcity on each technology component would be
positive, but because of lack of supermodularity, the advance in one component may then
induce an even larger deterioration in some other component, thus a precise result becomes
impossible. When G exhibits neither increasing or decreasing di¤erences, then a change in
labor supply L will a¤ect di¤erent components of technology in di¤erent directions and we
cannot reach an unambiguous conclusion about the overall e¤ect (without making further
parametric assumptions). Clearly, when         is single dimensional, the supermodularity condi-
tion is automatically satis…ed and G must exhibit either increasing or decreasing di¤erences in
the neighborhood of L, Z and        L,Z .
   Another potential shortcoming of this analysis is that the environment is static. Although
this makes the results not readily generalizable to a dynamic framework, it is clear that there
are multiple ways of extending this framework to a dynamic environment and the main forces
will continue to apply in this case (see subsection 5.1 for an illustration of this point using
an extension to a growth model). The advantage of the static environment is that it enables
us to develop these results at a fairly high level of generality, without being forced to make


                                                 18
functional form assumptions in order to ensure balanced growth or some other notion of a
well-de…ned dynamic equilibrium.

3.2   Further Results

The results of Theorem 3 apply to Economy M and under Assumption 3. These results can be
generalized to Economies E and O and also hold without Assumption 3. Here I show how this
can be done in the simplest possible way by focusing on global results (while simultaneously
relaxing Assumption 3). The next theorem is a direct analog of Theorem 3, except that now
equilibrium technology corresponds to the Nash equilibrium of the game among oligopolist
technology suppliers. As a consequence, multiple equilibria (multiple equilibrium technologies)
are possible. As is well known (e.g., Milgrom and Roberts, 1994, Topkis, 1998), when there
are multiple equilibria, we can typically only provide unambiguous comparative statics for
“extremal equilibria”. These extremal equilibria in the present context correspond to the
                                                                0              00
greatest and smallest equilibrium technologies,                     and             (meaning that if there exists another
equilibrium technology, ~, we must have           0        ~             00
                                                                              ). In this light, a technological advance
now refers to an increase in the greatest and the smallest equilibrium technologies.

Theorem 4 Consider Economy O and suppose that G (L; Z; ) is supermodular in                                     and that
C ( ) is strictly increasing in . If technology is strongly labor saving globally, then labor
scarcity will induce technological advances in the sense that the greatest and the smallest
                           0         00
equilibrium technologies       and        both increase. If technology is strongly labor complementary
globally, then labor scarcity will discourage technological advances in the sense that the greatest
                                                      0             00
and the smallest equilibrium technologies                 and            both decrease.

   Proof. In Economy O, the equilibrium is given by Proposition 4 and corresponds to a
Nash equilibrium of a game among the S oligopolist technology suppliers. Inspection of the
corresponding pro…t functions of each oligopolist shows that when G is supermodular in ,
this is a supermodular game. In addition, when G exhibits increasing di¤erences in L and
globally, the payo¤ of each oligopolist exhibits increasing di¤erences in its own strategies and
L. Then, Theorem 4.2.2 from Topkis (1998) implies that the greatest and smallest equilibria of
this game will increase when L increases. This establishes the second part of the theorem. The
…rst part follows with the same argument, using                          instead of , when technology is strongly
labor saving globally.

                                                          19
   This theorem therefore establishes the global counterparts of the results in Theorem 3
for Economy O, which features further game-theoretic interactions among the oligopolists.
Similar global results also hold for Economy M and Economy E, and are stated in the next
two corollaries. The proofs of both corollaries are simple applications (or extensions) of the
proof of Theorem 4 and thus omitted.

Corollary 1 Consider Economy M and suppose that G (L; Z; ) is supermodular in             and that
C ( ) is strictly increasing in . If technology is strongly labor saving [labor complementary]
globally, then labor scarcity will induce [discourage] technological advances.

Corollary 2 Consider Economy E and suppose that G L; Z; i ;               is supermodular in   i
                                                                                                   ;   ,
and that C ( ) is strictly increasing in . If technology is strongly labor saving [labor comple-
mentary] globally, then labor scarcity will induce [discourage] technological advances.

   Nevertheless, it is important to emphasize that these results do not apply to Economy D.
The main reason for this is that, as already discussed in the previous section, in the neighbor-
hood of an equilibrium in Economy D, there is no meaningful notion of “induced technological
advance”. Any small change in          will have second-order e¤ects on net output and any non-
small change in        will reduce net output at the starting factor proportions (at L and Z) since
   L; Z already maximizes output at these factor proportions.

3.3   Implications of Wage Push

Let us consider the same environments as in the previous subsections, and also suppose that
r2 F(L;   )(L; )   is negative semi-de…nite at the factor supplies L; Z , so that, from Theorem
2, the (endogenous-technology) relationship between labor supply and wage is given by a
decreasing function wL (L). This implies that we can equivalently talk of a decrease in labor
supply (corresponding to labor becoming more “scarce”) or a “wage push,” where a wage
above the market clearing level is imposed. In this light, we can generally think of equilibrium
                          n                   o
employment as Le = min (wL ) 1 (wL     e ) ; L , where w e is the equilibrium wage rate, either
                                                         L

determined in competitive labor markets or imposed by regulation. Under these assumptions,
all of the results presented in this section continue to hold. This is stated in the next corollary.

Corollary 3 Suppose that r2 F(L;         )(L; )   is negative semi-de…nite. Then under the same as-
sumptions as in Theorems 3 and 4 or in Corollaries 1 and 2, a minimum wage above the market

                                                     20
clearing wage level induces technological advances when technology is strongly labor saving and
discourages technological advances when technology is strongly labor complementary.

     Proof. This result follows immediately from the observation that, when r2 F(L;      )(L; )   is
negative semi-de…nite, a wage above the market clearing level is equivalent to a decline in
employment.
     The close association between labor scarcity and wage push in this result relies on the
assumption that r2 F(L;   )(L; )   is negative semi-de…nite, so that the endogenous-technology
demand curves are downward sloping (recall Theorem 2). When this is not the case, wage
push can have richer e¤ects and this is discussed in Section 5.
     While Corollary 3 shows that wage push can induce technological advances, it should
be noted that even when this is the case, net output may decline because of the reduction
in employment. Nevertheless, when the e¤ect of labor scarcity on technology is su¢ ciently
pronounced, overall output may increase even though employment declines. Consider the
following example, which illustrates both this possibility and also gives a simple instance where
technology is strongly labor saving.

Example 1 Let us focus on Economy M and suppose that the G function takes the form

                             G (L; Z; ) = 3 Z 1=3 + 3 (1             ) L1=3 ;

and the cost of technology creation is C ( ) = 3 2 =2. Let us normalize the supply of the Z
factor to Z = 1 and denote labor supply by L. Suppose to start with that equilibrium wages
will be given by marginal product. Equilibrium technology is then given by        L =1     L1=3 .
Equilibrium wage is given by the marginal product of labor at labor supply L and technology
 :
                                                            2=3
                                      w L;    = (1    )L             :

To obtain the endogenous-technology relationship between labor supply and wages, we substi-
tute for     L into this wage expression and obtain

                                                           1=3
                                       w L;    (L) = L           :

This shows that there is a decreasing relationship between labor supply and wages.
     Suppose that labor supply L is equal to 1=64. In that case, the equilibrium wage will
be 4. Next consider a minimum wage at w = 5. Since …nal good producers take prices

                                                21
as given, they have to be along their (endogenous-technology) labor demands; this implies
that employment will fall to Le = 1=125. Without “wage push,” technology was                       L =
3=4, whereas after the minimum wage, we have                (Le ) = 4=5, which illustrates the induced
technology adoption/innovation e¤ects of wage push.
     Does wage push increase overall output? Recall that net output is equal to Y (L; Z; )
(2        ) = (1   ) G (L; Z; )     C ( ). It can be veri…ed that for    close to 0, wage push reduces
net output; however for su¢ ciently high , net output increases despite the decline in employ-
ment. Generalizing this example, it can be veri…ed that when               R, wage push will increase
output if the following conditions are satis…ed:

     1. F L; Z;      (or G L; Z;      ) exhibits decreasing di¤erences in L and ;

                                                   2
     2. @F L; Z;       =@L     @ 2 F L; Z;    =@       < @ 2 F L; Z;    =@L@   @F L; Z;     =@ ;

     3.     is su¢ ciently small.

     These conditions can be easily generalized to cases in which          is multidimensional.


4         When is Technology Strongly Labor Saving?

In this section, I investigate the conditions under which, in a range of standard models, tech-
nology is strongly labor saving. The results show that it is possible to construct a rich set of
economies in which this is the case, though in most models commonly used in macroeconomics
and economic growth, technology turns out not to be strongly labor saving. Throughout, I
provide examples in which technology can be represented by a single-dimensional variable (thus
focus on Economy M). This is to simplify the expressions and communicate the basic ideas in
the most transparent manner. As the analysis in the previous sections illustrated, none of the
results require technology to be single dimensional.

4.1       Cobb-Douglas Production Functions with Harrod Neutral Technology

As a …rst example, suppose that the function G, and thus the aggregate production function
of the economy, takes a “Cobb-Douglas form” with Harrod-neutral technology. In particular,
let us write this function as
                                        G (L; Z; ) = H (Z) ( L) ;


                                                       22
where H : RN
           + ! R+ , and thus aggregate net output is given by Y (L; Z; ) = (2             ) H (Z) ( L) = (1   ),
where    2 (0; 1) is the parameter of the production function in (10), measuring the elasticity of
aggregate output to the subcomponent G. It is straightforward to verify that the cross-partial
of G with respect to L and     in this case is
                                                 2                1
                             GL (L; Z; ) =           H (Z) ( L)       > 0:

Therefore, technology is always strongly labor complementary in this case and labor scarcity
or wage push will necessarily discourage technological advances.
   It is also straightforward to verify that the same conclusion holds if the production function
is modi…ed to G (L; Z; ) = H (Z; ) L . In this case, the assumptions imposed so far imply
that H must be strictly increasing in . Supposing that it is also di¤erentiable, we have
GL (L; Z; ) = H (Z; ) L         1   > 0, so that the same conclusion is reached.

4.2     Changes in Substitution Patterns

Technological change that alters the substitution patterns across factors often turns out to be
strongly labor saving. The analysis in subsection 4.4 will illustrate this in detail, but a simple
example based on Cobb-Douglas production functions illustrates the intuition. Suppose that
the function G takes the form

                                    G (L; Z; ) = A ( ) H (Z) L1       ;

where A ( ) is a strictly increasing and di¤erentiable function. From Proposition 3, equilibrium
technology satis…es

                   A0 ( ) H Z L1             A ( ) H Z L1          ln L = C 0 ( ) :              (19)

Therefore, whether we have strongly labor saving technology depends on the sign of

         GL    L; Z;    = (1         ) A0 ( )    (1       ) A ( ) ln L       A( ) H Z L     :

It is clear that by modifying the function C ( ) and the level of labor supply and the economy,
L, this expression can be made positive or negative. In particular, suppose that in equilib-
rium C 0 ( )     L (where the function C is chosen appropriately for this to be the case in
equilibrium). Then using (19), we can write

                        GL   L; Z;       = (1         )   A( )H Z L            ;

which will be negative for   small enough.

                                                  23
4.3     Factor-Augmenting Technological Change

Let us next turn to constant elasticity of substitution (CES) production functions with factor-
augmenting technology, which are also commonly used in the macroeconomics literature. We
will see below that the important restriction here is that technology is factor augmenting. To
simplify the discussion, let us continue to focus on cases in which technology is represented
by a single-dimensional variable, , and also suppose that there is only one other factor of
production, for example land or capital, and thus Z is also single dimensional. This means
that we have to distinguish between two cases, one in which                      “augments”Z and one in which
  “augments” labor. Let us start with the former. The G function can then be written as
                                       h                           1              1
                                                                                      i
                                                                                          1
                           G (L; Z; ) = (1        ) ( Z)               + L                    ;

for     2 (0; 1), and once again, net output is equal to the same expression multiplied by
(2      ) = (1    ).
      Straightforward di¤erentiation then gives

                          +1                       1               1
                                                                       h                          1         1
                                                                                                                i       2
                                                                                                                    1
       GL (L; Z; ) =                 (1    )Z          ( L)                (1     ) ( Z)              + L                   :

This expression shows that technology will be strongly labor complementary (i.e., GL > 0) if
either of the following two conditions are satis…ed: (1)                    = 1 (constant returns to scale); (2)
      1 (gross complements).
      Therefore, in this case for technology to be strongly labor saving we would need both                                     <1
and     > 1 (and in fact both of them su¢ ciently so) so that the following condition is satis…ed.

                                                           1
                                             1         >       :                                                                (20)

      This result can be generalized as to any G featuring Z-augmenting technology (provided
that it is also homothetic in Z and L). In particular, for any such G, we can write G (L; Z; )
~ ( Z; L), where G
G                ~ is homothetic. It can then be veri…ed that (20) is again necessary and

su¢ cient for technology to be strongly labor saving, with                      corresponding to the local degree
                  ~ and
of homogeneity of G            corresponding to the local elasticity of substitution (both “local”
quali…ers are added, since these need not be constant).
      This result shows that with Z-augmenting technology, constant returns to scale is su¢ cient
to rule out strongly labor saving technological progress. In addition, in this case we also need

                                                  24
a high elasticity of substitution. Since          is augmenting the other factor, Z, a high elasticity
of substitution corresponds to technology “substituting” for tasks performed by labor. This
intuition will exhibit itself somewhat di¤erently next, when we turn to the CES production
function with labor-augmenting technology.
   With labor-augmenting technology, the G function takes the form
                                  h            1            1
                                                              i
                                                                1
                      G (L; Z; ) = (1     )Z     + ( L)           :

Straightforward di¤erentiation now gives
                            1            1                    1                  1
                                                                                     h              1             1
                                                                                                                      i       2
                                                                                                                          1
GL (L; Z; ) =        ( L)       +            (1    )Z                     ( L)           (1    )Z       + ( L)

Now de…ning the relative labor share as
                                                                      1
                                             wL L      ( L)
                                    sL            =                       1   > 0;
                                             wZ Z   (1    )Z
the condition that GL < 0 is equivalent to
                                                         1
                                                  sL <            :                                               (21)

   As with condition (20), (21) is more likely to be satis…ed, and technological change is more
likely to be strongly labor saving, when             is smaller and thus there are strong decreasing
returns. However, now technology cannot be strongly labor saving when                                   1, which is the
opposite of the restriction on the elasticity of substitution in the case when                            augments Z.
This is also intuitive. When        augments Z, a high degree of substitution between technology
and labor requires a high elasticity of substitution, in particular,                          > 1. In contrast, when
  augments labor, a high degree of substitution between technology and labor corresponds to
  < 1.
   This result can again be extended to labor-augmenting technology in general. Suppose
again that G (L; Z; )       ~ (Z; L), with G
                            G              ~ homothetic. Then (21) characterizes strongly

labor saving technology with                                                            ~ and
                                    corresponding to the local degree of homogeneity of G
corresponding to the local elasticity of substitution.
   This discussion highlights that with the most common production functions in macroeco-
nomics, Cobb-Douglas and production functions with a factor of minting technological change,
technology tends to be strongly labor complementary rather than strongly labor saving. Nev-
ertheless, the latter possibility is not ruled out, at least when technological change a¤ects the

                                                         25
patterns of substitution. I next turn to a setup where technological change more explicitly
replaces labor and thus a¤ects the patterns of substitution between labor and other factors.

4.4    Machines Replacing Labor

Models in which technological change is caused or accompanied by machines replacing human
labor have been proposed by Champernowne (1963), Zeira (1998, 2006) and Hellwig and Irmen
(2001). Let us consider a setup building on and generalizing the paper by Zeira (1998). I …rst
describe a fully competitive economy and explain why we need to depart from this towards an
environment such as Economy M.
   Aggregate output is given by
                                         Z    1
                                                                    "
                                                                   " 1
                                                         " 1
                                   y=             y( )    "    d         ;
                                          0

where y ( ) denotes intermediate good of type produced as
                                ( k( )
                                    ( ) if  uses new “technology”
                         y( ) =    l( )
                                    ( ) if  uses old “technology”,

where both ( ) and      ( ) are assumed to be continuous functions and goods are ordered such
that   ( ) is a strictly increasing function, and         ( ) is decreasing. In addition, k ( ) denotes
capital used in the production of intermediate . I use capital as the other factor of production
here to maximize similarity with Zeira (1998).
   Firms are competitive and can choose which product to produce with the new technology
and which one with the old technology. Total labor supply is L. For now, let us also suppose
that capital is supplied inelastically, with total supply given by K. Let the price of the …nal
good be normalized to 1 and that of each intermediate good be p ( ). We write n ( ) = 1 if
is using the new technology. Clearly, n ( ) = 1 whenever

                                        R ( ) < w ( );

where w is the wage rate and R is the endogenously determined rate of return on capital. Let

                                                          ( )
                                             ( )              ;
                                                          ( )

which is strictly increasing by assumption. In fact, this is all that is required, so            ( ) could
be decreasing or   ( ) could be increasing as long as              ( ) is strictly increasing.

                                                    26
   In the competitive equilibrium, we will have                        such that          =    1 (w=R),   so that

                                                  n ( ) = 1 for all              :

Since   is increasing, its inverse is also increasing, so a higher wage to rental rate ratio encour-
ages higher levels of        . This e¤ect is highlighted and exploited in Zeira (1998).
   Let us now see that this is indeed related to decreasing di¤erences. With the same reasoning,
suppose that
                                                   n ( ) = 1 for all

for some   2 (0; 1) (since, clearly, in any equilibrium or optimal allocation, this type of “single
crossing” must hold). Then, prices of intermediates must satisfy
                                                               ( ) R if
                                                p( ) =                                :
                                                               ( ) w if      >
   Therefore, the pro…t maximization problem of …nal good producers is
                    Z 1             "
                                   " 1
                                           Z                   Z 1
                             " 1
            max         y( )  "  d       R      ( )y( )d     w      ( )y( )d ;
           [y( )]   2[0;1]   0                                  0

which gives the following simple solution
                                        ( ( ) R) " Y if
                                           y( ) =              :
                                        ( ( ) w) " Y if >
                                           R           R                R
   Now market clearing for capital implies 0 k ( ) d = 0 ( ) y ( ) d = 0 ( )1 " R " Y d =
                                                  R1
K, and similarly, market clearing for labor gives    ( )1 " w " Y d = L. Let us de…ne
                             Z                           Z 1
                                      1 "
                     A( )          ( )    d and B ( )        ( )1 " d :               (22)
                                            0

Then the market clearing conditions can be expressed as
                                                         1 "                                  1 "
                                 1 "        Y             "
                                                                       1 "           Y         "
                             R         =      A( )             and w         =         B( )         :                (23)
                                            K                                        L
Using (22) and (23), we can write aggregate output (and aggregate net output) as
                                h     1   " 1        1
                                                           i "
                                                        " 1 " 1
                           Y = A ( )" K " + B ( )" L "          :                                                    (24)

   Equation (24) gives a simple expression for aggregate output as a function of the threshold
sector . It can be veri…ed that Y exhibits decreasing di¤erences in L and                               in the competitive
equilibrium. In particular, equilibrium technology in this case will satisfy
          @Y      1 h                  1 "   " 1                    1 "   " 1
                                                                              i                           1
              =          ( )1 " A ( ) " K "          ( )1 " B ( ) " L " Y                                 "   = 0:
          @      " 1

                                                                27
Since the term in square brackets must be equal to zero, we must have

                          @2Y            1                              1 "        1       1
                               =           ( )1           "
                                                              B( )       "    L    "   Y   "    < 0:
                          @ @L           "

   This argument suggests why there is an intimate connection between machines replacing
labor and technology being strongly labor saving. However, Theorem 3 does not apply to this
economy because we are in a fully competitive environment, and thus @Y =@ = 0 in equilibrium
(and hence induced changes in technology do not correspond to “technological advances”).
   Motivated by this, let us consider a version of the current environment corresponding to
Economy M. To do this, set Z = K and suppose that
                                    h      1  " 1        1
                                                               i "
                                                            " 1 " 1
                        G (L; K; ) = A ( ) " K " + B ( ) " L "      ;

with cost C ( ), " > 1, and A ( ) and B ( ) de…ned as in (22). The fact that                                     > 0 in this
economy ensures that an increase in            indeed corresponds to a technological advance. There-
fore, we only have to check whether technology is strongly labor saving, or whether G exhibits
decreasing di¤erences in L and . Straightforward di¤erentiation and some manipulation imply
that GL is proportional to

                                         1 "       " 1                   1
                       ( )1   "
                                  B( )    "    L    "    G (L; K; ) " + (2                      ) C 0 ( ) SL ;

with SL     wL L=[(2    ) G (L; K; ) = (1                )] as the labor share of income. This expression will
be negative when C 0 ( ) is small or when the share of labor is small. But without specifying
further functional forms, we cannot give primitive conditions for this to be the case. Instead,
technology that is strongly labor saving obtains easily if we consider a slight variation on this
baseline model, where the constant returns to scale assumption has been relaxed, so that the
G function takes the form

                                               h          1       " 1              1           " 1
                                                                                                     i
                          G (L; K; ) = A ( ) K            "        "    +B( ) L    "            "        :

Then it can be veri…ed that

                                     "         1                             1 "           1
                          GL =                      ( )1      "
                                                                  B( )        "    L       "   < 0;
                                          "2

so that technology is always strongly labor saving and a decrease in L will induce technological
advances.

                                                           28
    The analysis in this subsection therefore shows that models where technological progress
takes the form of machines replacing human labor create a tendency for strongly labor saving
technology. This is intuitive, since the process of machines replacing labor is closely connected
to new technology substituting for and saving on labor.


5     Extensions and Discussion

In this section, I discuss a number of issues raised by the analysis so far. First, I show that
technology being strongly labor saving does not contradict the positive impact of secular tech-
nological changes on wages. Second, I show how endogenous factor supplies can be incorporated
into this framework. Finally, I discuss how wage push can lead to very di¤erent results than
labor scarcity when the endogenous-technology demand curve for labor is upward sloping (in
line with the conditions provided in Theorem 2).

5.1   Technological Change and Wage Increases

One objection to the plausibility of strongly labor saving technology is that the growth process
is accompanied by a steady increase in the wage rate, while strongly labor saving technology
implies that further technological advances will tend to reduce the marginal product of labor.
In this subsection, I show that a simple dynamic extension allows technological change to
increase wages while still maintaining technology as strongly labor saving.
    My purpose here is not to develop a full dynamic general equilibrium model. For this
reason, I only use a slight variant of Economy E and a simple demographic structure to
communicate the main ideas. The exact form of the production function is motivated by
the models in which machines replace labor such as those discussed in subsection 4.4, though
various di¤erent alternative formulations could also have been used to obtain similar results.
    The economy is in discrete time and runs to in…nite horizon. It is inhabited by one-
period lived individuals, each operating a …rm. Therefore, each …rm maximizes static pro…ts.
The total measures of individuals and …rms are normalized to 1. There are two factors of
production, L and Z, both inelastically supplied in each period with supplies equal to L and
Z. Past technology choices create an externality similar to that in Economy E. In particular,
suppose that all …rms are competitive and the production function of each at time t is …rm
                                                            " 1                      " 1
                                              i 1+                      i 1+
               yti Lit ; Zti ; it ; At = At   t       Zti    "
                                                                  + 1   t      Lit    "
                                                                                           ;   (25)


                                                     29
where     < 0 and we assume that " is su¢ ciently close to 1, so that (25) is jointly concave in L,
Z and . This production function implies that higher                     will correspond to substituting factor
Z, which may be capital or other human or nonhuman factors, for tasks performed by labor.
Suppose that
                                    At = 1 + g           t 1        At    1;                              (26)
                                               R             i
where g is an increasing function and     t        i2F       t di   is the average technology choice of …rms
at time t. This form of intertemporal technological externalities is similar to that in Romer
(1986). It may result, for example, from the fact that past e¤orts to substitute machines or
capital for labor advance (and also build upon) the knowledge stock of the economy.
     A slightly modi…ed version of Proposition 2 applies in this environment and implies that
equilibrium technology       L; Z is given by the solution to

                                  @Yti L; Z;        L; Z ; At
                                                                         = 0:
                                               @
This implies that      L; Z is uniquely determined and independent of At , in particular, given
by
                                                         1
                                   L; Z =                       " 1    2 (0; 1) :
                                              1 + Z=L             "


Since     < 0 and " > 1,    L; Z is decreasing in L, so labor scarcity increases                 L; Z . Then,
(26) implies that a higher equilibrium level of                L; Z will lead to faster growth of output
and wages. This is despite the fact that, at the margin, labor scarcity increases                   L; Z and
substitutes for tasks previously performed by labor. It can be easily veri…ed that an increase
in Z will also increase      L; Z . The immediate impact of this will be to reduce the level
of wages, but this change will also increase the rate of wage and output growth. This result
highlights that in a dynamic framework with strongly labor saving technology, the short-run
and long-run impacts of technological advances on wages will typically di¤er.
     This analysis thus shows that in a dynamic economy, there is no tension between tech-
nological changes leading to a secular increase in wages and technology being strongly labor
saving.

5.2     Endogenous Factor Supplies

To highlight the new results of the framework presented in this paper, the analysis so far has
treated the supply of all factors as exogenous. This ignores both the response of labor supply

                                                   30
to changes in wages and also the adjustment of other factors, such as capital, to changes in
factor supplies or labor market regulations that create wage push. Endogenous labor supply
is further discussed in the next subsection.
   Here let us focus on endogenous supply of other factors. For example, we can imagine a
situation in which one of the other factors of production is capital that is elastically supplied. In
this case, a change in labor supply will a¤ect both technology and the supply of capital so that
the rental rate of capital remains constant. Consequently, the overall impact on technology
will be a combination of the direct e¤ect of labor supply and an indirect e¤ect working through
the induced changes in the capital stock of the economy. Although the details of the analysis
are somewhat di¤erent in this case, we can note that the essence of the main results presented
in Section 3 remain unchanged. In particular, those results were stated in terms of strongly
labor saving [complementary] technology or decreasing [increasing] di¤erences of the function
G holding the supply of other factors …xed. One can alternatively de…ne notions of labor saving
[complementary] technology (or decreasing [increasing] di¤erences) holding the price of capital
constant. It is then straightforward that Theorems 3 and 4 would apply with these modi…ed
de…nitions.

5.3    Wage Push vs. Labor Scarcity

Let us now suppose that the supply of labor is endogenous, given by a standard labor supply
function Ls (wL ). From the analysis leading to Corollary 3, it is then clear that none of the
results will be a¤ected if r2 F(L;   )(L; )   is negative semi-de…nite and Ls (wL ) is increasing. In par-
                                                                                           ~ s (wL ),
ticular, in this case, we can study the impact of a shift in labor supply from Ls (wL ) to L
      ~ s (wL ) < Ls (wL ), or the impact of a binding minimum wage. Since r2 F(L;
where L                                                                                           )(L; )   is
negative semi-de…nite, the endogenous-technology relationship between employment and wages
                                                                                          ~ s (wL )
is decreasing. Therefore, a leftwards shift of the labor supply schedule from Ls (wL ) to L
will reduce employment and increase wages. The implications for technology are determined
by whether technology is strongly labor saving or strongly labor complementary (according to
Theorems 3 and 4; see Corollary 3).
   However, the close connection between wage push and labor scarcity highlighted in Corol-
lary 3 is broken when r2 F(L;   )(L; )   is not negative semi-de…nite. In this case, the endogenous-
technology demand curve is upward sloping and thus a decrease in labor supply reduces wages,



                                                       31
                                                        demand



                            minimum
                            wage

                                                                            supply




                                                                                       L


                                            Figure 1: Multiple Equilibria


whereas an increase in labor supply increases wages. This becomes particularly interesting
when labor supply is endogenous as discussed in the previous subsection. In this case, multi-
ple equilibria, characterized by di¤erent levels of labor supply, technology and wages, become
possible. The next example illustrates this possibility using a simple extension of Example 1.

Example 2 Suppose that the G function takes a form similar to that in Example 1, except
for a slight variation in exponents. In particular, suppose that G (L; Z; ) = 3 Z 2=3 =2 +
3 (1      ) L2=3 =2, and the cost of technology creation is C ( ) = 3 2 =4. It can now be veri…ed
that r2 F(L;   )(L; )   is no longer negative semi-de…nite (where as it was in Example 1). Therefore,
from Theorem 2, we expect the endogenous-technology relationship between employment (labor
supply) and wage to be increasing. We will now see how this interacts with endogenous labor
supply.
       Let us again normalize the supply of the Z factor to Z = 1 and denote employment by
Le .   Equilibrium technology then satis…es                 (Le ) = 1   (Le )2=3 . Equilibrium wage is given by
                                  1=3
w (Le ; ) = (1          ) (Le )         for a given level of technology         and once we take into account the
response of      to employment Le , we have

                                              w (Le ;     (Le )) = (Le )1=3 ;                                (27)

which illustrates the potentially upward-sloping endogenous-technology relationship between
employment and wages demonstrated more generally in Theorem 2. Now suppose that labor
supply is also responsive to wage and takes the form Ls (w) = 6w2                       11w + 6. Now combining

                                                             32
this supply relationship with (27), we …nd that there are three equilibrium wages, with di¤erent
levels of labor supply and technology, w = 1, 2 and 3. Moreover, technology is most advanced
and labor supply is highest at w = 3.
    Next consider a minimum wage between 2 and 3. This will typically destroy the …rst two
equilibria. Thus the implications of “wage push” are potentially very di¤erent when it may
destroy the other equilibria. Figure 1 illustrates the situation diagrammatically. The minimum
wage indeed destroys the equilibria at w = 1 and w = 2. Nevertheless, some caution is also
necessary. In certain situations it can also introduce an extreme no-activity equilibrium, where
there is no employment, or it may make such a no-activity equilibrium, which may have already
existed, more likely. When we are in Economy M, such a no-activity equilibrium does not exist,
because the monopolist acts as a “Stackleberg leader”and chooses the technology anticipating
employment. However, in Economy O, such a no-activity equilibrium may arise if a high level
of minimum wage is imposed.


6    Conclusion

This paper studied the conditions under which the scarcity of a factor encourages technological
progress (innovation or adoption of technologies increasing output). Despite a large literature
on endogenous technological change and technology adoption, we do not yet have a compre-
hensive theoretical or empirical understanding of the determinants of innovation, technological
progress, and technology adoption. Most importantly, how factor proportions, for example,
abundance or scarcity of labor, a¤ect technology is poorly understood.
    In standard endogenous growth models, which feature a strong scale e¤ect, an increase in
the supply of a factor encourages technological progress. In contrast, the famous Habakkuk
hypothesis in economic history claims that technological progress was more rapid in 19th-
century United States than in Britain because of labor scarcity in the former country. Related
ideas are often suggested as possible reasons for why high wages might have encouraged more
rapid adoption of certain technologies in continental Europe than in the United States over
the past several decades. The famous Porter hypothesis has a similar logic and suggests that
environmental regulations can be a powerful inducement to technological progress.
    This paper characterizes the conditions under which factor scarcity can induce technological
advances (innovation or adoption of more productive technologies). I introduced the concepts


                                               33
of strongly labor (factor) saving and strongly labor (factor) complementary technology. In
particular, technology is strongly labor saving if the production function exhibits decreasing
di¤erences in an index of technology, , and labor. Conversely, technology is strongly labor
complementary if the production function exhibits increasing di¤erences in       and labor. The
main result of the paper shows that labor scarcity induces technological advances if technology
is strongly labor saving. In contrast, labor scarcity discourages technological advances if tech-
nology is strongly labor complementary. I also show that, under some additional conditions,
wage push— an increase in wage levels above the competitive equilibrium— has similar e¤ects
to labor scarcity. I also provided examples of environments in which technology can be strongly
labor saving and showed that such a result is not possible in certain canonical models. These
results clarify the conditions under which labor scarcity and high wages are likely to encourage
innovation and adoption of more productive technologies, and the reason why such results were
obtained or conjectured in certain settings but do not always apply in many models used in
the growth literature.
   While the theoretical analysis provided here clari…es the conditions under which factor
scarcity and wage (factor price) push may induce innovation and technology adoption, these
conditions may or may not hold depending on the speci…c application (time period, institu-
tional framework, the industry in question, etc.). This suggests that empirical evidence is
necessary to shed light on when factor scarcities and various regulations a¤ecting factor prices
may encourage innovation and technology adoption. Existing evidence suggests that this is
a possibility, but is not conclusive. For example, Newell, Ja¤ee and Stavins (1999) show an
e¤ect of changes in energy prices on the direction of innovation and on the energy e¢ ciency
of household durables and Popp (2002) provides similar evidence using patents. Acemoglu
and Finkelstein (2008) show that the Prospective Payment System reform of Medicare in the
United States, which increased the labor costs of hospitals with a signi…cant share of Medicare
patients, appears to have induced signi…cant technology adoption in the a¤ected hospitals.
In a di¤erent context, Lewis (2007) shows that the skill mix in US metropolitan areas ap-
pears to have an important e¤ect on the choice of technology of manufacturing …rms. Further
research might shed more systematic light on the empirical conditions under which we may
expect greater factor prices and factor scarcity to be an inducement, rather than a deterrent,
to technology adoption and innovation.


                                               34
7    References

    Acemoglu, Daron, “Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Technical
Change and Wage Inequality” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, (1998), 1055-1090.
    Acemoglu, Daron, “Directed Technical Change” Review of Economic Studies, 69, (2002),
781-810.
    Acemoglu, Daron, “Cross-Country Inequality Trends” Economic Journal, 113, (2003),
F121-149.
    Acemoglu, Daron, “Equilibrium Bias of Technology”Econometrica, 75, (2007), 1371-1410.
    Acemoglu, Daron and Fabrizio Zilibotti, “Productivity Di¤erences”(2001), Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics, 116, 563-606.
    Acemoglu, Daron and Amy Finkelstein, “Input and Technology Choices in Regulated In-
dustries: Evidence from the Healthcare Sector”, forthcoming Journal of Political Economy,
(2008).
    Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, “A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction”
Econometrica, 110, (1992), 323-351.
    Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, Endogenous Growth Theory, Cambridge, MA, MIT
Press, 1998.
    Alesina, America and Joseph Zeira, “Technology and Labor Regulations”Harvard Institute
of Economic Research, Discussion Paper 2123, (2006).
    Autor, David, Alan Krueger and Lawrence Katz, “Computing Inequality: Have Computers
Changed the Labor Market?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, (1998), 1169-1214.
    Beaudry Paul and Francis Collard, “Why Has the Employment Productivity Trade-O¤s
amongst Industrial Country Been So Strong?”National Bureau of Economic Research, Working
Paper 8754, 2002.
    Champernowne, David “A Dynamic Growth Model Involving a Production Function” in
F. A. Lutz and D. C. Hague (editors) The Theory of Capital, 1963, Macmillan, New York.
    David, Paul, Technical Choice, Innovation and Economic Growth: Essays on American
and British Experience in the Nineteenth Century, London, Cambridge University Press, 1975.
    Gans, Joshua, “Innovation and Climate Change Policy,” University of Melbourne, mimeo,
2009.
    Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman, Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy,

                                             35
Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1991.
   Habakkuk, H.J., American and British Technology in the Nineteenth Century, London:
Cambridge University Press, 1962.
   Hellwig, Martin and Andreas Irmen, “Endogenous Technical Change in a Competitive
Economy.” Journal of Economic Theory, 101, (2001), 1-39.
   Hicks, John The Theory of Wages, Macmillan, London, 1932.
   Howitt, Peter, “Steady Endogenous Growth with Population and R&D Inputs Growing.”
Journal of Political Economy, 107, (1999), 715-730.
   Ja¤e, Adam B., Steven R. Peterson, Paul R. Portney and Robert N. Stavins, “Environ-
mental Regulation and the Competitiveness of US My Fracturing: What Does the Evidence
Tell Us?” Journal of Economic Literature, 33, (1995), 132-163.
   Jones, Charles I., “R&D-Based Models of Economic Growth.” Journal of Political Eco-
nomics, 103, (1995), 759-784.
   Lewis, Ethan, “Immigration, Skill Mix, and the Choice of Technique”Federal Reserve Bank
of Philadelphia Working Paper, 2005.
   Mantoux, Paul, The Industrial Revolution in the Eighteenth Century: an Outline of the
Beginnings of the Modern Factory System in England [translated by Marjorie Vernon], London,
J. Cape, 1961.
   Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts, “Comparing Equilibria”American Economic Review, 84
(1994), 441-459.
   Mokyr, Joel, The Levers of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress Oxford
University Press, New York, 1990.
   Newell, Richard, Adam Ja¤ee and Robert Stavins. “The Induced Innovation Hypothesis
and Energy-Saving Technological Change,”Quarterly Journal of Economics. 104 (1999), 907-
940.
   Popp, David, “Induced Innovation and Energy Prices.” American Economic Review, 92,
(2002) 160-180.
   Porter, Michael “America’s Green Strategy,” Scienti…c American, 264, (1991) 96.
   Porter, Michael and Claas van der Linde “Toward a New Conception of the Environment-
Competitiveness Relationship,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9, (1995), 119-132.
   Ricardo, David, Works and Correspondences, edited by P. Sra¤a, Cambridge, Cambridge


                                             36
University Press, 1951.
   Romer, Paul M., “Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth.” Journal of Political Econ-
omy, 94, (1986), 1002-1037.
   Romer, Paul M., “Endogenous Technological Change” Journal of Political Economy, 98,
(1990), S71-S102.
   Rothbarth, Erwin “Causes of the Superior E¢ ciency of the USA Industry As Compared
with British Industry” Economics Journal (1946), 56, 383-390.
   Salter W. E.G., Productivity and Technical Change, 2nd edition, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1966.
   Segerstrom, P. S., T. Anant, and E. Dinopoulos, “A Schumpeterian Model of the Product
Life Cycle” American Economic Review 80 (1990), 1077-1092.
   Stewart, Frances; Technology and Underdevelopment, London, Macmillan Press, 1977.
   Topkis, Donald, Supermodularity and Complementarity, Princeton University Press, Prince-
ton New Jersey, 1998.
   Young, Alwyn, “Growth Without Scale E¤ects.”Journal of Political Economy, 106, (1998),
41-63.
   Zeira, Joseph “Workers, Machines and Economic Growth”Quarterly Journal of Economics,
113 (1998), 1091-1113.
   Zeira, Joseph “Machines As Engines of Growth” Center for Economic Policy Research,
Discussion Paper 5429, 2005.




                                            37
