                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            WHAT SEGMENTS EQUITY MARKETS?

                                           Geert Bekaert
                                         Campbell R. Harvey
                                         Christian Lundblad
                                           Stephan Siegel

                                        Working Paper 14802
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14802


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2009


This paper has benefited from discussions with and comments from Peter Bossaerts, John Campbell,
Ines Chaieb, Anusha Chari, Yu-Chin Chen, Josh Coval, John Driffill, Gunter Franke, John Heaton,
Andrew Karolyi, Aline Muller, Ruy Ribeiro, Ed Rice, Mark Spiegel, Mehmet Deniz Yavuz, and participants
at the 2007 American Economic Association Meetings, 2007 Washington University Asset Pricing
Conference, New York University, Harvard University, Cass Business School, McGill University,
Queen's University, Rutgers University, University of Kansas, University of Leuven, University of
Michigan, University of Minnesota, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2007 University
of Amsterdam Asset Pricing Retreat, 2007 Brazilian Finance Association Meeting, University of Washington,
2007 International Research Conference on Corporate Governance in Emerging Markets, 2007 European
Finance Association Meetings, 2007 German Finance Association Meetings, the 2008 Darden Emerging
Markets Conference, the 2008 Global Investment Conference, the 9th ECB-CFS Research Network
Meeting, NBER's Universities Research Conference "Micro and Macroeconomic Effects of Financial
Globalization", and the 2009 American Finance Association Meetings. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Geert Bekaert, Campbell R. Harvey, Christian Lundblad, and Stephan Siegel. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Segments Equity Markets?
Geert Bekaert, Campbell R. Harvey, Christian Lundblad, and Stephan Siegel
NBER Working Paper No. 14802
March 2009
JEL No. F00,F15,F21,F3,F43,F55,G1,G15,P45,P48

                                               ABSTRACT

We propose a new, valuation-based measure of world equity market segmentation. While we observe
decreased levels of segmentation in many developing countries, the level of segmentation is still significant.
In contrast to previous research, we characterize the factors that account for variation in market segmentation
both through time as well as across countries. While a country's regulation with respect to foreign
capital flows is important in determining its level of segmentation, we find that non-regulatory factors
are also related to the cross-sectional and time-series variation in the level of segmentation. We identify
a country's political risk profile and its stock market development as two additional local segmentation
factors as well as the U.S. corporate credit spread as a global segmentation factor.


Geert Bekaert                                          Christian Lundblad
Graduate School of Business                            Department of Finance
Columbia University                                    University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
3022 Broadway, 802 Uris Hall                           Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3490
New York, NY 10027                                     Christian_Lundblad@unc.edu
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu                                     Stephan Siegel
                                                       University of Washington
Campbell R. Harvey                                     Michael G. Foster School of Business
Fuqua School of Business                               328 Mackenzie
Duke University                                        Box 353200
Durham, NC 27708-0120                                  Seattle, WA 98195-3200
and NBER                                               ss1110@u.washington.edu
cam.harvey@duke.edu
1    Introduction

The removal of capital controls in both developed countries (mostly during the eighties)
and emerging markets (mostly at the end of the eighties and the early nineties) has led
to unparalleled financial openness across the world. The trade sector is also more open.
These important structural changes should have had a profound effect on the valuation
of stocks across the globe, and hence on important economic issues such as the cost of
capital, international diversification benefits, and international risk sharing. In particular,
globalization may have served to integrate equity markets across the world.
    Our research has three goals. First, we propose a new measure of the degree of effective or
de facto equity market segmentation. The country-level measure is based on industry-level
earnings yield differentials, aggregated across all industries in a given country. We show
that under the null hypothesis of full financial and economic integration, industry earnings
yield differentials between a country and the world market should be (i) relatively small and
fairly constant over time and (ii) explained entirely by differences in financial leverage and
earnings volatility. Using data from within the U.S., an effectively integrated economy, we
confirm that segmentation measured by randomly splitting U.S. data into pseudo-countries
is small (with a mean of 1.4%) and fairly constant (with a time-series standard deviation of
0.25%) relative to the level of measured segmentation for developed countries (with a mean
of 2.7% and an average time series standard deviation of 1.5%) and for emerging market
economies (with a mean of 4.4% and an average time series standard deviation of 2.6%).
Importantly and in contrast to many existing studies, our framework does not depend on a
specific asset pricing model. Finally, measuring the degree of segmentation within the U.S.
equity market provides us with a meaningful empirical benchmark to distinguish between
effectively segmented and integrated markets.
    Second, we apply our segmentation measure to a large set of fifty countries over a sample
period of more than 20 years. We document the extent to which market segmentation has
decreased over time. Using our empirical benchmark, we observe that the group of developed
countries has been effectively integrated since 1993, while emerging markets continue to


                                                1
display levels of segmentation above our benchmark.
   Third, we estimate the contribution of both financial and trade openness to the marked
reduction in measured segmentation. In addition to the effects of these regulatory or de jure
globalization factors, we examine the degree to which other (country) factors effectively de-
termine the degree of observed market segmentation. It is important to note that under the
alternative hypothesis (i.e. some degree of market segmentation), any country characteristic
correlated with local growth opportunities or local discount rates may influence prices. More-
over, factors such as political risk, liquidity risk, poor corporate governance, or inefficient
markets may generate implicit barriers to important institutional investors and lead to de
facto segmentation. It is also possible that factors affecting investors in major markets (their
preferences, the level of interest rates, etc.) affect price convergence across the world. Instead
of imposing a particular view about which factors matter the most, we employ an empirical
model reduction technique proposed by Hendry (1995) to select the statistically relevant
factors. We judge their economic importance by using a novel covariance decomposition.
Overall, our approach suggests that in addition to financial and trade openness, a country’s
political risk profile, its stock market development and the the U.S. corporate credit spread,
are statistically and economicly significant in explaining the variation in segmentation.
   Our empirical results provide useful guidance for theoretical research. While formal
international pricing models can lead to subtle empirical predictions, they tend to focus
on only a few key determinants of international pricing differences. For example, much
of the recent literature (see, for example, Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002), Hail and Leuz
(2006), and Albuquerque and Wang (2008)) focuses on cross-country differences in corporate
governance, setting aside other potentially important factors, such as financial openness and
stock market development. While our methodology allows us to empirically distinguish the
relative importance of these factors, it should also be helpful for research in other areas
where empirical complexity hinders the development of more comprehensive models.
   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The second section introduces our
measure of market segmentation. In section 3, we characterize the degree of market segmen-
tation across countries and industries. We apply our measure to the U.S. equity market in
order to develop a benchmark for an effectively integrated market. In section 4, we explore

                                                  2
the pure time-series variation in the degree of segmentation and the role for de jure global-
ization. While de jure openness has a significant effect on de facto segmentation, it cannot
fully account for the downward trend we observe in segmentation levels. Section 5 contains
the main results on what factors determine the variation in observed market segmentation
across countries and time. Section 6 presents several robustness checks. In the final section,
we offer some conclusions and discuss some related literature.


2    A new measure of market segmentation

We view each country as a portfolio of industries where an industry’s portfolio weight corre-
sponds to the relative (equity) market value of the industry in the country portfolio. Define
the weight of industry j in country i by IWi,j,t . Let EYi,j,t denote industry j’s earnings
yield, the inverse of the price earnings ratio, as determined locally in country i and EYw,j,t
the corresponding earnings yield as determined in global capital markets. Our main vari-
able of analysis is the absolute value of the difference between industry valuation ratios,
|EYi,j,t − EYw,j,t |. We propose the weighted sum of these local-global industry valuation
differentials as a measure of the degree of effective or de facto equity market segmentation
for a country:
                                       N
                                       X
                            SEGi,t =         IWi,j,t |EYi,j,t − EYw,j,t |,                  (1)
                                       j=1

for N industries.
    Note that our measure requires nothing more than industry-level valuation ratios which
are observed at every point in time and are not estimated. This contrasts with the standard
international finance literature that employs estimated measures of segmentation based on,
for example, the evolution of equity return correlations or systematic risk exposures (e.g.,
world market portfolio betas); see Bekaert, Hodrick and Zhang (2007) and the references
therein. However, the construction of these measures requires both historical data and a
particular estimation methodology. Further, as their interpretation requires a formal inter-
national asset pricing model (about which there is little consensus), estimation error is likely
compounded by model mis-specification.
    In Appendix A, we present a pricing model with stochastic growth opportunities and

                                                     3
discount rates that links the measure to the concepts of market integration and segmentation.
Most importantly, under a strong notion of integration, encompassing both financial and
economic integration, the time-varying components comprising the industry price-earnings
ratios are identical, being driven entirely by variation in the world discount rate and world
growth opportunities.
       Note that the model describes the determinants of price-earnings ratios; however, we use
their inverse, earnings yields, in our empirical work. We do so for a number of reasons. First,
the distribution of price-earnings ratios is highly positively skewed, increasing the risk that
outliers may affect the analysis. Second, and most importantly, price earnings ratios are
not defined when earnings are zero. Third, earnings yield differentials are easier to interpret
given that they are expressed in percentage terms.1
       We now review the model assumptions that deliver the equalization of valuation differ-
entials across countries. The model we provide helps to develop our understanding of where
country-specific effects may arise, but the usefulness of our measure does not hinge in any
way on a particular parameterization of this model.2 First, we assume a constant world
interest rate. Later, we add the world real interest rate as one of the potential determinants
of SEG. However, it is not likely that real rates account for much of the variation in earnings
yield ratios.
       Second, we assume that systematic risk for a given industry is identical across countries.
This is the key assumption rendering the SEG measure independent of local discount rate
variation under the null of integration. While this is the typical textbook assumption, the
industry classification may not be homogenous enough to make this an acceptable assump-
tion. We deal with this in two ways. We use an industry classification that is quite granular
compared to other work, involving (N =) 38 different industries (see below). In addition,
   1
       In an earlier version, we obtained qualitatively similar results, using the following segmentation measure:
                                             N
                                             X                            N
                                                                          X
                              SEGi,t = |ln         IWi,j,t EYi,j,t − ln         IWi,j,t EYw,j,t |
                                             j=1                          j=1


   2
       The model also implies other restrictions on the nature of local earnings yields in relation to their
global counterparts, for instance, their degree of comovement across time should become more pronounced.
However, investigating such implications again relinquishes the estimation-free nature of our measure.


                                                               4
in section 3.2, we use this industry classification on a large integrated market (the U.S.) to
verify that portfolios within industries have comparable multiples and to uncover any biases
that may arise in our measure.
       Third, we assume that the same industry in different countries has identical financial risk.
Because country specific circumstances may induce different leverage ratios across countries,
we verify that our results are robust to the inclusion of country-specific leverage ratios. Note
that other valuation measures, such as for example Tobin’s q, would not require assumptions
about financial risk. At the same time, the time series of available accounting data for a
large set of countries is very limited and would not allow us to examine the long sample
period we are interested in.3
       Fourth, we assume that the earnings growth process for each industry-country portfo-
lio depends on an persistent industry-specific, but country-independent growth opportunity
process and a country and industry-specific shock that is not persistent. Consequently, only
worldwide growth opportunities are priced.4 The assumption that only world factors drive
growth opportunities is common. For example, research by Rajan and Zingales (1998) and
Fisman and Love (2004), makes this assumption quite explicitly, arguing that growth oppor-
tunities primarily arise through technological shocks. Bekaert, Harvey, Lundblad, and Siegel
(BHLS) (2007) show that, in fact, global growth opportunities (measured using industry
valuation ratios) predict real economic growth for both developed and emerging markets.
       Under these assumptions, the weighted sum of these industry level absolute valuation
differences should be small and relatively constant over time. The equalization of industry
valuations is consistent with factor price equalization as implied by classical trade models
(see for example Samuelson (1948)). But even under the more recent trade literature that
explicitly allows for geography and differences in the level of productivity across countries
(see for example Eaton and Kortum (2002)), we expect industry valuations to be the same
across countries unless entry or exit barriers exist, as factor prices for the immobile factors
   3
       For example, Chua, Eun, and Lai (2007) study market level Tobin’s q for 49 countries between 1999 and
2004.
   4
     Even under the null of integration, our formulation implies that the constant term in the price-earnings
ratios still depends on local earnings growth volatility. In our empirical work, we are careful to add a measure
of earnings growth volatility differentials to deal with this dependence.


                                                         5
will adjust to the spatial variation in productivity such that capital is indifferent between
different locations (see Venables (2006)).
    Of course, most countries will be segmented to some degree according to this definition.
Our approach then tests the degree to which local and global factors matter for valuation
once we have controlled for a country’s global growth opportunities present in its industry
mix. We conjecture that a main driver of such segmentation is de jure access: some markets
are simply legally closed for foreign investment. But even when a country is formally open to
foreign capital, international investors may shun markets with weak corporate governance,
keeping discount rates local and likely higher. There may also be interesting interaction
effects between openness and weak corporate governance, which partially undo this effect.
While one might want to associate segmentation with “low” prices, segmentation need not
be asymmetric. For example, in markets with irrational agents, segmentation could cause
over-pricing (see Mei, Scheinkman and Xiong (2006) for an argument as to how excessive
speculation caused Chinese A-shares, traded by locals, to be over-priced relative to B-shares,
traded by foreigners). Likewise, regulations may protect local industries against foreign
competition and improve cash flow prospects.


3     Characterizing segmentation in countries and industries

In this section, we first describe the construction of the segmentation measure, SEG, and
report summary statistics. We then measure the relative importance of country and industry
effects in the SEG measures at the country-industry level. Finally, we establish an easily
interpretable benchmark for the remainder of the analysis by examining the SEG measure
within one large country, the U.S.


3.1    Segmentation in countries and industries

We construct our measure of segmentation, SEG, for a sample of 50 countries, using monthly
data from Datastream as well as from the Standard & Poors’ Emerging Market Data Base
(EMDB) between 1973 and 2005. While monthly SEG measures are constructed (and are
presented in subsequent figures), we conduct most of our subsequent analysis at the annual

                                                6
frequency from 1980-2005 given the availability of other variables.
       For 22 mainly developed countries, we collect equity market value data at the industry
level from Datastream, which typically covers about 85% of a country’s equity market. We
use the industry market value to determine a country’s industry composition in the form
of 38 portfolio weights, IWi,j,t , that reflect the Industry Classification Benchmark (ICB)
framework employed by Datastream.5 For the same set of countries and industries, we
also obtain industry earnings yields from Datastream. Datastream calculates these earnings
yields by adding (generally trailing) 12-month non-negative firm-level earnings across firms
in a given industry and country and then dividing aggregated earnings by the aggregated
market value of the firms in the industries.
       For the remaining 28 emerging market countries, we use EMDB to obtain market values
and trailing 12-month earnings data at the firm level. To be consistent with the Datastream
data, we set negative firm level earnings to zero. We then aggregate the firm level data
according to the industry classification employed by Datastream.6 For each industry and
country, we calculate local earnings yields and portfolio weights. Appendix Table 1 lists all
50 countries and the data source used for each country.
       For the construction of our segmentation measure as defined in (1), we also require global
industry earnings yields. We obtain these from Datastream’s global industry portfolios that
represent a weighted average of local industries. We adjust these global industry earnings
yields to exclude Japanese data as previous research (see for example French and Poterba
(1991)) has shown that Japanese accounting standards lead to an artificial depression of
Japanese earnings yields. Japanese earnings yields are roughly 70% smaller, on average,
than their global counterparts. While these known accounting differences could impact our
findings in an important way, the qualitative differences in the results are in fact minimal.
Results that include Japan are available upon request.
   5
       Note that in addition to the 38 industries used in our study (see Table 2 for a list of these industries),
Datastream also employs a “Nonequity Investment Instruments” category which we exclude.
  6
    EMDB classifies firms according to the Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS). We construct a
concordance table between the 150 GICS categories used by EMDB and the 38 ICB categories used in this
study and assign each firm an ICB industry code. The concordance between both classification systems is
available upon request.


                                                           7
       Table 1 first reports the time series average and standard deviation of our country seg-
mentation measure, SEG, for all countries in our sample. Our sample is unbalanced: we
have 26 years of data for most developed counties, but the average number of years with
data for emerging market countries is only about 17.7 At the bottom of the table, we report
the cross-sectional averages of these statistics for the set of developed, emerging, and all
countries. We observe that emerging markets on average exhibit larger earnings yields dif-
ferentials as well as larger fluctuations of SEG over time than do developed countries. The
“Rank” column shows that over the last five years, the U.S. is the least segmented country,
whereas Venezuela is the most segmented.
       The columns in the middle produce some preliminary information about how the seg-
mentation measures evolve over time. Segmentation for developed markets has fallen con-
siderably. The absolute earnings yield differential is 4.5%, on average, during 1980-1984, but
less than 2%, on average, during the 2001-2005 period. For emerging markets, the average
market segmentation measure falls from 5.8% in the first five years to 3.9% during 2001-2005.
While both developed and emerging markets exhibit yield convergence over time, industrial-
ized countries experience the largest drop in percentage terms. It should be pointed out that
segmentation also increases for a few emerging markets, such as Venezuela, a country which
experienced a significantly deteriorating political risk profile. Figure 1 presents, separately
for developed and emerging markets, a cross-country average for SEG along with a time
trend. Consistent with the results in Table 1, emerging markets appear more segmented
relative to developed but SEG exhibits a strong downward trend for both sets of countries.
It is this variation of segmentation over time as well as across countries that we seek to
explain in this paper.
       While most of our focus is on country segmentation, Table 2 also reports the main
statistics from Table 1 for industry-specific segmentation. We observe that the absolute
value of the yield differential has decreased for 23, but increased for 15 industries over the
last two decades. The most integrated industry in recent years is the Software and Computer
Services industry; indeed, it is the only one with a segmentation measure less than 2%.
   7
       Coverage for most developed countries actually starts in 1973. But our empirical analysis focuses on
1980 to 2005. See Appendix Table 1 for details.


                                                        8
The five industries that appeared to be the most segmented in 1980-1984, namely Banks,
Life Insurance, General Retailers, Non-life Insurance, and Industrial Metals all exhibit a
significant reduction in their degree of measured segmentation. Interestingly, several of these
industries have experienced substantial deregulation and privatization in many countries
over the last two decades. This raises the question whether some of the country effects
we document later may be influenced by the industry mix of the country. For example,
imagine most countries protect their banking sectors, even after official liberalization, until
worldwide technological (i.e., in telecommunication and web services) and regulatory changes
(i.e., changing BIS standards) force global deregulation. In this case, countries will appear
more or less segmented depending on the relative importance of the banking sector in the
industry mix. Finally, notice that the four most segmented industries during the more recent
period (2001 - 2005), Forestry & Paper, Industrial Metals, Travel & Leisure, and Mining are
largely endowment-based industries, the value of which depends to some extent on the price
of the immobile factor land.
      To gauge the relative importance of industry versus country effects in our yield differen-
tials, we regress the annual industry-country level segmentation measures onto a constant,
38 industry indicators, and up to 50 country indicators. This methodology was introduced
by Heston and Rouwenhorst (1994) to distinguish between country and industry effects in
firm return data.8 To identify the parameters, we require the sum of all industry dum-
mies as well as the sum of all country dummies to add up to zero. We then calculate the
equally-weighted average absolute value of all industry dummies in a given year as well as
of all country dummies. These numbers are commonly known as Mean Absolute Deviations
(MAD), the relative magnitudes of which essentially show which effects are largest: country
or industry. We find (in results available upon request) that country effects are dominant,
but industry effects are important too. Both decline over time. However, the country effects
are most prominent starting in the mid 1980s, and are therefore likely associated with the
introduction of the emerging markets into the sample around that time.
  8
      Bhoraj and Ng (2007) apply the methodology to valuation ratios.




                                                      9
3.2        Developing a benchmark: segmentation in the U.S.

Over the last five years, the average segmentation measure in the industrialized countries
was 1.9%. Given differences in leverage, earnings volatility across countries, imperfect homo-
geneity within industry classes, and/or just plain measurement error, is this a large number,
a small number, or what we would expect in relatively integrated countries? In this section,
we benchmark our measure of segmentation by examining its value within one country, the
U.S. Given that we sample firms within one country, any measured segmentation cannot be
ascribed to international market segmentation.
       We obtain earnings and equity market value data from Datastream and annual leverage
data from Compustat between 1973 and 2006 for the 4,594 firms that are covered by both
data vendors. We classify each firm into one of the 38 Datastream ICB industries
       We use the U.S. sample of firms to construct 100 random samples, each of which resembles
our actual data set of 50 countries, with the aggregate U.S. market playing the role of the
world market. As Appendix B describes in detail, the random data sets approximately
replicate both the cross-sectional and temporal variation in the number of firms in our
sample. This is important as an increase in the number of firms within each portfolio may
increase the accuracy of the measured earnings yield. For each random data set and each
pseudo-“country” within such a set, we then compute the segmentation measure exactly as
we do for the actual countries. Figure 2 shows the average, as well as the 5th and 95th
percentile, of the degree of measured segmentation across the 100 random replications over
time. The U.S. segmentation measure does not exhibit an obvious trend. The degree of
segmentation for developed countries has declined through time to the average segmentation
level in our U.S. benchmark case, which is about 2%. Since about 1993, segmentation in
developed markets has moved within the 90% percentile confidence bound of the U.S. random
measure, but the measured segmentation for emerging markets is still well above it.9
       To understand better what may cause the apparent segmentation found in the U.S. data,
we relate the annual segmentation measures for U.S. “countries” to four factors: a time
   9
       We also conduct the more precise exercise of randomizing twice to be consistent with the separate groups
of developed and emerging countries, respectively. This exercise yields very similar results.




                                                         10
trend, the log of the number of firms in a given “country” and year, the weighted average
of the absolute difference between industry leverage in a given “country” and in the U.S. as
a whole, and the weighted average of the absolute difference between industry log earnings
growth volatility in a given “country” and the U.S.10
       The earnings volatility and leverage variables have obvious implications for valuation
detailed earlier in Section 2, even under full market integration. Importantly, their temporal
variation may induce a downward trend in our segmentation measure. For example, the
general decline in macro-economic volatility since 1985 may have narrowed earnings volatility
differentials between firms. Likewise, general financial development may make it easier for
firms to hit their target debt levels, narrowing leverage differentials between firms. Finally,
if the number of firms increased over time, this alone may create a lower segmentation
level; whereas cross-sectionally, “countries” with more firms may on average show lower
segmentation levels.
       Table 3 reports the results from running the regression on the 100 replications of our
data set. We report the distribution of coefficient estimates and t-statistics. The signs of the
coefficients are as expected, with the trend and number of firms coefficients being negative
and the earnings growth volatility and leverage differential coefficients being positive. Fo-
cusing on the 95th (5th) percentile of the t-statistic distribution for the negative (positive)
coefficients, only the number of firms coefficient is significantly different from zero. The trend
and earnings growth volatility differential coefficients would be significant at lower critical
levels.11
  10
       The data sources and computations are described in Appendix Table 2. We clarify how we compute
standard errors in Section 4.
  11
     We also conducted a similar exercise with U.S. states serving as “countries,” using Compustat to associate
a firm’s principle location with a U.S. state. Whereas the results (available upon request) are broadly
similar to our reported findings, there is a concern that U.S. states may actually display genuine valuation
differentials due to differential branching restrictions in the local banking system. Deregulation in the banking
system could then lead to a trend in the segmentation measure.




                                                         11
4         Market segmentation dynamics

Our empirical results rely on unbalanced panel regressions for 50 countries using annual data
from 1980 to 2005 of the form:

                                           SEGi,t = α + β 0 xi,t + ηi,t ,                                    (2)

where SEGi,t is the year t measure of segmentation for country i, and xi,t represents the
various candidate explanatory variables. We use two estimation techniques. The first speci-
fication is pooled ordinary least squares (OLS). However, the standard errors are corrected
for unspecified serial correlation within a given country and for cross-sectional correlation
across countries in a given year (see Thompson (2006)). These corrections have the effect of
increasing the standard errors relative to simple OLS.
         To address the serial correlation in the error term in an alternative fashion, our second
approach uses a Prais-Winsten (1954) regression assuming that the autocorrelation coeffi-
cient of the error term is the same for all countries. We follow Beck and Katz (1995) and
calculate panel corrected standard errors that allow for heteroskedasticity across countries
as well as contemporaneous correlation of the error term between countries.12 To conserve
space, we only report coefficient estimates and standard errors from the pooled OLS es-
timation. Bold coefficients denote statistical significance at the 5% level under the panel
OLS specifications. However, we indicate statistical significance at the 5% level under the
Prais-Winsten specifications using underlined coefficients. Generally, the results from the
Prais-Winsten regressions are broadly similar to the OLS specification results.


4.1          Establishing a trend

Table 4 provides three sets of unbalanced panel regressions of market segmentation (SEG)
on a time trend (labeled “I” for each). The first set, in Panel A, includes all 50 countries from
1980-2005. The coefficient on the time trend is negative and statistically significant reflect-
ing declines in market segmentation across time for a broad set of developed and emerging
    12
         Given the unbalanced nature of our data set, we estimate the elements of the covariance matrix pairwise,
that is using for each pair of countries all years for which both countries have non-missing data.


                                                           12
countries. The same message is evident in Panel B where we consider a sub-sample of 19 de-
veloped markets. When we consider the 31 emerging markets in Panel C (with data starting
in 1988), the downward trend is also negative, but no longer statistically significant. In the
full country sample case which will reflect our main empirical focus henceforth, the regres-
sion R2 is not particularly large, suggesting that much of the variation in observed market
segmentation is not described by a simple time trend, despite the statistical significance of
the effect.
   To evaluate the robustness of the time trend effect, we add the three control variables
also examined in the U.S. benchmark regression in Section 3.2 as additional explanatory
factors in column II. For all three samples, the time trend retains the same general sign
and significance. Also, the regression R2 ’s increase significantly, reflecting the importance of
the additional regression controls. Earnings growth volatility differentials are significantly
associated with larger earnings yield spreads across all three samples. This is consistent
with the theoretical prediction in the valuation model as well as the empirical results of the
U.S. study. While the leverage differential has the expected sign for all samples, it is not
statistically significant. Finally, we find a significant role for the number of firms across all
three samples, corroborating the importance of that control highlighted in the U.S. study.
We conclude that there is a significant downward trend in segmentation of at least 7 basis
points per year.


4.2     Globalization and convergence

Globalization, particularly de jure financial and goods trade openness, has increased at a
tremendous pace over the last thirty years. Accordingly, the de jure globalization process
is the most obvious candidate determinant for the downward trend in SEG that we ob-
serve. In Table 5, we investigate the role of de jure financial and trade openness on market
segmentation.
   We use two different measures of financial openness, one focusing on the entire capital
account and the other based exclusively on equity markets. Given that the two measures are
highly correlated (0.74), we use them separately (Panel A and Panel B in Table 5) in our


                                                 13
regressions. The capital account openness measure compiled in Quinn (1997) and Quinn and
Toyoda (2008) is based on information from the IMF. A value of one indicates full capital
account openness, a value of zero a closed capital account, and larger intermediate values
indicate increasingly fewer regulations on international capital flows. The equity market
openness measure is based upon the ratio of the market capitalization of the S&P investable
to the S&P global indices in each country, following Bekaert (1995) and Edison and Warnock
(2003). The S&P’s global stock index seeks to represent the local stock market whereas the
investable index corrects the market capitalization for foreign ownership restrictions. Hence,
a ratio of one means that all of the stocks in the local market are available to foreigners.
To measure regulatory trade openness, we use the trade liberalization dates developed in
Wacziarg and Welch (2003) (based on the earlier work of Sachs and Warner (1995)). Wacziarg
and Welch look at five criteria: high tariff rates, extensive non-tariff barriers, large black
market exchange rate premia, state monopolies on major exports, and socialist economic
systems. If a country meets any of these five criteria, it is classified with an indicator
variable equal to zero and deemed closed.
   In columns I, II, and III across two panels, Table 5 reports the effect of capital account,
equity market and trade openness on market segmentation (intercepts are not reported).
While all coefficients are negative, as expected, only the two financial openness effects are
consistently significant. Note also that capital account openness as well as equity market
openness have each higher explanatory power (in terms of R2 ), than trade openness. Coun-
tries with completely open capital accounts or equity markets feature yield differentials that
are about 250 to 300 basis points smaller than those with completely closed financial sys-
tems. Given that trade and financial openness are positively correlated, these coefficients
decrease in joint regressions, but they remain statistically and economically significant.
   In column IV, we add a trend term to the regression to explore the extent to which de
jure openness subsumes the pure time effect documented above. Only in the capital account
regressions is the coefficient on the time trend reduced in magnitude indicating that some of
the time variation can be accounted for by trends in openness, but the magnitude is largely
unaffected by the inclusion of equity market openness. In both sets of regressions, the time
trend remains significantly different from zero. The time trend’s inclusion adds only 2% to

                                               14
the regression R2 , whereas the inclusion of the openness variables generates a significant
increase in the regression R2 over the time trend in isolation. The openness variables clearly
also explain cross-sectional differences in segmentation.
   Finally, in column V, we also include our three control variables. As in Table 4, this
generates a sizeable increase in the regression R2 , and the number of listed firms and earnings
growth volatility differentials remain important. The inclusion of these control variables does
slightly reduce the estimated financial openness effects, but they remain statistically and
economically significant. A closed to open difference still implies a 200 to 210 basis point
differential in earnings yields. While retaining the expected sign, the trade openness effect
is now statistically insignificant.


4.3    Baseline market segmentation

The de jure globalization measures jointly explain 9 to 13% of the variation in the de facto
market segmentation measure. To set a benchmark for our capacity to explain this variation,
we conduct a time-series fixed-effects regression:

                                      SEGi,t = αi + τt + ηi,t                               (3)

where SEGi,t is the year t measure of segmentation for country i, and αi and τt represent
country and year effects, respectively. This baseline regression explains 42% of the total
variation in SEG.
   Most of the R2 (31%) comes from the fixed effects, reported in Table 1, corroborating
the evidence that country factors are dominant and that valuation differentials are very
persistent. The individual country fixed effects are of interest as well. The three largest
fixed effects are due to Zimbabwe, Jamaica, and Côte d’Ivoire. The least integrated markets,
on average, among industrialized countries are Finland, Norway, and New Zealand. The
smallest country fixed effects are due to the United States (not surprisingly), the United
Kingdom, and Australia. Finally, the pure year effects exhibit a significant downward trend
over the sample, consistent with the previous evidence on significant time trends. Unlike
a pure time-trend, however, valuation convergence was notably interrupted following the


                                                  15
1997 South-East Asian crisis and the market turbulence in 1998 (the Russian debt crisis and
LTCM) (see Figure 1).


5     Determinants of market segmentation

De jure globalization measures together with controls for earnings volatility, leverage differ-
entials, and the number of firms explain about 25% of the total panel variation in SEG,
whereas a simple country and time effects regression explains 42%. Here we consider a host
of other factors potentially associated with segmentation. Appendix Table 3 provides a list
of all the variables we consider and Section 5.1 provides the economic rationale for why they
are considered. We relegate a detailed description of the sources and data construction to
Appendix Table 2. Our goal is to find a parsimonious set of factors that maximizes the
explanatory power for the segmentation variable. To this end, we employ statistical model
reduction techniques, detailed in Section 5.2. Section 5.3 conducts a variance decomposition
analysis on the selected models.


5.1    Other segmentation factors

We consider five categories of variables.


Measures of de facto openness
In addition to the de jure measures of financial and trade openness provided above, we also
consider two de facto measures of openness. First, we use a measure of the importance of
foreign direct investment (FDI), computed as the sum of the absolute values of inflows and
outflows of FDI relative to GDP. Second, we employ a traditional de facto measure of trade
openness, computed as the sum of exports and imports as a share of gross domestic product.


Political risk and institutions
There are many additional country characteristics that may effectively segment markets other
than formal capital or trade restrictions. La Porta et al. (1997) emphasize the importance of
investor protection and, more generally, the quality of institutions and the legal environment.

                                                16
Poor institutions and political instability may affect risk assessments of foreign investors
effectively segmenting capital markets (see Bekaert (1995)), and financial openness might
not suffice to attract foreign capital if the country is viewed as excessively risky.
   To explore these effects, we consider several variables that measure different aspects of
the institutional environment. First, we consider several sub-indices of the ICRG political
risk index: 1) the quality of institutions, reflecting corruption, the strength and impartiality
of the legal system (law and order), and bureaucratic quality, and 2) the investment profile,
reflecting the risk of expropriation, contract viability, payment delays, and the ability to
repatriate profits. This measure is closely associated with the attractiveness of a country
for FDI. We also separately consider the sub-index for law and order, which measures both
the quality of the legal system and whether laws are actually enforced. It is likely closely
associated with investor protection. Note that high ratings are associated with less risk.
Using Bhattacharya and Daouk’s (2002) data regarding insider trading laws, we construct
two indicator variables. The first takes the value of one following the introduction of an
insider trading law and the second takes the value of one after the law’s first prosecution.
Finally, we consider the country’s legal origin (Anglo-Saxon, French, and other), an often
used instrument for corporate governance and a “good” legal system.


Financial development
Poorly developed financial systems may also be an important factor driving market segmen-
tation. For example, in a 1992 survey by Chuhan, equity market illiquidity was mentioned
as one of the main reasons that prevented foreign institutional investors from investing in
emerging markets. Moreover, poor liquidity as a priced local factor may lead to valuation
differentials. When markets are closed, efficient capital allocation should depend on finan-
cial development (see Wurgler (2000) and Fisman and Love (2004)). Because banks are still
the dominant financing source in many countries, poor banking sector development may
severely hamper growth prospects and lower valuations. We employ several measures to
quantify stock and banking sector development.
   Our first equity market liquidity measure relies on the incidence of observed zero daily
returns, following the work of Lesmond, Ogden and Trzcinka (1999), Lesmond (2005), and

                                                 17
Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2007). Our other measures of equity market trading and
efficiency include: (i) turnover as the value traded relative to GDP, a standard measure of
stock market development (see Atje and Jovanovic (1989)); (ii) the size of the equity market
as measured by total market capitalization relative to GDP; and (iii) equity market syn-
chronicity (see Morck, Yeung, and Yu (MYY henceforth) (2000)), computed as an annual
value-weighted local market model R2 obtained from each firm’s returns regressed on the lo-
cal market portfolio return for that year. Last, we proxy for the development of the banking
system by the amount of private credit divided by GDP (see King and Levine (1993)).13


Risk appetite and business cycles
We also consider a number of variables that capture potential push factors driving capital
flows. Given that all these variables are based on U.S. or global data, they exhibit only
time-series variation. An established literature argues that market conditions in developed
countries, such as the level of interest rates, may drive capital flows, and thus affect inter-
national valuation differentials (see e.g. Fernandez-Arias (1996)). In particular, low real
rates in developed markets would cause capital to flow into emerging markets bringing their
valuations closer to developed market levels. While the evidence on this effect is mixed (see
Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2002)), we nonetheless try to capture it using the level of
the real interest rate across G-7 countries.
       While the real rate effect may reflect a behavioral search for yield, it is also possible
that the level of interest rates is correlated with a change in risk appetite. Risk averse
investors may view foreign markets (erroneously) as risky. However, real interest rates have
an ambiguous effect on risk aversion. Lower interest rates may increase wealth, and thus
increase risk tolerance (see e.g. Sharpe (1990)). Alternatively, if pro-cyclical, low interest
rates may be associated with recessions, and therefore with an increase in societal risk
  13
       Unfortunately, we lack sufficient data for accounting standards: the earnings levels employed in the price-
earnings ratios may exhibit systematic differences due to country-specific accounting rules and any perceived
risks associated with lax accounting standards or the opacity of corporate records may affect the cost of
capital across countries (see Hail and Leuz (2006)). However, it is likely that the development measures we
do have are highly correlated with accounting quality measures.



                                                           18
aversion. We consequently also include a more direct measure of U.S. risk aversion due
to Bekaert and Engstrom (2008) computed based on the parameter estimates of the habit
model in Campbell and Cochrane (1999). This measure tends to behave counter-cyclically.
    Finally, low real rates may be an indicator of lax monetary policy and a surge in “global
liquidity.” Popular stories claim such global liquidity increases stock market valuations across
the world. As an alternative global liquidity measure, we use the growth rate of the U.S.
money supply (M2). We also include world GDP growth, which may act as an indicator of
the world business cycle. To the extent the world business cycle affects global discount rates
and growth opportunities, it may not affect segmentation levels under the null of integration,
but it would cause variation in segmentation levels for these markets that are segmented.
Moreover, if correlated with global risk appetites, international business cycle indicators may
be associated with changes in international capital flows and affect overall segmentation.
    Other measures more directly correlated with the risk appetite or sentiments of world
investors are the U.S. corporate bond spread and the VIX option volatility index. The latter
is generally viewed as an indicator of market uncertainty and sudden increases in its level
with a flight to safety. Increases in these measures may lead to a retreat of U.S. capital
from foreign markets, leading to divergence in valuations. Alternatively, the VIX index is
simply a measure of the U.S. stock market’s volatility, which may proxy for U.S. earnings
growth and discount rate volatility. We also investigate one country-specific factor, the level
of the lagged country portfolio return over the last year to potentially proxy for return chas-
ing effects by international investors. Finally, we include a measure of world equity market
volatility.


Growth determinants
Under the null of integration, a country’s growth opportunities should be reflected in the
global valuation measure of its industry basket. However, it is conceivable, especially for
developing countries, that growth prospects are more local in nature. Following the extensive
work on growth determinants (see, e.g., Barro (1997)), we therefore include several measures
related to cross-country expected growth differentials: the initial level of per capita GDP,
the percentage of secondary school enrollment as a measure of human capital, the log of life

                                                19
expectancy, and population growth.


5.2        Multivariate analysis: Model selection and results

Our goal is to find a parsimonious set of factors that best explain the variation in SEG. With
a large number of highly correlated explanatory variables, this is no easy task. The procedure
we employ is the general-to-specific search algorithm (see Hendry (1995) and Hendry and
Krolzig (2001)) implemented, for example, in PcGets to automatically select the “optimal”
model. The algorithm constitutes a “testing down” process that eliminates variables with
coefficient estimates that are not statistically significant leading to a parsimonious undom-
inated model. In particular, in a first step we estimate a general unrestricted model that
contains all available variables by OLS. We then eliminate variables that are statistically
insignificant. The new model is then re-estimated, and a multiple reduction path search
is used to find all terminal models, that is models in which all variables have statistically
significant coefficient estimates. Finally, if more than one terminal model exists, the different
terminal models are compared to each other and one is chosen as the unique final model.
       We initially consider the various candidate variables mentioned above for which we have
data over the full sample of 50 countries. In addition, we augment the candidate factors
with the three control variables, leverage, earnings volatility, and the number of listed firms
suggested by our U.S. case study, and with a time trend. In all specifications, we impose
the inclusion of a constant as well as equity market and trade sector openness given their
documented primacy and theoretical justification.14 Appendix Table 3 lists the candidate
variables that enter into the algorithm as well as those that survive.
       We employ two main specifications differentiated by the inclusion of either the equity
market or capital account openness variables. In the first case, we eliminate 19 variables,
leaving us with a final model that contains 9 variables. When we apply the procedure re-
placing equity market openness with capital account openness, we retain 10 variables which
overlap greatly with the equity market openness specification. Note that we lose some obser-
  14
       If we do not impose their inclusion, equity market openness survives the specification reduction, whereas
trade sector openness does not.




                                                          20
vations to do so as Quinn’s capital account openness data are limited. While the algorithm
is entirely statistical in nature and not guided by theory (other than our inclusion of de jure
globalization), we view a model that has roughly 10 variables to be quite reasonable given
the large number of plausible determinants at the outset.


Statistical Significance
Table 6 provides the final regression specifications for the retained models. We first focus on
the main equity market openness specification presented in column 1. While equity market
openness has a robustly significant effect on segmentation, the trade openness variable is
not significant. Other surviving variables include the ICRG’s Investment Profile, for which
improvements are associated with significant reductions in market segmentation, the size of
the equity market, which has the expected sign, but is only borderline statistically significant,
global economic growth, and two additional “global risk” variables, the U.S. corporate bond
spread and the VIX volatility index (with the expected positive signs and significance).
Earnings growth volatility and the number of firms also survive the selection, and both
retain the signs and statistical significance documented above. Note that the pure time
trend does not survive the model selection methodology, suggesting that our explanatory
factors are rich enough to capture the pure time trend in observed market segmentation.
   It is possible that the documented effects for each variable change dramatically in the
presence of alternative explanatory variables sets. To address this criticism, we provide
a confidence interval for each entry beneath the estimates in brackets recognizing the po-
tential mis-specification of our preferred multivariate regression using the model reduction
techniques discussed above. The confidence intervals are constructed using a jackknife exper-
iment where, for each surviving variable separately, we randomly sample from the 27 other
possible variables (see Appendix Table 3) for which we have full sample data. The number of
additional variables and their identities are completely random, but we force the selection to
have between 8 and 27 additional variables. For each set of randomly selected explanatory
variables, we perform a regression with SEG as the dependent variable, throw out variables
with t-statistics below 1, and perform a second regression on the remaining set. We retain
the regression coefficient and the overall contribution that the particular variable makes for

                                                 21
predicted segmentation. We iterate this procedure 1,000 times for each variable separately
to construct a confidence interval. The 5 and 95% percentiles are presented. Most of the
main variables highlighted above, including de jure openness, continue to be significant with
the exceptions of world GDP growth and the VIX option volatility index. Interestingly, the
regression analysis seems to understate the role for MCAP/GDP and the number of firms,
where the estimated coefficient is near the upper bound of the confidence interval.
   Overall, it appears that de facto segmentation is driven by three types of factors: de jure
globalization (with Investment Profile being correlated with a regulatory climate conducive to
FDI), financial market development (market capitalization to GDP), and measures correlated
with global risk premia and appetites. The specification using capital account openness,
presented in column 3, confirms this general picture. The significant variables include capital
account openness, investment profile, local market capitalization to GDP, and again the
corporate bond spread and the VIX index. The only puzzling result is the significantly
positive association between SEG and U.S. money supply growth. The latter is often viewed,
as an indicator of global liquidity, so we would expect it to be negatively associated with
segmentation but the coefficient is positive. It is of course conceivable that monetary policy
reacts to tight conditions in financial markets (as proxied by high corporate bond spread
and VIX index levels) by providing liquidity to the markets. The jackknife analysis confirms
that trade openness is not a significant determinant, and suggests that the importance of
the VIX index may be exaggerated by the final specification.
   In the remaining columns (columns 2 and 4) of Table 6 we consider slightly shorter sam-
ples which allow the inclusion of explanatory variables focusing on stock market efficiency and
liquidity. In the equity market specification (column 2), the illiquidity measure survives but
is not significant at conventional levels; the MYY measure of stock market inefficiency also
survives and is significant under the Prais Winsten standard errors. Both variables have the
expected signs. The role for de jure equity market openness is somewhat reduced; however,
Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2007) document that the process towards equity market
openness itself directly affects the local trading environment, so we may in fact be capturing
a channel through which financial openness operates. That said, neither stock market vari-
able survives in the capital account openness specification (column 4), and general capital

                                                22
account openness retains the same magnitude and significance. It is also conceivable that
the effects of stock market development and efficiency are well captured by the MCAP/GDP
and number of firms variables.


Economic Significance
The signs and significance of the preferred multivariate specifications are fairly straight-
forward to interpret, but the results do not provide clear guidance on which factors are
relatively more important in explaining market segmentation. For our two main multivari-
ate regressions from Table 6, we conduct two experiments to reveal the economic importance
of the factors, both reported in Table 7. For both panels (equity market and capital account
openness), we report the change in the segmentation level when the independent variable
moves from the average value of an emerging to the average value of a developed market.
For the time series variables, we simply consider the response to a one standard deviation
change in the independent variable. The most important determinants for the equity open-
ness regression are equity openness and the U.S. Corporate Bond Spread. Trade openness,
MCAP/GDP and the number of firms are least important. For the capital account regres-
sion, the story is virtually identical, with Legal Origin, in addition to the three variables
mentioned above, being relatively less important.
   In a second experiment, we examine how much of the variation in the segmentation
variable is explained by the right-hand side explanatory variables and what is the relative
                                                                             ˆ i,t )
contribution of each. We use a simple R2 concept computed as           V ar(SEG               ˆ i,t =
                                                                                       where SEG
                                                                       V ar(SEGi,t )

α̂ + β̂xi,t . The denominator is defined as
                                                 N      Ti
                                              1 X   1 X               ¯ 2
                         V ar(SEGi,t ) =                   (SEGi,t − SEG)                         (4)
                                              N i=1 Ti t=1

       ¯ =     1    PN   1    PTi
where SEG      N     i=1 Ti    t=1   SEGi,t . The numerator is defined analogously as

                                           XN      Ti
                               ˆ i,t ) = 1     1 X               ¯ˆ 2
                                                        ˆ i,t − SEG)
                         V ar(SEG                     (SEG                                        (5)
                                         N i=1 Ti t=1

       ¯ˆ       1   PN   1    PTi      ˆ i,t . These quantities were already reported in Table 6.
where SEG =     N    i=1 Ti     t=1   SEG
Across the regression specifications provided, the predicted market segmentation explains


                                                     23
about 30% of the variation of the observed market segmentation in the data. That is,
relative to our exploratory regression including only country and year fixed effects discussed
above (with an R2 around 40%), we explain about three-fourths of our benchmark.
   To examine the contributions of each of the independent variables to the overall vari-
ation of the predicted market segmentation, we compute the following covariance for each
explanatory variable j:
                                                    N      Ti
                 ˆ i,t , β̂j xi,j,t ) =          1 X   1 X                   ¯ˆ
                                                                    ˆ i,t − SEG)(x
            Cov(SEG                                           β̂j (SEG             i,j,t − x̄j )    (6)
                                                 N i=1 Ti t=1

where x̄j is defined analogously as above. Summed across all individual explanatory variables,
these covariance terms must exactly equal the variance of the predicted market segmentation.
In Table 7, we report the ratio of each covariance term to the overall predicted market
                                ˆ i,t ,β̂j xi,j,t )
                          Cov(SEG
segmentation variance,             ˆ i,t )
                             V ar(SEG
                                                    ,   where each column must necessarily sum to 1. We
report this variance decomposition for the two main regression specifications.
   In the main equity market openness specification (see Panel A), the largest contributors
to the overall variation in the predicted market segmentation are equity market openness
(around 20%), the investment profile (around 15%), the two control variables (collectively
around 35%), and the U.S. corporate default spread (14%). The contribution from de jure
trade openness is relatively small. Panel B provides comparable evidence for the main
capital account openness specification. The general magnitudes are comparable, although
the explanatory contribution from general capital account openness is somewhat smaller
at around 12%. The jackknife analysis again confirms that the stock market development
variables (both MCAP/GDP and number of firms) are perhaps more important than the
final regression point estimates indicate. Again, the VIX, and World GDP growth may be
spurious factors. The increased importance of MCAP/GDP remains true when investigating
the jackknife results for the capital account openness specification. Trade openness and
the VIX also do not appear to generate robustly significant contributions to the explained
variance of SEG.
   It is also important to note that this measure of predicted segmentation variation cap-
tures both time-series and cross-sectional effects. We further perform two decompositions
of these covariance terms into separate effects that capture each of these features. The

                                                             24
first decomposition splits the total covariation for each explanatory variable into a within-
country component and a pure cross-sectional between-country component. The second
decomposition splits the total covariation into a within-year component and a pure time-
series between-year component. We describe the formulas for these calculations in Appendix
C.
     Table 7 reports both decompositions. All covariance terms are again scaled by the vari-
                                                    ˆ i,t ). Both decompositions suggest
ance of the predicted degree of segmentation, V ar(SEG
that the largest contribution to the variation in predicted market segmentation is the cross-
sectional component, the between-country component in the case of the first decomposition
(accounting for around 58% of the explained variation) and the within-year component in
the case of the second decomposition (accounting for 82%). The temporal variation is mostly
accounted for by the global factors, but temporal variation in openness, the investment pro-
file, and MCAP/GDP also contribute. Taken together, regulatory globalization is clearly an
important determinant of observed market segmentation. That is perhaps not surprising;
however, it is important again to reemphasize the distinction between our measures of de
jure regulatory openness and our new price-based measure of de facto segmentation. Fur-
ther, it is important to note that, beyond regulatory openness, the financial and institutional
conditions within which these market and economies operate are important determinants of
de facto market segmentation.


6     Robustness Checks

Finally, we briefly summarize several robustness checks. Detailed results are available upon
request.


U.S. as a benchmark
Using the world market as a benchmark to compare valuation levels has the disadvantage
that the number of countries in the index and their relative weights change over time. There-
fore, we repeat all of our empirical exercises using the U.S. stock market, the world’s largest,
as the benchmark. To do this, we drop the U.S. from the list of countries to investigate. Our


                                                25
results are robust to this change in benchmark. For example, all the coefficients for the four
specifications reported in Table 6 are largely unchanged when the U.S. benchmark is used
and have similar statistical significance levels.


Equally-weighted industry differentials
As we indicated before, the industry mix of a country may affect its segmentation level.
To more cleanly focus on country regulations, we investigate an alternative SEG measure
where we employ equal weights for the various industries within each country. The results
presented in Table 6 are also largely unchanged under this alternative weighting scheme.


Interaction effects
Finally, the effect of a number of our explanatory variables may themselves be a function of
the de jure openness of the country. For example, it is conceivable that financial development
only contributes to valuation convergence in financially open markets. Therefore, we inves-
tigate the role for interaction effects with equity market openness for all the variables in the
main specification from column 1 in Table 6. We examine these effects one-by-one to prevent
the proliferation of the independent variables. Only two of the variables, MCAP/GDP and
local market illiquidity, exhibit a significant interaction effect; for the most part, interaction
effects are not statistically significant.


Information variables
A rather extensive literature on home bias (see especially Portes and Rey (2006)) shows that
informational frictions play a large role in determining international transactions in financial
assets and the level of home bias. To the extent that there is a link between home bias and
asset transactions and valuation, such measures may help determine segmentation levels. We
therefore also include several proxies for the degree to which countries are connected with
the world through telecommunication. In particular, we include the number of fixed line
and mobile phone subscribers per 100 people, the number of Internet users per 100 people,
and the international voice traffic as measured by minutes per person. Because the latter
measure is not available for all observations in our sample, we applied the model reduction

                                                    26
process to a sample that is slightly smaller than the one considered in Section 5. Neither
of these information variables survive the robustness process; hence information asymmetry
seems not to play a critical role in driving segmentation levels.


7    Conclusions

We study the evolution of market segmentation. Our measure of market segmentation, SEG,
the absolute differential between local and global valuation ratios, will shrink as discount
rates and growth opportunities become global in nature.
    While it is well known that the forces of globalization have reduced market segmenta-
tion over the past few decades, it is difficult to quantify the magnitude, the timing, and
the sources of this reduction. Our measure allows us to characterize both the time-series
and cross-country variation in observed segmentation. We find that segmentation has sig-
nificantly trended downward through time for both developed and emerging markets, where
developed markets are now effectively integrated. De jure globalization, such as the open-
ness of equity market to foreign investors, plays a pivotal role in explaining cross-country
differences in market segmentation, but so does the institutional environment and local fi-
nancial market development. Variables reflecting global risk conditions, such as the U.S.
corporate bond spread, also account for a significant proportion of SEG’s variation. These
variables alongside de jure openness explain about 30% of the variation in segmentation. We
find equity market openness to be the single most important economic explanatory variable,
accounting for the largest share of the explained segmentation variance.
    Finally, since our segmentation measure employs a country’s industrial structure as a
key building block, we also explore market segmentation at the industry level. We find
that historically heavily regulated industries, such as the banking, insurance, and electricity
sectors, were among the least integrated early in our sample and are now among the most
integrated.
    Much of the literature has focused on equity returns, for example examining return corre-
lations (see Bekaert, Hodrick and Zhang (2007) and the references therein), or the evolution
of betas with respect to a global benchmark (see Bekaert and Harvey (2000) and Baele


                                                27
(2005), among others). While these approaches have sometimes led to the conclusion that
integration has significant effects on returns, the tests often lack statistical significance. Our
method to examine the effects of globalization on market integration offers an alternative and
perhaps more powerful perspective. Our analysis allows us to answer the important questions
of why one country is more segmented than another and why the degree of segmentation
changes over time.




                                                 28
8    Appendix
A: A simple pricing model for industry portfolios


    We begin by defining real log earnings growth, ∆ ln(Earnt ), with Earni,j,t the earnings
level, in country i, industry j as:

                           ∆ ln(Earni,j,t ) = GOw,j,t−1 + GOi,j,t−1 + ²i,j,t .              (7)

GOw,j,t represents the world-wide stochastic growth opportunity for each industry j which
does not depend on the country to which the industry belongs. In contrast, GOi,j,t is a
country and industry specific growth opportunity. For example, an industry’s growth oppor-
tunity may be curtailed by country-specific regulation or affected by country-specific factor
endowments. Finally, ²i,j,t is a country and industry specific earnings growth disturbance,
                             2
which we assume to be N (0, σi,j ). Because it has no persistence, it is not priced. Growth
opportunities themselves follow persistent stochastic processes:

                               GOw,j,t = µj + ϕj GOw,j,t−1 + ²w,j,t                         (8)

                                GOi,j,t = µ̄i,j + ϕ̄ij GOi,j,t−1 + ²̄i,j,t .

                          2                           2
We assume ²w,j,t ∼ N (0, σw,j ) and ²̄i,j,t ∼ N (0, σ̄i,j ).
    The real discount rate for each industry in each country is affected by two factors:

                            δi,j,t = rf (1 − βi,j − β̄i,j ) + βi,j δw,t + β̄i,j δi,t .      (9)

The constant term, with rf equal to the world risk free rate, arises because the discount
rates are total not excess discount rates. The world market discount rate process follows:

                                      δw,t = dw + φw δw,t−1 + ηw,t ,                       (10)

with ηw,t ∼ N (0, s2w ). Likewise, the country-specific discount factor follows:

                                        δi,t = di + φi δi,t−1 + ηi,t ,                     (11)

with ηi,t ∼ N (0, s2i ). We assume the various shocks to be uncorrelated.

                                                         29
   Assuming that each industry pays out all earnings, Earnt , each period, the valuation of
the industry under (7)-(11) is:
                                              ∞
                                              X            k−1
                                                           X
                              Vi,j,t = Et [        exp(−         δi,j,t+` )Earni,j,t+k ].                  (12)
                                            k=1            `=0

Given that we model earnings growth as in equation (7), the earnings process is non-
stationary. We must scale the current valuation by earnings, and impose a transversality
condition to obtain a solution:
                                         X∞   k−1
                                              X
                          Vi,j,t
            P Ei,j,t =             = Et [ exp( −δi,j,t+` + ∆ ln(Earni,j,t+1+` ))]                          (13)
                         Earni,j,t       k=1  `=0

   Given the assumed dynamics for δw , δi , GOw,j , and GOi,j and normally distributed
shocks, the P E ratio can be shown to be an infinite sum of exponentiated affine functions
of the current realizations of the growth opportunity factors (with a positive sign) and the
discount rate factors (with a negative sign) (a detailed derivation is available upon request):
                       ∞
                       X
          P Ei,j,t =         exp(ai,j,k + bi,j,k δw,t + ci,j,k GOw,j,t + ei,j,k δi,t + fi,j,k GOi,j,t ).   (14)
                       k=1

In this model, the cash flows and discount rate processes governing the pricing of various
industries in particular countries may be affected by both local and global factors. Note
that the constant in the expression for the P E ratio is affected positively by the volatility
of the shocks to the discount rates, growth opportunities, and earnings growth rates. This
dependence may lead to local variables affecting the dependence of the earnings yield on
global variables because of non-linearity in the model, but this dependence is likely second-
order.
   The model nests the two polar cases of full integration and full segmentation. Assume
that the variance of the country-specific growth opportunity is zero and β̄i,j = 0 ∀ i, j. Also,
assume that industry systematic risk is the same across integrated countries; that is,

                                                      βi,j = βj .                                          (15)

This assumption also implies that financial risk through leverage is identical across countries.
Under these assumptions, we can rewrite (14) as:
                                          ∞
                                          X
                             P Ei,j,t =         exp(ai,j,k + bj,k δw,t + cj,k GOw,j,t ).                   (16)
                                          k=1


                                                            30
An improvement in growth opportunities increases price earnings ratios for the industry
everywhere in the world, and the change in the P E ratio is larger when GOw,j,t is more
persistent. Similarly, a reduction in the world discount rate increases the P E ratio with
the magnitude of the response depending upon the persistence of the discount rate process
and the beta of the industry. Critically, the coefficients on δw,t and GOw,j,t are not country-
specific. Under these assumptions, valuation ratios for the same industry across countries
do not need to be strictly identical, but this difference only depends on the constant ai,j,k .
       Alternatively, if βi,j = 0 ∀ i, j, that is local investors determine discount rates and GOw,j,t
has zero variance, country-specific persistent components will drive local industry growth op-
portunities and discount rates. In that case, local industry P E ratios need not be tied to
global ratios for the same industry and price earnings ratios for each local industry depend
only on δi,t and GOi,j,t . While local and global factors may be correlated, local industry P E
ratios can now differ substantially from comparable global P E ratios.


B: Constructing 100 random samples of 50 “countries” from U.S. data
We use the sample of 4,594 U.S.firms to construct 100 random samples, each of which re-
sembles our actual data set of 50 countries with respect to the approximate number of firms
used.15 In particular, we allow for cases where a “country” contains 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60,
100, 150, 200, 250, 350, 500, or 1,000 firms. We start by defining country i = 1 and randomly
selecting 10 U.S. firms. We then add another 10 randomly selected firms, then another 10
firms and so on until we have randomly selected 1,000 U.S. firms. We repeat this process a
100 times, obtaining 100 “countries” i = 1, 2, 3..., 100 each with 10, 20, 30,..., 1,000 randomly
selected firms. We then randomly select 50 out of the 100 “countries” and associate them
with the 50 countries present in our actual international data set. For example, Argentina
could be associated with i = 5, Australia with i = 43 and so on. We then choose the number
of randomly selected firms that is approximately equal to the number of firms present in
  15
       We know the exact number of firms used in a given year for countries for which we use EMDB data, we
only know the approximate number of firms used by Datastream in 2006. For countries for which we obtain
data from Datastream, we assume that the number of firms used until 1989 is about half (but not less than
50) of the 2006 number of firms and is at the 2006 levels from 1990 onwards.



                                                       31
the actual data. Assume for example that we have 13 firms for Argentina in 1994 and 24 in
1995, we would work with the 10 randomly selected U.S. firms for i = 5 in 1994 and with the
20 randomly selected U.S. firms for i = 5 in 1995 and so on. Finally, we repeat this random
selection process 100 times, obtaining 100 data sets that approximate our actual data sets
with respect to the number of firms used in a given year and country. In each case, we
proceed exactly as described in Section 3 to calculate a “country’s” degree of segmentation,
that is we first aggregate earnings yields across firms in the same industry and take absolute
differences with respect to the corresponding U.S. earnings yield for the given industry and
then aggregate this absolute difference across industries in a given country using industry
market values as weights.


C: Variance Decomposition
We conduct two variance decompositions to isolate the time-series and cross-sectional effects
of each explanatory variables for predicted segmentation. The first decomposition splits the
total covariation for each explanatory variable into a within-country component and a pure
cross-sectional between-country component:
                                             N      Ti
                ˆ i,t , β̂j xi,j,t ) =    1 X   1 X                   ¯ˆ
                                                             ˆ i,t − SEG
           Cov(SEG                                     β̂j (SEG          i )(xi,j,t − x̄i,j )
                                          N i=1 Ti t=1
                                           N
                                        1 X         ¯ˆ      ¯ˆ
                                      +       β̂j (SEG i − SEG)(x̄i,j − x̄j )                       (17)
                                        N i=1

       ¯ˆ        1    PTi     ˆ i,t and x̄i,j =   1    PTi
where SEG i =    Ti    t=1   SEG                  Ti    t=1   xi,j,t denote the within-country means of
the relevant variables.
   The second decomposition splits the total covariation into a within-year component and
a pure time-series between-year component:
                                             N      Ti
                ˆ i,t , β̂j xi,j,t ) =    1 X   1 X                   ¯ˆ
                                                             ˆ i,t − SEG
           Cov(SEG                                     β̂j (SEG          t )(xi,j,t − x̄j,t )
                                          N i=1 Ti t=1
                                              Ti
                                          1 X          ¯ˆ      ¯ˆ
                                      +          β̂j (SEG t − SEG)(x̄j,t − x̄j )                    (18)
                                          Ti t=1

       ¯ˆ       1     PN      ˆ i,t and x̄j,t =   1    PN
where SEG t =   N      i=1   SEG                  N     i=1   xi,j,t denote the within-year cross-country
means of the relevant variables.

                                                        32
  9    References


Albuquerque, R., and N. Wang, 2008, Agency Conflicts, Investment, and Asset Pricing, Journal
  of Finance 63, 1-40.
Alfaro, L., Kalemlio-Ozcan S., and V. Volosovych, 2007, Why doesn’t capital flow from rich to
   poor countries? An empirical investigation, Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Atje, R., and B. Jovanovic, 1989, Stock markets and development, European Economic Review
  37, 632-640.
Baele, L., 2005, Volatility Spillover Effects in European Equity Markets, Journal of Financial
  and Quantitative Analysis 40, 373-401.
Barro, R., 1997, Determinants of Economic Growth, MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
Beck, N. and J. N. Katz, 1995, What to do (and not to do) with time-series cross-section data,
  American Political Science Review, 89, 634-647.
Bekaert, G., 1995, Market integration and investment barriers in emerging equity markets,
  World Bank Economic Review 9, 75-107.
Bekaert, G. and E. Engstrom, 2007, Inflation and the Stock Market: Understanding the Fed
  Model, working paper.
Bekaert, G., and C. R. Harvey, 2000, Foreign speculators and emerging equity markets, Journal
  of Finance 55, 565-614.
Bekaert, G., C. R. Harvey and R. Lumsdaine, 2002, The Dynamics of Emerging Market Equity
  Flows, Journal of International Money and Finance 21, 295–350.
Bekaert, G., C. R. Harvey, and C. Lundblad, 2007, Liquidity and Expected Returns: Lessons
  from Emerging Markets, Review of Financial Studies, 20, 1783-1831.
Bekaert, G., C. R. Harvey, C. Lundblad, and S. Siegel, 2007, Growth Opportunities and Market
  Integration, Journal of Finance, 62, 1081-1137.
Bekaert, G., R. J. Hodrick, and X. Zhang, 2007, International Stock Return Comovements,
  working paper.
Bhattacharya, U., and H. Daouk, 2002, The world price of insider trading, Journal of Finance
  57, 75-108.
Bhojraj, S. and D. Ng, 2007, Country Factors in Firm Valuation Ratios, working paper.
Campbell, J. and J. Cochrane, 1999, By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation of
  Aggregate Stock Market Behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205–251.
Chua, C. T., C. S. Eun, and S. Lai, 2007, Corporate valuation around the world: The effects
  of governance, growth, and openness, Journal of Banking & Finance 31, 35-56.
Chuhan, P., 1992, Are Institutional Investors an Important Source of Portfolio Investment in
  Emerging Markets?, World Bank Working Paper N. 1243.


                                                 33
Doidge C, Karolyi A., and R. Stulz, 2004, Why are foreign firms listed in the U.S. worth more?,
  Journal of Financial Economics 71, 205-238.
Eaton, J. and S. Kortum, 2002, Technology, Geography, and Trade, Econometrica 70, 1741-
  1779.
Edison, H., and F. Warnock, 2003, A simple measure of the intensity of capital controls, Journal
  of Empirical Finance 10, 81-103.
Eun, C., and J. Lee, 2006, Mean-variance convergence around the world, Working Paper,
  Georgia Institute of Technology.
Fernandez-Arias, E., The new wave of private capital inflows: Push or pull?, Journal of Devel-
   opment Economics 48, 389-418.
Fisman, R., and I. Love, 2004, Financial development and intersector allocation: A new ap-
   proach, Journal of Finance 59, 2785-2807.
French, K. R., and J. M. Poterba, 1991, International diversification and international equity
   markets, American Economic Review 81, 222-26.
Hail, L. and C. Leuz, 2006, International Differences in Cost of Capital: Do Legal Institutions
  and Securities Regulation Matter?, Journal of Accounting Research, forthcoming.
Hendry, D.F., 1995, Dynamic Econometrics, Oxford, Oxford University Press
Hendry, D. F., and H.-M. Krolzig, 2001, Automatic Econometric Model Selection, London.
King, R., and R. Levine, 1993, Finance and growth: Schumpeter might be right, Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 108, 717-738.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny, 1997, Legal determinants of
  external finance, Journal of Finance 52, 1131-1150.
Lesmond, D. A., 2005, The Costs of Equity Trading in Emerging Markets, Journal of Financial
  Economics 77, 411–452.
Lesmond, David A., J. P. Ogden, C. Trzcinka, A New Estimate of Transaction Costs, Review
  of Financial Studies 12, 1113-1141.
Mei, J., J. Scheinkman and W. Xiong, 2006, Speculative trading and Stock prices: Evidence
  from Chinese A-B Share premia, NBER working Paper 11362.
Morck, R., Yeung B., and W. Yu, 2000, The information content of stock markets: Why do
  emerging markets Have synchronous stock price movements?, Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 58, 215–260.
Newey, W., and K. West, 1987, A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity and Au-
  tocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix, Econometrica, 55, 703-708.
Nishiotis, G., 2004, Do Indirect Investment Barriers Contribute to Capital Market Segmenta-
   tion?, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39, 613–630.
Portes, R., and H. Rey, 2005, The Determinants of Cross-border Equity Flows, Journal of
  International Economics 65, 269–296.


                                                  34
Prais, S. J. and C. B. Winsten, 1954, Trend Estimators and Serial Correlation, Cowles Com-
  mission Discussion Paper.
Quinn, D., 1997, The correlates of changes in international financial regulation, American
  Political Science Review 91, 531-551.
Quinn, D., and A. M. Toyoda, 2008, How and where capital account liberalization leads to
  growth, Forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies.
Rajan, R. G., and L. Zingales, 1998, Financial dependence and growth, American Economic
  Review, 88:3, 559-586.
Sachs, J. D. and A. M. Warner, 1995, Economic Reform and the Process of Global Integration,
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1-118.
Samuelson, P. A., 1948, International Trade and the Equalization of Factor Prices, Economic
  Journal 58, 163-184.
Shleifer, A. and D. Wolfenzon, 2002, Investor Protection and Equity Markets, Journal of Fi-
  nancial Economics, 66, 3–27.
Sharpe, W. F., 1990, Investor wealth measures and expected return, in Quantifying the mar-
  ket risk premium phenomenon for investment decision making, The Institute of Chartered
  Financial Analysts, 29-37.
Siegel, J., 2005, Can foreign firms bond themselves effectively by renting U.S. securities laws?,
   Journal of Financial Economics 75, 319–359.
Thompson, S., Simple Formulas for Standard Errors that Cluster by Both Firm and Time,
  Unpublished working paper, Harvard University, 2006.
Venables, A. J., 2006, Shifts in Economic Geography and Their Causes, Federal Reserve Bank
  of Kansas City.
Wacziarg, R. and K. Welch, 2003, Trade Liberalization and Growth: New Evidence, NBER
  Working Paper No. 10152
Wurgler, J., 2000, Financial markets and the allocation of capital, Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 58, 187-214.




                                                  35
Table 1
Summary Statistics by Country
Annual Segmentation
1980 - 2005

                                 Segmentation                        Segmentation over time                          Rank           Fixed Effect
                                                                     Average                                      Rank based       Country fixed
                                                                   segmenation        Average                      on average         effect -         Number of
                                                     Year of first over first five segmentation Change in        segmentation      accounting for        Firms
  Country     Sample        Average     St. Dev.     observation       years        2001 - 2005 segmentation      2001 - 2005       year effects     (* as of 2006)
   ARG         EM             5.3%        5.2%          1988          9.5%           4.9%          -48.4%              8                8.1%               26
   AUS         DEV            1.9%        1.2%          1980          3.7%           1.2%          -68.5%             48                4.0%             160*
   AUT         DEV            2.4%        0.7%          1980          2.4%           2.7%           11.1%             24                4.5%              50*
   BEL         DEV            2.7%        1.7%          1980          4.5%           2.0%          -55.4%             39                4.8%              90*
   BGD         EM             6.4%        2.2%          1998          7.6%           5.9%          -22.4%              6                9.5%               49
   BRA         EM             6.1%        4.3%          1988         10.1%           4.8%          -52.4%              9                8.9%               74
   CAN         DEV            2.3%        1.1%          1980          3.8%           1.7%          -54.6%             44                4.4%             250*
   CHE         DEV            2.1%        1.4%          1980          4.5%           1.3%          -70.8%             46                4.2%             150*
   CHL         EM             2.7%        1.9%          1989          3.8%           2.5%          -35.5%             28                5.6%               41
   CHN         EM             2.3%        1.0%          1995          2.6%           2.1%          -18.1%             38                5.5%              215
   CIV         EM             7.0%        1.9%          1998          7.6%           6.7%          -11.9%              2               10.0%               12
   COL         EM             4.5%        3.0%          1986          7.4%           3.1%          -58.8%             18                7.1%               20
   DEU         DEV            2.1%        1.0%          1980          3.2%           2.4%          -25.7%             29                4.3%             250*
   DNK         DEV            3.5%        2.6%          1980          6.5%           1.3%          -80.6%             47                5.6%              50*
   EGY         EM             6.0%        2.8%          1998          7.5%           6.1%          -18.4%              4                9.1%               51
   ESP         DEV            2.0%        1.0%          1989          3.1%           1.5%          -52.2%             45                5.0%             120*
    FIN        DEV            4.1%        2.9%          1990          7.3%           2.2%          -69.2%             35                7.2%              50*
   FRA         DEV            2.4%        1.2%          1980          4.1%           2.0%          -51.9%             40                4.5%             250*
   GBR         DEV            1.9%        1.2%          1980          4.2%           1.2%          -72.8%             49                4.0%             550*
   GRC         EM             3.1%        2.0%          1991          4.5%           2.7%          -39.7%             22                6.3%              50*
   IDN         EM             3.7%        1.4%          1991          2.8%           4.4%           57.5%             10                6.8%               57
   IND         EM             3.2%        1.4%          1988          3.2%           2.7%          -13.8%             23                6.0%              100
    IRL        DEV            2.7%        2.0%          1980          5.4%           1.7%          -67.8%             43                4.8%              50*
    ISR        EM             2.3%        0.6%          1999          2.4%           2.2%           -7.4%             36                5.5%               50
   ITA         DEV            2.2%        0.5%          1988          2.5%           1.9%          -23.9%             42                5.0%             160*
   JAM         EM             8.7%        5.9%          1998         11.8%           5.1%          -56.7%              7               11.7%               19
   JOR         EM             2.6%        1.6%          1988          3.1%           2.9%           -8.5%             21                5.4%               31
   KEN         EM             5.3%        2.8%          1998          6.9%           4.1%          -40.0%             11                8.3%               18
   KOR         EM             3.6%        1.6%          1988          4.0%           3.6%          -11.0%             14                6.4%              123
   LKA         EM             6.1%        4.3%          1995          6.9%           3.4%          -50.5%             15                9.3%               40
   MAR         EM             2.7%        1.1%          1998          2.9%           3.1%            4.6%             19                5.8%               11
   MEX         EM             3.5%        3.6%          1988          5.8%           2.3%          -61.0%             34                6.3%               58
   MYS         EM             3.1%        0.8%          1986          3.9%           2.4%          -38.7%             30                5.7%               92
   NGA         EM             6.2%        3.7%          1986         11.1%           2.2%          -80.1%             37                8.8%               25
   NLD         DEV            2.6%        1.3%          1980          4.2%           2.6%          -38.5%             25                4.7%             130*
   NOR         DEV            5.6%        4.2%          1982         11.3%           3.4%          -70.0%             16                8.0%              50*
   NZL         DEV            2.9%        1.4%          1990          2.7%           2.5%           -7.0%             27                6.0%              50*
   PAK         EM             5.4%        5.2%          1988          4.3%           6.5%           50.4%              3                8.2%               51
   PHL         EM             2.9%        0.9%          1990          3.4%           2.5%          -26.0%             26                6.0%               43
   PRT         EM             2.2%        0.9%          1990          2.5%           2.3%           -8.9%             33                5.2%              50*
   SGP         DEV            3.7%        2.5%          1980          8.2%           2.3%          -71.7%             32                5.8%             100*
   SWE         DEV            2.8%        1.2%          1984          2.6%           2.4%          -10.0%             31                5.3%              70*
   THA         EM             3.8%        1.8%          1988          2.7%           3.8%           39.9%             12                6.6%               56
   TTO         EM             1.7%        0.6%          1998          1.6%           1.9%           16.6%             41                4.8%               11
   TUN         EM             3.8%        1.5%          1998          4.6%           3.6%          -21.0%             13                6.8%               17
   TUR         EM             3.8%        1.9%          1989          4.5%           3.1%          -32.0%             17                6.8%               41
   USA         DEV            0.7%        0.2%          1980          0.6%           0.8%           23.6%             50                2.8%            1,000*
   VEN         EM             6.8%        4.8%          1988          6.4%          10.0%           55.0%              1                9.6%               15
   ZAF         EM             2.6%        1.2%          1980          3.5%           2.9%          -18.9%             20                4.7%              70*
   ZWE         EM            10.3%       10.0%          1988         19.2%           6.0%          -68.6%              5               13.1%               22
Averages of country-level data
   DEV                        2.7%       1.5%           1982          4.5%           1.9%          -45.0%             37               5.0%
   EM                         4.4%       2.6%           1991          5.8%           3.9%          -20.1%             18               7.3%
   ALL                        3.8%       2.2%           1988          5.3%           3.1%          -29.6%                              6.4%
Dispersion of country-level data
   DEV                        1.0%       1.0%            3.86         2.4%           0.7%          31.1%                               1.2%
   EM                         2.1%       2.0%            5.10         3.7%           1.8%          35.4%                               2.1%
   ALL                        1.9%       1.8%            6.41         3.3%           1.8%          35.6%                               2.1%
The sample includes 19 developed (DEV) and 31 emerging-market (EM) countries detailed in Appendix Table 1. For each country, we report the time-series
average and standard deviation of the annual (end of December) segmentation measure SEG. We also compare the average segmentation between 1980 and 1984
(or over the first five years for which segmentation data are available) to the average segmentation between 2001 and 2005, indicating the relative change in
segmentation over time for each country as well as a country’s segmentation rank based on the measured segmentation between 2001 and 2005. A rank of one
indicates the highest degree of segmentation. Ranks one through five and 46 through 50 appear in bold. We regress the annual segmentation measure onto a set
of country and year dummies and report the estimated fixed effect for each country. The last column reports for each country the number of firms used in the
construction of SEG. For countries with data from Standard & Poors' Emerging Market Data Base (EMDB), we report the average number of firms over the
sample period, for countries with data from Datastream, we only have the approximate number of firms Datastream used in 2006 to calculate country-specific
indices. At the bottom of Table 1, we report the cross-sectional average and standard deviation of the country-level statistics reported in the upper part of the
table.
Table 2
Summary Statistics by Industry
Annual Segmentation
1980 - 2005

                                             Segmentation                   Segmentation over time                         Rank                Fixed Effect

                                                                                                                 Rank based Rank based        Industry fixed
                                                                      Average      Average     Change in         on average   on average         effect -
                                                                    segmentation segmentation segmentatio       segmentation segmentation     accounting for
               Industry                   Average     St. Dev.      1980 - 1984 2001 - 2005       n             1980 - 1984 2001 - 2005        year effects
Aerospace & Defense                         3.0%       2.6%             3.4%          2.5%         -25.7%            26             37            3.7%
Automobiles & Parts                         5.0%       1.6%             6.4%          4.9%         -24.0%             6              5            5.8%
Banks                                       5.2%       2.4%             8.9%          3.0%         -66.3%             1             33            5.9%
Beverages                                   3.5%       1.5%             4.4%          3.5%         -20.3%            20             27            4.2%
Chemicals                                   4.1%       1.6%             4.8%          3.9%         -18.0%            14             15            4.8%
Construction & Materials                    3.6%       1.1%             4.4%          3.9%         -11.5%            19             16            4.4%
Electricity                                 3.9%       1.7%             6.1%          3.5%         -42.7%             8             25            4.7%
Electronic & Electrical Equipment           3.1%       1.1%             2.6%          3.2%         22.3%             36             31            3.8%
Equity Investment Instruments               4.5%       1.7%             4.4%          4.8%           9.2%            18              6            5.2%
Food & Drug Retailers                       3.0%       1.3%             4.8%          2.8%         -41.9%            12             36            3.7%
Food Producers                              3.4%       1.2%             3.5%          4.0%         12.2%             25             14            4.1%
Forestry & Paper                            5.7%       2.2%             4.6%          6.1%         32.3%             15              1            6.4%
General Financial                           4.6%       1.8%             3.2%          4.4%         36.8%             27              9            5.3%
General Industrials                         4.0%       1.4%             4.3%          4.0%          -7.6%            21             13            4.8%
General Retailers                           4.4%       2.8%             8.2%          4.1%         -50.4%             3             11            5.1%
Gas, Water & Multiutilities                 2.6%       1.0%             2.9%          3.7%         28.3%             32             22            3.3%
Healthcare Equipment & Services             3.2%       1.6%             3.1%          3.8%         21.8%             28             19            3.9%
Household Goods                             3.7%       1.7%             2.8%          3.8%         35.6%             33             17            4.4%
Industrial Engineering                      4.0%       1.7%             6.2%          3.8%         -39.6%             7             20            4.7%
Industrial Metals                           5.9%       1.8%             6.9%          5.4%         -20.8%             5              2            6.7%
Industrial Transportation                   4.1%       1.5%             5.2%          4.5%         -13.4%            10              8            4.8%
Leisure Goods                               4.6%       2.2%             4.4%          4.1%          -7.1%            17             10            5.3%
Life Insurance                              5.1%       3.2%             8.5%          2.9%         -65.7%             2             34            5.8%
Media                                       3.0%       1.7%             4.8%          3.1%         -35.4%            13             32            3.7%
Mining                                      5.1%       2.1%             3.9%          5.2%         31.4%             23              4            5.8%
Nonlife Insurance                           4.8%       2.0%             7.3%          4.1%         -44.8%             4             12            5.5%
Oil Equipment & Services                    3.3%       1.7%             3.8%          3.7%          -3.6%            24             24            4.0%
Oil & Gas Producers                         4.2%       1.3%             5.1%          3.7%         -28.5%            11             23            4.9%
Personal Goods                              4.5%       2.4%             2.2%          4.7%         117.8%            37              7            5.3%
Pharmaceuticals & Biotechnology             3.0%       1.2%             3.0%          3.5%         16.1%             31             26            3.7%
Real Estate                                 3.6%       1.2%             4.1%          3.7%         -10.6%            22             21            4.3%
Software & Computer Services                2.7%       1.6%             2.8%          1.9%         -33.2%            34             38            3.4%
Support Services                            3.0%       1.8%             3.0%          3.2%           6.7%            29             30            3.8%
Technology Hardware & Equipment             3.2%       1.3%             1.7%          3.3%         95.5%             38             29            3.9%
Fixed Line Telecommunications               3.5%       1.6%             5.3%          3.8%         -28.1%             9             18            4.3%
Mobile Telecommunications                   2.8%       1.1%             4.5%          2.8%         -37.7%            16             35            3.6%
Tobacco                                     3.7%       1.5%             3.0%          3.4%         11.4%             30             28            4.4%
Travel & Leisure                            4.0%       1.9%             2.8%          5.4%         92.4%             35              3            4.8%

Average of industry-level data              3.9%       1.7%             4.5%          3.8%          -2.8%                                          4.6%
Dispersion of industry-level data           0.9%       0.5%             1.8%          0.9%          41.9%                                          0.9%

For each of the 38 industries in our sample, we report the time-series average and standard deviation of the annual (end of December) industry
segmentation. Industry segmentation is measured as the equally weighted cross-sectional average of the absolute difference between a country-specific
industry valuation and the corresponding global industry valuation. We also compare the average industry segmentation between 1980 and 1984 to the
average segmentation between 2001 and 2005, indicating the relative change in segmentation over time for each industry as well as an industry’s
segmentation rank 1980 and 1984 and between 2001 and 2005. A rank of one indicates the highest degree of segmentation. Ranks one through five and
34 through 38 appear in bold. We regress the annual segmentation measure onto a set of industry and year dummies and report the estimated fixed effect
for each industry. At the bottom of Table 2, we report the cross-sectional average and standard deviation of the industry-level statistics reported in the
upper part of the table.
Table 3
Segmentation for the U.S. Benchmark
100 Random Samples of 50 "Countries"
1973 - 2006
                                                                                  Percentile
  Distribution of coefficient estimates                5th            10th          50th             90th            95th
    Trend x 100                                     -0.0208         -0.0190         -0.0132        -0.0081         -0.0070
    Number of Public Firms (log)                    -0.0034         -0.0032         -0.0026        -0.0021         -0.0020
    Abs. Difference in Financial
    Leverage (|Local - US|)                          0.0033         0.0052          0.0220          0.0407         0.0427

    Abs. Difference in Log Earnings
    Growth Volatility (|Local - US|)                 0.0027         0.0036          0.0068          0.0108         0.0121


  Distribution of t - stats                            5th            10th            50th           90th            95th
    Trend                                            -6.956          -6.366         -4.427          -2.407          -0.668
    Number of Public Firms (log)                    -12.316         -11.814         -9.329          -6.554          -4.526
    Abs. Difference in Financial
    Leverage (|Local - US|)                           0.478          0.625           2.652          4.239           7.134
    Abs. Difference in Log Earnings
    Growth Volatility (|Local - US|)                  1.517          1.749           3.222          6.036           7.709

  Using annual data for U.S. firms between 1973 and 2006, we construct 100 random samples, each of which resembles
  our actual data set of 50 countries with respect to the cross-sectional and temporal variation in the number of firms
  used. For each random sample and each “country” within such a set, we compute the segmentation measure as we do
  for the actual data, with the U.S. market playing the role of the world market. For each sample, we regress the annual
  “country”-level segmentation measure on the following control variables: 1) a time trend, 2) the natural logarithm of
  the number of firms that are used in the construction of the segmentation measure for a given “country” in a given
  year, 3) the absolute difference between the industry leverage in a given “country” and the U.S. market as a whole,
  averaged across all industries in a given “country” and year, and 4) the absolute difference between the industry log
  earnings growth rate volatility in a given “country” and the U.S. market as a whole, averaged across all industries in a
  given “country” and year. We report the distribution of coefficient estimates and t-statistics from the 100 pooled OLS
  regressions. The reported t-statistics account for serial correlation by “country” and contemporaneous correlation
  across “countries”.
Table 4
Trends in Segmentation


Panel A: All Countries (1980 - 2005)                                         Panel C: Emerging Market Countries (1988 - 2005)
                                                  I              II                                                               I           II
Trend                                         -0.0007        -0.0008         Trend                                            -0.0012      -0.0011
                                              (0.0003)        (0.0002)                                                        (0.0008)     (0.0007)
Number of Public Firms (log)                                 -0.0058         Number of Public Firms (log)                                  -0.0059
                                                              (0.0019)                                                                     (0.0030)
Abs. Difference in Financial                                  0.0564         Abs. Difference in Financial                                  0.0050
Leverage (|Local - Global|)                                   (0.0508)       Leverage (|Local - Global|)                                   (0.0653)

Abs. Difference in Log Earnings                               0.1279         Abs. Difference in Log Earnings                               0.0669
Growth Volatility (|Local - Global|)                          (0.0276)       Growth Volatility (|Local - Global|)                          (0.0295)

N                                               906             906          N                                                  441          441
    2                                                                            2
R                                               0.02           0.16          R                                                  0.02         0.07

Panel B: Developed Countries (1980 - 2005)
                                                  I              II

Trend                                         -0.0012        -0.0012
                                              (0.0003)        (0.0002)
Number of Public Firms (log)                                 -0.0030
                                                              (0.0010)
Abs. Difference in Financial                                  0.0902
Leverage (|Local - Global|)                                   (0.0624)

Abs. Difference in Log Earnings                               0.1607
Growth Volatility (|Local - Global|)                          (0.0451)


N                                               451             451

R2                                              0.19           0.41

The sample includes 19 developed and 31 emerging-market countries detailed in Table 1. We regress the annual country-level segmentation
measure SEG onto the following control variables: 1) a time trend, 2) the natural logarithm of the number of publicly traded firms in a given
country and year, 3) the absolute difference between the industry leverage in a given country and the world market as a whole, averaged across all
industries in a given country and year, and 4) the absolute difference between the industry log earnings growth rate volatility in a given country and
the world market as a whole, averaged across all industries in a given country and year. Panel A reports results for our entire sample, Panel B for
developed countries only, and Panel C for emerging market countries (for comparability with Figure 1, we drop emerging market observations prior
to 1988). We report coefficient estimates from pooled OLS regressions. Reported standard errors in parentheses account for serial correlation by
country and contemporaneous correlation across countries. We also perform Prais-Winsten regressions and calculate panel corrected standard
errors. Bold coefficient estimates denote statistical significance at the 5% level under the panel OLS specification. Underlined coefficient estimates
denote statistical significance under the Prais-Winsten specification. N denotes the number of country-years and R2 denotes the coefficient of
determination.
Table 5
Market Segmentation Determinants
1980 - 2005

Panel A: Equity Market Openness
                                                         I            II           III          IV            V

Equity Market Openness                               -0.0282                    -0.0228      -0.0253      -0.0212
                                                      (0.0070)                  (0.0062)     (0.0063)      (0.0055)
Trade Openness                                                    -0.0289       -0.0151      -0.0122      -0.0092
                                                                   (0.0117)     (0.0116)     (0.0117)      (0.0107)
Trend                                                                                        -0.0008      -0.0009
                                                                                             (0.0003)      (0.0003)
Number of Public Firms (log)                                                                              -0.0045
                                                                                                           (0.0016)
Abs. Difference in Financial Leverage                                                                      0.0339
(|Local - Global|)                                                                                         (0.0530)
Abs. Difference in Log Earnings                                                                            0.1121
Growth Volatility (|Local - Global|)                                                                       (0.0277)

N                                                      906           906          906          906          906
R2                                                     0.11         0.07          0.13         0.15         0.24

Panel B: Capital Account Openness
                                                         I            II           III          IV            V
Capital Account Openness                             -0.0331                    -0.0296      -0.0296      -0.0202
                                                      (0.0086)                  (0.0080)     (0.0083)      (0.0071)
Trade Openness                                                    -0.0185       -0.0076      -0.0063      -0.0063
                                                                   (0.0087)     (0.0091)     (0.0092)      (0.0072)
Trend                                                                                        -0.0006      -0.0007
                                                                                             (0.0003)      (0.0003)
Number of Public Firms (log)                                                                              -0.0047
                                                                                                           (0.0011)
Abs. Difference in Financial Leverage                                                                      0.0478
(|Local - Global|)                                                                                         (0.0437)

Abs. Difference in Log Earnings                                                                            0.1074
Growth Volatility (|Local - Global|)                                                                       (0.0279)

N                                                      880           880          880          880          880
    2
R                                                      0.08         0.03          0.09         0.11         0.23

The sample includes 19 developed and 31 (29 in Panel B) emerging-market countries detailed in Table 1. We
regress the annual country-level segmentation measure SEG onto the following variables: 1) the degree of equity
market openness (investability) (Panel A) or a continuous measure of the degree of capital account openness from
Quinn (only 48 countries are available) (Panel B), 2) a 0/1 indicator of trade openness based on trade liberalization
dates from Wacziarg and Welch (2003), 3) a time trend, 4) the natural logarithm of the number of publicly traded
firms in a given country and year, 5) the absolute difference between the industry leverage in a given country and
the world market as a whole, averaged across all industries in a given country and year, and 6) the absolute
difference between the industry log earnings growth rate volatility in a given country and the world market as a
whole, averaged across all industries in a given country and year. We report coefficient estimates from pooled OLS
regressions. Reported standard errors in parentheses account for serial correlation by country and contemporaneous
correlation across countries. We also perform Prais-Winsten regressions and calculate panel corrected standard
errors. Bold coefficient estimates denote statistical significance at the 5% level under the panel OLS specification.
Underlined coefficient estimates denote statistical significance under the Prais-Winsten specification. N denotes the
number of country-years and R2 denotes the coefficient of determination.
Table 6
Determinants of Market Segmentation
1980 - 2005


                                                                                           Equity Market Openness                     Capital Account Openness
                                                                                            Main         Additional                    Main           Additional
                                                                                         Specification  Specification               Specification    Specification

Trend                                                                                                             0.0006                                      0.0004
                                                                                                                  (0.0004)                                    (0.0003)

Capital Account Openness                                                                                                               -0.0164                -0.0114
                                                                                                                                        (0.0055)              (0.0047)
                                                                                                                                   [-0.0181, -0.0035]

Equity Market Openness                                                                      -0.0149              -0.0071
                                                                                            (0.0047)              (0.0043)
                                                                                       [-0.0195, -0.0064]

Trade Openness                                                                              -0.0082              -0.0073               -0.0014                -0.0018
                                                                                            (0.0102)              (0.0099)              (0.0073)              (0.0076)
                                                                                       [-0.0134, -0.0036]                          [-0.0052, 0.0038]

Trade/GDP                                                                                                                                                     0.0035
                                                                                                                                                              (0.0015)
Investment Profile                                                                          -0.0277              -0.0279               -0.0300                -0.0371
                                                                                            (0.0065)              (0.0097)              (0.0070)              (0.0100)
                                                                                       [-0.0328, -0.0074]                          [-0.0353, -0.0082]

Legal Origin (French)                                                                                            -0.0056               -0.0042
                                                                                                                  (0.0033)              (0.0038)
                                                                                                                                   [-0.0090, -0.0007]

Local Equity Market Illiquidity                                                                                   0.0248
                                                                                                                  (0.0142)

MYY R 2 Synchronicity                                                                                             0.0506
                                                                                                                  (0.0273)
MCAP/GDP                                                                                    -0.0056              -0.0068               -0.0054                -0.0058
                                                                                            (0.0033)              (0.0033)              (0.0033)              (0.0024)
                                                                                       [-0.0145, -0.0060]                          [-0.0130, -0.0048]

U.S. Money Supply Growth                                                                                                                0.1026
                                                                                                                                        (0.0382)
                                                                                                                                    [0.0225, 0.1821]

World GDP Growth                                                                            0.2315                0.2590                                      0.2654
                                                                                             (0.1090)             (0.1140)                                    (0.1100)
                                                                                        [-0.1029, 0.2339]

U.S. Corporate Bond Spread                                                                  2.0605                2.2806                1.6139                2.6339
                                                                                            (0.4360)              (0.5430)              (0.3210)              (0.4340)
                                                                                        [0.9646, 2.3691]                            [1.0317, 2.5450]

VIX Option Volatility Index                                                                 0.0465                                      0.0471                0.0438
                                                                                             (0.0148)                                   (0.0099)              (0.0100)
                                                                                        [-0.0048, 0.0551]                          [-0.0045, 0.0611]
Abs. Difference in Log Earnings Growth Volatility (|Local - Global|)                        0.0911                0.0781                0.1044                0.0925
                                                                                            (0.0306)              (0.0296)              (0.0280)              (0.0235)
                                                                                        [0.0905, 0.1320]                            [0.1003, 0.1299]

Number of Public Firms (log)                                                                -0.0042              -0.0022               -0.0044                -0.0025
                                                                                            (0.0015)              (0.0012)              (0.0013)              (0.0010)
                                                                                       [-0.0069, -0.0040]                          [-0.0054, -0.0032]


N                                                                                             906                   820                  880                    802
R2                                                                                            0.30                 0.30                  0.33                   0.31
The sample includes (from left to right in the Table): 19/13/19/13 developed and 31/26/29/25 emerging-market countries detailed in Table 1. We regress the annual country-
level segmentation measure SEG onto the independent variables that have survived the model reduction algorithm (see Appendix Table 3). For a detailed description of all
variables, see Appendix Table 2. We report coefficient estimates from pooled OLS regressions. Reported standard errors in parentheses account for serial correlation by
country and contemporaneous correlation across countries. We also perform Prais-Winsten regressions and calculate panel corrected standard errors. Bold coefficient estimates
denote statistical significance at the 5% level under the panel OLS specification. Underlined coefficient estimates denote statistical significance under the Prais-Winsten
specification. Finally, beneath the standard errors (for the main specifications only) in brackets we provide a confidence interval for each entry. These are derived from a
jackknife experiment where, for each surviving variable separately, we randomly sample from the 27 other possible variables (noted in Appendix Table 3) for which we have
full sample data. The number of additional variables and their identities are completely random, but we force the selection of between 8 and 27 additional variables. For this
set of explanatory variables, we perform a regression with SEG as the dependent variable, throw out variables with t-statistics below 1, and perform a regression on the
remaining set. For each case, we retain the regression coefficient. We iterate this procedure 1,000 times for each variable separately. The 5 and 95% percentiles are presented
in the brackets. N denotes the number of country-years and R2 denotes the coefficient of determination.
Table 7
Contribution of Market Segmentation Determinants
1980-2005

Panel A: Equity Market                                                                                  Variance Decomposition
                                                   Effect on                Overall                yit-yi        remainder             yit-yt         remainder
                                                 Segmentation             Contribution             (TS)            (CS)                (CS)             (TS)
Equity Market Openness                             -0.0075                  0.192                  0.040           0.152               0.191            0.001
                                                                           [0.095, 0.321]
Trade Openness                                      -0.0016                   0.056                0.012            0.044              0.053             0.003
                                                                           [0.028, 0.133]
Investment Profile                                  -0.0038                   0.152                0.063            0.089              0.146             0.006
                                                                           [0.049, 0.238]
MCAP/GDP                                            -0.0010                   0.100                0.043            0.057              0.087             0.013
                                                                           [0.105, 0.324]
World GDP Growth                                     0.0031                   -0.009              -0.009                                                -0.009
                                                                          [-0.009, 0.005]
U.S. Corporate Bond Spread                           0.0098                   0.141                0.141                                                 0.141
                                                                           [0.077, 0.195]
VIX Option Volatility Index                          0.0034                   0.034                0.034                                                 0.034
                                                                          [-0.004, 0.049]
Abs. Diff. in Log Earnings Growth
Volatility (|Local - Global|)                       -0.0038                   0.195                0.087            0.108              0.207            -0.011
                                                                           [0.178, 0.304]


Number of Public Firms (log)                        -0.0017                   0.138                0.015            0.122              0.138            -0.001
                                                                           [0.141, 0.292]




N                                                      906
  2
R                                                     0.30
We further analyze the main specifications from Table 7. Panel A reports results for Equity Market Openness and Panel B for Capital Account Openness. In
each panel and for each segmentation determinant, we first report the product of the coefficient estimate and either the difference between the average value for
developed countries and the average value for emerging market countries or, in the case of variables that vary only over time, one standard deviation of that
variable. We then report results from a variance decomposition. In particular, we report the contribution of each variable to the variation of the predicted degree
of segmentation, defined as the ratio of the covariance between the given variable and the predicted degree of segmentation relative to the variance of the
predicted degree of segmentation. We further distinguish between the time-series (TS) and cross-sectional (CS) component of this overall contribution in two
different ways. For details on this distinction, see the corresponding chapter of the paper. Finally, beneath the estimated over all contribution in brackets we
provide a confidence interval for each entry. These are derived from a jackknife experiment where, for each surviving variable separately, we randomly sample
from the 27 other possible variables (noted in Appendix Table 3) for which we have full sample data. The number of additional variables and their identities
are completely random, but we force the selection of between 8 and 27 additional variables. For this set of explanatory variables, we perform a regression with
SEG as the dependent variable, throw out variables with t-statistics below 1, and perform a regression on the remaining set. For each case, we retain the overall
contribution that the particular variable makes for predicted segmentation. We iterate this procedure 1,000 times for each variable separately. The 5 and 95%
percentiles are presented in the brackets. Last, N denotes the number of country-years and R2 denotes the coefficient of determination.
Table 7 (continued)




Panel B: Capital Account                                                  Variance Decomposition
                                      Effect on      Overall          yit-yi     remainder         yit-yt   remainder
                                    Segmentation   Contribution       (TS)         (CS)            (CS)        (TS)
Capital Account Openness              -0.0058        0.123            0.032        0.091           0.125      -0.001
                                                    [0.03, 0.191]
Trade Openness                        -0.0002          0.005          0.001       0.003            0.004     0.000
                                                    [-0.02, 0.032]
Investment Profile                    -0.0038          0.161          0.079       0.081            0.153     0.007
                                                   [0.053, 0.256]
Legal Origin (French)                 0.0013           -0.011                     -0.011           -0.017
                                                   [-0.031, -0.003]
MCAP/GDP                              -0.0009          0.110          0.052       0.058            0.093     0.016
                                                   [0.091, 0.345]
U.S. Money Supply Growth              0.0036           0.040          0.048                                  0.040
                                                   [0.013, 0.103]
U.S. Corporate Bond Spread            0.0077           0.149          0.182                                  0.149
                                                   [0.109, 0.296]


VIX Option Volatility Index           0.0034           0.049          0.040                                  0.049
                                                   [-0.005, 0.078]
Abs. Diff. in Log Earnings Growth
Volatility (|Local - Global|)         -0.0043          0.224          0.106       0.118            0.237     -0.013
                                                    [0.215, 0.36]
Number of Public Firms (log)          -0.0016          0.149          0.020       0.129            0.152     -0.003
                                                   [0.116, 0.268]

N                                       880
  2
R                                       0.33
                                                                         Figure 1
                                          Average Segementation Measure: Developed Countries and Emerging Markets
                                                                       1973 - 2005
12%

                                                                                                                              Emerging Markets Segmentation
                                                                                                                              Developed Countries Segmentation
10%                                                                                                                           Linear (Emerging Markets Segmentation)
                                                                                                                              Linear (Developed Countries Segmentation)



8%




6%




4%




2%




0%
                                                                                                 92
                                                                                                      93
                                                                                                           94
                                                                                                                95
                                                                                                                     96
                                                                                                                             97
 73
       74
            75
                 76
                      77
                           78
                                79
                                     80
                                          81
                                               82
                                                    83
                                                         84
                                                              85
                                                                   86
                                                                        87
                                                                             88
                                                                                  89
                                                                                       90
                                                                                            91




                                                                                                                             98
                                                                                                                             99
                                                                                                                             00
                                                                                                                             01
                                                                                                                             02
                                                                                                                             03
                                                                                                                             04
                                                                                                                             05
                                                                                                     19
                                                                                                          19
                                                                                                               19
                                                                                                                    19
                                                                                                                         19
19
      19
           19
                19
                     19
                          19
                               19
                                    19
                                         19
                                              19
                                                   19
                                                        19
                                                             19
                                                                  19
                                                                       19
                                                                            19
                                                                                 19
                                                                                      19
                                                                                           19
                                                                                                19




                                                                                                                          19
                                                                                                                          19
                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                          20
                                                                       Figure 2
                                     Benchmarking the Segmentation Measure: Segmentation within the U.S., 1973 - 2006
                                                         100 Random Samples of 50 "Countries"
12%




10%                                                                                                                                 Average Segmentation within U.S.
                                                                                                                                    5th percentile Segmentation
                                                                                                                                    95th percentile Segmentation
                                                                                                                                    Developed Countries Segmentation
8%
                                                                                                                                    Emerging Markets Segmentation



6%




4%




2%




0%
  73
       74
            75
                 76
                      77
                           78
                                79
                                     80
                                          81
                                               82
                                                    83
                                                         84
                                                              85
                                                                   86
                                                                        87
                                                                             88
                                                                                  89
                                                                                       90
                                                                                            91
                                                                                                 92
                                                                                                      93
                                                                                                           94
                                                                                                                95
                                                                                                                     96
                                                                                                                          97
                                                                                                                               98
                                                                                                                                     99
                                                                                                                                          00
                                                                                                                                               01
                                                                                                                                                    02
                                                                                                                                                         03
                                                                                                                                                              04
                                                                                                                                                                   05
                                                                                                                                                                        06
 19
      19
           19
                19
                     19
                          19
                               19
                                    19
                                         19
                                              19
                                                   19
                                                        19
                                                             19
                                                                  19
                                                                       19
                                                                            19
                                                                                 19
                                                                                      19
                                                                                           19
                                                                                                19
                                                                                                     19
                                                                                                          19
                                                                                                               19
                                                                                                                    19
                                                                                                                         19
                                                                                                                              19
                                                                                                                                   19
                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                                                      20
Appendix Table 1
Data Availability

                              Developed                                                  Emerging
Source   Code         Name          SEG data start        Source    Code         Name        SEG data start
DS       AUS    Australia               197301            EMDB     ARG     Argentina             198604
DS       AUT    Austria                 197301            EMDB     BGD     Bangladesh            199601
DS       BEL    Belgium                 197301            EMDB     BRA     Brazil                198604
DS       CAN    Canada                  197301            EMDB     CHL     Chile                 198601
DS       DNK    Denmark                 197301            EMDB     CHN     China                 199301
DS       FIN    Finland                 198803            EMDB     COL     Colombia              198412
DS       FRA    France                  197301            EMDB     CIV     Cote d'Ivoire         199601
DS       DEU    Germany                 197301            EMDB     EGY     Egypt                 199601
DS       IRL    Ireland                 197301            DS       GRC     Greece                198903
DS       ITA    Italy                   198601            EMDB     IND     India                 198604
DS       NLD    Netherlands             197301            EMDB     IDN     Indonesia             198912
DS       NZL    New Zealand             198801            EMDB     ISR     Israel                199701
DS       NOR    Norway                  198001            EMDB     JAM     Jamaica               199601
DS       SGP    Singapore               197301            EMDB     JOR     Jordan                198607
DS       ESP    Spain                   198703            EMDB     KEN     Kenya                 199601
DS       SWE    Sweden                  198201            EMDB     KOR     Korea                 198601
DS       CHE    Switzerland             197301            EMDB     MYS     Malaysia              198412
DS       GBR    United Kingdom          197301            EMDB     MEX     Mexico                198604
DS       USA    United States           197301            EMDB     MAR     Morocco               199601
                                                          EMDB     NGA     Nigeria               198412
                                                          EMDB     PAK     Pakistan              198601
                                                          EMDB     PHL     Philippines           198412
                                                          DS       PRT     Portugal              198801
                                                          DS       ZAF     South Africa          197301
                                                          EMDB     LKA     Sri Lanka             199301
                                                          EMDB     THA     Thailand              198601
                                                          EMDB     TTO     Trin. & Tobago        199601
                                                          EMDB     TUN     Tunisia               199601
                                                          EMDB     TUR     Turkey                198612
                                                          EMDB     VEN     Venezuela             198601
                                                          EMDB     ZWE     Zimbabwe              198601
Appendix Table 1 lists the source of the data used in the construction of the measure of segmentation SEG:
Datastream (DS) or Standard & Poors' Emerging Market Data Base (EMDB). The table also lists the country
code and the corresponding country name as well as the first year for which the segmentation measure is
available. In our analysis, we generally only include observations after 1979 for which our main independent
variables are available. Due to the calculations of the volatility of log earning growth, a country with data
availability starting after 1977 is included in our analysis with a delay of two years. For Figures 1 and 2, we
report observations prior to 1980. For those early years, we include all data points available.
Appendix Table 2
Description of all Variables

                       Variable                                                     Description

SEG                               SEG measures the valueweighted average of the absolute difference between a country's local industry
                                  earnings yields and the corresponding global industry earnings yields. Available for all countries. For details,
                                  see sections 2 and 3. Frequency: Monthly and Annual. Sources: Datastream and Standard & Poors'
                                  Emerging Market Data Base.

Openness
Capital account openness          Quinn’s capital account openness measure is created from the text of the annual volume published by the
                                  International Monetary Fund (IMF), Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions. Quinn’s
                                  openness measure is scored 0-4, in half integer units, with 4 representing a fully open economy. The
                                  measure hence facilitates a more nuanced view of capital account openness than the usual 0/1 indicator, and
                                  is available for 48 countries in our study. We transform the measure into a 0 to 1 scale. Frequency: Annual


Equity market openness            Following Bekaert (1995) and Edison and Warnock (2003), the equity market openness measure is based on
                                  the ratio of the market capitalization of the constituent firms comprising the IFC Investable index to those
                                  that comprise the IFC Global index for each country. The IFC Global index, subject to some exclusion
                                  restrictions, is designed to represent the overall market portfolio for each country, whereas the IFC
                                  Investable index is designed to represent a portfolio of domestic equities that are available to foreign
                                  investors. A ratio of one means that all of the stocks are available to foreign investors. Fully segmented
                                  countries have an intensity measure of zero, and fully liberalized countries have an intensity measure of one.
                                  Frequency: Annual

Gross FDI/GDP                     Gross foreign direct investment is the sum of the absolute values of inflows and outflows of foreign direct
                                  investment recorded in the balance of payments financial account. It includes equity capital, reinvestment of
                                  earnings, other long-term capital, and short-term capital. The indicator is calculated as a ratio to GDP.
                                  Frequency: Annual. Source: World Bank Development Indicators .

Trade openness                    We obtain the trade liberalization dates developed in Wacziarg and Welch (2003). Wacziarg and Welch
                                  look at five factors: average tariff rates of 40% or more; nontariff barriers covering 40% or more of trade; a
                                  black market exchange rate that is depreciated by 20% or more relative to the official exchange rate, on
                                  average, during the 1970s or 1980s; a state monopoly on major exports; and a socialist economic system. If a
                                  country meets any of these five criteria, it is classified with indicator variable equal to zero and deemed
                                  closed. Frequency: Annual.

Trade/GDP                         The sum of exports and imports of goods and services measured as a share of gross domestic product.
                                  Frequency: Annual. Source: World Bank Development Indicators .

Political Risk and Institutions
Quality of institutions           The sum of ICRG subcomponents: Corruption, Law and Order, and Bureaucratic Quality. Available for all
                                  countries. Frequency: Annual.
   Corruption                     ICRG political risk sub-component. This is a measure of corruption within the political system. Such
                                  corruption distorts the economic and financial environment, reduces the efficiency of government and
                                  business by enabling people to assume positions of power through patronage rather than ability, and
                                  introduces an inherent instability into the political process. The most common form of corruption met
                                  directly by business is financial corruption in the form of demands for special payments and bribes
                                  connected with import and export licenses, exchange controls, tax assessments, police protection, or loans.
                                  Although the PRS measure takes such corruption into account, it is more concerned with actual or potential
                                  corruption in the form of excessive patronage, nepotism, job reservations, “favor-for-favors,” secret party
                                  funding, and suspiciously close ties between politics and business. In PRS's view these sorts of corruption
                                  pose risk to foreign business, potentially leading to popular discontent, unrealistic and inefficient controls on
                                  the state economy, and encourage the development of the black market. Frequency: Annual.


   Law and order                  ICRG political risk sub-component. PRS assesses Law and Order separately, with each sub-component
                                  comprising zero to three points. The Law sub-component is an assessment of the strength and impartiality
                                  of the legal system, while the Order sub-component is an assessment of popular observance of the law.
                                  Thus, a country can enjoy a high rating (3.0) in terms of its judicial system, but a low rating (1.0) if the law
                                  is ignored for a political aim. Frequency: Annual.
Appendix Table 2
(Continued)
                          Variable                                                     Description
   Bureaucratic quality              ICRG political risk sub-component. The institutional strength and quality of the bureaucracy can act as a
                                     shock absorber that tends to minimize revisions of policy when governments change. Therefore, high points
                                     are given to countries where the bureaucracy has the strength and expertise to govern without drastic
                                     changes in policy or interruptions in government services. In these low-risk countries, the bureaucracy tends
                                     to be somewhat autonomous from political pressure and to have an established mechanism for recruitment
                                     and training. Countries that lack the cushioning effect of a strong bureaucracy receive low points because a
                                     change in government tends to be traumatic in terms of policy formulation and day-to-day administrative
                                     functions. Frequency: Annual.

Investment profile                   ICRG political risk sub-component. Investment Profile reflects the risk of expropriation, contract viability,
                                     payment delays, and the ability to repatriate profits. This measure is closely associated with the
                                     attractiveness of a country for FDI. Available for all countries. Frequency: Annual.

Insider trading law                  Bhattacharya and Daouk (2002) document the enactment of insider trading laws and the first prosecution of
                                     these laws. We construct two indicator variables. The first takes the value of one following the introduction
                                     of an insider trading law. The second takes the value of one after the law's first prosecution. Available for all
                                     countries. Frequency: Annual.

Legal origin                         Identifies the legal origin of the company law or commercial code of each country (English, French,
                                     Socialist, German, Scandinavian). We construct three indicators that take the value of one when the legal
                                     origin is Anglo-Saxon (English law), French (French law), or other (law other), and zero otherwise. This
                                     variable is purely cross-sectional and available for all countries. The source is La Porta, Lopez-di-Silanes,
                                     Shleifer, and Vishny (1999). Available for all countries.


Financial Development
Illiquidity                          Following Lesmond, Ogden, and Trzcinka (1999), Lesmond (2005), and Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad
                                     (2007), we construct the illiquidity measure as the proportion of zero daily returns observed over the relevant
                                     year for each equity market. We obtain daily returns data in local currency at the firm level from the
                                     Datastream research files. For each country, we observe daily returns (using closing prices) for a large
                                     collection of firms. The total number of firms available from the Datastream research files accounts for about
                                     90%, on average, of the number of domestically listed firms reported by the World Bank's World
                                     Development Indicators. For each country, we calculate the capitalization-weighted proportion of zero daily
                                     returns across all firms, and average this proportion over the year. Available for 46 countries. Frequency:
                                     Annual.

Equity market turnover               The ratio of equity market value traded to the market capitalization. The data are available for all countries.
                                     Frequency: Annual. Source: Standard and Poor's/International Finance Corporation's Emerging Stock
                                     Markets Factbook & World Bank Development Indicators.

MYY R 2 synchronicity                Equity market synchronicity as developed in Morck, Yeung, and Yu (2000). The measure is an annual value-
                                     weighted local market model R 2 obtained from each firm's daily returns regressed on the local market
                                     portfolio return for that year. Available for 47 countries. Frequency: Annual.

Private credit/GDP                   Private credit divided by gross domestic product. Credit to private sector refers to financial resources
                                     provided to the private sector, such as through loans, purchases of non-equity securities, and trade credits
                                     and other accounts receivable that establish a claim for repayment. Available for all countries. Frequency:
                                     Annual. Source: World Bank Development Indicators .

MCAP/GDP                             Equity market capitalization divided by gross domestic product. Available for all countries. Frequency:
                                     Annual. Source: World Bank Development Indicators .

Risk Appetite and Business Cycle
G7 real rate                         Weighted average real short term interest rate in G7 countries: the prime lending interest rate adjusted for
                                     inflation as measured by the GDP deflator. Frequency: Annual.

U.S. money supply growth             Annual growth in money supply (M2) for the United States. Frequency: Annual. Source: World Bank
                                     Development Indicators .

U.S. risk aversion                   We measure U.S. risk aversion based on the parameter estimates of the habit-persistence model from
                                     Campbell and Cochrane (1999). Frequency: Annual. Source: Bekaert and Engstrom (2008).

World GDP growth                     Growth of real world per capita gross domestic product. Frequency: Annual. Source: World Bank
                                     Development Indicators.
U.S. corporate bond spread           The yield spread between U.S. BAA and AAA rated bonds obtianed from the Federal Reserve Board.
                                     Frequency: Annual.
Appendix Table 2
(Continued)
                        Variable                                                                             Description
VIX option volatility index                               The VIX option volatility index available from the CBOE (www.cboe.com). The Deecember value of the
                                                          volatility index is used for each year. The volatility index covers 1986 to the present, before which we take
                                                          the square root of the average daily squared CRSP U.S. total market return over the year to extend the index
                                                          back to 1980. Frequency: Annual.

Past local equity market return                           The lagged annual return, from December to December, on the country-level market portfolio. Available for
                                                          all counries. Frequency: Annual. Sources: Datastream and Standard & Poors' Emerging Market Data
                                                          Base.

World equity market volatility                            The variance of the world market portfolio return, measured as the five-year rolling variance of the monthly
                                                          return on the world market portfolio. Frequency: Annual. Source: Datastream.
Information Variables
Phone lines per 100 people                                Number of fixed lines and mobile phone subscribers per 100 people. Available for all countries and years.
                                                          Frequency: Annual. Source: World Bank Development Indicators .

Internet users per 100 people                             Number of internet users per 100 people. Available for all countries and years. Frequency: Annual. Source:
                                                          World Bank Development Indicators .

International voice traffic                               The number of minutes of international phone calls per person. Available for a subset of countries and
                                                          years. Frequency: Annual. Source: World Bank Development Indicators.

Growth Determinants
Initial log GDP                                           Logarithm of real per capita gross domestic product reset every five years in 1980, 1985, 1990, 1995, and
                                                          2000. Source: World Bank Development Indicators.

Secondary school enrollment                               Secondary school enrollment ratio is the ratio of total enrollment, regardless of age, to the population of the
                                                          age group that officially corresponds to the secondary level of education. Accordingly, the reported value can
                                                          exceed (or average) more than 100%. Available for all countries. Frequency: Annual. Source: World Bank
                                                          Development Indicators.

Log life expectancy                                       Growth rate of total population which counts all residents regardless of legal status or citizenship. Available
                                                          for all countries. Frequency: Annual. Source: World Bank Development Indicators.

Population growth                                         Life expectancy at birth indicates the number of years a newborn infant would live if prevailing patterns of
                                                          mortality at the time of its birth were to stay the same throughout its life. Available for all countries.
                                                          Frequency: Annual. Source: World Bank Development Indicators.
Controls
Number of public firms (log )                             The log of the number of publicly traded firms in a given country. Frequency: Annual. Source: World Bank
                                                          Development Indicators.

Number of public firms (log ) (U.S. benchmark)            The natural logarithm of the number of U.S. public firms used in the construction of the segmentation
                                                          measure for a given state or "country" in a given year. Frequency: Annual.

Abs. difference in financial leverage (|Local - Global|) We obtain annual accounting data for all public firms contained in Bureau van Dijk's OSIRIS data base. For
                                                         industrial firms, we define financial leverage as the ratio of long term interest bearing debt to total assets. For
                                                         financial firms, we define financial leverage as the ratio of total liabilities to total assets. Weighting each
                                                         observation by total assets, we aggregate this ratio across all firms per industry, country and year. Since
                                                         coverage is limited in time and across industries and countries, we use linear regressions based on country
                                                         dummies, industry dummies, private credit over GDP as well as industry return volatility to predict industry
                                                         leverage when leverage data are not available. We then take the absolute difference between local industry
                                                         leverage and the corresponding global industry leverage which we calculate as the weighted average across
                                                         all firms around the world in a given industry. Finally, for each country and year we average this absolute
                                                         leverge difference across all industries in a country using an industry's market value as its weight. Available
                                                         for all countries. Frequency: Annual.
Appendix Table 2
(Continued)
                        Variable                                                                           Description

Abs. difference in financial leverage (|Local - US|)    Used in the U.S. Benchmark Analysis
                                                        Industry leverage is the ratio of long term debt, data item 9 in Compustat, summed over all firms in a given
                                                        industry and state/"country", to total assets, data item 6 in Compustat, summed over all firms in a given
                                                        industry and state/"country". We use an industry's equity market value to average the absolute differences
                                                        between state/"country" and U.S. market leverage across all industries in a given state/"country". Frequency:
                                                        Annual.
                                                        Used in robustness when differentials are measured relative to U.S. earnings yields
                                                        We obtain annual accounting data for all public firms contained in Bureau van Dijk's OSIRIS data base. For
                                                        industrial firms, we define financial leverage as the ratio of long term interest bearing debt to total assets. For
                                                        financial firms, we define financial leverage as the ratio of total liabilities to total assets. Weighting each
                                                        observation by total assets, we aggregate this ratio across all firms per industry, country and year. Since
                                                        coverage is limited in time and across industries and countries, we use linear regressions based on country
                                                        dummies, industry dummies, private credit over GDP as well as industry return volatility to predict industry
                                                        leverage when leverage data are not available. We then take the absolute difference between local industry
                                                        leverage and the corresponding U.S. industry leverage. Finally, for each country and year we average this
                                                        absolute leverge difference across all industries in a country using an industry's market value as its weight.
                                                        Available for all countries. Frequency: Annual.


Abs. difference in log earnings growth volatility       We measure log earnings growth volatility by calculating the five-year standard deviation of quarterly log
(|Local - Global|)                                      growth rates of 12-month earnings for all industries at the country and global level. We require at least eight
                                                        quarters of data for the calculation. We then form the weighted average of the absolute difference between
                                                        local and global industry log earnings growth volatility for each country and year, where we use industry
                                                        market values as weights. Available for all countries. Frequency: Annual.

Abs. difference in log earnings growth volatility       Used in the U.S. Benchmark Analysis
(|Local - US|)                                          We calculate the volatility of log industry earnings growth each December by aggregating quarterly firm-
                                                        level earnings across firms with consecutive earnings data in a given industry and state/"country", taking the
                                                        log of the growth rate in industry earnings and calculating the standard deviation of the log growth rate over
                                                        the past 20 quarters, as long as we have non-missing data for at least eight quarters. We use an industry's
                                                        equity market value to average the absolute differences between state/"country" and U.S. market log
                                                        earnings growth volatility across all industries in a given state/"country". Frequency: Annual.

                                                        Used in robustness when differentials are measured relative to U.S. earnings yields
                                                        We measure log earnings growth volatility by calculating the five-year standard deviation of quarterly log
                                                        earnings growth rate for all industries at the country. We require at least eight quarters of data for the
                                                        calculation. We then form the weighted average of the absolute difference between local and U.S. industry
                                                        log earnings growth volatility for each country and year, where we use industry market values as weights.
                                                        Available for all countries. Frequency: Annual.


While the list is long, we considered several other potentially useful measures, such as earnings expectations, measures of regulatory conditions and labor
market frictions, accounting standards and earnings management, etc., but had to drop them because of data limitations.
Appendix Table 3
Model Reduction
1980 - 2005
                                                             Equity Market Openness                                                          Capital Account Openness

                                             Main Specification                   Additional Specification                    Main Specification                  Additional Specification
                                                 (N =906)                                (N =820)                                 (N =880)                               (N =802)

                                        General                                  General                                  General                                  General            Sign of
                                       Unrestricted Sign of Selected            Unrestricted Sign of Selected            Unrestricted Sign of Selected            Unrestricted       Selected
Candidate Variables                      Model         Variables                  Model         Variables                  Model         Variables                  Model            Variables
Constant                                   Fixed             Positive               Fixed            Negative               Fixed              Positive              Fixed            Negative
Trend                                        X                                        X              Positive                 X                                        X              Positive

Openness
Capital Account Openness                                                                                                       X              Negative               Fixed            Negative
Equity Market Openness                       X              Negative                Fixed            Negative
Trade Openness                             Fixed            Negative                Fixed            Negative               Fixed             Negative               Fixed            Negative
Gross FDI/GDP                                                                         X                                                                                X
Trade/GDP                                    X                                        X                                        X                                       X              Positive

Political Risk and
Institutions
Quality of Institutions                      X                                        X                                        X                                        X
Investment Profile                           X              Negative                  X              Negative                  X              Negative                  X             Negative
Law and Order                                X                                        X                                        X                                        X
Insider Trading Law                          X                                        X                                        X                                        X
Insider Trading Prosecution                  X                                        X                                        X                                        X
Legal Origin (English)                       X                                        X                                        X                                        X
Legal Origin (French)                        X                                        X              Negative                  X              Negative                  X

Financial Development
Local Equity Market Illiquidity                                                       X               Positive                                                          X
Local Equity Market Turnover                 X                                        X                                        X                                        X
        2
MYY R Synchronicity                                                                   X               Positive                                                          X
Private Credit/GDP                           X                                        X                                        X                                        X
MCAP/GDP                                     X              Negative                  X              Negative                  X              Negative                  X             Negative

Risk Appetite and Business
Cycles
G7 Real Rate                                 X                                        X                                        X                                        X
U.S. Money Supply Growth                     X                                        X                                        X               Positive                 X
U.S. Risk Aversion                           X                                        X                                        X                                        X
World GDP Growth                             X               Positive                 X               Positive                 X                                        X             Positive
U.S. Corporate Bond Spread                   X               Positive                 X               Positive                 X               Positive                 X             Positive
VIX Option Volatillity Index                 X               Positive                 X                                        X               Positive                 X             Positive
Past Local Equity Market
                                                                                      X                                                                                 X
Return
World Equity Market Volatility               X                                        X                                        X                                        X

Information Variables
Phone Lines per 100 people                   X                                        X                                        X                                        X
Internet Users per 100 people                X                                        X                                        X                                        X

Growth Determinants
Initial Log GDP                              X                                        X                                        X                                        X
Secondary School Enrollment                  X                                        X                                        X                                        X
Log Life Expectancy                          X                                        X                                        X                                        X
Population Growth                            X                                        X                                        X                                        X

Controls
Abs. Difference in Financial
                                                                                      X                                        X                                        X
Leverage (|Local - Global|)                  X
Abs. Difference in Log
Earnings Growth Volatility                   X               Positive                 X               Positive                 X               Positive                 X             Positive
(|Local - Global|)
Number of Public Firms (log)                 X              Negative                  X              Negative                  X              Negative                  X             Negative
Number of Variables                          30                  9                    34                 12                   30                  10                   34                 11
Appendix Table 3 lists the independent variables that are part of the unrestricted econometric model (marked by X or Fixed – Fixed indicates that a variable was forced to survive the reduction
process) as well as those that survive the model reduction algorithm (marked by Positive / Negative – indicating the sign of the estimated coefficient). The dependent variable is the measured
degree of segmentation SEG. For a detailed description of all variables, see Appendix Table 2. N denotes the number of country-years.
