NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TIME OF TROUBLES:
THE YEN AND JAPAN'S ECONOMY, 1985-2008
Maurice Obstfeld
Working Paper 14816
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14816

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2009

Prepared for the ESRI/Chicago GSB/Columbia Business School Conference on “Japan’s Bubble, Deflation,
and Long-Term Stagnation,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, December 11-12, 2008. I thank
Thomas Becker, Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, and Matteo Maggiori for excellent research assistance.
The paper has benefited from the helpful suggestions of Mick Devereux, Kyoji Fukao, Linda Goldberg,
Koichi Hamada, Takatoshi Ito, Anil Kashyap, Jaewoo Lee, Masao Ogaki, David Weinstein, and participants
at the March 2008 Columbia University pre-workshop on “Japan’s Bubble,” the follow-up December
2008 San Francisco Federal Reserve conference, and the November 2008 Swiss National Bank/IMF
conference on exchange rates, held in Zürich. Research support has been provided by the Class of
1958 chair and by the Coleman Fung Risk Management Research Center, both at UC Berkeley. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Maurice Obstfeld. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Time of Troubles: The Yen and Japan's Economy, 1985-2008
Maurice Obstfeld
NBER Working Paper No. 14816
March 2009
JEL No. F14,F41,F42,F51,N15
ABSTRACT
This paper explores the links between macroeconomic developments, especially monetary policy,
and the exchange rate during the period of Japan’s bubble economy and subsequent stagnation. The
yen experienced epic gyrations over that period, starting with its rapid ascent after the March 1985
Plaza Accord of major industrial countries. Two distinct periods of endaka fukyo, or recession induced
by a strong yen, occurred in the late 1980s and the early 1990s at critical phases of the monetary policy
cycle. My approach emphasizes the interaction of short-term developments driven by monetary factors
(as they affect international real interest rate differentials) and the long-term determinants of the real
exchange rate’s equilibrium path. Chief among those long-run determinants are relative sectoral productivity
levels and the terms of trade, including the price of oil. Since the mid-1990s, the yen’s real exchange
rate has generally followed a depreciating trend and Japan’s comprehensive terms of trade have deteriorated.

Maurice Obstfeld
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
508-1 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
obstfeld@econ.berkeley.edu

Introduction
In the late 1980s, Japan’s economy embarked on a period of rapid escalation in the prices
of shares and real estate. This “bubble economy” was followed by a collapse in asset
values, a reduced pace of real economic growth, banking problems, and deflation. Nearly
two decades after the demise of the bubble economy, the prognosis for Japanese growth
is again bleak amid a turbulent global economic outlook. Japan’s experience carries
lessons for those hoping to understand and contain the 2007-09 financial crisis
originating in the United States housing and financial markets.
Some observers of Japan blame its monetary policy for failing to react promptly
and aggressively enough, both as asset prices exploded upward in the late 1980s and as
they plummeted afterward. In these accounts, official concerns about the yen’s foreign
exchange rate and the competitiveness of the export sector were significant
considerations for monetary policy. Indeed, the yen has experienced epic gyrations since
the mid-1980s, starting with its rapid ascent after the March 1985 Plaza Accord of major
industrial countries. Two distinct periods of endaka fukyo, or recession induced by a
strong yen, occurred in the late 1980s and the early 1990s at critical phases of the
monetary policy cycle. In general, Japan’s real economic growth rate is rather strongly
negatively correlated with the level of the yen’s real effective exchange rate, as illustrated
in Figure 1. Over 1978-2007, the correlation coefficient between the real exchange rate
and real GDP growth is −0.38.
Yet the determinants of the yen’s short- and even longer-term movements remain
mysterious in light of the development of Japan’s macro economy. What factors, for
example, can explain the yen’s steady and dramatic appreciation against the dollar over

1

the early 1990s as Japan’s real economy and its financial system deteriorated? In their
prominent study of the Japanese economy through 1997, McKinnon and Ohno (1997, p.
2) go so far as to “treat the course of the yen-dollar exchange rate as a forcing variable for
Japanese monetary policy, rather than assuming that monetary policy independently
determines the exchange rate.” While the U.S.-Japan trade tensions that McKinnon and
Ohno view as the underlying determinant of yen/dollar movements undoubtedly
influenced market expectations, their vision of yen fluctuations that are largely
exogenous with respect to macro policies begs the question of how policymakers were
able to direct market-determined exchange rates toward politically expedient levels.1
This paper explores the links between macroeconomic developments, especially
monetary policy, and the exchange rate during the period of Japan’s bubble economy and
subsequent stagnation. My approach emphasizes the interaction of short-term
developments driven by monetary factors (as they affect international real interest rate
differentials) and the longer-term determinants of the real exchange rate’s equilibrium
path. While I believe this approach to be fruitful, it raises further questions for future
research as I describe below. Hopefully this exploration will nonetheless throw light on
the general question of how major currency misalignments emerge and recede. The
narrative focuses on how monetary and goods-market factors interacted with the
exchange rate, but there is no doubt that the health of Japan’s financial system was a
critically important growth determinant during this period, in part through its effect on
the monetary transmission mechanism.

1

As McKinnon and Ohno (1997) express their thesis elsewhere, “The erratically appreciating yen has been
an independent (or exogenous) source of disturbance. And since 1984, at least, it has imposed undue
deflation on the Japanese economy” (p. 199).
2

The paper begins by reviewing the broad outlines of Japan’s monetary policy
experience and the yen’s exchange-market behavior since the Plaza agreement of 1985.2
The paper then sets out a simple framework relating real interest differentials to the
exchange rate, and uses it to explore the role of monetary policies.
In the paper’s second half I focus on the longer-term determination of the real
exchange rate, which informs the exchange rate forecasts underlying international real
interest rate differentials. Specifically, I consider the evolution of the yen’s real exchange
rate with reference to international and intersectoral productivity growth gaps, as posited
by the Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson (HBS) model, and fluctuations in relative international
prices for traded goods, including energy.
The rationale for carefully analyzing the benchmark is that real appreciations in
accord with the HBS prediction – those driven by relatively high productivity growth in
export and import competing industries – should not entail lower profitability in the
manufacture of tradable Japanese goods. The analysis shows, however, that yen real
exchange rate movements against the United States dollar are not closely related to HBS
factors over any reasonable medium term, and in fact are negatively correlated on a yearto-year basis. Furthermore, year-to-year real yen depreciations are positively correlated
with gains in competitiveness by Japanese exporters. (There is somewhat more evidence
of a role for HBS factors against some nondollar currencies and on an effective basis). An
important question is the extent to which sharp exchange rate movements have
2

A complementary study exploring this ground is Hamada and Okada (2007). Hamada and Okada
sometimes verge on language seeming to imply an exogenous yen real exchange rate, which on their p. 17
they compare to “an outside temperature that Japan faced during these 20 years ….” Elsewhere, however,
they clarify their belief the yen exchange rate has reacted in part to domestic macro policies. Like
McKinnon and Ohno they allude to trade conflict (through a theoretical analysis of current account targets),
but place little emphasis on it in their detailed policy narrative.

3

themselves affected productivity levels in Japanese industry. Terms of trade movements,
in particular fluctuations in global energy prices, are powerful correlates of changes in the
yen’s real exchange rate: declines in the terms of trade tend to coincide with real yen
depreciation.

Overview of Japan’s Monetary Experience

As the United States undertook a program of disinflation and fiscal expansion in the early
1980s, the yen and other world currencies depreciated sharply against the United States
dollar. After averaging below 220 yen per dollar over 1978-81 – that level itself a very
sharp appreciation relative to the average of 288 over 1974-77 – the yen depreciated to
about 250 in 1982, before assuming an average value of around 238 for 1983-85. These
annual averages in exchange rates disguise very high intra-year volatility, however.
Between March 1984 and February 1985, for example, the yen depreciated from 225.40
to 260.24 against the dollar, a move of more than 14 percent (in log points). The dollar’s
renewed strength reinforced trade tensions between the U.S. and its trading partners, and
eventually led to the September 1985 Plaza Accord. The U.S. and four major allies – the
United Kingdom, France, Germany, and Japan – pledged concerted policy intervention to
bring the dollar down.
The aftermath of the Plaza accord saw a dramatic move in the yen’s dollar
exchange rate, as illustrated in Figure 2. Figure 2 displays the nominal yen/dollar
exchange rate, quoted in yen per dollar but on an inverted scale so that a rise in the series
is a nominal appreciation in the yen. The figure also plots two indexes of the yen’s real

4

exchange rate on a secondary vertical axis, with a rise in the index being a real yen
appreciation. One real exchange rate series is the bilateral rate against the United States
dollar, while the second is a trade-weighted multilateral (effective) index. Both of these
real exchange rates are computed with respect to consumer price indexes, and they move
reasonably closely together most of the time. The real effective CPI rate, in turn, is highly
correlated with the real effective rate based on unit labor costs, shown in Figure 1.
Having been around 260 yen per dollar in early 1985, the yen price of dollars had
fallen to around 125 by early 1988, an appreciation of roughly 73 percent (in log points)
over only three years. In its latter stages, the yen’s rise was encouraged by somewhat
easier U.S. monetary policy immediately following the October 1987 stock market crash.
Estimates such as those reported by Ahearne and others (2002) suggest that Japan’s GDP
was below potential in 1986 and 1987 as exporters struggled. Very quickly, enyasu had
become endaka.
Japan’s policy interest rates, having been raised abruptly late in 1985 to support
the Plaza policy, were lowered sharply through 1986 and 1987. (See Figure 3.) From a
high point above 8 percent in late 1985, the overnight call money rate fell to just above 3
percent in the first half of 1987.
Early in 1986, the prices of equity and land began to rise appreciably more
sharply than in previous years. Although it was not understood at the time, this marked
the start of the great Japanese stock market and real estate bubbles. Figure 4 shows the
trajectories of land prices in six major cities and of the Nikkei stock-price average. All
categories of real estate appreciated, but commercial properties far outpaced industrial
and residential real estate, rising in price by more than 75 percent between 1986 and their

5

1991-92 market peak. In percentage terms, however, the bubble in stock prices was much
more extreme. The Nikkei 225 average rose from about 13,000 at the start of 1986 to
about 39,000 at the end of 1989, when the bubble peaked. With the benefit hindsight, the
steep price increases look wildly unsustainable. Yet the Bank of Japan did not raise
interest rates until the bubble was roughly two and a half years old.
Many observers, for example, Okina, Shirakawa, and Shiratsuka (2001), Ahearne
and others (2002), Ito and Mishkin (2006), and Hamada and Okada (2007), link the
Japanese authorities’ policy response to the emerging asset bubble to policy dilemmas
embedded in the macro landscape in the late 1980s. With the yen historically strong,
output below potential, and inflation therefore quiescent in 1986-88 during this first
episode of endaka fukyo, there was no appetite to restrict monetary policy in the hope of
moderating asset-price inflation. Such action would have risked further yen appreciation,
and, as McKinnon and Ohno (1997) argue, the wealth effect of the bubble may have
moderated the growth slowdown that otherwise would have occurred. In addition,
concurrent trade tensions with the United States discouraged Japanese authorities from
contractionary macroeconomic actions that foreigners would perceive as increasing
Japan’s current account surplus.3 This seems an odd concern, because generally it is a
weaker currency, not a stronger one, that inflicts beggar-thy-neighbor trade-volume
effects on trade partners. I discuss possible drivers of the yen’s exchange rate below.
The period was the first of several episodes in which Japan’s macro policies,
perhaps lagging “behind the curve,” contributed to a sequence of destabilizing exchange
rate movements that ultimately worsened the bubble and its aftermath. These episodes

3

See, for example, Okina, Shirakawa, and Shiratsuka (2001, p. 421).

6

will be discussed in greater detail below. Okina and Shiratsuka (2002, p. 44), suggest that
the monetary stance over 1986-88 might have fueled a “euphoric” expectation of
“protracted low interest rates.”
Any such expectation was dashed in mid-1989, when the Bank of Japan finally
did embark upon a cycle of sharply higher interest rates (see Figure 3). The Nikkei
continued to rise through the end of 1989, however, and the yen, which had stopped
appreciating in 1988 and then reversed course, depreciated through April 1990. But, with
inflation finally on the rise, the policy interest rate was to continue rising for almost a full
year, eventually reaching a level of about 8.2 percent (again, see Figure 3). As described
by Ito and Mishkin (2006, p. 136), the Japanese government in 1990 began to deploy
regulatory and fiscal weapons to counteract the land bubble. Land prices peaked in 1991
and declined relentlessly thereafter. By the end of 1990 the Nikkei stood at only around
23,000 – a 41 percent decline from the stock bubble’s peak. By the summer of 1992 the
Nikkei stood at around 16,000.
Real GDP growth, which had proceeded at an average rate of nearly 5.8 percent
per year over 1988-90, slowed to 3.3 percent in 1991, to just under 1 percent I 1992, and
to 0.2 percent in 1993. It collapsed to –2.4 percent in 1994. From its peak of over 8
percent in the spring of 1991, the overnight call rate if interest fell to slightly over 2
percent by the summer of 1994. Throughout this period, however, the yen appreciated
strongly, so the economy was again in the grip of endaka fukyo. As output growth slowed
and then turned negative, core inflationary pressures subsided, as shown in Figure 5
(which does not adjust the Japanese CPI for two substantial increase in consumption

7

tax).4 Events of this period have sparked debate about whether the Bank of Japan lowered
interest rates sufficiently quickly.5 I return to discuss the yen’s seemingly perverse
appreciation, which continued through April 1995, below. Ito and Mishkin (2006, p. 138)
state that the damaging appreciation occurred “with no apparent macrofundamental
reasons ….”
In the early 1990s Japan’s financial sector came under increasing stress as a result
of nonperforming loans, many extended to the construction and real estate sectors that
were now suffering the effects of plummeting property values. Falling land and equity
prices reduced the collateral available for new loans and tightened liquidity constraints, in
a manner that has become all too familiar in recent years. Bank-sponsored mortgage
lending companies called jusen had helped fuel the land bubble by lending aggressively
to finance real estate development projects. They began to suffer in 1991 and after two
failed rescue plans the government decided to close them in 1995. As far as the banks
themselves were concerned, they too held mortgage loans; but in addition, stocks formed
part of their assets, and a hefty percentage of unrealized capital losses counted against
regulatory capital. To make matters worse, lightly regulated banks continued to extend
credit to basically insolvent borrowers, thereby weakening their own balance sheets
through a process of “evergreening.”
Over 1992-95 some smaller institutions began to fail. Banking and credit
problems were to escalate over the decade, and became especially acute in the latter

4

The tax increases (from 0 to 3 percent and from 3 to 5 percent, respectively) took place on April 1, 1989
and April 1, 1997. The definition of core inflation that I use for Japan, reported by the Ministry of Internal
Affairs and Communication, excludes the prices of food (other than alcoholic beverages) and energy.
5
See Kuttner and Posen (2001), Mori, Shiratsuka, and Taguchi (2001), Okina and Shiratsuka (2002), and
Ito and Mishkin (2006) for alternative views. According to Ito and Mishkin (p. 138), “the BOJ might have
underestimated deflationary forces.”
8

1990s after the outbreak of the Asian emerging-market financial crisis in the summer of
1997. The Ministry of Finance issued a deposit guarantee in 1995, and subsequently
injected capital into banks in 1998-99 after the failures of three large Japanese banks,
smaller banks, and securities firms starting late in 1997.6
The travails of the financial industry in Japan proved to be a serious drag on the
economy, especially starting in the late 1990s; conversely, the stagnant economy
impeded financial-sector recovery. Evergreening and government guarantees led to the
survival of “zombie” firms and financial institutions, the continuing presence of which
impeded restructuring and discouraged investment and productivity growth.7
Notwithstanding the difficulties the crippled financial system had in channeling credit to
productive uses, the government did little to force a restructuring of banks’ balance sheets
until late in 2002.
Buttressed in part by the depreciating yen, output growth recovered somewhat
between the second half of 1995 and the first quarter of 1997. Core inflation continued
slowly to decline (Figure 5). In April 1997 the government implemented two
preannounced but contractionary fiscal moves, an increase in the consumption tax from 3
to 5 percent and the withdrawal of a temporary income tax cut. In the second half of the
year, the Asian emerging-market financial crisis erupted, contributing to a fall in demand
and to the financial instability described earlier.
The yen appreciated in both nominal and real terms between August 1998 and
December 1999, a development that placed a further drag on the economy (Figure 2). In

6
7

See Hoshi and Kashyap (2004) for an extensive discussion.
For a theoretical model and evidence, see Caballero, Hoshi, and Kashyap (2008).
9

1998 real GDP fell by more than 2 percent, and with core inflation slightly negative by
year’s end, even the rate of nominal GDP growth was negative for the year.
On April 1, 1998, a new Bank of Japan Law came into effect, changing the de
jure institutional balance of power between the central bank and the Ministry of Finance.
The BOJ was given goal as well as instrument independence with respect to inflation; its
official mandate under the new law was to maintain “price stability” – nowhere defined
in the Law – and to share with the government in maintaining financial stability. Among
the political factors underlying the grant of independence were the finance ministry’s
failure effectively to address financial-sector weaknesses and the suspicion that an
independent BOJ might have responded more aggressively to the late 1980s asset
bubble.8
At the time the BOJ became independent, the overnight call interest rate stood at
around 40 to 50 basis points and core inflation remained slightly positive. In February
1999 after core inflation had become negative, the BOJ policy board, under Governor
Masaru Hayami, lowered the policy interest rate effectively to zero. This action initiated
the Zero Interest Rate Policy (ZIRP). But in spite of the economy’s continuing weakness,
the BOJ policy board, discerning signs of recovery and concerned about negative sideeffects from holding interest rates at zero for too long, ended the ZIRP in August 2000 by
moving to a policy rate of around 25 basis points.9

8

See Cargill, Hutchison, and Ito (2000, pp. 91-3).

9

In March 2000 Governor Hayami gave an influential speech on “Price Stability and Monetary Policy.” In
it he rejected the idea of targeting a substantially positive inflation rate and questioned the contollability of
inflation once it had reached a level as high as 2 to 3 percent per year. For discussion see Kuttner and Posen
(2001, pp. 120-1).
10

In retrospect, this move appears to have been ill timed. True, real GDP growth,
which had been roughly zero in 1999, registered about 2.8 percent for all of 2000. The
economy was hardly in robust condition, however, even though the yen’s foreign
exchange value had stabilized after the appreciation of 1998-99. More remarkably, core
inflation (excluding energy as well as food) had been zero or negative, with a growing
deflationary trend, in every single month since September 1998! (See Figure 5.) The BOJ
had earlier pledged to maintain the ZIRP “until deflationary concerns subside” (Ito and
Mishkin 2006, p. 145). By instead lifting interest rates from zero despite ongoing and
even accelerating deflation, the independent BOJ signaled that its discomfort with zero
interest rates exceeded its fear of prolonging deflation. The economy deteriorated in the
final quarter of 2000. Real GDP grew at rates of only 0.16 percent in 2001 and 0.26
percent in 2002 (Figure 1), and in both years the rate of core consumer price deflation
was close to 1 percent.
On March 19, 2001, the BOJ again lowered the nominal interest rate, effectively
bringing back the ZIRP, and clarified that the ZIRP would be abandoned only after the
rate of CPI inflation, excluding fresh food, was “stably” at a positive value. The zero
interest rate was to be brought about, however, by excess-reserve targeting – a policy of
unconventional, quantitative easing. Originally set at ¥5 trillion (an amount in excess of
the then required reserves of ¥4 trillion), the target for bank current accounts with the
BOJ was raised to ¥15-20 trillion by the final quarter of 2002 (Ito and Mishkin 2006, pp.
146-7). But deflation continued. There is considerable debate about the effectiveness of
the quantitative easing policy. Its success was certainly hampered by the BOJ’s resistance
to such measures prior to March 2001 and by the impression sometimes conveyed by

11

Bank officials, even after the policy’s adoption, that it was unlikely to succeed.
Moreover, the BOJ had signaled a degree of inflation aversion so high as to be
inconsistent with a successful quantitative easing strategy.10 From this perspective, a
change in regime at the BOJ probably was a necessary condition for progress in the battle
against deflation.
Governor Toshihiko Fukui succeeded Governor Hayami in March 2003; in
addition, two new deputy governors arrived, including Kasumasa Iwata, a supporter of
inflation targeting. The new management increased the extent of quantitative easing
sharply, at the same time clarifying that zero interest would not be abandoned in the
future unless inflation was clearly positive. In October 2003, the BOJ announced that
“necessary” (but not always sufficient) conditions for raising the interest rate from zero
were that core CPI inflation be above zero “over a few months,” and that the Bank be
convinced “that the prospective core CPI will not be expected to register below zero
percent.”11
These measures may have been helpful in clarifying the intention of monetary
policymakers to indeed keep the policy interest rate at its lower bound until deflation had
been decisively vanquished; that is, the intention not to withdraw monetary stimulus
when the inflation rate was still nonpositive. In addition, some observers place
considerable weight on a Ministry of Finance program of massive dollar purchases over
2003-04, which may have choked off another damaging yen appreciation cycle (see
Hamada and Okada 2007, and the discussion below). Yet a third factor helping the
10

For a discussion of the issues, see Auerbach and Obstfeld (2005). It is certainly true that under
quantitative easing, the increase in broad monetary aggregates was not nearly commensurate with the
increase in the monetary base, nor did the additional liquidity lead still-troubled banks to extend much
additional credit.

12

economy was the government effort led by economy and financial services minister
Heizo Takenaka to curb regulatory forbearance and resolve the bad-loans problem of the
banks. Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi appointed Takenaka to head the financial
services ministry in September 2002. Key subsequent events included the pre-emptive
recapitalization and restructuring plan for Resona Bank in the spring of 2003, which
arguably stabilized expectations of lending risk, as well as Takenaka’s insistence on a
timetable for other banks to dispose of nonperforming loans. Over 2004-07, the rate of
real GDP growth was much more stable and averaged around 2.25 percent per year.
Deflation, measured by a core CPI excluding energy as well as food, decelerated
but did not disappear completely over these years. In March 2006, however, the BOJ
policy board took a major step toward clarifying its operational understanding of “price
stability” – a clarification that, for the first time, specified at positive inflation as possibly
consistent with the BOJ’s goals. The minutes of the March 8-9, 2006 meeting state that
“It was agreed that, by making use of the rate of year-on-year change in the consumer
price index to describe the understanding, an approximate range between zero and two
percent was generally consistent with the distribution of each Board member’s
understanding of medium- to long-term price stability.”12
Notwithstanding the (at best) ambiguous evidence that deflation had receded, the
BOJ, in July 2006 raised its lending rate to 0.25 percent. This was the end of the ZIRP.
The rate was raised further, to 50 basis points, in March 2007 before being cut again in
2008 as the global financial crisis intensified, The BOJ cited improving economic activity
levels and hinted that it would foster an “accommodative” environment by maintaining

11
12

Ito and Mishkin (2006, p. 151).
Bank of Japan (2006, p. 61).
13

rates at low positive levels for some time. Nonetheless, the move was controversial, with
Prime Minister Koizumi, for one, arguing that the end of deflation was near but not yet
fully achieved. As in previous episodes (see Cargill, Hutchison, and Ito 2000, p. 173),
one motivation for the BOJ’s action seems to have been a desire to underscore its
independence. As one press account put it, “Yesterday's rate rise was the end of a
prolonged bout of shadow boxing between government ministers, who believed a rate
rise would dent the recovery, and the BoJ, which wanted to raise rates to demonstrate its
independence and show it was able to take pre-emptive action.”13
Even if Japan was truly at the end of its period of stagnation in 2006, its economy
was overtaken by the events of 2007-09. With global financial markets in turmoil and
Governor Fukui’s five-year term coming to a close early in 2008, the Japanese
government and the upper house of the Diet found themselves deadlocked over the
choice of a successor. The parliamentary opposition argued that the government’s initial
nominees would compromise BOJ independence. In March, the two sides agreed to
appoint as governor Maasaki Shirakawa of the BOJ, who had initially been nominated
along with Takatoshi Ito, a vocal proponent of inflation targeting, to be one of two deputy
governors. Ito was a casualty of the political wrangling. Japan’s financial sector, unlike
those in the United States and Europe, was fortunately minimally exposed to subprime
products. But as the word financial crisis intensified, the yen assumed the role of safehaven currency, appreciating multilaterally and bilaterally against the dollar. In 2008,

13

See “Bank of Japan acts to end its era of zero interest rates,” The Independent, July 15, 2006, at:
http://www.independent.co.uk/news/business/news/bank-of-japan-acts-to-end-its-era-of-zero-interest-rates408064.html

14

Japan suffered the dual blows of falling export demand and an asset-market driven
appreciation. These both put renewed downward pressure on the price level.

Real Interest Differentials, Natural Real Rates, and the Real Exchange Rate

The open or uncovered interest rate parity theory of the exchange rate predicts that any
nominal interest differental between currencies must be offset by expected depreciation
of the high-interest currency against the low-interest currency. A corollary, derived by
subtracting the expected inflation difference from both sides of the preceding
relationship, is that expected real interest differentials are offset by expected movements
in real exchange rates. These predictions have received quite limited support from the
empirical record of the modern floating exchange rate era. I will nonetheless rely upon
interest parity as a basic framework for thinking about the link between monetary policy
and the yen. Why could this be a reasonable approach? There are three reasons:

1. Some framework is essential, and our knowledge of risk premia is rudimentary at
best. It thus seems prudent to start with the simplest framework, even if it does
not fit the data exactly, and then, if necessary, add additional conjectural factors
such as risk premia.

2. If risk premia or other deviations from interest parity move slowly over time, a
first-differenced relationship could be useful even if level deviations from interest
parity are significant.

15

3. My focus will be on long-horizon interest parity, and the evidence (partial as it is)
suggests that interest parity may hold more closely for long-term interest rates
(see, for example, Alexius and Sellin 2002; Chinn 2006).

Modern discussions of monetary transmission – echoing the classic insights of
Wicksell more than a century ago – stress the link between the real interest rate implied
by the monetary policy stance and the natural, market-clearing real interest rate. The
interest-parity relation suggests, moreover, that relative international discrepancies
between natural and market real interest rates have consequences for real exchange rates.
Thus, the interest-parity relationship, once reinterpreted, is a natural vehicle for linking
the expansiveness or restrictiveness of monetary policy to the exchange rate. This
approach is most likely to be informative when applied to long-term interest-parity,
If rt is the long-term real rate of interest at home, rt* the long-term real rate abroad,
and qt the real exchange rate (defined as the domestic consumption cost of foreign
consumption), then if q t is the expected long-run real exchange rate as of date t, the
(open) interest-parity condition is

rt − rt* = qt − qt .

(1)

Observe that in this notation, a rise in q is a real depreciation of the domestic currency. A
rise in rt − rt* , holding q t constant, elicits a real domestic appreciation. The convention I
am following – in which a rise in q is a real depreciation – is opposite to the one typically
used for real exchange rate indexes such as those in Figure 2, which are meant to measure
the real external values of currencies. Notice that for the sake of easier visual

16

interpretation in Figures 2, 6, and 7, I measured even the bilateral dollar-yen real
exchange rate so that an increase is a real yen appreciation, contrary to the convention in
equation (1).
Let a tilde over a variable denote its “natural” level: the level consistent with market
clearing in a flexible-price world. In particular, q~t denotes the flex-price equilibrium real
exchange rate and, q t denotes the expected long-run “natural” real exchange rate, which
– importantly – coincides with qt . In the flex-price equilibrium the analog of eq. (1)
holds:

rt − rt * = qt − qt .

(2)

By subtracting (2) from (1), we obtain a simple relationship that ties the current
deviation of the real exchange rate from its flex-price level to the relative expansiveness
of domestic monetary policy, as represented by deviations of market from natural longterm real rates of interest:

(

)

qt = q~t + rt* − r~t * − (rt − r~t ).

(3)

If the domestic real rate of interest rises relative to its natural level, for example, then the
domestic currency will appreciate in real terms relative to its own full-employment level
(everything else equal). For example, a decline in economic growth prospects would
naturally be associated with a fall in the natural long-term real interest rate, r~t , but if
monetary policy is expected to remain restrictive over the medium term, the result could
well be a real currency appreciation and recession.
Of course, equation (1) by itself also has implications for the real exchange rate.
Rewrite (1) as

17

qt = qt − ( rt − rt* ) .

This relationship implies that if changes in the expected long-run real exchange rate qt
are small and if risk premia changes are excluded, the currency will appreciate in real
terms when the domestic-foreign real interest differential rises. This pattern is most likely
when the main shocks hitting the economy are monetary, for pure monetary shocks do
not alter the long-run real exchange rate. In reality, the implied relation between current
real exchange rates and real interest differentials seems to be rather loose for most
currencies. In the Japanese case, however, I will argue that monetary shocks were
important and do provide some traction for understanding exchange rate movements.
This approach still leaves most of short-term exchange rate movements unexplained, of
course, so it is important to keep in mind that expected real interest rates are measured
with some error (due to the use of inflation-expectations proxies), that variable risk
premia indeed are relevant, and that changes in expectations of long-run real exchange
rates are likely to have occurred at various points. An advantage of formulation (3) is that
it may be more robust than (1) to the presence of risk premia, but on the other hand,
empirical implementation of (3) requires assumptions on the “natural” levels of real
interest rates and exchange rates.
Figure 6 displays the monthly time series of Japan less United States real interest
differentials and the real yen/dollar exchange rate index, calculated on the basis of CPIs
(with an upward move in the exchange rate index being a real yen appreciation). The real
interest rate is calculated as the 10-year government bond rate less the centered twelvemonth ex post inflation rate.

18

For the period from June 1980 to July 2008, the correlation coefficient between
the real interest differential and the log real exchange rate is +0.45. Evidently real interest
differentials do not explain everything, but they are surprisingly highly correlated with
real yen/dollar movements, and in the direction that a simplified interest parity theory
would suggest.14 Figure 7 parallels Figure 6 with a comparison of Japanese and German
real interest differentials. There are clearly periods of medium-term comovement
between the Japan-Germany real exchange rate and the corresponding real interest
differential, but in the case shown in Figure 7, the short-term correlation is far below that
in Figure 6, and is in fact negative (–0.11). In both figures there is a real depreciation in
the 2000s beyond what real interest differentials would predict, perhaps reflecting
revisions in expectations of the long-run real exchange rate.

Patterns in Nominal and Yen Real Exchange Rates since 1988

Figure 2 shows that, as far as the nominal exchange rate is concerned, the yen
depreciated after late 1988 through April 1990, then embarking upon a sharp appreciation
trajectory that would culminate in a nominal rate near 80 yen per dollar in April 1995.
After depreciating again through late 1998, the yen reversed course and appreciated
sharply through end-1999. Since then it has remained in a range of roughly 95 to 130 yen
per dollar.

14

The bilateral real exchange rate measure and the Japanese CPI inflation measure used in calculating the
real interest rate are adjusted to remove the effects of the consumption tax increases of April 1, 1989 and
April 1, 1997.

19

More relevant for assessing the competitiveness of Japan’s exports is the yen’s

real exchange rate, also shown in Figure 2 for the case of consumer-price deflators. The
cycles are similar to those for the nominal exchange rate, but some distinct trends are
now apparent. Most importantly, after the April 1995 peak for the yen, there is a strong
trend of real depreciation, whether the real exchange rate is measured in real effective
terms or bilaterally against the dollar. Between April 1995 and mid-2008, the yen
depreciated in real effective terms (based on the CPI, as a log difference) by 57 percent.
For the bilateral yen/dollar rate, the corresponding real depreciation rate is 60 percent.
Strikingly, the real depreciation trend is driven entirely by the relatively higher
inflation rates in Japan’s trading partners over a period when Japan at times suffered from
outright deflation. The nominal exchange rate, in contrast, has remained within a
relatively narrow range since around 2000. This unusual pattern – typically observed only
in gold standard and other “hard peg” countries painfully unwinding an overvalued
currency – is itself symptomatic of Japan’s post-bubble stagnation.
Figure 2 suggests that the yen real exchange rate’s history since 1988 can be
divided into (at least) six periods, characterized by the following given changes in the
extreme month-average nominal exchange rates against the dollar:
1. December 1988−April 1990: Depreciation (123 ¥/$ −158 ¥/$).
2. April 1990−April 1995: Appreciation (158 ¥/$ − 84 ¥/$).
3. April 1995−August 1998: Depreciation (84 ¥/$ −145 ¥/$).
4. August 1998−December 1999: Appreciation (145 ¥/$ −103¥/$).
5. December 1999−July 2007: Depreciation (103¥/$ −122 ¥/$).
6. July 2007−December 2008: Appreciation (122 ¥/$ − 90¥/$).

20

Our question is how the cycles and trends in real exchange rates are driven by
monetary policy actions as well as by the longer-run evolution of the Japanese economy.
Period 1. After the protracted appreciation period the followed the Plaza
agreement, the yen appeared to stabilize early in 1988. Japanese authorities welcomed
that development, which boosted the economy. The asset-price boom continued,
however, and inflationary forces, which remained muted after a period of yen strength,
were in fact gathering (Figure 5). Apparently unwilling to risk renewed appreciation,
however, the Japanese authorities did not aggressively raise target interest rates (Figure
3). Inflationary pressures were evident earlier in the United States economy, and the Fed
did respond with a series of interest rate hikes starting in the second half of 1988 (Figure
8).15 The yen started to depreciate late in 1988.
The Bank of Japan began to raise short-term interest rates in mid-1989 (Figure 3).
Core inflation was significantly higher by the spring of 1990 – by which time the pricelevel effects of the April 1989 consumption tax increase are no longer distorting the data
in Figure 5. Yen depreciation continued. Even after the stock market peaked early in
1990 and the yen hit bottom in April 1990, and with Japanese and U.S. long-term real
interest rates close once again (Figure 6), the BOJ continued to tighten short rates.
Around that time Japanese inflation also took a ratchet-step upward.
Why did the yen depreciate through April 1990 and not begin to appreciate sooner
after Japanese monetary policy began to tighten? One possibility is that falling Japanese
equity prices prompted an international portfolio shift out of yen. It may also be that the
15

The “Record of Policy Actions of the Federal Open Market Committee,” Meeting of May 17, 1988
(http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomchistorical1988.htm), noted that “consumer and
producer prices have risen more rapidly recently. In addition, labor costs increased substantially in the first
quarter.”

21

markets had some doubts about the willingness of the BOJ, not a formal inflation
targeter, to do what was necessary to keep inflation down. As the policy interest rate
continued to climb, however, markets became convinced that the BOJ meant to limit
inflation. At this point, Japanese long-term real interest rates had generally been above
U.S. rates for some time (Figure 6).16
Period 2. With long-term Japanese real interest rates exceeding those of the U.S.
in the spring of 1990, and Japanese short-term rates continuing to rise, the yen began to
appreciate sharply. In the last quarter of 1990 the Japanese long-term nominal interest
rate fell below the overnight rate, which stood at better than 8 percent throughout the first
quarter of 1991. The sharp reversal in interest-rate policy that began in the spring of 1991
moderated the pace of yen appreciation but did not induce depreciation. One reason was
that the U.S. monetary tightening cycle had peaked in the fall of 1990, and U.S. policy
rates were falling rapidly from the end of the year. The Fed’s view was that, despite the
possible inflationary effects of a rise in oil prices, U.S. real activity was slowing.17 By the
final quarter of 1991, the Japanese economy was suffering the coincidence of a
strengthening currency, uncomfortably high inflation, and asset-price collapse. In 1991,
Japan’s real GDP growth slowed whereas the U.S. entered a mild recession. As U.S.
growth recovered in 1992, however, Japan’s slowed further and it remained low in 1993.
In 1994, Japanese growth turned sharply negative (Figure 9).
Contributing to poor growth performance was a sharp upward movement of the
yen (roughly 25 percent) between mid-1992 and the last quarter 1993. This was the start

16

Clarida and Waldman (2008) show that the response of exchange rates to inflation news has been quite
different as between inflation-targeting central banks and non-targeters (such as the BOJ and the Fed).

22

of a second great episode of endaka fukyo. At this point U.S. inflation had largely
stabilized but Japanese inflation was falling (Figure 5). Inflation expectations may
therefore have played some role in the yen appreciation over 1992-93, but from a macro
perspective the appreciation remains puzzling. It seems likely, however, that U.S.-Japan
trade tensions created expectations that the Japanese authorities would limit potential yen
depreciation. This is the interpretation favored by McKinnon and Ohno (1997). In
January 1992, President George H. W. Bush visited Japan and secured commitments to
specified increases in imports of autos and auto parts from the U.S.18 The election of the
Democratic Clinton administration in November 1992 may well have raised expectations
of a more confrontational U.S. trade stance. Coupled with Japan’s slow growth, U.S.
recovery was leading to an expansion in American imports from Japan, and this,
paradoxically, added to the tense atmosphere regarding trade.
As Japan’s short-term interest rate fell and the Fed kept short-term rates on hold,
the yen stabilized, but a renewed appreciation episode started in mid-1994, just as the yen
overnight interest rate stopped falling and began to inch upward (Figure 3). Between June
1994 and April 1995, when the yen reached its all-time peak, the yen appreciated by 12.5
percent (log points) in real effective terms and by 18 percent (log points) in real terms
against the dollar. This episode has puzzled observers, as it occurred when the Japanese
economy was already quite weak and about to fall into deflation.
As of early 1994, however, private and policy forecasts discerned signs of
recovery, and indeed, at that point the long-term yen nominal interest rate began to move
17

See The “Record of Policy Actions of the Federal Open Market Committee,” Meeting of November 13,
1990 (http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomchistorical1990.htm). The average price of crude
petroleum doubled temporarily between the summer and fall of 1990 as Iraq invaded Kuwait in August.

23

up. Ahearne and others (2002, p. 17) quote the BOJ Quarterly Bulletins for May and
November 1994 as pointing, respectively, to stabilization of the economic growth rate
and to strength in “all categories of spending….” Short-term interest rates remained on
hold, however, and with the fundamentals of the economy in reality deteriorating, it is
possible, as Ahearne and others (2002, p. 18) suggest, that the market real interest rate
rose above the natural rate, prompting the sharp yen appreciation of early 1995. This
result is consistent with the prediction of equation (3). The sharp appreciation itself,
coupled with the Kobe earthquake and falling equity prices, helped snuff out a possible of
economic recovery. Early in 1995, headline CPI inflation, which had risen slightly
toward the end of 1994, dropped to around zero. Core inflation also was low and
declining (Figure 5).
Period 3. In April 1995, a series of dramatic policy interventions, carried out by
both Japanese and foreign authorities, initiated a new, long-term weakening trend for the
yen. The BOJ discount rate was slashed and the yen overnight interest rate fell
dramatically, reaching a level of about 0.5 percent by the fall of 1995 (Figure 3). As
described by McKinnon and Ohno (1997, pp. 226-8), the U.S. eased mercantile pressures
and Japan, while several countries carried out joint foreign exchange market interventions
to support the dollar in currency markets. The Japanese authorities had purchased dollars
in unilateral official intervention operations on 21 days in March 1995 as the yen
continued to rise. They intervened on eight more days between April 3 and 18,
purchasing about $500 billion for the month.

18

This visit may best be remembered as the one in which President Bush, at a state dinner, vomited into
Japanese Prime Minister Miyazawa’s lap.
24

Nominal long-term interest rates in Japan fell dramatically as expectations of low
growth and low inflation took hold. As Figure 6 shows, Japan’s long-term real interest
rate fell far below that of the United States. From a level of around 4.2 percent per year in
March 1995, the nominal10-year JGB rate fell to a low of around 0.9 percent in the fall of
1998. The upward spike in domestic financial instability late in 1997, after the outbreak
of the crisis in Asian emerging markets, no doubt contributed to the yen’s rather rapid
depreciation through August 1998.
Not only did Japanese nominal long-term rates start to rise in the fall of 1998, but
also, accelerating Japanese CPI deflation had started to cause the long-term real Japanese
interest rate to start trending upward. Even before then, U.S. short and real long-term
rates had started to decline in the aftermath of the Asian financial crisis. Eventually those
factors halted the yen’s depreciation and reinforced a new appreciation cycle.
Period 4. It was in August 1998 that the yen’s next real appreciation cycle began.
During this period, Japan’s real long-term interest rate rose relative to that in the United
States. In Japan the overnight interest rate stood at just under 0.5 percent and would fall
effectively to zero within a year, but in the presence of deflation expectations, yen
appreciation continued. At the point when the zero lower bound was reached late in
February 1999, the BOJ had no further ability to lower the short-term nominal interest
rate. By the end of 1999, Japanese and U.S. real long-term interest rates were again very
close, and the upward trend in the (negative) Japan-U.S. differential had ceased (Figure
6), in part because U.S. headline inflation had moved upward.

25

Over the entire period from August 1998 to December 1999, the yen appreciated
in real effective terms by 29.8 percent and in real bilateral terms against the dollar by
31.2 percent.
Period 5. In the subsequent long real depreciation phase, a falling yen price level
reinforced the yen’s nominal depreciation against the dollar. The yen fell sharply in real
terms through the end of 2001 as Japan’s relative real interest rate fell. From August 2000
to March 2001 the BOJ held policy interest rates above zero, as described earlier, having
perceived signs of recovery despite a core inflation rate that remained negative.19 This
move caused a small temporary strengthening of the yen, but economic activity slowed
and deflation accelerated.
The yen stabilized and even rose (against the dollar) after early 2002 as Japan’s
real interest rate rose toward the U.S. level (Figure 6), but depreciation returned early in
2005 despite a relative Japanese real interest rate that continued to rise for several months
(part of the Greenspan “conundrum” period).
Hamada and Okada (2007) argue that the yen would have appreciated far more in
2003-04, crippling Japanese recovery, if not for the energetic dollar purchases carried out
by Japan’s Ministry of Finance under Vice Minister Zembei Mizoguchi. Between January
2003 and the end of March 2004, the MOF sold ¥35,256.4 billion for dollars in the
foreign exchange market.20 Ito (2004) discusses the rationale and context for these
interventions in detail and suggests that while they could have had a weakening effect on
the yen of up to 13 percent compared to the counterfactual of no intervention, it is also
possible that their effects were mostly temporary. In any case, the Fed had begun to
19

Ito and Mishkin (2006, pp. 145-6).

26

tighten U.S. monetary conditions in mid-2004 in the face of mounting inflation pressure
(Figures 5 and 8). From April 2005 Japanese long-term real rates began to fall compared
to the U.S., and yen depreciation accelerated.
In July 2006, the BOJ definitively ended its zero-interest policy regime, as we
have seen (Figure 3). Even with some signs of Japanese recovery and Japan’s relative
real long-term interest rate rising, yen depreciation continued through July 2007. It could
be that markets perceived unusually high risks in a period of monetary policy transition,
or that market expectations of Japanese long-term growth were again being revised
downward.
Period 6. Yen behavior during this period is dominated by Japan’s emergence as a
relative safe haven in a period of global financial market crisis. Paradoxically, the
weakness of Japan’s financial system over prior years may have deterred Japanese
institutions from overextending themselves during the 2000s, unlike institutions in
Europe and especially the United States. The yen strengthened sharply starting in the fall
of 2008. At that time, emerging markets and industrial countries came under financial
pressure and the world price of oil plummeted from the unprecedented heights reached
the previous summer. By the end of 2008 the yen was around the ¥90 per dollar level. Of
course, the yen was much weaker in real terms by 2008 than when the yen had reached
that nominal rate in the mid-1990s. Even so, a higher yen, coupled with rapidly shrinking
markets for Japanese exports, threw Japan’s growth sharply into reverse.

20

See Ministry of Finance Japan, “Foreign Exchange Intervention Operations,”
http://www.mof.go.jp/english/e1c021.htm.
27

Long Run Trends in the Yen: The Role of Productivity Growth

Movements in relative real long-term interest rates offer some insight into short-term
exchange rate dynamics, but it is also likely that perceptions of long-run real exchange
rates changed over the period following the collapse of Japan’s asset bubble. We would
like to understand whether and when such changes in long-term perceptions may have
occurred. A closely related challenge is to explain the observed long-term trends in the
yen’s real exchange rate. I therefore turn to the question of long-term movements in the
yen and their relationship to underlying economic fundamentals. This section focuses on
productivity trends, the next, on trends in international trade.

The Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson Approach
Perhaps the most fundamental benchmark model for thinking about real exchange rates is
the Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson (HBS) model (see Rogoff 1992; Obstfeld 1993; Asea and
Mendoza 1994; Obstfeld and Rogoff 1996, Chapter 4). The model posits economies with
two sectors, tradable and nontradable goods. In essence, the real exchange rate depends
on the international “difference in differences” between the economies’ tradable-sector
and nontradable-sector productivity growth rates. The HBS model provides a key
benchmark, because real appreciations consistent with the model’s predictions are purely
productivity driven and do not entail a decline in the competitiveness of exports.
To understand the HBS approach, let P be Japan’s consumer price level and P*
that of the United States, with E the price of yen in terms of dollars. Then the real
exchange rate of the yen against the dollar (defined so that an increase is a relative real

28

depreciation of the yen) is q = EP*/P. In this notation, a rise in E (nominal yen
depreciation) or rise in P*/P (fall in Japan’s relative money price level) lowers the price
of consumer goods in Japan compared to the U.S.
Each country’s consumer price level, in turn, depends on the domestic price
indexes for tradable and nontradable goods, denoted PT and PN for Japan and PT* and PN*
for the United States. In general, as shown by Obstfeld and Rogoff (2007, p. 356), a
useful approximation for the change in the log yen real exchange rate is

 PN* / PT* 
 EPT* 
∆ log q ≈ (1 − γ )∆ log 
 + ∆ log 
,
 PT 
 PN / PT 

(4)

where γ is the share of tradables in the CPI (the same in the two countries). This equation
discloses the two main determinants of the real exchange rate: the international ratio of
relative nontradables prices, and the relative international price of tradables.
The HBS theory presumes that the law of one price holds for every tradable good
and that consumers in the two countries have identical preferences over the tradable
goods. Thus, EPT* = PT , so that the HBS theory operates entirely through the
determination of the relative price of nontradables in terms of tradables. There is
considerable evidence, however, that relative international tradables prices vary greatly,
at least for some country pairs and over some horizons. Moreover, they tend to covary
positively and strongly with nominal exchange rates, so that nominal yen depreciation,
for example, raises the price level of tradables in Japan relative to tradable price levels
abroad. For Japan, the terms of trade closely mirror the evolution of the exchange rate,
with nominal (and real) yen depreciation generally associated with deterioration in
Japan’s terms of trade – a rise in import price relative to export prices. I temporarily put

29

this evidence aside to focus on the HBS predictions about relative nontraded-goods
prices, predictions that are quite robust as longer-term predictions and are broadly
consistent with data from many countries.
Over a sufficiently long horizon – one in which goods prices are flexible and
domestic factor markets can adjust to ensure the equality of factor rewards across sectors
of the economy – relative productivity growth is a prime determinant of the first term on
the right-hand side of equation (4). To see this, assume that outputs in the tradable and
nontradable sectors are given by the constant-returns production functions of capital and
labor:

YT = AT F ( KT , LT ) ,
YN = AN G ( K N , LN ) ,
where AT and AN measure total factor productivity (TFP).21 Let µ LT denote labor’s
income share in tradables, µ LN its share in nontradables, and x̂ the proportional rate of
change of variable x. Furthermore, define the relative price of nontradables as p ≡ PN / PT .
Proceed as in Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996, Section 4.2.1) but allow for the possibility that
both the real (tradable) wage w and the real (tradable) return to capital r can change. Log
differentiation of zero-profit conditions, assuming firm optimization and free domestic
factor mobility, yields:

21

It would be simple to include nontraded goods as an input to tradables (think of retailing services
required to deliver tradables to final consumers). That change would not alter the main qualitative
predictions concerning relative sectoral TFP and the relative price of nontradables, but it would place a
wedge between different countries’ price indexes for tradable consumption. That additional wedge would,
however, depend mainly on relative nontradables prices.
30

AˆT = µ LT ( wˆ − rˆ ) + rˆ,
pˆ + Aˆ N = µ LN ( wˆ − rˆ ) + rˆ.

(5)

Combining these, one obtains a relationship linking the change in the real exchange rate
to relative TFP growth,

pˆ = AˆT − Aˆ N + ( µ LN − µ LT ) ( wˆ − rˆ ) .

(6)

In general, the change in p depends not only on the sectoral difference in TFP growth, but
also on the evolution of the wage-rental ratio, with a rise in the latter raising p when
nontradables are relatively labor intensive.22 If there are significant movements in relative
factor rewards over time and intersectoral differences in functional income shares, then
the relation between the relative price of tradables and sectoral TFP growth rates may not
be straightforward. Evolution in the relative price of nontradables will depend exclusively
on differential TFP growth only in very special cases, for example, when sectoral factor
shares are the same.
One way to circumvent the problem is to focus on labor productivity rather than
total factor productivity, as Canzoneri, Cumby, and Diba (1999) do. That approach
potentially confounds long-term TFP movements with other factors, but it has a number
of countervailing advantages, as Canzoneri, Cumby, and Diba show.
To understand their approach, note that along the economy’s long-run production
possibilities frontier, p equals the ratio of labor’s marginal physical productivity in
22

One could solve for the endogenous wage-rental ratio in terms of exogenous variables by imposing
further structure on the consumption side and assuming a balanced growth path, as Asea and Mendoza
(1994) do, but at the cost of restricting generality. For my purposes it is not necessary to follow that route.
In the context of a growth model, and assuming a balanced growth path with a constant marginal product of

31

tradables to its marginal physical productivity in nontradables. Let f ( kT ) ≡ F ( KT / LT ,1)
and g ( k N ) ≡ G ( K N / LN ,1) . Under the tentative assumption that marginal labor products
are proportional to average labor products, one can therefore write

p=

AT  f ( kT ) − f ′ ( kT ) kT  ϕ AT f ( kT )
=
AN  g ( k N ) − g ′ ( k N ) k N  ψ AN g ( k N )

for suitable constants φ and ψ. Log differentiating this expression, one finds that

pˆ = AˆT + (1 − µ LT ) kˆT −  Aˆ N − (1 − µ LN ) kˆN  .


Here, AˆT + (1 − µ LT ) kˆT is the growth rate of (average) labor productivity in tradables (in
contrast to TFP in tradables), whereas Aˆ N + (1 − µ LN ) kˆN is the growth rate of labor
productivity in nontradables. (In general, labor productivity growth rates exceed TFP
growth rates when there is capital deepening over time.)
The earlier tentative assumption that marginal and average labor products
coincide can hold true only if the last equation is the same as equation (6). Let σ T and σ N
be the elasticities of factor substitution in the traded and nontraded goods sectors. Then
one can express the last equation in terms of factor-price changes as





µ
capital r, equation (5) would imply that wˆ = AˆT / µ LT . Accordingly, (6) implies pˆ =  LN  AˆT − Aˆ N . This is

 µ LT 

the formula in Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996, Chapter 4) for the case of a constant world real interest rate.
32

pˆ = AˆT + (1 − µ LT ) σ T ( wˆ − rˆ ) −  Aˆ N − (1 − µ LN ) σ N ( wˆ − rˆ )  .
This equation is valid – that is, it agrees with equation (6) – when (and only when)

σ T = σ N = 1. Thus, for Cobb-Douglas production functions, the long-run relative price of
nontradables depends exclusively on differential labor-productivity growth in
nontradables and tradables. I will assume that Cobb-Douglas production functions
adequately represent Japanese industry.
Below I explore the relationship between the preceding labor productivity
differential and the yen’s real exchange rate. One point to notice, however, is that for the
tradable and nontradable sectors, short-term movements in labor productivity and TFP
are very highly positively correlated. The six panels of Figure 10 (a through f) illustrate
this correlation for the tradable and nontradable sectors of Japan, the United States, and
Germany. Productivity growth rate data are from the EU KLEMS database (URL:
http://www.euklems.net/, March 2008), and sectoral value-added productivity figures are
constructed from less aggregated industry figures using a Törnqvist index with valueadded weights.23 As an example, for Japanese tradables the contemporaneous correlation
coefficient between labor productivity and TFP growth rates is 0.95; for Japanese
nontradables the corresponding correlation coefficient is 0.94. Note that, as the HBS
literature suggests, productivity growth in tradables is generally higher than that in

23

Tradables consist of agriculture, hunting, forestry, and fishing; mining and quarrying; total
manufacturing; and electricity, gas, and water supply. Nontradables consist of construction; wholesale and
retail trade; hotels and restaurants; transport, storage, and communication; finance, insurance, real estate,
and business services; public administration and defense; compulsory social security; education, health, and
social work; and other community, social, and personal services.
33

nontradables, with the implication that the relative price of services should rise
secularly.24

Evidence on HBS and Its Component Sub-theories
For much of its postwar history Japan was a poster-child for the HBS theory. In an early
study, Hsieh (1982) derived a one-factor version of the HBS theory and tested it on labor
productivity data for Japan and Germany versus aggregates of major trading partners. For
his study, tradables were defined as manufacturing and nontradables as
nonmanufacturing. The theory received support for both countries, but over a sample
period (1954-1976) containing very few observations from the post-1973 floating
exchange rate era. As I argue below, however, deviations from the HBS model are likely
to be larger and more persistent under floating exchange rates.25
Marston (1987) offered the first detailed study of Japan based on a substantial
span of data from the floating exchange rate period (1973-1983). Marston found that in
the U.S. over that period, tradables productivity growth exceeded that in nontradables by
13.2 percent. For Japan, he found that the same cumulative differential was 73.2 percent.
Japanese relative nontradables prices rose by 56.9 percent as opposed to only 12.3
percent in the U.S, The yen appreciated significantly against the U.S. dollar in real terms.
These results seemed strikingly to confirm the HBS approach.26

24

Lee and Tang (2007) find that logarithmic levels of TFP and labor productivity need not be highly or
(even positively) correlated for the U.S. and Germany, although they are for Japan. In panel regressions on
an industrial-country sample, they find that labor productivity variables and TFP variables have opposite
effects on real exchange rates.
25
Hsieh’s findings in support of HBS went against previous negative cross-section work reported by
Officer (1976).
26
In a related vein, Yoshikawa (1990) claimed an important role for relative labor productivities in
determining the long-run nominal yen/dollar exchange rate over 1973-87. Yoshikawa’s model assumed an
average law-of-one-price relationship for tradables, and allowed for changes in the relative price of energy
34

Subsequent research has focused on larger samples of countries. De Gregorio,
Giovannini, and Wolf (1994), using the newly assembled OECD sectoral database for
1970-85, showed a strong relationship between differential sectoral TFP growth and the
growth of relative nontradables prices for a sample of 14 countries including Japan. They
did not look explicitly at real exchange rates. Asea and Mendoza (1994) reached similar
conclusions regarding relative sectoral prices levels within the OECD sample, but found
that TFP differentials were much less useful in understanding even low-frequency
movements in real exchange rates.
That failure is not surprising in view of equation (4), as a major role in
movements of the real exchange rate, alongside that of relative sectoral prices, is played
by the relative international price of tradables. Under floating exchange rates, the latter
relative price is highly correlated with the nominal exchange rate in the short run, and
hence is much more volatile than either of the relative prices p and p* that enter the first
right-hand term in (4). The volatility in relative international tradables prices, to some
degree, reflects widespread violations of the law of one price; it also reflects terms of
trade changes (given international differences in consumer preferences) as well as the
nontradable content of final “tradable” consumption goods. Engel (1999) argues that even
over longer horizons, variation in the relative international prices of tradables dominates
real exchange rate movements of the United States dollar; this point has implications for
the yen that I will explore later. Were Hsieh’s (1982) tests to be carried out over post-

inputs. Rather than focusing on relative productivity in nontraded and traded sectors, however,
Yoshikawa’s model focuses on the relative importance of labor and energy in producing export goods. I
return to the importance of energy prices below.
35

1973 data, it seems certain that any measured effects of intersectoral productivity
differentials would be swamped by the influence of nominal exchange rate movements.27
Many recent studies employ error-correction models to look for cointegrating
relationships among real exchange rates and the other variables that underlie the HBS
model. The basic presumption of these models is that real exchange rates contain unit
roots. While the unit-root hypothesis has proved difficult to reject in the spans of data that
are typically used, the question of mean reversion in real exchange rates in fact remains
quite open, with many researchers believing in some degree of slow mean reversion, a
belief derived in part from the analysis of longer time series samples. Thus, Taylor and
Taylor (2004, p. 154) describe as a “consensus view” the propositions “that short-run
PPP does not hold, that long-run PPP may hold in the sense that there is significant mean
reversion of the real exchange rate, although there may be factors impinging on the
equilibrium exchange rate through time ….” It should be kept in mind that the statistical
tests described next all rely on the hypothesis that real exchange rates and their
determinants are I(1) random variables,
Retaining a focus on the OECD sectoral data but working in terms of labor
productivity as noted above, Canzoneri, Cumby, and Diba (1999) looked separately at the
two components of the HBS model: the ability of sectoral productivity differences to
explain the relative price of nontradables in terms of tradables, and the validity of
purchasing power parity (PPP) with respect to indexes of tradables prices. Using 19701993 data, carry out a panel cointegration analysis aimed at ascertaining long-run
dynamic features of the data record. They found that relative sectoral prices and relative

27

Park and Ogaki (2007) caution, however, against drawing long-run implications from data samples of the
size that Engel uses.
36

productivities were cointegrated with a coefficient near 1.0.28 However, nominal
exchange rates against the U.S. dollar were not cointegrated with tradables prices relative
to those of the U.S. Interestingly, the hypothesis of PPP for tradables fared much better
when Germany rather than the United States was used as the comparison country. Kakkar
and Ogaki (1999), also using cointegration techniques, explicitly studied long-run
comovements in real exchange rates and relative nontradables prices. Their long data
sample, ranging from as early as 1929 to the late 1980s, contained several spans with
fixed exchange rates. Particularly in floating-rate data, they found mixed support for a
close long-run relationship between relative nontradables prices and real exchange
rates.29 This is consistent, once again, with a large role for nominal exchange rate
movements in driving deviations from PPP for tradable goods. In a panel cointegration
study covering 48 countries, Ricci, Milesi-Ferretti, and Lee (2008), relate real exchange
rates to a range of explanatory variables. They find a statistically significant productivity
effect consistent with the HBS theory, but regard it as relatively small in magnitude.30
A number of studies focus explicitly on real exchange rates of East Asian
countries. Some authors, such as Chinn (2000, p. 20), argue that “The East Asian
economies are exactly the type for which Balassa posited the relevance of the HBS effect:
economies characterized by rapid growth, presumably due to rapid manufacturing—and
hence traded—sector productivity growth.” Ito, Isard, and Symansky (1999), Drine and
Rault (2003), and Thomas and King (2004), however, all find mixed evidence concerning
the HBS theory. Chinn (2000) himself studies the bilateral real exchange rates of a group

28

Kakkar (2003) established the same result for a model based on TFP measures.
Similarly mixed evidence is found by DeLoach (1997), who uses CPI/WPI ratios to proxy relative
nontradables prices.
30
Further analysis and discussion can be found in Lee et al. (2008).
29

37

of nine East Asian countries, including Japan and China, against the U.S. dollar. He finds
that for Japan, Malaysia, and the Philippines, the real exchange rate is cointegrated with
relative sectoral labor productivities based on a 1970-93 sample. He notes, however, that
real exchange rates display protracted swings away from the levels predicted either by
relative nontradables prices or by relative productivity levels. Kakkar and Yan (2006)
assemble a disaggregated data set of TFPs for Hong Kong, Indonesia, Korea. Malaysia,
Singapore, and Thailand, They find that in panel data, real exchange rates appear
cointegrated with relative sectoral productivity differentials, but whereas long-run PPP
for tradables appears reasonable when East Asian currencies are compared to the yen, it
fails when the dollar is the comparison currency. This difference could result from the
closer trading linkages among the East Asian countries, including Japan.31 Choudhri and
Khan (2005) present a panel study of 16 emerging market countries, including some in
East Asia, over 1976-94. They find that bilateral real exchange rates against the dollar are
related to relative nontraded goods prices and that the latter are, in turn, related to relative
labor productivity as the HBS theory suggests, but they do not test directly for a link
between real exchange rates and relative sectoral productivity differences. They also find
a role for the terms of trade in determining real exchange rates. Chen and Rogoff (2003)
document a positive and significant HBS effects in the bilateral real exchange rates of
Australia and New Zealand against the United States.

31

Kakkar and Yan (2006) combine the equations in (5) by eliminating wˆ − rˆ rather than r̂ . The result is

pˆ =

µ LN 
 µ − µ LN
AT − A N +  LT
µ LT
 µ LT


 rˆ , rather than equation (6). The authors then work with the level form of


this equation under the hypothesis that the real return to capital, r, is an I(0) random variable. Their
methodology obviously obliges them to supply labor-income shares in tradables and nontradables.
38

The body of evidence on the HBS theory indicates a definite connection between
international differences in relative sectoral productivity levels and international
differences in the price of nontraded in terms of traded goods. The connection seems
valid whether productivity is measured by output-labor ratios or by TFP. Direct linkages
between productivity variables or relative price variables and real exchange rates is more
tenuous, especially under floating nominal exchange rates, because of large and persistent
deviations from purchasing power parity for tradables; see equation (4). These deviations
may limit the usefulness of the HBS theory for explaining or predicting real exchange
rates over all but the longest horizons. PPP for tradables – and therefore the HBS
connection between relative productivity levels and real exchange rates – may hold more
closely for pairs of countries with relatively extensive mutual trading links.

Sectoral Productivity and the Yen’s Real Exchange Rate
A real yen appreciation caused by high productivity growth in tradables would not
undermine the competitive position of Japanese exporters. The available evidence
indicates, however, that at least in the short run, episodes of sharp yen appreciation have
indeed harmed the fortunes of Japan’s manufacturing exporters, with negative
implications for overall Japanese economic growth (as suggested by Figure 1). Dekle and
Fukao (2008) document how the yen’s 1985-95 appreciation raised average costs levels
in Japanese industries relative to those in the United States.
A first regularity to examine is the short-run relationship between real exchange
rate movements and changes in the HBS relative productivity variable, which I define in

(

)

(

)

terms of relative labor productivity as YˆT − LˆT − YˆN − LˆN − YˆT* − Lˆ*T − YˆN* − Lˆ*N  . In



39

practice, I take Japan as the home country and take the “starred” foreign country to be
either the U.S. or Germany. Figures 11a and 11b, respectively, plot the data, which show
no evidence of short-run positive correlation. Indeed the sample correlation coefficients
are slightly negative, equal to −0.14 for the comparison with the U.S. and to −0.16 for the
comparison with Germany. These short-term comovements are the opposite of what the
HBS theory predicts as a longer-term correlation.
In the short term, when prices are sticky and factors are immobile between
sectors, real yen appreciation reduces the demand for Japanese exports and puts
downward pressure on exporters’ profit margins. This account is consistent with the
evidence in Dekle and Fukao (2008). The appreciation could result from monetary factors
as discussed earlier, from changed perceptions of the long-run equilibrium real exchange
rate, or from shifting risk premia. Faced with reduced demand, Japanese exporters react
immediately by reducing levels of capacity utilization and working existing labor pool
less intensely. These adjustments, in turn, lower measured productivity, whether
measured as TFP or as labor productivity.
For the United States, Basu (1996) has made a compelling case that procyclical
rates of factor utilization play the main role in explaining the observed high degree of
procyclical overall productivity.32 His analysis uses data on material inputs effectively to
track firms’ use of capital and labor inputs. It would be interesting to use methods like
Basu’s to more closely isolate the exogenous technological shocks driving observed

32

See also Basu and Fernald (2001). For a related analysis using Japanese data, see Vecchi (2000).

40

productivity movements in traded and nontraded sectors. The resulting data would deliver
a sharper test of the HBS theory.
In Figures 11a and 11b, real exchange rate movements are more volatile than the
contemporaneous movements in international relative productivity ratios. The latter are,
however, still surprisingly large. A yen appreciation lowers demand for tradable goods
and may raise the demand for nontradables. To the extent that slow growth in the export
sector depresses overall demand, however, any resulting rise in the cyclical component of
nontraded-sector productivity may be dampened. In fact, over 1978-2005, the correlation
between changes in Japanese tradable and nontradable productivity is only 0.05,
effectively zero.
An analysis of longer-term changes in productivity levels and real exchange rates
gives a sense of whether the historical trends are consistent with the HBS theory. For this
purpose, I use the log levels version of equation (4), taking γ = 0.25 and identifying the
relative prices p and p* with the tradables-to-nontradables labor productivity ratios.
Figures 12a and 12b present the data for the comparison of Japan against the U.S. and
Germany, respectively, over the nearly three decades from 1978-2005. Against the U.S.,
over this entire period, Japan experiences a small real depreciation and a small decline in
the HBS relative intersectoral productivity variable. In the interim, however, the swings
away from “Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson” parity are huge and persistent. On this metric,
the yen was about 50 percent “undervalued” during the strong dollar of the Reagan years,
and about 40 percent “overvalued” during the height of the mid-1990s appreciation,
which pushed Japan into protracted deflation. The “overvaluation” of the first endaka

fukyo of the late 1980s is comparatively small and briefer, as is the “overvaluation” that

41

emerges after the Asian crisis (August 1998−December 1999, described as Period 4
above). In all of these episodes, often identified as misalignments, sharp movements in
the yen’s nominal exchange rate were associated with commensurately sharp movements
in relative international tradables prices. As in equation (4), those developments helped to
drive the real exchange rate far from the HBS benchmark. I return to this point in the next
section, which explicitly introduces international trade in different products.
Figure 12a shows that in many of the subperiods of the 1978-2007 span, the yen’s
evolution vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar is in fact the opposite of what the HBS theory would
imply. I have already observed (in connection with Figures 11a and 11b) that year-to-year

changes in bilateral real exchange rates and the bilateral HBS productivity variable are
slightly negatively correlated. The correlation between log levels in Figure 12a is a much
more dramatic –0.46. Furthermore, the relevant productivity trends seem quite minor in
magnitude compared to the long swings in the exchange rate – for example, over the
1995-2004 subperiod, when the HBS theory does get at least the direction of change in
the real exchange rate right. But the magnitude is way off. Changes in real exchange rates
are more volatile than changes in productivity, yet are quite persistent.33 Lane (2008)
finds that the yen’s multilateral real exchange rate is positively and significantly related
to a multilateral HBS variable, but all in all, there is little evidence that this relationship is
important for the bilateral yen rate against the dollar.

33

Caballero, Hoshi, and Kashyap (2008) observe that from the early 1990s to the early 2000s, there was
positive TFP growth in Japanese manufacturing while TFP stagnated in nontraded sectors such as
construction. They attribute this in part to the concentration of “zombie” firms in nontraded sectors. Taken
alone, this pattern would cause a real yen appreciation according to the HBS theory. However, U.S.
productivity developments also played a role. Furthermore, Caballero, Hoshi, and Kashyap argue that
sectors heavily populated with zombie firms could be characterized by excessive supply and hence lower
prices.
42

The bilateral real exchange rate of the yen against Germany puts the HBS theory
in a slightly better light; see Figure 12b. The real exchange rate still fluctuates about the
HBS trend, but the departures are smaller and less persistent than in the yen/dollar case.
Notable examples of “misalignment” – in the narrow sense of a significant departure
from the HBS trend – are the yen’s real depreciation against the deutsche mark at the
time of the second oil shock of the late 1970s, real appreciation in the mid-1990s (less
pronounced than that against the United States), and a substantial real appreciation
around the launch date of the euro in 1999. Notwithstanding the negative correlation in
annual changes shown in Figure 11b, the correlation between log levels is strongly
positive and equal to 0.61, which is suggestive a reasonably strong HBS effect over the
medium term.
An interesting question is why HBS has a bit more success in explaining swings
of the Japanese currency against Germany than against the United States. Canzoneri,
Cumby, and Diba (1999) likewise found that convergence to PPP for tradables held more
closely when they compared OECD countries to Germany, rather than the U.S. As the
world’s premier exporter, Germany’s integration into global markets exceeds that of the
larger and more insular United States economy. This may explain the greater apparent
coherence between world and German tradables prices, which, in turn, might reduce the
size and persistence of departures from an HBS benchmark. An interesting general
question is whether predictions of the HBS theory holds more closely for economies that
are more open to international trade.
The figures leave open the possibility that the real exchange rate might appear to
be cointegrated with the HBS relative productivity variable, Lane (2008), who examines

43

the real effective CPI exchange rate in a multivariate context using an effective HBS
variable as a regressor, finds this to be the case. However, Figures 12a and 12b suggest
that HBS factors could have little explanatory power for real exchange rates over
medium-term horizons, and that forecasters would face considerable uncertainty in
predicting when a real exchange rate might converge near to the HBS benchmark.34

Overall Productivity and the Yen’s Real Exchange Rate
Another regularity worth noting is the relationship between overall productivity
growth measures and the real exchange rate, shown in Figure 13. As argued by Hayashi
and Prescott (2002), Japan’s stagnation has been characterized by a reversal in the earlier
increasing trend of TFP relative to the United States. In addition, overall labor
productivity leveled off in the mid-1990s (again relative to the U.S.).
The arc of relative productivity is roughly captured by the real exchange rate – in
a manner more consistent with the Kravis-Lipsey effect (price levels are relatively low in
relatively poor countries) than with the HBS effect.35 One channel through which overall
productivity growth could affect the real exchange rate is through the terms of trade. The
strict HBS theory’s apparent assumption that terms of trade movements are unimportant
for the real exchange rate, except insofar as they affect productivity growth, is quite
wrong for Japan, as I document next. No discussion of the real exchange rate is complete
unless one integrates the implications of international trade in heterogeneous goods.

34

Two important future research issues are to take into account both the endogeneity of the traded versus
nontraded categories, as well as the importance of nontraded distribution services in determing the
consumer price of tradable goods. See also Lee and Tang (2007). Devereux (1999) presents a model in
which endogenous growth of the distribution sector affects the path of the real exchange rate.

44

Long-Term Trends in the Yen: International Trade.
The simplest versions of the HBS theory ignore variation in the relative prices of
different tradable goods. There is considerable cross-country evidence, however, that
such variation is an important (if not dominant) source of real exchange rate variation. In
turn, that evidence makes it plausible that factors related to international trade can help
explain the real exchange rate deviations in Figures 12a and 12b.

The Yen’s Real Exchange Rate and the Terms of Trade
A very basic fact about the yen’s real exchange rate is that its level has an
extremely high positive correlation with Japan’s terms of trade – the ratio of export price
to import prices.
Figure 14 graphs both the terms of trade and the yen’s real effective exchange rate
based on unit labor costs in Japan and its main trade partners (these are monthly data in
logs). In the figure, the terms of trade measure is constructed as an aggregate export price
index divided by an aggregate import price index (both from IMF, International

Financial Statistics), so that a rise in the terms of trade causes a welfare-enhancing shift
in Japan’s national budget constraint. Evidently, the terms of trade closely mirror both the
trends and cycles in the real exchange rate; the correlation between the two series’ log
levels is 0.75. This measure of the overall terms of trade – despite including volatile
components such as oil prices – generally shows somewhat less volatility than the real
exchange rate. Were the export and import indexes restricted to manufactured products,
the resulting terms of trade measure would be much less variable, as is shown below.
35

I am grateful to Mick Devereux for discussions on this point.
45

An important empirical mechanism behind the high correlation displayed in
Figure 14 is that the terms of trade and the real exchange rate both respond, and in the
same direction, to shocks to the nominal exchange rate. With pervasive labor-cost
stickiness, no segmentation between domestic and export markets, and producer-currency
pricing of exports, both the real exchange rate based on unit labor costs the terms of trade
would both move in proportion to a nominal exchange rate change, whatever its cause.
Let us provisionally maintain the assumptions that there is no international market
segmentation and no pricing to market in order to gauge their usefulness in explaining
how the terms of trade and the real exchange rate are related in the data. For this purpose,
I focus on bilateral comparisons between Japan and the U.S. or Germany, assuming for
simplicity a Cobb-Douglas form for various price indexes.
Retaining the earlier notation, I assume that overall CPI P for Japan is given
by P = PTγ PN1−γ . If PX is the price index of Japanese exports and PM the Japanese export

index, then the price index for tradables is PT = PXα PM1−α . Once again, the provisional
assumption behind this definition – one that I will modify later – is that exporters do not
price to market, so that the price of exported goods is the same as that of exportables sold
domestically. The terms of trade are PX / PM . Parallel price indexes characterize foreign
countries.
The real exchange rate (expressed as the price of the foreign CPI in terms of
Japan’s) is:

46

E ( PX* α PM* 1 − α ) PN* 1 − γ
E PT* γ PN* 1 − γ
EP*
q =
=
=
γ
P
PTγ PN1 − γ
( PXα PM1 − α ) PN1 − γ
γ

=

( P / PM
EP
⋅ X
PX
( PX* / PM*
*
X

)

γ (1 − α )

⋅

)

γ (1 − α )

(P

/P

*
X

)

( PN

/ PX

)

*
N

1− γ

1− γ

(7)

.

This equation shows that the bilateral real exchange rate between Japan and a foreign
competitor is the product of three factors. First is the relative price of Japanese exports in
head-to-head competition with the other exporter, EPX* / PX . A rise in domestic export
prices relative to foreign export prices raises the relative domestic price level for
tradables, reducing q (a real appreciation in the present notation). A second international
trade factor entering the real exchange rate reflects a comparison of the Japanese and
foreign overall terms of trade,

( PX / PM )

(P

*
X

/ PM* )

γ (1−α )

γ (1−α )

. Other things equal, a rise in Japanese

import prices PM, for example, pushes up Japan’s tradable price level and causes real

(P
appreciation of the yen.36 Finally, the third factor above,

*
N

/ PX* )

1−γ

( PN / PX )

1−γ

, reflects the relative

price of nontradable and tradable production, the focus of the HBS model.
A related calculation shows the role of the terms of trade in determining the
(multilateral) real effective exchange rate, denoted qm. In essence this approach uses the
calculation from Obstfeld and Rogoff (2007), assuming (purely for notational parsimony)
that Japanese exports play a negligible role in the rest of the world’s tradable
consumption, so that PT* = PX* = PM / E. In that case the real effective exchange rate is:

36

In models such as that of Obstfeld and Rogoff (2007), PM = EPX* and α > 1/ 2, so a rise in import prices
implies real currency depreciation.
47

qm =

E PT* γ PN* 1 − γ
E PX* γ PN* 1 − γ
EP*
=
=
γ
P
PTγ PN1 − γ
 P α ( E P * )1 − α  P 1 − γ
X
N
 X


 P 
=  M 
 PX 

1 − γ (1 − α )

⋅

*
X

(P

)

( PN / PX

)

*
N

/P

1− γ
1− γ

(8)

.

This expression shows that, other things equal, a fall in the terms of trade (a rise
in PM / PX ) feeds directly into multilateral real depreciation with an elasticity 1 − γ (1 − α )
that is likely to be large.
Taking the tradables share in the CPI to be γ = 0.25 in equation (7) and the export

share in tradables to be α = 0.15, one can construct the product of the two trade factors,
EPX* ( PX / PM )
⋅
, and ascertain its contribution to the evolution of the overall
PX ( P* / P* )γ (1−α )
X
M
γ (1−α )

bilateral real exchange rate. In constructing this variable, I use aggregate export and
import price indexes for Japan, the United States, and Germany.
Figure 15a shows the result for yen/dollar pairing. (The figure graphs all variables
in logs.) The constructed data for the log relative tradables price is positively correlated
with the real exchange rate (the correlation coefficient is 0.40), but the series of
international tradables prices is less volatile than the real exchange rate – as was the
overall terms of trade in comparison to the effective real exchange rate. When the relative
tradables component is added to the HBS component graphed in Figure 12a to form a
composite simulated real exchange rate, the fit is worsened compared to that of the
tradables component alone (consistent with the findings of Engel 1999 for the U.S.).
The figure illustrates how inaccurate are our temporary assumptions on the
international pricing of tradable goods, which rule out internationally segmented markets

48

and the resulting pricing to market by imperfectly competitive manufacturing exporters.
Although, at least some of the strong correlation between real exchange rates and terms
of trade is due to nominal exchange rate movements driven by asset-market shocks,
pricing to market tends to make the non-commodity terms of trade smoother than the real
exchange rate in practice; see Atkeson and Burstein (2008) for a recent discussion. When
the yen appreciates in nominal terms against the dollar, Japanese exporters lower the yen
prices of exports relative to domestic sales, whereas U.S. exporters raise the dollar prices
of their exports to partially exploit their enhanced competitiveness. Thus, in terms of
equation (7), when E falls, the ratio PX* / PX . rises, muting (but not reversing) the impact
of the nominal yen appreciation on the head-to-head competitiveness measure EPX* / PX .
Were these pricing-to-market effects absent, the relative tradables price in Figure 15a
would track the real exchange rate much more closely.
Indeed, the two most glaring deviations in the figure are the endaka fukyo
episodes of the late 1980s and early 1990s, when Japanese exporters suffered compressed
profits as they lowered yen export prices in the face of a sharply appreciating currency.
In the Japan/Germany pairing in Figure 15b, the correlation between the relative
tradables price and the real exchange rate is 0.62, considerably higher than in the U.S.
case. But in addition, the HBS variable now actually improves the composite simulation’s
ability to track the real exchange rate. Pricing to market behavior is still very evident,
however, particularly during the euro’s sharp depreciation in the years immediately
following its introduction. Once one allows for pricing to market, the large deviations
between the real exchange rate and the HBS benchmark appear to be substantially
accounted for (at least in a mechanical sense) by nominal exchange rate movements. One

49

would reach the same conclusion using equation (8) to construct the real effective
exchange rate.
While these results are illuminating, they do not provide a truly causal account of
the yen’s evolution because the terms of trade and nominal exchange rate, like the real
exchange rate, are endogenous and jointly determined, even at low frequencies. Only
exogenous shocks to the terms of trade can be identified with confidence as causal drivers

of the yen’s long-term evolution.

Oil and the Yen

The leading candidate for an exogenous cause of the close correlation in Figure
14 is the world price of energy. Over the last three decades, the share of mineral fuels in
total Japanese imports has ranged from 50.6 percent in 1981 to 15.9 percent in 1995 and
27.7 percent in 2007. Japan’s high dependence on energy imports compared to its many
of its trading partners suggests several mechanisms through which world energy prices
could affect the real exchange rate.37
Figure 16 shows monthly log levels of the yen price of oil in terms of Japan’s PPI
and the effective yen real exchange rate based on normalized unit labor costs. Here the
real exchange rate is plotted on an inverted scale, so that a move upward in the figure is a
real depreciation. The data start in January 1978. The correlation coefficient between the
two series, equal to –0.83, is remarkably high in absolute terms, indicating a strong
tendency for the yen to be relatively weak when the price of oil is relatively high.

37

Amano and van Norden (1998) contend that oil prices Granger cause real exchange rates but not vice
versa.
50

Evidently, an exogenous rise in the world price of oil causes a real yen depreciation.38
Observe, however, that the real oil price is several times more variable than the real
exchange rate – indeed, much of the variability in Japan’s comprehensive terms of trade
is due to energy, which currently carries a weight above 0.25 in the overall import price
index published by Japan’s government. 39
Recently several papers have documented the strong effect of a dominant
commodity export price on the exporter’s real exchange rate.40 From this perspective, the
yen appears to be a “commodity currency” on the import side. Although commodity
terms of trade appear to be an important determinant of real exchange rates in broader
samples of countries (see Ricci, Milesi-Ferretti, and Lee 2008),41 the close link between
the yen and energy prices evident in Figure 16 is especially striking. The main departure
from the dominant pattern appears to be in the period from late 1997 to late 1999. Over
those months, the yen first depreciated sharply under the pressure of low interest rates

38

Lane (2008) documents an empirical relationship between the real price of oil and the yen real exchange
rate within an error-correction model.
39
Rogoff (1992, p. 18) displayed a similarly high correlation for the period 1975-90, as did Amano and van
Norden (1998) for 1973-1993 data. (The latter authors also show a high correlation for the deutsche mark,
and present regression evidence consistent with their graphical findings. They interpret that evidence as
showing that a 10 percent rise in the real oil price causes a 1.7 percent real yen depreciation.) What is
remarkable is that the correlation shown by Rogoff and by Amano and van Norden has held up so well over
many more years and several further cycles in the yen exchange rate. As noted above, the real oil price
measure I use is the yen price of oil divided by the Japanese PPI. That variable is roughly congruent to the
yen real exchange rate multiplied by the real dollar price of oil (in terms of a U.S. price index). One might
worry that because my measure includes the log real yen exchange rate as an additive factor, it is not really
exogenous with respect to the real exchange rate; furthermore, the close correlation in Figure 15 could in
theory be driven mostly by variability in the real exchange rate. These theoretical possibilities are not
significant in practice because the world oil price is so much more variable than the real exchange rate. The
correlation between the real exchange rate and the real dollar price of oil (in terms of the U.S. CPI) is –
0.79, only slightly less in absolute value than the correlation cited in the text. Indeed, Rogoff (1992)
graphed the bilateral real yen/dollar CPI exchange rate against the world price of oil in terms of the U.S.
CPI. His discussion of the relation between the two variables focuses on HBS productivity effects.
40
See, for example, Chen and Rogoff (2003) and Cashin, Céspedes, and Sahay (2004).
41
See also Kohli and Natal (2008), who find no significant role for the HBS effect in determining the real
exchange rate of the Swiss franc, but do detect a strong terms-of-trade effect.
51

and domestic financial turmoil while the price of oil fell in the backwash of the Asian
crisis; afterward both the yen and the price of oil recovered lost ground.
Figure 17 graphs annual data on the real effective exchange rate (starting in
1975), the overall terms of trade, and an “ex-oil” terms of trade measure adjusted to
remove energy prices.42 The terms of trade less energy are much less variable than the
overall terms of trade, and, as is typical of industrial countries, much less variable than
the real exchange rate (Atkeson and Burstein 2008). Indeed, it is apparent that
fluctuations in energy prices are responsible for most of the variance in Japan’s terms of
trade. The correlation between even the ex-oil terms of trade and the real exchange rate
(in log levels) is high (0.56), but not as high as that between the overall terms of trade and
the real exchange rate (0.77 in annual data). Thus, the oil price is an arguably exogenous
variable with a quantitatively important impact on the real exchange rate.
While a broad-based deterioration in the terms of trade directly enters the real
exchange rate through the first multiplicative factor on the right-hand side of equation
(8), the same formula cannot be mechanically applied to the case of an energy-price
increase. Taken alone, and absent changes in the prices of other tradable and nontradable
goods, that shock might not have positive impact on the relative foreign price level for
tradables, and therefore it might not result in a rise in qm (an effective yen depreciation).
The root cause of the high correlation shown in Figure 16 is therefore likely to lie in other
factors that transform the real exchange rate over time and move the nominal exchange
rate in the short term.

42

Makoto Hosoya at the Price Statistics Section of the Bank of Japan graciously provided disaggregated
historical data underlying the BOJ’s import and export price indexes. The component weights allowed me
to strip out energy prices.
52

A primary mechanism through which energy prices could affect the long-run real
exchange rate is through the HBS channel, which modifies the second multiplicative

(P
factor on the right-hand side of equation (8),

*
N

/ PX* )

1−γ

( PN / PX )

1−γ

. Let us now write the

production functions for traded and nontraded goods as functions of capital, labor and oil
inputs,

YT = AT F ( KT , LT , OT ) ,
YN = AN G ( K N , LN , OT ) ,
and denote the world price of oil in terms of tradable goods by pO. With the simplifying
assumption of a constant rental rate on capital ( rˆ = 0 ), the change in the relative price of
nontradables will be pˆ =

µ
µLN ˆ ˆ
µ 
AT − AN + µLN  ON − OT  pˆO. To the extent that tradables are
µLT
 µLN µLT 

relatively energy intensive and nontradables relatively labor intensive, a rise in the energy
price lowers the relative price of nontradables. If this effect operates asymmetrically
across countries because, for example, Japanese manufacturing is more energy intensive
than manufacturing abroad, a real depreciation of the yen would result. That mechanism
works, however, by lowering manufacturing wages and is likely to play out only over
time (though it might well affect long-term real exchange rate expectations immediately).
In an analysis based on relative labor productivities (rather than TFPs), the effect of
energy prices would work entirely through labor productivity. A rise in energy prices
would lower relative labor productivity in the energy-intensive tradable sector and cause
a real depreciation. The incorporation of energy prices into the standard HBS framework

53

would not alter Figures 12a or 12b at all, although some of the productivity changes
shown would be attributable to changing energy prices.
The high correlation in Figure 16 plausibly also reflects other mechanisms
operating in the short term. 43 If wages are sticky and labor immobile in the short run
between the economy’s sectors, a rise in energy prices raises production costs and
potentially creates unemployment. In this circumstance, real yen depreciation can
substitute for a reduction in wages, shifting world demand toward Japanese exports and
shifting Japanese demand toward Japanese nontradables. Because an oil shock is a global
shock, however, this mechanism relies on the fact that Japan is more energy-dependent
than most other energy importers.44 Other potential channels for energy prices (or
commodity prices in general) to influence the real exchange rate rely on wealth effects, as
postulated by Ricci, Milesi-Ferretti, and Lee (2008). If market participants view higher
energy prices as permanent, they might also adjust their expectations of long-run capital
intensity and possibly growth downward, with immediate repercussion on the real
exchange rate.45 Through myriad channels, the price of oil has had a decisive influence
on the yen’s real exchange rate over the period of this study, with the yen generally
depreciating when the real price of oil is rising and appreciating when it is falling.

43

These short-run effects are strengthened if monetary policy systematically responds expansively to
increases in the oil price.
44
Findlay and Rodríguez (1977) present a short-term Mundell-Fleming type model that can deliver this sort
of result.
45
Sachs (1983) explores a growth model with flexible exchange rates and energy inputs.

54

Secular Deterioration in Japan’s Terms of Trade

Between 1988 and 2007, Japan’s comprehensive terms of trade declined by more
than 54 percent (in log points). The decline in the ex-energy terms of trade, at only about
18 percent, is much less dramatic; see Figure 17. Much of the latter decline occurred after
1994, and it has arguably contributed to the yen’s real depreciation since then. Any
definitive account of Japan’s terms of trade would require a close analysis of
disaggregated import and export price and quantity data, an undertaking that is beyond
the scope of this paper (but a very worthy area for future research). Here I simply offer a
few observations and conjectures.
IMPLICATIONS OF SLOWER GROWTH AND REDUCED INNOVATION. Slower growth
and dynamism in Japan’s economy may have resulted in relatively more growth along the
intensive than the extensive margin. Krugman (1989) has emphasized that growth in
exports of new products need not depress the terms of trade, in contrast to growth at the
intensive margin. Thus, a reduced pace of growth and innovation in Japan could
contribute to declining terms of trade.
An additional implication of slower growth is that imperfectly competitive
Japanese exporters could have experienced declining market power in world markets,
leading to lower export prices. As noted above, pricing-to-market appears to be
widespread in global markets for manufactures, a fact that has inspired theoretical
analyses over more than two decades, ranging from Dornbusch (1987) and Krugman
(1987) to Atkeson and Burstein (2008) and Burstein and Jaimovich (2008). In a model of
Bertrand competition among sellers, in which buyers have a constant elasticity of

55

substitution ε among varieties of a good, the markup charged by a monopolistic producer
of a particular variety is given by
price
ε (1 − s )
,
=
marginal cost ε (1 − s ) − 1
where s is the exporter’s global market share. Between 1993 and 2003, Japan’s share in
world exports of manufactured goods declined from 12.5 to only 7. 5 percent (Gaulier,
Lemoine, and Ünal-Kesenci 2007),46 while Japan’s share in world income likewise
declined. This dynamic would have led to lower markups over time; and with labor costs
and markups both declining, export prices had to fall as well. Intuitively, the pricing
decisions of a larger player have bigger effects on the global price index for the good,
thereby reducing the perceived price elasticity of demand. As the Japanese economy
shrank, Japanese exporters therefore perceived increasingly intense competition abroad.
CHANGING TRADE PATTERNS AND CHINA’S ROLE. China’s emergence as a leading
exporter no doubt has numerous implications for Japan’s economy. Chinese export
products display a surprisingly large overlap with those of OECD countries (Schott 2006;
Amiti and Freund 2009; Wang and Wei 2009), so it is conceivable that the country’s
rapid export growth has undercut the prices of Japanese exports. Coleman (2007)
develops a global growth model in which such effects drive resource reallocation among
trade partners. He argues that price and production trends in Asian-Pacific countries are
broadly consistent with the model’s predictions.

46

Interestingly, and possibly relevant to the terms-of-trade trend, Japanese imports as a share of world
imports declined by much less in percentage terms, from 5.1 to 4 percent.
56

Japan’s trade patterns have indeed changed radically since the mid-1990s, with a
general reorientation of its import and export trade toward Asia and significant changes
in the composition of its trade. Japan now exports more parts and components and semifinished goods relative to capital goods, with much of the flow going to China for
processing, assembly, and re-export. At the same time, Japan’s imports have swung
toward parts and components and capital goods produced in China. These changes have
been driven by a number of factors, including structural changes within Asia, greater
regional integration, and the birth in 1995 of NAFTA, the trade-diverting effects of which
have helped make North America less important in Japan’s trade.47
The implied terms of trade changes are not obvious a priori. Japanese exporters
may have faced downward price pressure in the course of trade re-orientation, but
China’s goods (including its exports to Japan) are priced quite competitively in world
markets (Schott 2006). In light of the dramatic change in trade patterns, one must be
cautious in interpreting movements in aggregate export or import price indexes, as
emphasized by Weinstein and Broda (2009). One must also question even more strongly
any identification of export prices with consumer prices for tradable goods. Eichengreen,
Rhee, and Tong (2007) conclude that on balance, China’s export growth has had more
important consequences important for low-income Asian countries than for higherincome Asian countries such as Japan.
There is another important channel through which China’s torrid growth through
mid-2008 affected Japan’s overall terms of trade: by pushing up global commodity
prices, notably the price of energy.

47

Again, see Gaulier, Lemoine, and Ünal-Kesenci (2007).
57

Conclusion

The recent history of the yen suggests prolonged departures from longer-run trends,
especially with respect to the U.S. dollar. These departures cannot be explained reliably
even after the fact, but they appear to be related to macroeconomic policy actions, both in
Japan and abroad, and to market expectations of future policies.
In Japan’s economic history after the generation and collapse of the great asset
price bubble, the yen’s strong real appreciation in 1990-95 stands out as a pivotal
episode. From the point of view of the Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson theory, prior sectoral
growth trends changed around this time, and it is doubtful that foreign exchange market
participants were able to foresee these structural shifts. Against the United States, relative
tradables productivity growth actually went into decline, whereas against Germany it
leveled off, as Figures 12a and 12b show. To the extent that foreign exchange markets
were mistakenly expecting a return to previous growth trends, the yen’s expected future
real exchange rate could have been artificially high. Short-term monetary developments
may have reinforced the latter stages of this appreciation, and trade tensions with the
United States certainly played a role, as discussed above. In any case, the strong yen
appreciation helped propel the Japanese economy into stagnation and deflation.
The yen’s trend depreciation since early 1995 is more easily justifiable in terms of
the underlying evolution of sectoral productivity growth and of overall growth in Japan
and its trading partners. Japan’s terms of trade have declined along with the yen’s real
exchange rate, and have contributed to the latter depreciation trend. Real yen depreciation
after 1995 has to some degree bolstered the economy through export promotion, though

58

renewed trade friction with the United States remains a threat. The yen’s sharp
appreciation late in 2008 in the midst of the global financial crisis, coupled with the
collapse of the Asian and American markets for Japanese exports, has once again thrown
Japan into deep recession.

References

Ahearne, Alan, and others. “Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan’s Experience in
the 1990s.” International Finance Discussion Papers 729, Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, June 2002.
Alexius, Annika and Peter Sellin. “Exchange Rates and Long-Term Bonds.” Mimeo,
Uppsala University and Sveriges Riksbank, April 2002.
Amano, Robert A. and Simon van Norden. “Exchange Rates and Oil Prices.” Review of
International Economics 6 (November 1998): 683-94.
Amiti, Mary and Caroline Freund. “An Anatomy of China’s Export Growth.” In Robert
Feenstra and Shang-Jin Wei, eds., China’s Growing Role in World Trade. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2009, forthcoming.
Asea, Patrick K. and Enrique G. Mendoza. “The Balassa-Samuelson Model: A General
Equilibrium Appraisal.” Review of International Economics 2 (October 1994): 244-67.
Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Burstein. “Pricing-to-Market, Trade Costs, and International
Relative Prices.” American Economic Review 98 (December 2008): 1998-2031.
Auerbach, Alan J. and Maurice Obstfeld. “The Case for Open-Market Purchases in a
Liquidity Trap.” American Economic Review 95 (March 2005): 110-37.
Bank of Japan. “Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting on March 8 and 9, 2006.” Bank
of Japan Quarterly Bulletin 14 (no. 2, 2006).
Basu, Susanto. “Procyclical Productivity: Increasing Returns or Cyclical Utilization?”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (August 1996): 719-51.
Basu, Susanto and John Fernald. “Why is Productivity Procyclical? Why Do We Care?”
In New Developments in Productivity Analyisis, edited by Charles R. Hulten, Edwin R.
Dean, and Michael J. Harper. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001.
Burstein, Ariel and Nir Jaimovich. “Understanding Movements in Aggregate and

59

Product-Level Real-Exchange Rates.” Mimeo, UCLA and Stanford University,
November 2008.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Takeo Hoshi, and Anil K. Kashyap. “Zombie Lending and
Depressed Restructuring in Japan.” American Economic Review 98 (December 2008):
1943-77.
Canzoneri, Matthew B., Robert E. Cumby, and Behzad Diba. “Relative Labor
Productivity and the Real Exchange Rate in the Long Run: Evidence for a Panel of
OECD Countries.” Journal of International Economics 47 (April 1999): 245-66.
Cargill, Thomas F., Michael M. Hutchison, and Takatoshi Ito. Financial Policy and
Central Banking in Japan. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000.
Cashin, Paul, Luis F. Céspedes, and Ratna Sahay. “Commodity Currencies and the Real
Exchange Rate.” Journal of Development Economics 75 (October 2004): 239-68.
Chen, Yu-chin and Kenneth Rogoff. “Commodity Currencies.” Journal of International
Economics 60 (May 2003): 133-60.
Chinn, Menzie. “The Usual Suspects? Productivity and Demand Shocks and Asia-Pacific
Real Exchange Rates.” Review of International Economics 8 (February 2000): 20-43.
Chinn, Menzie. “The (Partial) Rehabilitation of Interest Rate Parity in the Floating Rate
Era: Longer Horizons, Alternative Expectations, and Emerging Markets.” Journal of
International Money and Finance 25 (February 2006): 7-21.
Choudhri, Ehsan U. and Mohsin S, Khan. “Real Exchange Rates in Developing
Countries: Are Balassa-Samuelson Effects Present?” International Monetary Fund Staff
Papers 52 (no. 3, 2005): 387-409.
Clarida, Richard H. and Daniel Waldman. “Is Bad News about Inflation Good News for
the Exchange Rate? And, If So, Can That Tell Us Anything about the Conduct of
Monetary Policy?” In John Y. Campbell, ed., Asset Prices and Monetary Policy.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008, pp. 371-92.
Coleman, Wilbur John, II. “Accommodating Emerging Giants.” Mimeo, Duke
University, November 2007.
De Gregorio, José, Alberto Giovannini, and Holger C. Wolf. “International Evidence on
Tradables and Nontradables Inflation.” European Economic Review 38 (June 1994):
1225-44.
Dekle, Robert and Kyoji Fukao. “The Japan-U.S. Exchange Rate, Productivity, and the
Competitiveness of Japanese Industries.” Mimeo, USC and Hitostubashi University,
November 2008.

60

DeLoach, Stephen B. “Do Relative Prices of Non-Traded Goods Determine Long-Run
Real Exchange Rates?” Canadian Journal of Economics 30 (November 1997): 891-909.
Devereux, Michael B. “Real Exchange Rate Trends and Growth: A Model of East Asia.”
Review of International Economics 7 (August 1999): 509-21.
Dornbusch, Rudiger. “Exchange Rates and Prices.” American Economic Review 77
(March 1987): 93-106.
Drine, Imed and Christophe Rault. “Does the Balassa-Samuelson Hypothesis Hold for
Asian Countries? An Empirical Analysis Using Panel Cointegration Tests.” Mimeo,
Sorbonne and Evry Universities, 2003.
Eichengreen Barry, Yeongseop Rhee, and Hui Tong. “China and the Exports of Other
Asian Countries.” Review of World Economics 143 (2007): 201-26.
Engel, Charles. “Accounting for U.S. Real Exchange Rate Changes.” Journal of Political
Economy 107 (June 1999): 507-38.
Findlay, Ronald E. and Carlos Alfredo Rodríguez. “Intermediate Imports and
Macroeconomic Policy under Flexible Exchange Rates.” Canadian Journal of Economics
10 (May 1977): 208-17.
Gaulier, Guillaume, Françoise Lemoine, and Deniz Ünal-Kesenci. “China’s Emergence
and the Reorganisation of Trade Flows in Asia.” China Economic Review 18 (September
2007): 209-43.
Hamada, Koichi and Yasushi Okada. “Monetary and International Factors Behind
Japan’s Lost Decade: From the Plaza Accord to the Great Intervention.” Mimeo, Yale
University and ESRI, Cabinet Office of Japan, December 2007. Journal of the Japanese
and International Economies, forthcoming.
Hayashi, Fumio and Edward C. Prescott. “The 1990s in Japan: A Lost Decade.” Review
of Economic Dynamics 5 (January 2002): 206-35.
Hoshi, Takeo and Anil K. Kashyap. “Japan’s Financial Crisis and Economic Stagnation.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 18 (Winter 2004): 3-26.
Hsieh, David A. “The Determination of the Real Exchange Rate: The Productivity
Approach.” Journal of International Economics 12 (May 1982): 355-62.
Ito, Takatoshi. “The Yen and the Japanese Economy, 2004.” In C, Fred Bergsten and
John Williamson, eds., Dollar Adjustment: How Far? Against What? Washington, DC:
Institute for International Economics, 2004.

61

Ito, Takatoshi, Peter Isard, and Steven Symansky. “Economic Growth and Real Exchange
Rate: An Overview of the Balassa-Samuelson Hypothesis in Asia.” In Takatoshi Ito and
Anne O. Krueger, eds., Changes in Exchange Rates in Rapidly Developing Countries.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.
Ito, Takatoshi and Frederic S. Mishkin. “Two Decades of Japanese Monetary Policy and
the Deflation Problem.” In Takatoshi Ito and Andrew K. Rose, eds., Monetary Policy
with Very Low Inflation in the Pacific Rim. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006,
pp. 131-93. M
Kakkar, Vikas. “The Relative Price of Nontraded Goods and Sectoral Total Factor
Productivity: An Empirical Investigation.” Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (May
2003): 444-52.
Kakkar, Vikas and Masao Ogaki. “Real Exchange Rates and Nontradables: A Relative
Price Approach.” Journal of Empirical Finance 6 (April 1999): 193-215.
Kakkar, Vikas and Isabel Yan. “Real Exchange Rates and Productivity: Evidence from
Asia.” Mimeo, City University of Hong Kong, November 2006.
Kohli, Ulrich and Jean-Marc Natal. “The Real Exchange Rate and the Structure of
Aggregate Production.” Mimeo, Swiss National Bank, October 2008.
Krugman, Paul R. “Pricing to Market when the Exchange Rate Changes.” In Sven W.
Arndt and J. David Richardson, eds., Real-Financial Linkages among Open Economies.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1987.
Krugman, Paul R. “Differences in Income Elasticities and Trends in Real Exchange
Rates.” European Economic Review 33 (May 1989): 1031-54.
Kuttner, Kenneth N. and Adam S. Posen. “The Great Recession: Lessons for
Macroeconomic Policy from Japan.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2 (2001):
93-185.
Lane, Philip R. “International Financial Integration and Japanese Economic
Performance.” Mimeo, Trinity College, Dublin, November 2008.
Lee, Jaewoo and Man Keung Tang. “Does Productivity Growth Appreciate the Real
Exchange Rate?” Review of International Economics 15 (February 2007): 164-87.
Lee, Jaewoo, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, Jonathan Ostry, Alessandro Prati, and Luca
Antonio Ricci. Exchange Rate Assessments: CGER Methodologies. Occasional Paper
261, International Monatry Fund, 2008.
Richardson, eds., Real-Financial Linkages among Open Economies.

62

Marston, Richard C. “Real Exchange Rates and Productivity Growth in the United States
and Japan.” In Sven W. Arndt and J. David Richardson, eds., Real-Financial Linkages
among Open Economies. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1987.
McKinnon, Ronald I. and Kenichi Ohno. Dollar and Yen: Resolving Economic Conflict
between the Unites States and Japan. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997.
Mori, Naruki, Shigenori Shiratsuka, and Hiroo Taguchi. “Policy Responses to the PostBubble Adjustments in Japan: A Tentative Review.” Monetary and Economic Studies 19
(February 2001): 53-102.
Obstfeld, Maurice. “Model Trending Real Exchange Rates.” Working Paper C93-011,
Center for International and Development Economics Research, University of California,
Berkeley, February 1993. URL: elsa/berkeley/edu/~obstfeld/model.pdf
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. Foundations of International Macroeconomics.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. “The Unsustainable U.S. Current Account
Position Revisited.” In Richard H. Clarida, ed., G7 Current Account Imbalances.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007, pp. 339-66.
Officer, Lawrence H. “The Productivity Bias in Purchasing Power Parity: An
Econometric Investigation.” International Monetary Fund Staff Papers 23 (November
1976): 545-79.
Okina, Kunio, Masaaki Shirakawa, and Shigenori Shiratsuka. “The Asset Bubble and
Monetary Policy: Japan’s Experience in the late 1980s and the Lessons.” Monetary and
Economic Studies 19 (February 2001): 395-450.
Okina, Kunio and Shigenori Shiratsuka. “Asset Price Bubbles, Price Stability, and
Monetary Policy: Japan’s Experience.” Monetary and Economic Studies 20 (October
2002): 35-76.
Park, Sungwook and Masao Ogaki. “Long-Run Real Exchange Rate Changes and the
Properties of the Variances of k-Differences.” Mimeo, Bank of Korea and Ohio State
University, December 2007.
Ricci, Luca Antonio, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, and Jaewoo Lee. “Real Exchange Rates
and Fundamentals: A Cross-Country Perspective.” IMF Working Paper WP/08/13,
Research Department, International Monetary Fund, January 2008.
Rogoff, Kenneth. “Traded Goods Consumption Smoothing and the Random Walk
Behavior of the Real Exchange Rate.” Monetary and Economic Studies 10 (1992): 1-29.

63

Sachs, Jeffrey D. “Energy and Growth under Flexible Exchange Rates: A Simulation
Study.” In Jagdeep S. Bhandari and Bluford H. Putnam, eds., Economic Interdependence
and Flexible Exchange Rates. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1983.
Schott, Peter K. “The Relative Sophistication of Chinese Exports.” Working Paper
12173, National Bureau of Economic Research, April 2006.
Taylor, Alan M. and Mark P. Taylor. “The Purchasing Power Parity Debate.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 18 (Autumn 2004): 135-58.
Thomas, Alastair and Alan King. “The Balassa-Samuelson Effect in Asia: Now You See
It, Now You Don’t.” Mimeo, University of Otago, 2004.
Vecchi, Michela. “Increasing Returns, Labour Utilization, and Externalities: Procyclical
Productivity in the United States and Japan.” Economica 67 (May 2000): 229-44.
Wang, Zhi and Shang-Jin Wei. “What Accounts for the Rising Sophistication of China’s
Exports?” In Robert Feenstra and Shang-Jin Wei, eds., China’s Growing Role in World
Trade. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009, forthcoming.
Weinstein, David and Christian Broda. “Exporting Deflation? Chinese Exports and
Japanese Prices.” In Robert Feenstra and Shang-Jin Wei, eds., China’s Growing Role in
World Trade. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009, forthcoming.
Yoshikawa, Hiroshi. “On the Equilibrium Yen-Dollar Rate.” American Economic Review
80 (June 1990): 576-83.

64

Figure 1: Yen real exchange rate and Japan's growth

105
5
95
3

85

1

75

Real yen exchange rate based on unit labor costs

65

2006

2004

2002

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

-3
1984

55
1982

-1

1980

65

1978

Real effective exchange rate (index)

7

Real GDP growth

Real GDP growth rate (percent per year)

115

Nominal yen/dollar rate (inverted scale)
115

135

275

120

155

110

175

100

90

215

80

235

70

255

60

50

Nominal yen/dollar rate
Real effective CPI yen

66
Bilateral real yen/dollar

Real yen exchange rate index

195

M
1
1
M 97
5 8
1
M 97
9 9
19
M 8
1 0
1
M 98
5 2
1
M 98
9 3
1
M 98
1 4
1
M 98
5 6
1
M 98
9 7
19
M 8
1 8
1
M 99
5 0
1
M 99
9 1
19
M 9
1 2
1
M 99
5 4
1
M 99
9 5
19
M 9
1 6
1
M 99
5 8
1
M 99
9 9
20
M 0
1 0
2
M 00
5 2
2
M 00
9 3
20
M 0
1 4
2
M 00
5 6
20
07

Figure 2: Yen/dollar nominal and real exchange rates

75

95

140

130

Figure 3: Japan nominal short-term interest rate
9

Overnight call money interest rate, pecent

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08
n- an- an- an- an- an- an- an- an- an- an- an- an- an- an- an- an- an- an- an- an- an- an- an- an- an- an-1
a
J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J

67

Figure 4: Land and stock-market prices

200.0

40,000.00

180.0

35,000.00

160.0
140.0
25,000.00

120.0
100.0

20,000.00

80.0

15,000.00

60.0
10,000.00

40.0
5,000.00

20.0
0.0
19
7
19 0
7
19 2
7
19 4
7
19 6
7
19 8
8
19 0
8
19 2
8
19 4
8
19 6
8
19 8
9
19 0
9
19 2
9
19 4
9
19 6
9
20 8
0
20 0
0
20 2
0
20 4
0
20 6
08

0.00

Sources: Real Estate Institute of Japan and Global Financial Data. Land-price indexes cover Tokyo,
Osaka, Kobe, Yokohama, Nagoya, and Kyoto.

Commercial real estate
Residential real estate

68

Industrial real estate
Nikkei 225 stock index

Nikkei average

Land price indexes,
March 2000 = 100

30,000.00

Figure 5: Japan and US Core CPI Inflation
6
5
4

Percent per year

3
2
1
0
3
-8
n-1
a
J

nJa

85

nJa

87

nJa

89

nJa

91

nJa

93

nJa

95

nJa

97

nJa

99

nJa

01

nJa

03

nJa

-2
-3

Japan core CPI inflation

69

US core CPI inflation

05

nJa

07

Figure 6: Japan less US real long-term interest differential
and real exchange rate

130

0.8
Jun-06

Jun-04

Jun-02

Jun-00

Jun-98

Jun-96

Jun-94

Jun-92

Jun-90

Jun-88

Jun-86

Jun-84

-1.2

Jun-82

-0.2

120
Jun-80

Real interest difference (percent)

140

1.8

110
100
90

-2.2

80

-3.2

70

-4.2

60

-5.2

50
Japan -US real long-term interest differential

70

Real dollar/yen exchange rate

Yen real exchange rate against dollar

150

2.8

105

1.6

95

-2.4

Jun-06

Jun-04

Jun-02

Jun-00

Jun-98

Jun-96

Jun-94

Jun-92

Jun-90

Jun-88

Jun-86

-1.4

Jun-84

-0.4

Jun-82

0.6
Jun-80

Real interest difference (percent)

2.6

85
75
65

-3.4

55

-4.4

Yen real exchange rate against DM/euro

Figure 7: Japan less Germany real long-term interest
differential and real exchange rate

45

-5.4

Japan -Germany real long-term interest differential

71

Real DM(euro)/yen exchange rate

Figure 8: Dollar nominal short-term interest rate
16

Federal funds rate, percent

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08
n- n- n- n- n- n- n- n- n- n- n- n- n- n- n- n- n- n- n- n- n- n- n- n- n- n- nJa Ja Ja Ja Ja Ja Ja Ja Ja Ja Ja Ja Ja Ja Ja Ja Ja Ja Ja Ja Ja Ja Ja Ja Ja Ja Ja

72

Figure 9: Japan and U.S. real GDP growth rates
7
6

Annual growth rate, percent

5
4
3
2
1
0
7
-119

8

8
19

0

8
19

2

8
19

4

8
19

6

8
19

8

9
19

0

9
19

2

9
19

4

9
19

6

9
19

-2
-3

Japan

73

United States

8

0
20

0

0
20

2

0
20

4

0
20

6

Figure 10a: Japan tradables
12.0
10.0

6.0
4.0

Labor productvity: tradables
TFP: tradables

2.0
0.0
19
78
19
80
19
82
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00
20
02
20
04

Annual growth rate, percent

8.0

-2.0
-4.0
-6.0

74

Figure 10b: Japan nontradables
7.0

5.0
4.0
Labor productvity:
nontradables
TFP: nontradables

3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
19
78
19
80
19
82
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00
20
02
20
04

Annual growth rate, percent

6.0

-1.0
-2.0

75

Figure 10c: United States tradables
10.0
8.0

4.0
Labor productvity: tradables
TFP: tradables

-4.0
-6.0

76

2004

2002

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

-2.0

1982

0.0

1980

2.0

1978

Annual growth rate, percent

6.0

Figure 10d: United States nontradables
4.0

2.0

Labor productvity:
nontradables

1.0

TFP: nontradables

-2.0

-3.0

77

04

02

20

00

20

98

20

96

19

94

19

92

19

90

19

88

19

86

19

84

19

82

19

80

19

-1.0

19

78

0.0
19

Annual growth rate, percent

3.0

Figure 10e: Germany tradables
8.0
7.0

5.0
4.0
3.0

Labor productvity: tradables

2.0

TFP: tradables

1.0

-2.0
-3.0

78

05
20

02
20

99
19

96
19

93
19

90
19

87
19

84
19

81

-1.0

19

78

0.0
19

Annual growth rate, percent

6.0

Figure 10f: Germany nontradables
3.5
3.0

2.0
1.5
1.0

Labor productvity:
nontradables

0.5

TFP: nontradables

-1.0
-1.5
-2.0

79

04

02

20

00

20

98

20

96

19

94

19

92

19

90

19

88

19

86

19

84

19

82

19

19

19

78

-0.5

80

0.0
19

Annual growth rate, percent

2.5

Figure 11a: Bilateral Japan/US productivity growth comparison
and real exchange rate change

20.0

10.0

-10.0

-20.0
Rel T vs. NT productivity change

80

Real exchange rate change

20
05

20
03

20
01

19
99

19
97

19
95

19
93

19
91

19
89

19
87

19
85

19
83

19
81

0.0
19
79

Annual change, percent

30.0

Figure 11b: Bilateral Japan/Germany productivity growth
comparison and real exchange rate change
25.0
20.0

10.0
5.0

-10.0
-15.0
-20.0
-25.0
Rel T vs. NT productivity change

81

Real exchange rate change

20
05

20
03

20
01

19
99

19
97

19
95

19
93

19
91

19
89

19
87

19
85

19
83

-5.0

19
81

0.0
19
79

Annual change, percent

15.0

Figure 12a: Bilateral Japan/US productivity comparison and
real exchange rate: Levels
0.55000

0.35000

0.15000

-0.25000

-0.45000
Relative T vs. NT productivity

82

Log real exchange rate

04
20

02
20

00
20

98
19

96
19

94
19

92
19

90
19

88
19

86
19

84
19

82
19

80
19

19

78

-0.05000

Figure 12b: Bilateral Japan/Germany productivity comparison
and real exchange rate: Levels
0.55000

0.35000

0.15000

-0.25000

-0.45000
Relative T vs. NT productivity

83

Log real exchange rate

04
20

02
20

00
20

98
19

96
19

94
19

92
19

90
19

88
19

86
19

84
19

82
19

80
19

19

78

-0.05000

Figure 13: Real exchange rate vs. economy-wide productivity
ratios

95

130

90

$/yen real CPI exchange rate

Japan/US TFP ratio

Japan/US labor productivity ratio

84

2004

2002

2000

60
1998

70
1996

65
1994

80
1992

70

1990

90

1988

75

1986

100

1984

80

1982

85

110

1980

120

1978

$/yen CPI real exchange rate

100

140

Japan/US productivity ratio

105

150

Log real exchange rate and terms of trade
M
1
1
M 97
6 8
M 19
11 79
1
M 98
4 0
1
M 98
9 2
1
M 98
2 3
1
M 98
7 5
M 19
12 86
1
M 98
5 7
M 19
10 89
1
M 99
3 0
1
M 99
8 2
1
M 99
1 3
1
M 99
6 5
M 19
11 96
1
M 99
4 7
1
M 99
9 9
2
M 00
2 0
2
M 00
7 2
M 20
12 03
2
M 00
5 4
M 20
10 06
20
07

Figure 14: Real yen exchange rate and Japan's terms of trade

0.7

0.5

0.3

0.1

-0.1

-0.3

-0.5

-0.7

Export price index/import price index
Real effective exchange rate (labor cost basis)

85

Figure 15a: Bilateral Japan/US terms of trade adjustment and
composite simulated real exchange rate: Levels
0.55
0.35

0.15

-0.25
-0.45

Composite simulated real exchange rate
Log real exchange rate
Log relative tradables price

86

04
20

02
20

20

00

98
19

96
19

94
19

92
19

90
19

88
19

86
19

84
19

82
19

80
19

19

78

-0.05

Figure 15b: Bilateral Japan/Germany terms of trade
adjustment and composite simulated real exchange rate:
Levels
0.55
0.35
0.15

-0.25
-0.45

Composite simulated real exchange rate
Log real exchange rate
Log relative tradables price

87

20
04

20
02

20
00

19
98

19
96

19
94

19
92

19
90

19
88

19
86

19
84

19
82

19
80

19
78

-0.05

Log real petroleum price
-0.2
M1 1978
M1 1979
M1 1980
M1 1981
M1 1982
M1 1983
M1 1984
M1 1985
M1 1986
M1 1987
M1 1988
M1 1989
M1 1990
M1 1991
M1 1992
M1 1993
M1 1994
M1 1995
M1 1996
M1 1997
M1 1998
M1 1999
M1 2000
M1 2001
M1 2002
M1 2003
M1 2004
M1 2005
M1 2006
M1 2007
M1 2008

1.3
-0.3

0.8
-0.2

0.3
-0.1

0

-1.2
Real petroleum price

88

0.1

0.2

-0.7
0.3

0.4

Real effective exchange rate (labor cost basis)

Log real exchange rate (inverted scale)

Figure 16: Oil prices and the yen's real exchange rate
-0.4

0.3
0.2
0.1

-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
-0.6
-0.7
Real effective exchange rate (labor cost basis)
Terms of trade
Terms of trade ex energy

89

07
20

05
20

03
20

99

01
20

19

95

97
19

19

93
19

91
19

89
19

87
19

85
19

81

83
19

19

79
19

-0.2

19

75

-0.1

77

0
19

Log real exchange rate and terms of trade

Figure 17: Real effective exchange rate, overall terms of trade,
and ex-oil terms of trade

