NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HYSTERESIS IN UNEMPLOYMENT:
OLD AND NEW EVIDENCE
Laurence M. Ball
Working Paper 14818
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14818

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2009

This paper was prepared for "A Phillips Curve Retrospective" sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank
of Boston in June 2008. I am grateful for research assistance from Sandeep Mazumder and for comments
from V.V. Chari, Jordi Gali, Engelbert Stockhammer, two anonymous referees, and conference participants.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Laurence M. Ball. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Hysteresis in Unemployment: Old and New Evidence
Laurence M. Ball
NBER Working Paper No. 14818
March 2009
JEL No. E24
ABSTRACT
This paper argues that hysteresis helps explain the long-run behavior of unemployment. The natural
rate of unemployment is influenced by the path of actual unemployment, and hence by shifts in aggregate
demand. I review past evidence for hysteresis effects and present new evidence for 20 developed countries.
A central finding is that large increases in the natural rate are associated with disinflations, and large
decreases with run-ups in inflation. These facts are consistent with hysteresis theories and inconsistent
with theories in which the natural rate is independent of aggregate demand.

Laurence M. Ball
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
lball@jhu.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
Much of mainstream macroeconomics is based on an
Aaccelerationist@ Phillips curve.

It was described by Friedman

(1968) in his Presidential Address.
π = π-1 + α(U-U*),

A simple form is

α<0

(1)

Inflation depends on lagged inflation, often interpreted as a
proxy for expected inflation.

It also depends on the deviation

of unemployment from the natural rate or NAIRU, U*.1
According to Friedman, shifts in aggregate demand coming
from either monetary policy or other sources have short run
impacts on unemployment.
returns to U*.

In the long run, however, U always

And U* is not influenced by aggregate demand.

Instead, it is determined by the supply side of the economy,
especially frictions in labor markets.

This means the classical

dichotomy holds in the long run: monetary policy cannot cause
long-run changes in unemployment.
Practically speaking, most economists think monetary policy
can push U away from U* for a few years.

Paul Volcker, for

example, managed to raise unemployment over 1980-83.

1

However,

This is an old-fashioned backward-looking Phillips curve,
replaced in much modern research by the forward-looking New
Keynesian Phillips Curve. This paper is based on the premise
that the old Phillips curve is a useful framework. The relative
merits of old and new Phillips curves can be debated elsewhere.
1

changes in unemployment over a decade or more are determined by
changes in the natural rate.

The fact that unemployment was

substantially higher in France in 2000 than in 1980 has little or
nothing to do with monetary policy.
This essay questions this conventional wisdom.

I accept

equation (1), but not the view that only supply-side factors
influence U*.

I believe in the concept of hysteresis advocated

by Blanchard and Summers (1986): the natural rate can be
influenced by the path of actual unemployment.

If U rises above

U*, for example, there exist mechanisms that pull U* upward.
Since aggregate demand influences U, hysteresis means that demand
also influences U*.
Hysteresis is central to long-run unemployment movements in
many countries.

If we want to know why unemployment rose in much

of Europe in the 1980s, or why it fell in the U.K. in the 1990s,
or why it has remained relatively stable in the United States, we
need to understand hysteresis.
This essay addresses two broad issues.

The first is whether

there is clear evidence of hysteresis effects.

To put it

differently, can we reject the hypothesis that the NAIRU, and
hence the long run behavior of unemployment, is independent of
aggregate demand?
The answer to this question is YES! I review past evidence
on hysteresis and present some new evidence.
2

The second broad issue is the nature of hysteresis.

Through

what mechanisms do short-run unemployment movements influence the
NAIRU?

What determines the strength of these effects in

different countries and time periods?

What are the implications

for monetary policy?
My discussion of these topics is speculative.

In my view,

it=s clear that some form of hysteresis exists, but it=s not clear
why.

The relationships among unemployment, the natural rate, and

inflation appear to be non-linear, but it=s hard to pin down the
non-linearities precisely.

As a result, policy implications are

not crisp.
In sum, hysteresis is an important phenomenon, but one that
is not well understood.

This means more research is needed.

The

topic of hysteresis has been neglected in recent years, and that
should change.

II. THE PHILLIPS CURVE AND THE CHANGING NAIRU
Friedman (1968) says, AThere is always a temporary tradeoff
between unemployment and inflation; there is no permanent
tradeoff.

The temporary tradeoff comes not from inflation per

se, but from unanticipated inflation, which generally means, from
a rising rate of inflation.@

Eventually, says Friedman,

unemployment returns to the natural rate.
Friedman=s theory is summarized by equation (1).
3

Today

economists use ANAIRU@ (for non-accelerating inflation rate of
unemployment) as a synonym for the natural rate, because the
natural rate is the unemployment level consistent with stable
inflation.

Forty years after Friedman wrote, equation (1) is a

foundation for much of applied macroeconomics.
Friedman says the natural rate depends on features of the
labor market such as minimum wages, labor unions, and frictions
in matching the unemployed with job vacancies.

He says that

monetary policy cannot affect the natural rate.
Friedman suggests that the natural rate may change over
time, and experience has shown that it does.

In the United

States, the NAIRU has varied by moderate amounts; according to
estimates detailed below, it fell from 7.1% in 1980 to 4.9% in
2007.

In Europe, the NAIRU has changed by larger amounts; in

Spain, it rose from 6.5% in 1980 to 14.4 in 1995, then fell to
7.5% in 2007.
A large literature has tried to explain changes in the
NAIRU.

Some researchers focus on changes in labor-market

imperfections of the type discussed by Friedman (e.g. Nickell,
2005).

Others examine interactions between such Ainstitutions@

and economic Ashocks,@ such as the productivity slowdown and
globalization (e.g. Blanchard and Wolfers, 2000; Blanchard,
2005).

While the stories vary, they almost always involve the

supply side of the economy.

They presume that aggregate demand
4

doesn=t affect the NAIRU.
Much work focuses on Europe, where the NAIRU rose
dramatically between 1960 and 2000.

Mankiw (2006) tells

undergraduates that there is a Aleading theory@ of this
experience, one from the class of shock/institution theories.

In

this story, proposed by Krugman (1994) and others, the shock is a
decrease in the demand for low-skill labor caused by
technological change.

The institutions are labor-market

distortions that create wage rigidity.

The equilibrium wages of

low-skill workers have fallen but their actual wages have not, so
unemployment has risen.
This story gets much of its appeal from the fact that it
fits two data points, the United States and aggregate Europe.
The U.S. has more flexible labor markets than Europe and has not
experienced a rise in the NAIRU.

We=ll see, however, that the

story works less well when we extend the sample from two
economies to twenty.
Departing from most of the literature, this paper will argue
that NAIRU changes are caused largely by shifts in aggregate
demand.

Demand influences actual unemployment, U, which in turn

influences the natural rate through hysteresis channels.

5

What are these channels?

When Blanchard and Summers (1986)

introduced the idea of hysteresis, they emphasized the Ainsideroutsider@ theory of wage bargaining.

When workers become

unemployed, the remaining employed workers increase their wage
targets, preventing the unemployed from getting their jobs back.
In my view, however, there is little evidence for this kind of
hysteresis effect.
There is more evidence for stories in which the long-term
unemployed become detached from the labor market.

These workers

are unattractive to employers, or they don=t try hard to find
jobs.

These stories fit evidence that hysteresis effects are

stronger in countries with long-lived unemployment benefits.
However, as discussed below, we have at best a hazy understanding
of hysteresis mechanisms.
Allowing for hysteresis can greatly change our explanations
for unemployment movements and our prescriptions for monetary
policy.

However, I don=t view hysteresis as a radical departure

from mainstream economic theory.

It is not a rejection of

Friedman=s model, but a generalization of it.

We expand the set

of factors that cause the U* term in equation (1) to change over
time: these factors include movements in actual unemployment as
well as supply-side variables.
To study movements in the NAIRU, we need to estimate this
variable.

One simple method is to smooth the series for actual
6

unemployment with the Hodrick-Prescott filter, based on the idea
that the NAIRU is the long-term trend in unemployment.

In this

paper, I use a somewhat more sophisticated technique based on
Ball and Mankiw (2002).

This procedure modifies the results from

a univariate smoother based on the behavior of inflation.

During

a period of falling inflation, for example, the Ball-Mankiw
method produces lower NAIRU estimates than a univariate smoother,
because falling inflation suggests that U* is below U.
The Appendix to this paper details my procedure for
estimating the NAIRU.

As an example of the results, Figure 1

shows the estimated NAIRU for France from 1980 to 2007 and
compares it to a univariate unemployment trend (based on the HP
filter with λ=100).

The estimated NAIRU is below the univariate

trend over 1980-1997, reflecting the fact that inflation was
falling.

After that the two series converge, as inflation was

stable.
I estimate NAIRU series for twenty countries: all the
countries with populations above one million that were members of
the OECD in 1985.

This group includes 15 countries in Western

Europe, two each in North America and the Antipodes, and Japan.
I focus on the period since 1980.

The NAIRU rose in many

countries during the 1970s, but it is harder to detect hysteresis
effects in that period.

The large supply shocks make it harder

to estimate Phillips curves and NAIRUs.
7

Also, there was a major

change in the real economy B- the productivity slowdown B- that
probably increased the NAIRU in many countries.
effects may have been secondary in the 1970s.

Hysteresis

Since 1980,

however, hysteresis is a big part of the unemployment story.

III. PREVIOUS EVIDENCE OF HYSTERESIS
This paper will confess to major gaps in our understanding
of hysteresis, but argue that it clearly exists in some form.
That is, there is strong evidence against the hypothesis that
movements in the NAIRU are independent of aggregate demand.
Here I discuss evidence for hysteresis in previous work.

I

emphasize two papers from some time ago: Ball (1997) and Ball
(1999).

The reason I focus on my own past work is not narcissism

(or, at least, that=s not the only reason).

Beyond my work,

there isn=t much literature to review, as most researchers of the
21st century have ignored hysteresis.

However, the Boston Fed=s

invitation to write about the topic has rekindled my hope that
economists will take it seriously.2
Disinflations in the 1980s
My 1997 paper examines changes in the NAIRU from 1980 to
1990.

It uses estimates of the NAIRU produced by the OECD with a

method that is similar in spirit to the Ball-Mankiw method.
2

Another promising sign is Stockhammer and Sturn (2008),
which updates and extends the analysis in Ball (1999).
8

According to these estimates, the NAIRU rose over the 1980s in 17
of the 20 countries in the sample.

NAIRU changes ranged from -

1.4% in the U.S. and Portugal to +9.3% in Ireland.
I argue that NAIRU increases in the 1980s were caused
largely by monetary tightenings aimed at reducing inflation.
This conclusion is based on the following evidence:
C Measures of labor market distortions B- the degree of
unionization, the severity of firing restrictions, and so on Bare generally uncorrelated across countries with changes in the
NAIRU.

The only exception is a weak effect of the duration of

unemployment benefits.

Overall, this is evidence against the

Krugman story about the interaction of labor demand shifts with
labor market rigidities.

That story predicts greater increases

in the NAIRU where rigidities are greater.
C 19 of the 20 countries reduced inflation over the 1980s.
There is a significant relationship across countries between the
size of the inflation decrease and the change in the NAIRU.

My

interpretation is that larger disinflations required larger
monetary tightenings, therefore raised unemployment more,
therefore raised the NAIRU more through hysteresis.
C The change in the NAIRU is related not only to how much
inflation fell, but also to the length of time over which
disinflation occurred.

Holding constant the total fall in

inflation, a quick disinflation raises the NAIRU less than one
9

that is drawn out over time.

This result suggests mechanisms for

hysteresis, as discussed below.
C While measures of labor-market distortions are generally
uncorrelated with NAIRU changes, one of these variables B-

the

duration of unemployment benefits -- interacts significantly with
the size and length of disinflation.

That is, a given

disinflation is associated with a larger rise in the NAIRU if
unemployment benefits are available indefinitely.

Once we

control for this interaction, there is no direct effect of
benefit duration.

Again, this result is suggestive about

hysteresis mechanisms.
Policy Responses to Recessions
My 1999 paper examines the disinflations of the 1980s from
another angle.

Countries that reduced inflation generally

experienced recessions and short-run rises in unemployment.
However, the aftermath of disinflation varied: in some countries
unemployment fell again after a few years, while in others the
NAIRU rose and unemployment stayed high.
I argue that these differences are largely explained by the
conduct of monetary policy.

Some central banks tightened policy

to reduce inflation, but reversed course when recessions
occurred.

They eased policy, pushing unemployment back down.

Other central banks tightened policy and kept it tight, so high
unemployment persisted.
10

To make this argument, the 1999 paper measures policy
responses to recessions with changes in nominal and real interest
rates (following Romer and Romer [1994]).

The Fed is one central

bank that cut rates sharply when recessions began, even though
inflation had not yet fallen significantly.

Many European

central banks, by contrast, did not respond aggressively to
recessions.

They were reluctant to ease policy until inflation

was clearly defeated.

In addition, exchange rate concerns

deterred some central banks from cutting interest rates.
The paper also measures the degree of hysteresis in each
country by comparing increases in the NAIRU to short-run
increases in unemployment during disinflation.

I find that

hysteresis effects are larger when central banks respond less
strongly to recessions.
By itself, the fact that persistently tight policy causes
persistently high unemployment is consistent with conventional
macro, specifically the IS curve.

Where the early-80s experience

deviates from conventional models is in the behavior of
inflation.

If a monetary tightening doesn=t affect the NAIRU,

then equation (1) says inflation should fall as long as
unemployment remains high.

In many countries, inflation fell for

a few years but then leveled off with unemployment still high.
This meant by definition that the NAIRU rose.

11

Success Stories
The NAIRU started falling in some countries in the mid1980s.

Another part of my 1999 paper asks why.

I focus on four

countries that reduced the NAIRU (as estimated by the OECD) by at
least 2 percentage points between 1985 and 1997.

One is the

U.K., which reversed the NAIRU run-up of the early 1980s; the
others are Ireland, Netherlands, and Portugal.
Many observers attribute these NAIRU decreases to reductions
in labor-market distortions (e.g. Siebert, 1997).
interpretation does not withstand scrutiny.

But this

Countries where the

NAIRU fell did implement some labor-market reforms, but they were
modest.

For example, the Netherlands slightly reduced the

replacement ratio for UI, and the U.K. increased job counseling
for UI recipients; neither put a time limit on benefits.

Many

other countries had similar or more extensive labor market
reforms (Spain reduced the replacement ratio by the same amount
as the Netherlands, and Belgium introduced a job-placement
program similar to the UK=s).

The four countries where

unemployment fell don=t stand out as aggressive labor market
reformers.
Instead, these countries stand out for their macroeconomic
histories: they experienced demand expansions during the period
when the NAIRU fell.

The demand expansions reduced unemployment,

which reduced the NAIRU through hysteresis.
12

The U.K., for example, departed from the monetary policy of
other European countries when it dropped out of the ERM in 1992
and lowered interest rates.

Before that, in the late 1980s, the

U.K. experienced the ALawson boom,@ named after the Chancellor of
the Exchequer who pursued fiscal expansion at the same time
financial liberalization raised consumption and investment.

The

Bank of England was slow to tighten policy to choke off the boom,
and inflation rose by more than five percentage points.
A substantial run-up in inflation also accompanied the NAIRU
decreases in Portugal and the Netherlands (although not Ireland).
As in the U.K., central banks did not raise inflation
intentionally, but they failed to offset expansionary shocks.

In

my view, the coincidence of rising inflation with a falling NAIRU
suggests that hysteresis is at work, that is, that a demand
expansion is driving the NAIRU down.

I return to this point

below.
An important nuance is that the inflation run-ups in the
U.K. and elsewhere were not permanent.

A period of overheating

and rising inflation was needed to reduce the NAIRU, but
eventually inflation went back down.

And when that happened, the

NAIRU did not go back up.

IV. SOME NEW EVIDENCE
Here I present new evidence of hysteresis effects.
13

I try to

capture these effects in a simple way using data from 1980
through 2007.
My strategy is to focus on large changes in the NAIRU.

I

define large to mean a rise or fall of at least three percentage
points.

While my method for estimating the NAIRU is imprecise,

an estimated change of 3% almost certainly indicates a
substantial change in the true NAIRU.
I restrict attention to episodes in which the NAIRU changed
by at least 3% within a period of ten years.

This ten-year rule

means I ignore changes in the NAIRU that are substantial but very
gradual.

It is harder to identify the sources of gradual changes

than of relatively abrupt changes.
Usually the ten-year periods I identify lie within longer
periods in which the NAIRU moves in the same direction.

I define

a NAIRU-change episode as the entire period in which the NAIRU
moves in one direction.

This implies that episodes start and end

at peaks and troughs in the NAIRU series, or at the start and end
of the 1980-2007 period.
In France, for example, the NAIRU increased from 1980, when
it was 5.4%, to 1996, when it peaked at 9.4% (see Figure 1).
This period qualifies for my set of episodes because the NAIRU
rose by more than 3% over the ten years from 1980 to 1990.
For the 20 countries in the sample, there are eight episodes
of NAIRU increases that meet my criteria and nine episodes of
14

NAIRU decreases.

Table 1 lists the episodes, their dates, and

the changes in the NAIRU over the episodes.
For each episode, I examine the behavior of inflation.

This

seems a natural way to distinguish between conventional stories
about NAIRU changes and hysteresis theories.

In hysteresis

theories, changes in the NAIRU are driven by demand movements
that initially push U away from U*.

Assuming equation (1) holds,

we should see rising inflation if strong demand is pushing the
NAIRU down, and falling inflation if the NAIRU is rising.

That

is, inflation and the NAIRU should move in opposite directions.
The implications for inflation are different if real
factors, such as changes in productivity growth or in labormarket distortions, cause changes in the NAIRU.

In this case,

one possibility is that the central bank adjusts U to keep it
near U*.

If that happens, inflation remains stable as U*

changes.
Another possibility is that actual unemployment lags behind
changes in the NAIRU.

In this case inflation moves in the same

direction as the NAIRU, the opposite of the comovement predicted
by hysteresis theories.

Orphanides (2000) argues that this

happened in the United States in the 1970s.

The NAIRU rose but

policymakers did not recognize the change, so they tried to hold
unemployment at the old NAIRU.

With U below U*, inflation rose.

In examining inflation behavior, as with unemployment, I
15

look for large changes.

I identify major disinflations, defined

as a fall of at least 3% in Atrend inflation.@

Following Ball

(1994, 1999), trend inflation is measured by a nine-quarter
centered moving average of inflation.

Similarly, I identify

major inflation run-ups, defined as increases in trend inflation
of at least 3%.

I ask whether episodes of large changes in the

NAIRU are associated with large disinflations or inflation runups.3
For each of the 17 episodes of major NAIRU changes, Table 2
shows the disinflations and inflation run-ups that occurred
within the episode or overlapped with it significantly.

The

Table gives the dates and sizes of the inflation movements.

A

given NAIRU-change episode includes from zero to three inflationchange episodes.

3

An alternative would be to measure the total change in
trend inflation over the NAIRU-change episode. One problem with
this approach is that the results would be sensitive to the
dating of starts and ends of episodes. These dates are hard to
pin down with confidence, as they depend on how the series for
unemployment is smoothed.
In addition, simply examining total inflation changes would
hide the fact that significant fluctuations in inflation can
occur within a NAIRU-change episode. As shown in Table 2, some
episodes include both a disinflation and an inflation run-up.
16

What do we learn from Table 2?
episodes of increasing NAIRUs.

Let=s first examine the

In six of these eight episodes,

there was a significant disinflation, and no inflation run-up.
The other two cases, Sweden and New Zealand, have the pattern of
a disinflation followed by an inflation run-up followed by
another disinflation.

In both of these cases, each of the

disinflations is larger than the intervening runup, and the total
change in inflation over the three periods is highly negative (9.2% in Sweden and -14.7% in New Zealand).

I interpret these two

countries as having disinflationary regimes overall, despite an
interruption in disinflation.4
I therefore count all eight episodes of NAIRU increases as
involving disinflations.

One way to put the result is that a

major NAIRU increase is sufficient to tell us that a country
experienced a major disinflation:

NAIRU Increase --> Disinflation

where the arrow does not indicate causality, but rather
sufficiency in the sense that if you find an episode with a NAIRU
increase, it is always an episode with a major disinflation.

To

put the same result a different way, a major disinflation is a

4

In New Zealand=s case, the seesaw pattern of inflation may
reflect wage and price controls, which were introduced in 1982
17

necessary condition for a NAIRU increase.
Note that the reverse result does not hold: a disinflation
is not sufficient for a NAIRU increase (equivalently, a NAIRU
increase is not necessary for disinflation).

Many countries in

the sample experienced major disinflations without the NAIRU
rising by 3%.

In some countries, such as the United States and

Norway, disinflation occurred with almost no change in the NAIRU.
Now let=s examine decreases in the NAIRU.
is more complex.

and lifted in 1984.
18

Here the story

Of the nine NAIRU-decrease episodes, five include at least
one inflation run-up.

One of these five episodes, in the

Netherlands, includes two run-ups and no disinflations.
other four include a disinflation as well as a run-up.

The
However,

in contrast to the cases of Sweden and New Zealand, the inflation
run-ups and disinflations are similar sizes.

In Australia,

Ireland, and the U.K., the inflation run-up and disinflation
(which are always contiguous) sum to 0.7%, 0.7%, and -1.5%,
respectively.

Portugal is a special case of volatile inflation:

there are two inflation run-ups with a large disinflation inbetween.

The total inflation change over these episodes is -

4.7%.5
Overall, I interpret these five episodes as consistent with
hysteresis theories.

In each case, the fall in the NAIRU

produced a major inflation run-up at some point, suggesting
demand expansions.

These demand expansions reduced the NAIRU

because they were not overwhelmed by much larger disinflations,
as in Sweden and New Zealand.
The evidence shows, however, that reducing the NAIRU does
not require a permanent increase in inflation.
5

This is most

A referee suggests that Australia=s inflation run-up was
caused by the introduction of a sales tax. However, the tax was
introduced in July 2000, and most of the run-up occurred before
then. My measure of trend inflation rose from 0.6% in 1998Q1 to
4.2% in 2000Q2. Over the same period, a backward-looking fourquarter average of inflation rose from -0.2% to 3.2%.
19

clear in Ireland and the U.K., where an inflation run-up was
followed by a disinflation of similar magnitude.

A successful

theory of hysteresis will need to explain this pattern.
Four countries have decreases in the NAIRU with neither
inflation run-ups nor disinflations: Finland, Italy, New Zealand,
and Spain.

Notice that, in all four cases, the episodes of

falling NAIRUs followed large NAIRU increases, and only partly
reversed these increases.
mean reversion.

The decreases look like some kind of

One interpretation is that hysteresis effects

are long-lived but not permanent.

Tight monetary policy causes a

rise in unemployment that lasts a long time, but eventually
unemployment starts falling even if inflation is stable.
Note that four of the NAIRU decreases in Table 1 were not
preceded by large NAIRU increases.

These four episodes are among

the five in which a NAIRU decrease was accompanied by a run-up in
inflation.

So the data suggest that a rise in inflation is

necessary for reducing the NAIRU if mean reversion is not at
work.

We can summarize the results with

NAIRU Decrease --> Previous NAIRU Increase or Inflation Run-up

capturing the fact that all NAIRU decreases involve at least one
of the factors on the right of the arrow.
We can also look at the inflation run-up / NAIRU
20

relationship from the other direction.

Table 3 lists all

episodes of inflation run-ups since 1980 B- those included in
Table 2 and those not included in Table 2 because they did not
coincide with major changes in the NAIRU.

The episodes are

ranked by the size of the inflation increase.
I want to argue that inflation run-ups are associated with
decreases in the NAIRU.

That=s not true for all of the run-ups

in Table 3, but I have good excuses for discounting some of these
cases.

The two with asterisks are the Swedish and New Zealand

episodes in which inflation run-ups interrupt regimes that are
disinflationary overall.

In the two cases with double asterisks,

in Japan and Switzerland, a 3% decrease in the NAIRU was
impossible because the NAIRU was less than 3% when inflation
started to rise.
That leaves nine inflation run-ups, and seven of them
occurred during periods of NAIRU decreases.

The two that didn=t

are the two smallest inflation run-ups on the list B- early runups in Australia and Finland.

So, among inflation run-ups that

were not sandwiched between big disinflations, and where the
NAIRU was not below 3% initially, the seven largest run-ups
occurred during episodes of NAIRU decreases.

To a first

approximation we can say

Inflation run-up --> Decrease in NAIRU
21

With some qualifications, an inflation run-up is sufficient for a
NAIRU decrease (or a NAIRU decrease is necessary for an inflation
run-up).
To summarize, the patterns we see in these data are complex.
It appears, however, that there are relationships of some type
among large rises and falls in the NAIRU and large rises and
falls in inflation.

These relationships generally go in the

direction predicted by hysteresis theories.

The data are

inconsistent with purely real theories of NAIRU changes, which
predict either no relationship between NAIRU changes and
inflation or a positive relationship.
V. OPEN QUESTIONS
While there is evidence that hysteresis exists, there are
many open questions about the nature of the phenomenon.
What Mechanism?
Why might hystersis exist?

In introducing the concept,

Blanchard and Summers explained it with an insider-outsider model
of wage bargaining.

These models have not been popular in recent

years, however, and there may be good reason.

There isn=t much

empirical evidence for insider-outsider models.

In particular,

they suggest that the degree of hysteresis should depend on wagesetting institutions, and that doesn=t seem to be the case.

For

example, my 1997 paper finds no link between hysteresis and a
22

country=s level of unionization.
A more promising idea, which Blanchard and Summers discuss
but deemphasize, involves the behavior of the long-term
unemployed.

The key idea is that these workers become detached

from the labor market, both because they appear unattractive to
employers and because they don=t search vigorously for jobs.
Consequently, while a high level of short-term unemployment puts
downward pressure on wage inflation, a high level of long-term
unemployment does not.
If this effect is strong, then it potentially explains
hysteresis.

One story is that a decrease in aggregate demand

initially causes a rise in short-term unemployment, but this
turns into long-term unemployment if the slump continues.

The

initial short-term unemployment causes inflation to fall, but
then inflation stabilizes.

At that point the NAIRU is higher

because of the large pool of long-term unemployed.
This story is lent plausibility by evidence (in both my 1997
and 1999 papers) that a long duration of unemployment benefits
magnifies hysteresis.

Presumably it is more likely that the

long-term unemployed become detached from the labor market if
they can live on the dole indefinitely.
The story is also consistent with Llaudes (2007), who
estimates Phillips curves with separate terms for long-term and
short-term unemployment.

For many countries, Llaudes finds that
23

long-term unemployment has smaller effects on inflation.

This

result is stronger in countries with long-lived unemployment
benefits.
Yet current stories about hysteresis mechanisms are
speculative.

More research is needed.

In particular,

researchers should directly examine the idea that the long-term
unemployed become detached from the labor market.

One method

would be interviews of the type in Bewley (1999).

Researchers

could ask employers about their attitudes toward the long-term
unemployed, and ask the unemployed about their search behavior.
Non-linearities and State-dependence
In explaining the idea of hysteresis to students, I
sometimes combine the Phillips curve, equation (1), with
U* = (1-μ)U*-1 + μU-1

(2)

Here, the NAIRU is pulled toward actual unemployment.

The

parameter μ measures the degree of hysteresis.
Empirically, however, it=s clear that no such linear
relationship exists.
and sometimes don=t.

Changes in U sometimes cause changes in U*
It seems to depend on the past history of

U* and the length of time that U is pushed away from U*.
Hysteresis also appears asymmetric (e.g. an inflation run-up
means it=s very likely U* is falling, while disinflations often
occur without U* rising).
As usual, it=s difficult to measure non-linearities
24

precisely.

And our hazy understanding of hysteresis mechanisms

means theory doesn=t give us much guidance.

However, there are

promising avenues for research.
In particular, there should be more work examining the timeseries behavior of short-term and long-term unemployment.
Suppose, as suggested by Llaudes= work, that long-term
unemployment puts less pressure on inflation than short-term
unemployment.

Then we can learn about the varying effects of U

on U* by examining the evolution of U of different durations.
For example, we can directly check whether NAIRU increases are
tied to shifts from short-term to long-term unemployment.
We also might better understand why some countries reduce
the NAIRU without significant effects on inflation, while
inflation rises in other cases.

Perhaps in some countries a

demand expansion cuts into long-term unemployment without much
effect on short-term unemployment.

Elsewhere, a NAIRU decrease

involves falling short-term unemployment, either because there is
less long-term unemployment initially or because demand expands
more rapidly.

In this case, the effects on inflation are likely

to be larger.
Policy Implications
If hysteresis exists, a broad lesson is that it=s dangerous
for central banks to focus policy too heavily on inflation,
either through explicit inflation targeting or otherwise.
25

If the

natural rate is independent of monetary policy, then focusing on
inflation can at worst exacerbate short-run unemployment
movements.

With hysteresis, by contrast, a given inflation

target is consistent with more than one level of unemployment,
even in the long run.

A central bank might achieve its inflation

target but create needlessly high unemployment in the process.
A closely related point is that policy should ease when a
recession occurs.

This principle might seem like common sense,

and the Fed has followed it (Romer and Romer, 1994), but not all
central banks have.

Ball (1999) finds that inadequate responses

to recessions have contributed to hysteresis in some countries.
One can dream up more novel ideas for policy based on the
types of hysteresis effects that seem to exist.

For example,

maybe central banks facing high unemployment should expand
demand, accepting a rise in inflation to reduce the NAIRU.

Then

they should tighten policy to reduce inflation, but reverse the
tightening quickly, before a temporary rise in unemployment can
push the NAIRU back up.
However, central banks generally presume that steady
policies are better than tricky plans for first overheating and
then underheating the economy.

We would need much greater

confidence in our understanding of hysteresis to give contrary
advice.

26

VI. CONCLUSION
In the last decade, mainstream economists have not paid much
attention to the idea of hysteresis.

Likely reasons include the

theoretical appeal of long-run neutrality and our weak
understanding of hysteresis mechanisms.

In addition, many

economists interpret the 1960s and 70s as showing that it=s
dangerous for central banks to target unemployment.

Hysteresis

stories evoke negative reactions because they seem like a step
back toward the bad old days.6
Yet there is considerable evidence that hysteresis is an
important factor in unemployment behavior.

And there are clear

avenues for research, for example using data on short-term and
long-term unemployment.

I hope hysteresis becomes a more popular

topic in the future.

6

Another factor is that Blanchard and Summers have been
poor stewards of their hysteresis idea. Summers has been busy
with other things. Blanchard has written extensively about
unemployment since 1985, but much of his work explicitly or
implicitly denies the existence of hysteresis. For example,
Blanchard and Wolfers (2000) take it as given that shifts in
aggregate demand affect actual unemployment but not Aequilibrium@
unemployment. When even the creator of an idea doesn=t seem to
believe it, the idea loses credibility.

27

APPENDIX: ESTIMATING THE NAIRU
To estimate the NAIRU, Ball and Mankiw (2002) first estimate
the parameter α in
π

=

π-1 + α(U-U*) + ε

(3)

which is equation (1) with an error ε, which we interpret as a
short-run supply shock.

We estimate α by OLS, treating U* as a

constant.
Rearranging equation (3) gives us
U* - (1/α)ε

=

U - (1/α)(π-π-1)

(4)

We construct the right side of this equation from the estimated α
and data on unemployment and inflation, giving us the left side.
This expression, U*-(1/α)ε, is the NAIRU minus a term
proportional to the supply shock.

We smooth this series with the

Hodrick-Prescott filter to get NAIRU estimates.
The Ball-Mankiw procedure is internally inconsistent because
it estimates a time-varying U*, but assumes a constant U* to
estimate α.

Here I resolve this inconsistency with an iterative

procedure.

Once I have a series for U*, I use that series to re-

estimate equation (3), yielding a new estimate of α.

I use the

new α to estimate a new series for U*, and so on until the
results converge to an α and a U* series that are consistent.
This procedure is applied to data from 1975 through 2007.
(I only use NAIRU estimates for 1980-2007, but I start the
28

estimation in 1975 to minimize endpoint problems.)
parameter of 100 in the HP filter.

29

I use a λ

REFERENCES
Ball, Laurence, AWhat Determines the Sacrifice Ratio,@ in Mankiw
(ed.), Monetary Policy, 1994
Ball, Laurence, ADisinflation and the NAIRU,@ in Romer and Romer
(ed.), Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy, 1997
Ball, Laurence, AAggregate Demand and Long-Run Unemployment,@
Brookings Papers, 1999
Ball, Laurence, and N. Gregory Mankiw, AThe NAIRU in Theory and
Practice,@ Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2002
Bewley, Truman, Why Wages Don=t Fall During a Recession, 1999
Blanchard, Oliver, AEuropean Unemployment: The Evolution of Facts
and Ideas,@ NBER Working Paper #11750, 2005
Blanchard, Olivier, and Lawrence Summers, AHysteresis and the
European Unemployment Problem,@ NBER Macro Annual, 1986
Blanchard, Olivier, and Justin Wolfers, AThe Roles of Shocks and
Institutions in the Rise of European Unemployment: The
Aggregate Evidence,@ Economic Journal, 2000
Friedman, Milton, AThe Role of Monetary Policy,@ American
Economic Review, 1968
Krugman, APast and Prospective Causes of High Unemployment,@ in
Kansas City Federal Reserve, Reducing Unemployment: Current
Issues and Policy Options, 1994
Llaudes, Ricardo, Johns Hopkins University dissertation, 2007
Mankiw, N. Gregory, Macroeconomics 6th ed., 2006
Nickell, Stephen, AUnemployment in the OECD,@ Economic Journal,
2005
Orphanides, Athanasios, AThe Search for Prosperity without
Inflation,@ ECB Working Paper 15, 2000
Romer, Christina and David Romer, AWhat Ends Recessions?,@ NBER
Macro Annual, 1994
Siebert, Horst, ALabor Market Rigidities: At the Root of
Unemployment in Europe,@ Journal of Economic Perspectives,
30

1997
Stockhammer, Engelbert, and Simon Sturn, AThe Impact of Monetary
Policy on Unemployment Hysteresis,@ IMK Working Paper
15/2008, October 2008.

31

Table I
Large Changes in the NAIRU, 1980-1997
INCREASES
Country

Period of Change

Size of Change

Finland

1980-1996

9.7%

France

1980-1996

4.0%

Germany

1980-2007

5.6%

Ireland

1980-1989

5.2%

Italy

1980-1996

4.9%

New Zealand

1980-1994

4.9%

Spain

1980-1995

7.8%

Sweden

1983-1999

4.1%

Country

Period of Change

Size of Change

Australia

1994-2007

-4.0%

Finland

1996-2007

-4.3%

Ireland

1989-2007

-11.0%

Italy

1996-2007

-3.9%

Netherlands

1988-2007

-3.8%

New Zealand

1994-2007

-4.1%

Portugal

1981-1992

-3.3%

Spain

1995-2007

-6.9%

UK

1987-2007

-4.4%

DECREASES

32

Table 2
Major Inflation Changes During Changes in the NAIRU
EPISODES OF NAIRU INCREASES
NAIRU-Change Episode

Major Changes in Inflation

Finland 80-86

-8.2%, 81-86

France 80-96

-10.4%, 81-87

Germany 80-07

- 5.9%, 81-86

Ireland 80-89

-16.7%, 81-87

Italy 80-96

-14.4%, 80-87

NZ 80-94

-8.9%, 80-83; +8.6%, 83-85; -14.4%, 85-92

Spain 80-95

-5.2%, 89-97

Sweden 83-99

-8.2%, 80-86; +5.6%, 86-90; -6.6% 90-93

EPISODES OF NAIRU DECREASES
NAIRU-Change Episode
Australia, 94-07

Major Changes in Inflation
-3.1%, 95-98;

+3.8%, 98-01

+3.9%, 98-01;

-3.2%, 01-04

+4.4%, 86-89;

+3.8%, 97-00

Finland, 96-07
Ireland, 89-07
Italy, 96-07
Netherlands, 88-07
NZ, 94-07
Portugal, 81-92

+8.8%, 80-84; -17.5%, 84-87; +4.0%, 87-89

Spain, 95-07
UK, 87-07

+5.6%, 86-89; -7.1%, 89-93
33

Table 3
All Inflation Run-ups, 1980-2007
Portugal 80-84

8.8%

New Zealand 83-85

8.6%*

UK 86-89

5.6%

Sweden 86-90

5.6%*

Switzerland 86-90

4.7%**

Netherlands 86-89

4.4%

Portugal 87-89

4.0%

Ireland 98-01

3.9%

Japan 87-90

3.9%**

Australia 98-01

3.8%

Netherlands 97-00

3.8%

Australia 84-86

3.2%

Finland 86-89

3.2%

* Preceded and followed by larger disinflations
** Initial NAIRU <3%

34

Figure 1
Unemployment in France

35

