                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       LEARNING ABOUT ACADEMIC ABILITY AND THE COLLEGE DROP-OUT
                              DECISION

                                      Todd R. Stinebrickner
                                       Ralph Stinebrickner

                                       Working Paper 14810
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14810


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2009




We appreciate comments from seminar participants at New York University, Rochester, Yale, Syracuse,
Simon Fraser, NBER, The winter meetings of the Econometric Society, and The Analytical Labor
Conference at the University of Chicago. We are grateful for support from The Mellon Foundation,
The Spencer Foundation, The National Science Foundation, SSHRC, and Berea College. This work
would not have been possible without the extraordinary work of Lori Scafidi and the assistance of
Diana Stinebrickner, Pam Thomas, and Albert Conley. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Todd R. Stinebrickner and Ralph Stinebrickner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Learning about academic ability and the college drop-out decision
Todd R. Stinebrickner and Ralph Stinebrickner
NBER Working Paper No. 14810
March 2009
JEL No. I2,I21,I23,I3,J24

                                             ABSTRACT

We use unique data to examine how college students from low income families form expectations
about academic ability and to examine the role that learning about ability and a variety of other factors
play in the college drop-out decision. From the standpoint of satisfying a central implication from
the theory of drop-out, we find that self-reported expectations data perform well relative to standard
assumptions employed in empirical work when it is necessary to explicitly characterize beliefs. At
the time of entrance, students tend to substantially discount the possibility of bad grade performance,
with this finding having implications for understanding the importance of the option value of schooling.
After entrance, students update their beliefs in a manner which takes into account both initial beliefs
and new information, with heterogeneity in weighting being broadly consistent with the spirit of Bayesian
updating. Learning about ability plays a very prominent role in the drop-out decision. Among other
possible factors of importance, while students who find school to be unenjoyable are unconditionally
much more likely to leave school, this effect arises to a large extent because these students also tend
to receive poor grades. We end by examining whether students whose grades are lower than expected
understand the underlying reasons for their poor grade performance.


Todd R. Stinebrickner
Department of Economics
University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario, N6A 5C2
CANADA
and NBER
trstineb@uwo.ca

Ralph Stinebrickner
Dept. of Mathematics
Berea College
Berea, KY 40404
ralph_stinebrickner@berea.edu
I. Introduction

           While it is well recognized that students from low income families have much higher college drop-out

rates than other students, little is know about the relative importance of various possible explanations for the

educational outcomes of this group.1 In this paper we provide direct, new evidence about this issue by taking

advantage of a unique longitudinal survey that provides information about a comprehensive set of factors that

theory suggests might influence the drop-out decision. The project, The Berea Panel Study, takes place at a

school, Berea College, that is valuable for an in-depth case study of this sort because it operates under a mission

of providing educational opportunities to students from low income families.

           Much previous research on educational attainment of low income students has focused on the role of

credit constraints. Berea College offers a full tuition (and a large room and board) subsidy to all entering

students. Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2003) (hereafter referred to as S&S) found that, despite the fact that

the direct costs of students at Berea are approximately zero (and perhaps negative), fifty percent of students do

not graduate.2 S&S (2008a) found that, in the aggregate, difficulties borrowing money to pay for consumption

during school also do not play a particularly important role at Berea. Thus, it seems reasonable to believe that

explanations unrelated to short-term credit constraints play an important role in determining drop-out. The goal

of this work is to provide some of the first direct evidence about the relative importance of the most prominent

alternative explanations.

           We pay particular attention to perhaps the most prominent alternative explanation - that college drop-out

arises as students learn about their academic ability after matriculation (Manski, 1989, Altonji, 1993, Carneiro

et al., 2005, Cunha et al., 2005). The reality that little direct empirical evidence exists about the importance


   1
    Bowen and Bok (1998) write “One large question is the extent to which low national graduation rates are due to
   the inability of students and their families to meet college costs, rather than to academic difficulties or other
   factors.” Outside of economics, the most referenced work, Tinto (1975), suggests that whether a students drops out
   is strongly related to the student’s degree of academic and social integration. However, while this theory has
   received much attention, Draper (2005) writes “It is less clear whether there is much direct empirical support for it,
   and certainly it is hard to find direct empirical tests of and challenges of it.” The problem is primarily related to data
   limitations; it is often hard to even tell exactly what information is being used to proxy for social and academic
   integration (Draper, 2005; Beekhoven, 2002).
   2
       S&S(2003) find that these drop-out rates are generally similar to those of low income students elsewhere.

                                                               1
of this explanation stems from the difficulty in characterizing what a person has learned about his academic

ability during school. The fundamental problem is that identifying beliefs (expectations) about a factor such as

ability at any particular point in time is difficult using standard choice data because a particular behavior may

be consistent with multiple characterizations of preferences and expectations (Manski, 2002, 2004).                 In

response to this fundamental identification issue, researchers in economics have recently paid much closer

attention to the virtues of eliciting self-reports of subjective probabilities using carefully worded survey

questions (Dominitz, 1998; Dominitz and Manski, 1996, 1997).3 However, even with this development in

survey methodology, there are practical difficulties related to the timing of surveys that are often encountered

if one wishes to characterize learning. In the drop-out context, providing relevant evidence about how beliefs

change requires the elicitation of beliefs both at the time of entrance and at a time close to when the decision

of whether to remain in school is made, with this task being difficult in standard longitudinal survey designs

which typically contact students at most once a year.

           We are able to overcome the standard difficulty in characterizing what a person has learned about his

academic ability during school because our initiation of the BPS gave us the flexibility to elicit self-reported

beliefs at multiple times each year, starting at the time of college entrance. As such, in the process of providing

a new understanding of the drop-out decision, this work is able to make a second contribution ! providing some

of the first evidence about how agents update subjective beliefs in response to the arrival of new information.

Manski (2004) writes that there exists a “critical need for basic research on expectations formation.”4

           After describing the Berea Panel Study in Section II, we next take a detailed look at beliefs. Section III

examines beliefs at the time of entrance. We find that students are, on average, considerably too optimistic about

their grade performance at entrance. This result is inconsistent with the standard assumption employed in

empirical work when it is necessary to explicitly characterize beliefs. Given this inconsistency, we discuss the



   3
       For early work in economics see Juster (1966).
   4
    For work that has measured revisions to expectations, see , for example, Dominitz, 1998; Dominitz and Manski,
   2003; Dominitz and Hung, 2003; Delevande, 2006; Lochner, 2007; Madeira, 2007; Zafar, 2008.

                                                           2
implications of our finding that students are overly optimistic for understanding the role that the option value

of schooling plays in the college entrance decision and college drop-out decision (Manski, 1989; Altonji, 1993;

Cunha et al. 2005; Stange, 2007). Section IV examines expectations formation. We find that individuals update

their beliefs at the end of a semester in a reasonable manner which, for example, takes into account both their

beliefs at the beginning of the semester (prior beliefs) and the information (noisy signal) that they receive during

the semester in the form of semester grades. Further, while the goal of this work is not to test any particular

model of learning, we find that heterogeneity in updating conditional on a person’s prior beliefs and noisy signal

can be predicted by individual-specific perceptions that a Bayesian learning model suggests would be of

importance.

        We then turn to understanding the importance of various explanations for drop-out. Perhaps the most

important potential use of self-reported expectations data is to reduce the reliance of arbitrary assumptions in

the estimation of behavioral models.5 However, because the estimation of a full learning model of the drop-out

decision is beyond the scope of this paper, in Section V we estimate simple models of drop-out. We estimate

both models in which independent variables are derived from a student’s stock of information at the time of the

drop-out decision and models in which independent variables are derived from the amount that the student has

learned by the time of the drop-out decision. Our results indicate that learning about ability plays a particularly

important role in the drop-out decision, and we discuss the importance of this finding for thinking about the

option value of schooling. Among other possible factors of importance, our results show that, while students

who find school to be unenjoyable are unconditionally much more likely to leave school, this effect arises to

a large extent because these students also tend to receive poor grades. In Section VI we pay careful attention

to students at the bottom of the grade distribution with a focus on examining whether these students understand

the reasons for their worse than expected grade performance. We conclude in Section VII.


   5
    The use of expectations data in the estimation of behavioral models is quite limited. Wolpin (1999), van der
   Klaauw (2000), and van der Klaauw and Wolpin (forthcoming) take advantage of expectations data in a different
   manner than what would be suggested by the data collected here - they show that self-reported expectations about
   future outcomes of interest can be used to increase the precision of estimators in models that make standard
   assumptions about beliefs.

                                                           3
        While interactions with respondents make us confident that students were comfortable with the survey

questions we used to elicit expectations, it is worth noting that it will never be possible to directly examine how

accurately self-reported expectations data represent a person’s true beliefs. Instead, confidence in the

usefulness of this sort of data is best accumulated by examining, as in Manski (2004), its performance across

a variety of substantive contexts. As such, by and large, we take as our starting point that useful information

about subjective beliefs can be elicited from carefully worded survey questions. Nonetheless, our findings

provide perhaps the strongest evidence to-date for this starting point. Simple theory related to the drop-out

decision suggests that both a person’s actual grade point average in the first year and the person’s beliefs about

future grade performance at the end of the first year should be important predictors of whether a person returns

to college after the first year. In Section V we find that this theoretical implication is satisfied when we

measure beliefs about future grade performance directly using self-reported expectations data. However, this

theoretical implication is not satisfied when we construct beliefs about future grade performance using

standard assumptions employed in empirical work when it is necessary to explicitly characterize beliefs.

II. The Berea Panel Study

        Berea College is located in central Kentucky and operates under a mission of providing an education

to students from low income families. The BPS baseline surveys were administered to students in the first BPS

cohort (the 2000 cohort) immediately before they began their freshman year classes in the fall of 2000 and

were administered to students in the second BPS cohort (the 2001 cohort) immediately before they began their

freshman year classes in the fall of 2001. The baseline surveys took advantage of recent advances in survey

methodology (see e.g., Barsky et al., 1997, Dominitz, 1998, and Dominitz and Manski, 1996 and 1997) to

collect information about students’ expectations towards uncertain future events and outcomes, including

academic performance, that could influence the drop-out decision. Substantial follow-up surveys were

administered at the beginning and end of each subsequent semester to provide information about how

expectations change over time, and time-use information was collected four times each semester using the 24-

hour time-diaries shown in the Appendix A (Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2004; Stinebrickner and


                                                        4
Stinebrickner, forthcoming A).

        We examine learning during the first year of college, the period when the majority of attrition occurs.

We focus on the 2001 BPS cohort because certain questions of interest for this paper were added after the 2000

cohort completed its first year at Berea. Because our interest in learning requires that we observe expectations

about grade performance at two different points in time, we focus on students in the 2001 cohort who answered

both our baseline survey and the survey that took place immediately before the beginning of the second

semester. Three hundred seventy-five of 420 (89%) matriculating students in this cohort completed our

baseline survey. Three hundred twenty-five of these students were still in school at the beginning of the

second semester and answered the survey which took place at that time.6

III. Beliefs at the time of entrance

        We observe each student’s first semester grade point average measured on a four point scale, GPA1i,

directly from administrative data. We elicit each student’s subjective beliefs about the distribution of GPA1i

using survey Question A.2 (Appendix A) which was administered immediately before the start of classes in

the first semester. Paying close attention to methodological suggestions in Dominitz (1998) and Dominitz and

Manski (1996, 1997), the question asks each student to report the “percent chance” that his GPA1i will fall in

each of a set of mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive categories, conditional on an expected level

of study effort for the first semester, Expected_STUDY1i, that is elicited in Question A.1 (Appendix A).

        Column 1 of Table 1A shows the subjective probabilities of first semester grade point average, GPA1i,

from Question A.2 averaged over the 325 students in our sample. Column 2 of Table 1A shows the proportion

of students in the sample whose actual GPA1i falls in each category. Comparing Column 1 and Column 2 of

Table 1A reveals that, on average, individuals are too optimistic about their grade performance. For example,

on average, individuals believe that the probability of obtaining a GPA1i between 3.5 and 4.0 is .401 while, in

   6
    The response rate on the survey at the beginning of the second semester was approximately 94%. This implies that
   approximately half of the 50 students who answered the baseline survey but did not answer the survey at the
   beginning of the second semester had left school by the beginning of the second semester. While it would also be
   of interest to know how the beliefs about academic ability changed for these students (who are not in the sample
   used in this paper) between the time of entrance and the time of departure, the period between the beginning of the
   second semester and the beginning of the second year is the period with the highest amount of attrition.

                                                           5
reality, only .234 of students actually receive a GPA1i in this range. Similarly, on average, individuals believe

that the probability of obtaining a GPA1i of less than 2.0 is .037 while, in reality, .141 of students actually

receive a GPA1i in this range. A chi square goodness-of-fit test rejects the null hypothesis that the distribution

in Column 2 is obtained by sampling from the distribution in Column 1at all traditional levels of significance

(chi square statistic = 139.8 with 5 d.f.)7.

        In empirical work, including structural estimation, in which it is necessary to characterize a person’s

beliefs about an uncertain outcome, the standard approach is to assume that the distribution describing the

person’s beliefs corresponds to the distribution of actual outcomes for people deemed by the econometrician

to be “like” the person (typically) in observable ways. For example, this assumption in this context would

imply that: 1) a student believes that, on average, his grades will be equal to the average grades of people

deemed to be like him and 2) the student’s uncertainty about his grade performance corresponds to the amount

of variation in the actual grade outcomes of people deemed to be like him. Thus, the evidence from Table 1A

does not support this standard assumption. In the remainder of this paper, we follow the convention in this

empirical literature by referring to this assumption as Rational Expectations (RE).

        The result that students assign too little probability to the poor academic outcomes arises as a

combination of the fact that the mean of a student’s subjective GPA1i distribution is, on average, biased

upwards and the fact that, on average, students are more certain about their first semester grade point average

than would be suggested by a Rational Expectations assumption. With respect to the former, we compute an

approximate value of E(GPA1i) for each person i from survey Question A.2 by assuming that the grade density

is uniform within each of the mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive grade categories.8 Referring to



   7
    It may be desirable to combine the intervals [1.0, 2.0) and [0.0,1.0) before performing the Chi square test but this
   has no effect on the conclusions from the test.
   8
    The need to approximate is a disadvantage of using our information about the entire grade distribution to compute
   the expected value. Nonetheless, because we are confident that students are comfortable answering our Question
   A.2 about the entire grade distribution and because we find it appealing to compute expected values ourselves
   (rather than relying on students to use an appropriate definition of “expected” grade performance), we believe that,
   on net, the use of this question is desirable for our purposes. Hereafter, we largely ignore the presence of
   approximation error in the construction of this variable.

                                                             6
this approximate mean as prior_meani, the second to last entry in Column 1 of Table 1A shows that the

average prior_meani for the 325 students in our sample is 3.22 while the last entry of Column 2 shows that the

average GPA1i is 2.88.9 With respect to the latter, the last entry in Column 1 of Table 1A shows that, on

average, the standard deviation of a student’s subjective GPA1i distribution is .532 while the last entry of

Column 2 shows that the standard deviation of actual GPA1i is .784.10 11

        Tables 1B and 1C, which show the results in Table 1A separately by whether a student’s high school

grade point average, HSGPAi, is above or below the median in our sample, show that the RE assumption may

be particularly problematic for some subgroups. The last rows of Table 1B show that the difference between

the average prior_meani in the sample and the average GPA1i in the sample is .11 for students whose high

school grade point average is above the median (3.275 vs. 3.164). However, the last rows of Table 1C show

that this difference is .58 for students whose high school grade point average is below the median(3.161 vs.

2.579).12

         The option value of schooling arises because, when uncertainty exists about ability at the time of

entrance, students benefit from a system in which they decide sequentially whether or not to stay in college

as uncertainty is resolved. One possible definition of the option value of college attendance is the difference

between the discounted expected utility of entering college under the current system in which a student decides



   9
    A standard normal test rejects the null that the average prior_meani is the same as the average actual GPA1i at all
   traditional significant levels (test statistic = 8.05).
   10
    As above, we compute this latter number by assuming that the grade density is uniform within each of the
   mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive grade categories in Question A.2.
   11
     While the evidence in the previous paragraph suggests that prior_mean is far from a perfect predictor of first
   semester grade point average, we do find that prior_mean contains information about actual grade performance. In
   particular, in results not shown, regressing GPA1i on prior_meani yields an estimated coefficient (standard error) of
   .394 (.147) for prior_meani. As can be seen in Table 2, the correlation between GPA1i and prior_meani is .147.
   12
     For students above the median, a standard normal test rejects the null hypothesis that the average prior_meani is
   the same as the average actual GPA1i at only significant levels greater than .134 ( t-statistic = 1.50) while, for
   students below the median, this null hypothesis is rejected at all traditional significance levels (t-statistic = 8.00).
   For students above the median, a chi square test easily rejects the null hypothesis that the distribution in Column 2 is
   obtained by sampling from the distribution in Column 1 at all traditional significance levels (chi square statistic =
   83.5 with 5 d.f.). A chi square test rejects the same null hypothesis for students whose high school grade point
   average is above the median at a significance level of .10 but not at .05. (Chi square statistic=10.0 with 5 d.f.).

                                                             7
sequentially (e.g., on a semester-by-semester basis) whether or not to remain in college and the discounted

expected utility of entering college under the counterfactual in which a student who enters college must

precommit to remaining in school until graduation.13 Thus, the option value will be lower if the student is

more certain at the time of college entrance that he will graduate from college. The strong relationship

consistently found in previous literature (and in Section V of this paper) between academic performance and

college drop-out suggests that students who obtain high grades are typically well above the margin of

indifference between being in and out of college. Then, our finding that even students who have relatively

high actual probabilities of performing poorly believe that bad grade outcomes are very unlikely suggests that

students may be substantially more certain than they should be that they will graduate from college. This

suggests that students may perceive the option value to be substantially lower than what would be suggested

by a Rational Expectations assumption.

            From an additional survey question on the baseline BPS survey, we find additional, direct evidence

that students are likely to perceive the option value to be substantially lower than what would be suggested

by a Rational expectations assumption:


Question B What is the percent chance that you will eventually graduate from Berea College?_________.


While approximately 60% of entering students in this cohort eventually graduate from Berea, on average,

students believe that there is an 86% chance that they will graduate from Berea.14 In Section V we discuss

what simple theory implies about the usefulness of this question in empirical models that examine the effect

of learning on college drop-out . We find empirical evidence that the answers to this question contain valuable

information.

           Recent evidence that families of potential college students tend to substantially overestimate the direct


   13
     This definition of the option value focuses on uncertainty about ability (Stange, 2007). One could also include in
   this definition the continuation value of starting school which is present even if no uncertainty exists about ability
   (Heckman, Lochner, and Todd, 2006; Heckman and Navarro, 2007).
   14
        The graduation rates at Berea increased slightly from the earlier periods studied in S&S (2003).

                                                               8
costs of college has led to a concern that inaccurate information may lead to a situation where too few students

choose to enter college (NCES, 2003). The evidence here raises the very real possibility that more accurate

information about academic performance in college could lead to a situation where some students who are

currently entering might decide not to enter.15

IV. Expectations formation: Changes in beliefs between time of entrance and second semester

        To study expectations formation in this section, we first measure revisions to expectations by

comparing beliefs at the time of entrance to beliefs at the beginning of the second semester (Section IV.A).

We then examine how students arrive at their new beliefs (Section IV.B).

IV.A. Measuring revisions to expectations: Comparing beliefs at beginning of the 1st and 2nd semesters

        We examine revisions to expectations by comparing a student’s subjective beliefs about GPA1i from

Section III to the student’s subjective beliefs about second semester grade point average, GPA2i. The latter

beliefs were elicited using Question A.4 (Appendix A) which was administered immediately before the start

of classes in the second semester. The question asks each student to report the “percent chance” that his GPA2i

will fall in each of a set of mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive categories, conditional on an

expected level of study effort in the second semester, Expected_STUDY2i, that is elicited in Question A.3

(Appendix A).16

        Table 3 shows the subjective probabilities of GPA2i from Question A.4 averaged over the 325 students

in our sample. In much of the remainder of this paper we focus our attention by examining revisions to mean

expectations. We compute an approximate value of E(GPA2i) for person i from survey Question A.4 in the

same way as described in Section III. Referring to this approximate mean as posterior_meani, the second-to-

last entry of Table 3 shows that posterior_meani has an average value in our sample of 3.14. Comparing, in



   15
     It is impossible to know from our data what effect accurate information would have on people who have chosen
   not to enter college. It is very possible that some of these people are incorrectly pessimistic about their college
   academic performance.
   16
     Due in large part to a substantial number of required courses in the liberal arts curriculum, it is probably not
   unreasonable to believe that overall course difficulty tends to be generally similar between the 1st and 2nd
   semesters.

                                                              9
the first Column of Table 4, this value to the average prior_meani of 3.22 from Section III reveals that, on

average, individuals are significantly revising their beliefs about grade performance between the start of the

first semester and the start of the second semester.17 Further, this comparison tends to mask the full degree

of updating that is taking place at the individual level since some individuals revise their beliefs upwards while

others revise their beliefs downwards; on average, the absolute value of the difference between prior_meani

and posterior_meani is .289.

IV.B. How do students arrive at their new beliefs?

IV.B.1. Do new beliefs respond to new information?

        Central to theories of learning is the notion that individuals respond to new information. The new

information that we consider is a person’s first semester grade point average, GPA1i. Stratifying the sample

by GPA1i we find sensible patterns of updating by GPA1i group. For example, in the second column of Table

4 we show the average prior_meani and the average posterior_meani for students in the top-third of the actual

GPA1i distribution. In the third column of Table 4 we show the average prior_meani and the average

posterior_meani for students in the bottom third of the actual GPA1i distribution. While the difference in the

average prior_meani between the groups is relatively small, .08, the difference in the average posterior_meani

between the groups becomes substantial, .50, after the groups observe large differences in first semester grade

performance.18

IV.B.2. Do new beliefs depend on previous beliefs?

        It is natural to believe that new beliefs may depend on previous beliefs, even after taking into account

the new information that is observed. We find strong evidence of this; prior_meani and GPA1i are both

important predictors of posterior_meani when we use our entire sample to estimate a regression of the form

(1) posterior_meani =β0 + β1 prior_meani + β2 GPA1i + ui


   17
     The null hypothesis that the average mean in the population is the same between the two semesters is rejected at
   traditional significance levels (p-value .0017).
   18
     The null hypothesis that the difference in the average posterior means between the groups is the same as the
   difference in the average prior means between the groups is easily rejected at all traditional significance levels.

                                                             10
by Ordinary Least Squares (OLS). Specifically, Column 1 of Table 5 shows that the point estimates (standard

errors) for β1 and β2 are .396 (.051) and .245 (.019), respectively. The null hypothesis that β1=0 and the null

hypothesis that β2=0 are each rejected with the tests having t-statistics of 7.76 and 12.89, respectively.

IV.B.3 Can we understand heterogeneity in updating conditional on prior_meani and GPA1i?

        In this section we examine whether we can provide any evidence about why substantial heterogeneity

exists in posterior_meani for students who have the same prior_meani and GPA1i. We stress that it is not our

objective to provide a formal test of any specific model of learning. Indeed, as will be discussed in detail later,

doing so will always be extremely difficult using real-world data.19 Nonetheless, given that little is understood

about the process governing expectations formation in the real world, we turn to a particularly prominent

model of learning - the Bayesian model - to obtain some theoretical implications describing why heterogeneity

may exist in updating. Whether, in practice, these implications are useful for predicting heterogeneity is

examined by taking advantage of survey questions that were motivated by the theory.

        Suppose that student i’s grade point average on a 4.0 scale in a particular semester t is determined by

the sum of a constant θi that represents his person-specific, permanent academic ability (or academic

preparation that is essentially permanent in nature at time of college entrance) and a random variable εti20;

(2) GPAti =     θi +εti .

We begin by describing the model under assumptions about εti that would be standard in a textbook version -


   19
     Moreover, doing so runs somewhat counter to perhaps the strongest rationale for collecting survey data on
   expectations - that it allows researchers estimating behavioral models to move away from somewhat arbitrary,
   untestable assumptions about the learning process in favor of relatively flexible specifications for the learning
   process. Providing evidence about whether agents update in, for example, a Bayesian manner has been the focus of
   experimental work.

   20
     Although we tend to refer to θi as ability, we note that it is not necessarily literally true that changes in beliefs
   about θi entirely represent changes in beliefs about ability. For example, a person who enters school with a belief
   that the mean of the school’s grade distribution is higher than it actually is may reduce his beliefs about his own
   mean GPA after the time of entrance even if he has not learned anything about his ability relative to other students
   at the school. However, what seems important is that, if misperceptions about average grades at the school exist at
   the time of entrance, they are not likely to be overly large. Thus, students of perhaps the most policy interest - those
   who perform very poorly - are almost certainly learning primarily about something other than their relative position
   in the grade distribution when they see grades that are much lower than expected. Regardless, if one wanted to be
   technically correct, θi would be referred to as mean GPA for person i, and for much of this paper the distinction is
   not of particular importance.

                                                            11
that εti represents semester randomness in grades that is purely idiosyncratic in nature, that εti is not observed

directly by students, and that beliefs about εti are fixed for all t.21

        Learning takes place about θi. Beliefs about θi at the beginning of the first semester (t=1) are

characterized by a distribution that we refer to as the “prior” distribution. We refer to the mean and variance

of this prior distribution of ability for person i as the prior mean and prior variance. After the first semester,

the student observes his first semester grade point average GPA1i = θi +ε1i which represents a noisy signal of

academic ability. This noisy signal (hereafter often referred to simply as the “signal”) is used in conjunction

with the prior distribution of θi and the belief about the distribution of εti to generate the distribution that

characterizes the person’s beliefs about θi at the beginning of the second semester (t=2). Hereafter, we refer

to this t=2 distribution as the “posterior” distribution. We refer to the mean and variance of this distribution

of ability for person i as the posterior mean and posterior variance.

        From our survey questions it is not possible to identify the entire prior distribution or the entire

posterior distribution of θi. For example, because survey question A.2 (Appendix A) elicits information about

GPA1i =θi + ε1i, an attempt to identify the prior distribution of θi from this question is confounded by the

presence of ε1i - with the problem being that a student’s beliefs about ε1i are not observed.22 Similarly, because

survey question A.4 (Appendix A) elicits information about GPA2i =θi + ε2i, an attempt to identify the posterior

distribution of θi from this question is confounded by the presence of ε2i. However, under the assumption that

students believe that E(εti)=0, we can identify the prior mean and posterior mean from the survey questions

A.2 and A.4 since this assumption implies that Et=1(GPA1i)=Et=1(θi) and Et=2(GPA2i)=Et=2(θi).23 The construction

   21
     These beliefs about εti may or may not be correct. The assumption that students do not learn about εti reduces the
   dimension of the learning problem.
   22
     One might think about estimating the distribution of ε1i to use in place of beliefs about ε1i. However, assuming
   that beliefs correspond to the true distribution is not particularly appealing given that the objective of this paper is to
   examine what can be learned directly from the data without making such assumptions. Further, beliefs constructed
   in this way would be contradicted directly by the data; for some individuals, the variance of θi +ε1i elicited in survey
   question A.2 would be smaller than the estimated variance of ε1i.
   23
     In the textbook model εti can be thought of as something like luck. Then, the assumption is that, on average, luck
   is neither good nor bad. Grades are bounded on the [0.0, 4.0] grade interval. While this reality does suggest that
   certain distributions for ε cannot be literally correct, it does not by itself directly lead to a contradiction of the
   assumption that a person believes that E(εti)=0. Nonetheless, we stress that this is an assumption made largely for

                                                              12
of E(GPA1i) and E(GPA2i) from the survey questions was described in Sections III and IV.A, respectively, with

these variables being referred to in those sections as prior_meani and posterior_meani, respectively.

          Thus, while one would be interested, most generally, in how the entire posterior distribution of ability

evolves, we focus our attention by attempting to understand how the posterior mean evolves. Under Bayesian

updating, a convenient linear form arises for the posterior mean under the assumption that a student’s prior

distribution of θi is normally distributed and the assumption that the student believes that εti is normally

distributed. Specifically, under these assumptions and the assumption that the student believes that E(εti)=0:

(3a)              posterior_meani = W1i·prior_meani + W2i·GPA1i

(3b)                                = prior_meani + W2i· (GPA1i - prior_meani)

where, denoting σ2εi to be the variance of εti,


                                              σ2εi                         prior&variancei
(3c)                        W1i '                           , W2i '                               .
                                    σ2εi%prior&variancei                σ2εi%prior&variancei



Thus, in the Bayesian model, heterogeneity exists in posterior_meani for students with the same GPA1i and

prior_meani because different students assign different weights to GPA1i and prior_meani. We are interested

in the model’s explanation for why this heterogeneity exists. Equation (3b) shows that W2i can be interpreted

as the proportion of the gap between actual and expected performance (GPA1i -prior_meani) that the student

believes will persist into the future, or, equivalently, is due to permanent factors. Equation (3c) shows that the

weight W2i is decreasing in the amount of noise, σ2εi, that a person believes exists in the grade process. Then,

the model produces three implications for why heterogeneity may exist in weights:

       Implication 1: A student should put more weight on GPA1i and less weight on prior_meani if he
                     believes that his better or worse than expected performance is due to permanent factors;

       Implication 2: A student should be more likely to believe that his better or worse than expected
                     performance is due to permanent factors if he believes that σ2εi is small;




   convenience with the objective of keeping the subsequent analysis and interpretation as simple/transparent as
   possible.

                                                             13
    Implication 3: A student should put more weight on GPA1i and less weight on prior_meani if he believes
                   that σ2εi is small.

        Our objective is to use unique survey questions to examine whether heterogeneity in updating in

our data is generally consistent with these implications. Before turning to this exercise, we note that, in

practice, there is plenty of scope for questioning the textbook model so that providing a formal test of

Bayesian updating is difficult using non-experimental data (and not the objective here). For example, the

assumption that a student does not observe any portion of ε directly will not be literally true. If a researcher

knew exactly which elements of ε were known to the individual and could measure these elements, then the

researcher could adjust equation (2) to reflect this information. While it would never be possible to observe

everything in a person’s information set, it seems worthwhile to take into account that the BPS data are unique

in providing information about one component of ε - study effort - that is observed by the student and is

perhaps the most important input in the grade production function (S&S, 2008b)

        The manner in which we incorporate study effort into the textbook model is discussed in detail in

Appendix B. As described there, what is needed is a comparison of the prior mean, posterior mean, and first

semester grade performance holding study effort constant.24 To allow such a comparison, we construct adjusted

measures of the posterior mean and first semester grade performance, which we refer to as posterior_meani*

and GPA1i*, by holding effort constant at Expected_STUDY1i, the study effort on which the student person is

asked to condition when answering the question from which we construct prior_meani (Question A.2). The

approach also requires an assumption about how study effort influences grade performance. We assume that

students believe that study effort affects grade performance in a linear manner.

(4) GPAti = αiSTUDYti + θi +εti.

        We now turn to examining whether heterogeneity in updating in our data is generally consistent


   24
     First, a simple comparison of prior_meani to posterior_meani would produce a misleading view of what a person
   has learned about his academic ability if the number of hours that the person expects to study per day in semester t
   (Expected_STUDYti) changes between the beginning of the first semester (t=1) and the beginning of the second
   semester (t=2). Second, a simple comparison of GPA1i to prior_meani would provide misleading information about
   the accuracy of a person’s prior beliefs about his ability if a person’s study effort in the first semester was different
   than what he expected at the beginning of the first semester.

                                                             14
with the three implications. For this exercise, we use both our unadjusted measures and the measures

adjusted to take into account study effort.25 Here, we discuss the survey questions that we use and describe,

in broad strokes, the main findings. In Appendix C, we detail the results using the unadjusted and adjusted

measures.

Implication1 To examine Implication 1 we need a measure of the extent to which a person believes that his

better or worse than expected performance is due to permanent factors. This motivated the wording of

Question C (Appendix A) which, between the first and second semesters, elicited individual perceptions about

the percentage of the GPA1i - prior_meani gap that should be attributed to each of the following: better or

worse than expected ability (Line A), better or worse than expected preparation (Line B), higher or lower than

expected study effort (Line C), and better or worse than expected luck (Line D).26

            In the model with study effort, the analog to Equation (3b) shows that W2i can be interpreted as the

proportion of the gap between actual and expected performance (GPA1i -prior_meani) that the student believes

is due to permanent factors after one takes out the portion of the gap that is due to different than expected study

                                          $ 2i , is created under the assumption that Line A and Line B tend
effort. Our measure, which we refer to as W

to be viewed as persistent and Line D tends to be viewed as transitory:


                                                 %lineA%%lineB
(5)                                 Ŵ2i '                        ,               Ŵ1i'1&Ŵ2i.
                                             %lineA%%lineB%%lineD



           Consistent with Implication 1, Appendix C shows that, when forming the posterior mean, students put

significantly more weight on their first semester grade point average and significantly less weight on their prior


      25
        In the adjusted model with study effort, the starting point analogous to equation (1) comes from replacing
      posterior_meani with the adjusted measure posterior_meani* and GPA1i with the adjusted measure GPA1i*. The
      results are shown in Column 1 of Table 6. Both the null hypothesis that β1=0 and the null hypothesis that β2=0
      continue to be rejected at all traditional significance levels with t-statistics of 11.098 and 8.091, respectively.
      26
        In order to keep this experimental question manageable, if a student performed worse (better) than expected, the
      survey question abstracts from the possibility that the student might have found expected ability to be better (worse)
      than expected or expected preparation to be better (worse) than expected or study effort to be higher (lower) than
      expected or luck to be better (worse) than expected.

                                                               15
          $ 2i is high.
mean when W

Implication 2 To test the second implication from the previous section we need a measure of how much noise

students believe exists in the grade process. This motivated question D (Appendix A) which at the beginning

of the first semester asked individuals about the importance of “luck” in the determinations of grades, where

we have attempted to define luck to contain a wide range of transitory factors that would be contained in ε.

If “luck” is roughly synonymous with ε (and under the previous assumption that students believe that E(εti)=0),

the sum of the responses on lines D.2 and D.3 of question D would represent a person’s beliefs about Pr(εti

>.25|εti >0).27 Although this interpretation of the sum of the responses on lines D.2 and D.3 is certainly not

literally correct, the sum should be strongly (positively) correlated with σ2εi so, acknowledging the obvious

abuse of notation, we refer to the sum as σ̂2εi . As discussed in Appendix C, we find strong evidence of a

negative relationship between W$ 2 i and σ̂2εi that is consistent with Implication 2.

Implication 3 Examining the third implication requires that we examine the influence of our proxy σ̂2εi

directly. Consistent with implication 2, Appendix C shows that, when forming the posterior mean, students

put significantly more weight on their first semester grade point average and significantly less weight on their

prior mean when they believe that σ2εi is small. We note that the evidence in support of this implication is

                                                                    $ 2i ) represents a structural, environmental
particularly useful for future work since σ̂2εi (unlike the measure W

belief. As such, this finding could allow a more useful specification for the learning process to be embedded

in a behavioral model of the drop-out decision.

V. Direct evidence about the reasons for drop-out.

              The outcome variable we use, dropouti, is an indicator of whether students in our sample (who were

all enrolled at the beginning of the second semester and typically finished the second semester) leave school

before the beginning of the second year. We find that 17% (56 out of 325) of the students in our sample do

so.


      27
           This measure has a mean (standard deviation) of .511 (.250) for the sample of 211 students in Table 7.

                                                                 16
           The drop-out decision at the end of the second semester can be written

(6) dropouti =1 iff dropouti*=E2(VN)-E2(VS)>0,

where E2(VS) is the expected present value of lifetime utility at the end of the second semester (t=2) of

returning to college and E2(VN) is the expected present value of lifetime utility at the end of the second

semester of entering the workforce.

           While, in reality, dropouti represents the solution to a non-trivial dynamic programming problem, the

estimation of a structural model of the drop-out decision is beyond the scope of this paper. Instead we employ

straightforward linear probability models, so that the contribution of the analysis here comes entirely from the

unique nature of the data. Although we have a specific interest in understanding the importance of learning,

note that Equation (6) motivates specifications in which variables related to a person’s state at the end of the

second semester, rather than what the person has learned during the year, enter as independent variables. In

terms of state variables related to academic ability, a student’s cumulative grade point average at the end of

the second semester (GPA_Cumulativei) influences E2(VS) because it represents a student’s current stock of

grades and a student’s beliefs about the mean of his ability/grade distribution at the end of the second semester

influences E2(VS) because it represents beliefs about the future flow of grades.28 The former is essentially just

an average of GPA1i and GPA2i and is obtained directly from administrative data. For the latter, we construct

a self-reported version EOY_meani from an end-of-the-second-semester survey question that is identical to

Survey Questions A.2 and A.4 except that it elicited beliefs about grades in the fall term of the second year

by asking students to “assume that you return to Berea and that the classes you take in the fall term are of equal

difficulty as those you took this year.”29

           Two hundred sixty-eight students have legitimate values of both EOY_meani and GPA_Cumulativei.

We remove an additional six people who had GPA_Cumulativei<1.5, and, therefore, were forced to leave



   28
     While the entire belief distribution could influence decisions, we focus on the mean of this distribution for
   simplicity.
   29
        This variable is constructed in the same manner as prior_meani and posterior_meani in Sections III and IV.

                                                             17
school.      Regressing dropouti on GPA_Cumulativei in the                first column of Table 9 indicates that

GPA_Cumulativei is a statistically significant and quantitatively important predictor of dropouti (t-statistic

= !5.772). Regressing dropouti on EOY_meani in the second column of Table 9 indicates that EOY_meani is

a statistically significant and quantitatively important predictor of dropouti (t-statistic = -5.615). More

importantly, Column 3 of Table 9 shows that EOY_meani continues to be significant predictor of dropouti (t-

statistic -2.349) when it is included in a specification that also includes GPA_Cumulativei (t-statistic !2.673).

Thus, the results when we use beliefs about academic ability/grade performance from self-reported

expectations data are consistent with the theoretical implication that actual grade performance and beliefs about

future grade performance should both influence the drop-out decision.30

          The potential value of the self-reported expectations data becomes particularly evident after viewing

the results in Column 4 of Table 9 in which the self-reported EOY_meani is replaced by a Rational

Expectations estimate RE_EOY_meani which is constructed as described in Appendix D. Inconsistent with the

simple theory, the RE results indicate that beliefs about future grade performance do not affect the drop-out

decision after conditioning on GPA_Cumulativei. The estimated effect of RE_EOY_meani is quantitatively very

small (.021) and of an unexpected sign. In addition, both the effect of RE_EOY_meani and the effect of

GPA_Cumulativei are estimated imprecisely. Intuitively, this occurs because GPA_Cumulativei both enters

the drop-out specification itself and is forced to play a central role in the construction of RE_EOY_meani.

          Of relevance for thinking about various explanations for drop-out that might serve as alternatives to

explanations involving academic ability/grade performance, in S&S (2008a) we find that, although credit

constraints likely influence the drop-out decision of some students at Berea, the large majority of attrition is

unrelated to credit constraints. We focus most of our attention here on the most prominent remaining

explanation - that students often leave school because they find it to be stressful or unenjoyable - although we




   30
     One could perhaps construct a scenario in which only current grade performance matters. However, given that
   future grade performance will account for roughly 75% of a person’s final grade point average, it seems only natural
   to believe that both current grades and beliefs about future grades should be important determinants of drop-out.

                                                          18
do return later to a discussion of other possible explanations.31 At the end of the second semester, the BPS

elicited information about how enjoyable person i found being in school relative to being out of school using

Survey Question E (Appendix A). To simplify the discussion we ignore the qualitative nature of the variable

and treat this information as a quantitative, continuous variable EOY_enjoyabilityi which, in practice, has five

possible values (1-5) with higher values representing a situation in which school is less enjoyable. Column

5 of Table 9 shows that students who find school to be unenjoyable are much more likely to drop out, with the

estimated effect of EOY_enjoyabilityi on dropouti being significant at .001. However, Table 10 shows that

EOY_enjoyabilityi is very strongly correlated with both GPA_Cumulativei (p-value .0002) and EOY_meani (p-

value < .0001). In Column 6 of Table 9 we see that adding EOY_enjoyabilityi to the specification that includes

EOY_meani, and GPA_Cumulativei (Column 3 of Table 9) leaves the estimated effects of EOY_meani, and

GPA_Cumulativei essentially unchanged. However, the estimated effect of EOY_enjoyabilityi decreases by

fifty percent relative to the specification in which EOY_enjoyabilityi is included by itself (Column 5), with

the p-value associated with a test of the hypothesis of no effect for EOY_enjoyabilityi increasing from .001

(Column 5) to .079 (Column 6). Thus, while the enjoyability of school does itself appear to have some effect

on drop-out, much of the drop-out of unhappy students appears to arise because these students also tend to

have had poor academic performance and tend to expect to have poor academic performance in the future.

        From an interpretation standpoint, an important, open question is whether, to some extent, bad grade

performance causes school to be unenjoyable or vice-versa. If unhappiness at school causes bad grade

performance, one might expect this to be revealed primarily in substantial decreases in effort (relative to what

was expected at the time of entrance) for those who find school to be unenjoyable. The null hypothesis that

students with higher values of EOY_enjoyabilityi study the same amount as other students during the first year

can be rejected at significance levels greater than .085.32 However, the relatively small size of the estimated


   31
     Our data collection is related to the notion that a first pass at collecting measures of social integration in Tinto
   (1975) might utilize a question along the lines of “Are you enjoying being at university?” Draper (2005).
   32
    We find no differences in the amount that students expected to study at the beginning of the year by
   EOY_enjoyabilityi group.

                                                              19
effect implies that the effect of unhappiness on grade performance through this route would be quite small.33

Thus, it seems likely that bad grade performance itself is an important underlying cause of dropout.

           The results from Column 6 of Table 9 can be used to quantify the role that learning plays in the

drop-out decision. The average predicted value of dropouti is .126.34 To examine the amount of drop-out that

would have been present if students had learned nothing about their ability after the time of entrance, we

compute the average predicted value of dropouti under the counterfactual assumptions that EOY_meani is equal

to prior_meani and that GPA_Cumulativei is equal to prior_meani. Under these assumptions we find that the

average predicted drop-out rate decreases by 34% to .083. To examine the amount of drop-out that would be

present if students had learned nothing about the enjoyability of school, we compute the average predicted

value of dropouti under the counterfactual assumption that EOY_enjoyabilityi is equal to what was expected

at the beginning of the year (as elicited by Question F in Appendix A and referred to as prior_enjoyabilityi).

Under this counterfactual, the average predicted drop-out rate decreases by 10% to .113.35

        Thus, the results suggest that what a students learns after arriving at school plays an important role in

the drop-out decision, with learning about ability being particularly prominent. Given our specific interest in

the role of learning, it is worth exploring whether it is possible to estimate specifications that incorporate

learning directly. To motivate the form of these specifications, rewrite equation (6):

(7) dropouti =1 iff dropouti*=E0(VN)-E0(VS) +[ E2(VN)-E2(VS)- {E0(VN)-E0(VS)} ] > 0.

The second term, [E2(VN)-E2(VS)- {E0(VN)-E0(VS)}], captures what the student has learned, between the time

of college entrance (t=0) and the end of the second semester (t=2), about the expected benefits of being in


   33
    A one unit increase in EOY_enjoyabilityi is associated with a .139 decrease in a student’s average study hours per
   day in the first year.

   34
    Note that 33 of 262 (12.6%) of the 262 person subsample have dropouti equal to one. This percentage becomes
   14.6% if we add back in the students who satisfied the condition of having legitimate values of both EOY_meani
   and GPA_Cumulativei but had GPA_Cumulativei<1.5. This is still slightly lower than the drop-out rate for the full
   325 person sample (17%), in part because a few students drop-out during the second semester.
   35
     The analysis of this section has included only individuals who have GPA_Cumulativei greater than 1.5. Including
   the remainder of the individuals and reestimating Column 6 of Table 9, we find that the drop-out rate would have
   decreased by 39% due to learning about ability. The decrease in the drop-out rate due to learning about the
   enjoyability of school is predicted to remain at 10%.

                                                           20
school . To allow comparability with our earlier results, we begin by focusing on learning about ability as

measured by the difference in mean expectations EOY_meani - prior_meani and learning about the

enjoyability of school as measured by EOY_enjoyabilityi - prior_enjoyabilityi. The presence of the first term,

E0(VN)-E0(VS), indicates that, in order for a specification in which learning enters directly to be sensible, it

must also include information about how far each student was from the margin of indifference at the time of

college entrance.36 Since, all else being equal, students who are closer to the margin of indifference at the time

of entrance will be less likely to graduate, we are able to take into account possible differences in this “initial

condition” by including each student’s perception about the probability that he will graduate at the time of

college entrance (prob_gradi) which we obtain from Question B in Section III.

        The results in the first column of Table 11 indicate that there is information in the self-reported initial

conditions variable prob_gradi; students with higher values of prob_gradi are significantly less likely to drop

out conditional on what they learn about their ability and the enjoyability of school with a test of the hypothesis

that prob_gradi has no effect having a p-value of .039. The effect of learning about ability is highly

significant with the null hypothesis that EOY_meani - prior_meani has no effect on drop-out yielding a t-

statistic of -4.225. The effect of learning about the enjoyability of school is just significant at 5%.

        We can use this model to re-examine our earlier results which quantify the role that learning plays in

the drop-out decision. The average predicted value of dropouti is essentially the same as before, .127.

Assuming no learning about ability (setting EOY_meani - prior_meani equal to zero for all students) leads to

an average predicted drop-out value of .103. Assuming no learning about the enjoyability of school (setting

EOY_enjoyabilityi - prior_enjoyabilityi equal to zero for all students) leads to an average predicted drop-out

value of .117. In the second column of Table 11 we add the additional learning term GPA_Cumulativei -

prior_meani to account for learning about the stock of grades at the end of the first year. Using this model




   36
     That is, whether a student ultimately ends up above the margin of indifference and out of school (dropouti* >0)
   depends on how far below the margin of indifference he was at the time of entrance (i.e. how negative E0(VN)-
   E0(VS) is) and, given this, whether the amount he learns after college entrance pushes him over the margin of
   indifference.

                                                           21
leads to an average predicted drop-out value of .089 when we assume that no learning about ability takes place

(setting both EOY_meani - prior_meani and GPA_Cumulativei - prior_meani equal to zero) and leads to an

average predicted drop-out value of .119 when we assume that no learning about the enjoyability of school

takes place. Thus, the results are very consistent with what was found using equation (6).

        The BPS also collects information about other factors that could influence a student’s state at the end

of the first year. In the last column of Table 9 we add, to the specification in Column 6, variables representing

a person’s beliefs about the financial returns to schooling at the end of the year (EOY_returnsi), whether the

student has a parent that lost a job during the year (parental_job_lossi), and a student’s health on a four point

scale where higher values represent better health (EOY_healthi).37 A student’s health and whether the student

has a parent that lost a job may influence how enjoyable it is to be in school. Indeed, Table 10 shows a

statistically   significant correlation between EOY_enjoyabilityi and EOY_healthi and between

EOY_enjoyabilityi and parental_job_lossi. As a result, adding the additional variables makes it difficult to

interpret the estimated effect of EOY_enjoyabilityi. However, the primary message from Column 6 of Table

9 - that previous academic performance and beliefs about ability/future grade performance play a central role

in the drop-out decision - remains strong with the estimated effect of EOY_meani and GPA_Cumulativei

staying roughly the same when the new variables are added. In the last column of Table 11, we add variables

representing what a person has learned about the financial returns to schooling during the academic year

(EOY_returnsi - prior_returnsi), the change in the student’s health during the year (EOY_healthi -

prior_healthi), and the parental job loss variable (parental_job_lossi) to the specification in Column 1 of Table

11. Again we find that adding these variables has little effect on the estimated importance of learning about

ability (EOY_meani - prior_meani).




   37
    EOY_returnsi is the difference, at the end of the first year, between a student’s beliefs about the median earnings
   he would receive if he graduated from college with a 3.0 grade point average and the student’s beliefs about the
   median earnings he would receive if he left school immediately. EOY_healthi comes from Question G (Appendix
   A).

                                                            22
VI. A study of poorly performing students

        Our results indicate that what a student learns about his academic ability plays an important role in

whether he drops out of school. Thus, from a policy standpoint it is important to understand to what extent

students update their beliefs in a reasonable fashion. Here we study this issue by focusing on the group of

students who are of particular concern to policymakers - students with poor grade performance in the first

semester. Specifically, in order to continue to take advantage of Question C of Appendix A (which examines

how well a student performs relative to expected), we examine students who have values of

GPA1i!Prior_Meani in the bottom third of our sample.38 One hundred of the 109 students in the bottom third

correctly recognized in Question C.1 that their first semester grades were worse than expected. On average,

these 100 students have a GPA1i -Prior_Meani gap of !1.25 points. Table 12A uses Question C.3 to show

how much of this gap these students believe, on average, should be attributed to worse than expected

ability/preparation, worse than expected luck, and lower than expected study effort. Comparing the numbers

in Table 12A to the numbers in Table 12B for students in the top third of the GPA1i -Prior_Meani distribution

raises the possible concern that students in the bottom third may be incorrectly dismissing new information

about their ability; students in the bottom third attribute, on average, only 27% of the GPA1i -Prior_Meani to

worse than expected ability/preparation whereas students in the top third attribute, on average, 67% of the

GPA1i -Prior_Meani to better than expected ability/preparation.39

VI.A. Are beliefs about the reasons for poor academic performance accurate?

        In order to examine whether the beliefs in Table 12A are accurate we must determine what proportion

of the average GPA1i -Prior_Meani gap should actually be attributed to each of the three possibilities. Because

the decomposition exercise requires assumptions, the results should be viewed as an attempt to provide some


   38
     These students have a GPA1i!Prior_Meani <-.56. We note that, because most students tend to be very optimistic
   initially about their grade performance, being in the bottom of the GPA1i!Prior_Meani is essentially synonymous
   with being in the bottom of the GPA1i distribution; the average value of GPA1i is 2.012 for the former group and is
   1.924 for the latter group.
   39
     In results not shown, we find that differences in updating between these groups is broadly consistent with this
   finding; students in the bottom third put significantly less weight on GPA1i than students in the top third in the
   construction of the posterior mean.

                                                            23
rough evidence about whether, on average, students are generally able to comprehend the underlying reasons

for their worse than expected performance.

The portion of the gap that should be attributed to lower than expected study effort

        As seen in Table 12a, on average, students in the bottom third of the GPA1i -Prior_Mean1i distribution

believe that the majority of their grade gap (55%) should be attributed to the fact that they did not study as hard

as expected. Our results provide striking evidence that they are indeed correct in believing that their effort was

substantially lower than expected; while Question A.1 indicates that, on average, students in the bottom third

expected to study 3.98 hours per day, our time-diaries show that they actually studied only 3.07 hours a day.40

Further, as a bit of an aside, individuals in the top third of the GPA1i -Prior_Mean1i , who, on average, were

much less likely to report that studying more than expected was an important reason for their better than

expected grade performance (21%), did indeed have initial beliefs about studying that were much more

accurate; while, on average, students in the top third expected to study 3.44 hours per day, in reality they

studied 3.57 hours per day.41

        As discussed earlier, in S&S (2008b) we find that an extra hour of studying per day increases first

semester grade point average by .36. Using this estimate, the fact that, on average, students in the bottom third

studied .91 hours a day less than expected implies that (.91*.36/1.25)%=26% of the average GPA1i -

Prior_Mean1i gap should be attributed to the fact that these students studied less than

expected. This number is shown in Table 13.42

   40
     The null hypothesis that the average actual amount studied is the same as the average expected amount studied
   leads to rejection at all traditional significance levels with a standard normal test statistic of 3.65.
   41
     The null hypothesis that the average actual amount studied is the same as the average expected amount studied
   cannot be rejected at any traditional significance levels with a standard normal test statistic of .57.
   42
     One possible explanation for the finding that individuals in the bottom third significantly overstate the role of
   effort is that students have perceptions about the causal effect of studying on academic performance that are not be
   the same as the estimated causal effect in S&S (2008b). Survey question H (Appendix A) not only allows
   heterogeneity across students but also allows a particular student’s belief about the effect of an additional hour of
   studying to vary with the number of hours that he is currently studying. We find that, on average, students believe
   that, if they had studied as much as they expected, their grade performance would be higher by .51. Using the
   information from Question H as if it is the truth (in place of our estimate of .36) and recomputing the numbers in
   Table 13, we find that the proportion of the gap that should actually be attributed to less effort than expected
   increases from 26% to 41% (with the perceived amount of 55% from Table 12A).

                                                            24
The portion of the gap that should be attributed to worse than expected luck

        The intuition underlying our approach for determining the portion of the gap that should be attributed

to worse than expected luck is that a group of students who, on average, have bad luck in the first semester

should see their average grades rebound in the second semester (after adjusting for study effort in the two

semesters). Using our estimate of .36 for α and referring to equation (4):

        (8) GPA1i = .36Study1i + θi +ε1i

        (9) GPA2i = .36Study2i + θi +ε2i.

By assumption, E(ε1i)=0 and E(ε2i )=0. Further, for this section we think of the transitory components ε1i and

ε2i as representing short-term luck, in which case it is reasonable to assume that ε1i is independent of ε2i.43 The

question of the degree to which students in the bottom third have bad luck in the first semester is then a

question of how much the average value of ε1i is less than zero for these students.

        Differencing equation (9) from equation (8) and rearranging yields

(10) GPA1i ! GPA2i !.36(Study1i ! Study2i )=ε1i!ε2i.

Thus, the left hand side of equation (10) represents the difference in a person’s “luck” between the two

semesters.    Conditional on being in the bottom third of the GPA1i -Prior_Mean1i distribution, the average

value of ε1i may indeed be negative. However, under the assumption that ε1i is independent of ε2i, individuals

in the bottom third have E(ε2i)=0. Thus, the intuition underlying our approach is that, if individuals in the

bottom third have bad luck, on average, in the first semester, then we should see the average grades of this

group rebound in the second semester (after taking into account any change in study effort). Specifically,

taking expectations in equation (10) and rearranging, we get an equation for the average first semester luck



   43
      This is a non-trivial assumption. There would seem to be little doubt that things that could be characterized as
   short-term luck are likely to be an important component of the ε’s. For example, fitting this description would be
   bad matches with teachers, sampling variation in test taking, inopportune short-term sicknesses etc. Examples of
   things that would not fit this description are, for example, the ability to choose courses and long-term sicknesses.
   The effect of course choice is mitigated to a large extent by the reality that many first-year courses are mandatory
   under a general studies curriculum and our data reveal very little evidence of long-term health problems that
   develop after the beginning of the first year. However, it is not possible to rule out other possible examples as well
   (e.g., problems with living arrangements that last a full year). As a result we do not believe that this assumption is
   literally true.

                                                            25
(11) E(ε1i) = E[GPA1i ! GPA2i !.36(Study1i ! Study2i )].

Thus, an estimate of E(ε1i) for the bottom third can be computed as the sample average value of GPA1i !

GPA2i !.36(STUDY1i ! STUDY2i) for individuals in the bottom third.

        For students in the bottom third, there is evidence of the rebound that would indicate bad luck in the

first semester. For this group, the sample averages of GPA1i and GPA2i are 1.98 and 2.44, respectively, and

the sample averages of STUDY1i and STUDY2i are 3.07 and 2.99, respectively. These numbers imply that

students in the bottom third have a sample average of !.49 for GPA1i !GPA2i !.36(STUDY1i ! STUDY2i).

Thus, as shown in Table 13, bad luck accounts for (.49/1.25)%=39% of the average gap.

The portion of the gap that should be attributed to worse than expected ability/preparation

        The portion of the average gap that should be attributed, on average, to lower than expected

ability/preparation is the residual between the average total gap and the portions that should be attributed to

lower than expected effort and bad luck. Thus, as shown in Table 13, 100%-39%-26%=35% is the proportion

of the average GPA1i -Prior_Mean1i gap that should be attributed to worse ability/preparation than expected.

Discussion

        A comparison of Table 12A to Table 13 indicates that, on average, this group of poorly performing

students have a reasonably accurate perception of the extent to which the GPA1i -Prior_Mean gap should be

attributed to worse than expected ability/academic preparation (27% perceived vs. 35% actual). The fact that,

if anything, individuals tend to understate the role of these presumably persistent factors should perhaps be

reassuring to policymakers worried that students might leave school prematurely when things go badly. With

respect to the remaining portion of the GPA1i -Prior_Mean gap, perhaps somewhat surprisingly, students tend

to take much personal responsibility for their poor performance in the sense that they attribute a larger

percentage of the gap than they should to lower than expected effort (55% perceived versus 26% actual) and

a lower percentage of the gap than they should to bad luck (18% perceived versus 39% actual).

V. B. Do forecasts improve for this group?

        For students in the bottom third, Table 4 shows that the average value of Posterior_Meani (2.923) is


                                                      26
much closer to the average value of GPA2i (2.457) than the average value of Prior_Meani (3.267) is to the

average value of GPA1i (2.012).44 Similarly, for this group, the average value of |Posterior_Meani!GPA2i| is

.720 while the average value of |Prior_Meani!GPA1i| is .1.277.45 The improved prediction occurs, in part,

because the grades of this group improve in the second semester, but also because students in this group have

significantly revised their beliefs about grade performance - a null hypothesis that the average value of

Posterior_Meani is the same as the average value of Prior_Meani is rejected at all traditional significance levels.

Approximately 1/3 of the gap that remains between the average value of Posterior_Meani and the average value

of GPA2i can be attributed to the fact that, although students in this group do revise beliefs about how much

they will study, they remain too optimistic; although, on average, students in this group have a value

Expected_STUDY2i of 3.391 (down from an average Expected_STUDY1i of 3.978), the average value of STUDY2i

is 2.992.

VII. Conclusion

        The paper shows that learning about ability plays a major role in the drop-out decision process. We

leave the estimation of a dynamic, learning model of the drop-out decision to future work, although the

results here suggest the value of taking advantage of self-reported expectations data to reduce the reliance

on assumptions in such a behavioral model.




   44
    A test rejects, at all traditional significance levels, the null hypothesis that there is no difference between
   E(Posterior_Meani)-E(GPA2i) and E(Prior_Meani)-E(GPA1i).
   45
    A test rejects, at all traditional significance levels, the null hypothesis that there is no difference between the
   average value of |Posterior_Meani!GPA2i| and the average value of |Prior_Meani!GPA1i|.

                                                              27
References

Altonji, Joseph. “The Demand for and Return to Education When Education Outcomes are Uncertain,” Journal
of Labor Economics, 1993, vol. 11, no. 1, 48-83.

Barsky, Robert, Kimball, Miles, Juster, F. Thomas, and Shapiro, Matthew. “Preference Parameters and
Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and Retirement Survey,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, May 1997, 537-579.

Beekhoven, S., De Jong, U. And Van Hout, H. “Explaining Academic Progress Via Combining Concepts
of Integration Theory and Rational Choice Theory, Research in Higher Education, 43(5), October 2002,
577-600.

Carneiro, Pedro, Hansen, Karsten, and Heckman, James, “Estimating Distributions of Counterfactuals with an
Application to the Returns to Schooling and Measurement of the Effect of Uncertainty on Schooling Choice,”
International Economic Review, 2005

Cunha, Flavio, Heckman, James, and Navarro, Salvador, “Separating Uncertainty from Heterogeneity in Life
Cycle Earnings,” Oxford Economic Papers, 2005, 57(2), 191-261.

Das, Marcel and van Soest, Arthur, “Expected Versus Realized Income Expectations: A Test of the Rational
Expectations Hypothesis,” unpublished manuscript, 2000.

Delavande, Adeline, “Pill, Patch or Shot? Subjective Expectations and Birth Control Choice,”
unpublished manuscript, 2006.

Dominitz, Jeff. “Earnings Expectations, Revisions, and Realizations,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
August 1998, 374-388.

Dominitz, and Hung, “Evidence on the Formation of Information Cascades,” unpublished manuscript, 2003.

Dominitz, Jeff and Manski, Charles. “Eliciting Student Expectations of the Returns to Schooling,” Winter 1996,
1-26.

Dominitz, Jeff and Manski, Charles. “Using Expectations Data to Study Subjective Income Expectations,”
Journal of American Statistical Association, September 1997, 855-867.

Dominitz, Jeff and Manski, Charles. “How Should We Measure Consumer Confidence (sentiment)? Evidence
form the Michigan Survey of Consumers,” Working paper 9926, National Bureau of Research, 2003.

Draper, Stephen, “Tinto’s Model of Student Retention,” Notes:
http://www.psy.gla.ac.uk/~steve/localed/tinto.html (2005).

Heckman, James, Lochner, L, and Todd, Petra. “Earnings Functions, Rates of Return and Treatment Effects:
The Mincer Equation and Beyond.” In Handbook of the Economics of Education, ed. By E. Hanushek and F.
Welch. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 307-458.

Heckman, James and S. Navarro, 2007.” Dynamic Discrete Choice and Dynamic Treatment Effects,” Journal
of Econometrics, 136 (2007): 341-396


                                                     28
Juster, T. “Consumer Buying Intentions and Purchase Probability: An Experiment in Survey Design,” Journal
of the American Statistical Association, 61, 658-696.

Lochner, Lance, “Individual Perceptions of the Criminal Justice System,” American Economic Review, 97(1),
March 2007.

Madeira, Carlos, “Forecasting Academic Achievement,” working paper, Northwestern University, 2007.

Manski, Charles, “Schooling as Experimentation: a reappraisal of the post-secondary drop-out
phenomenon,”Economics of Education Review, Volume 8 number 4, 1989, 305-312.

Manski, C., “Identification of Decision Rules in Experiments on Simple Games of Proposal and
Responses,” European Economic Review, 46 (2002), 880-91.

Manski, C., “Measuring Expectations,” Econometrica, 72 (5), (2004), 1329-1376.

National Center for Education Statistics, “Getting Ready to Pay for College: What Students and Their Parents
Know about the Cost of College Tuition and What They Are Doing to Find Out,” Publication # 2003030,
September, 2003.

Stange, Kevin, “An Empirical Examination of the Option Value of Schooling,” working paper, University
of California Berkeley, 2007.

Stinebrickner, Todd and Stinebrickner, Ralph, “Understanding Educational Outcomes of Students from
Low-Income Families: Evidence from a Liberal Arts College with a Full Tuition Subsidy Program,”
Journal of Human Resources, 38(3) Summer (2003), 591-617.

Stinebrickner, Todd and Stinebrickner, Ralph, “Time-Use and College Outcomes,” Journal of
Econometrics, 121 (1-2) July-August (2004), 243-269.

Stinebrickner, Todd and Stinebrickner, Ralph, “The Effect of Credit Constrains on the College Drop-Out
Decision: A Direct Approach Using a New Panel Study,” American Economic Review. December (2008a)

Stinebrickner, Todd and Stinebrickner, Ralph, “The Causal Effect of Studying on Academic Performance,”
Frontiers in Economic Policy and Analysis (Frontiers), Berkeley Electronic Press (2008b).

Stinebrickner, Todd and Stinebrickner, Ralph, “The Effect of Credit Constrains on the College Drop-Out
Decision: A Direct Approach Using a New Panel Study,” American Economic Review. December (2008).

Tinto, V. “Dropout from Higher Education: A Theoretical Synthesis of Recent Research, Review of
Educational Research, Winter, 1975, Vol. 45, No. 1, 89-125.

van der Klaauw, Wilbert and Wolpin, Kenneth, “Social Security and the Retirement and Savings Behavior
of Low Income Households,” Journal of Econometrics, (forthcoming).

van der Klaauw, Wilbert, “On the Use of Expectations Data in Estimating Structural Dynamic Models: An
Analysis of Career Choices,” unpublished manuscript, 2000.

Wolpin, Kenneth, “Commentary on ‘Analysis of Choice Expectations in Incomplete Scenarios’, by C.F.
Manski,”Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 19, issues 1-3, 1999, 67-69.

                                                    29
Zafar, Basit,“How do College Students Form and Revise Expectations about Major-Specific Outcomes,
working paper, 2008.




                                               30
Table 1A

                    FIRST SEMESTER GPA - BELIEFS AND ACTUAL (n=325)
                                               Subjective probability                    Sample
 1st semester GPA interval
                                                                                       probability
 [3.5,4.0]                                                     .401 (.256)                .234
 [3.0,3.5)                                                     .329 (.175)                .302
 [2.5,3.0)                                                     .160 (.132)                .200
 [2.0,2.5)                                                     .072 (.073)                .123
 [1.0,2.0)                                                     .025 (.035)                .108
 [0.0,1.0)                                                     .012 (.022)                .033

 prior_meani: Approximate subjective mean of GPA1i            3.220 (.292)
      sample average (sample standard deviation)
 Approximate subjective standard deviation of GPA1i            .532 (.195)
      sample average (sample standard deviation)
                                                                                       2.879 (.784)
 Actual GPA1i
       sample average (sample standard deviation)
Note: First column shows average subjective probability (standard deviation) of having GPA1 in
each category. Second column shows proportion of sample with actual GPA1i in each category.

Table 1B
                        FIRST SEMESTER GPA - BELIEFS AND ACTUAL
                   High School Grade Point Average Greater Than Median (n=157)
                                                    Subjective probability Sample probability
 1st semester GPA interval
 [3.5,4.0]                                                 .454 (.245)           .338
 [3.0,3.5)                                                 .310 (.158)           .369
 [2.5,3.0)                                                 .139 (.102)           .153
 [2.0,2.5)                                                 .064 (.060)           .089
 [1.0,2.0)                                                 .022 (.031)           .031
 [0.0,1.0)                                                 .010 (.020)           .019

 prior_meani: Approximate subjective mean of GPA1i          3.275 (.266)
      sample average (sample standard deviation)
 Approximate subjective standard deviation of GPA1i          .526 (.192)
      sample average (sample standard deviation)
 Actual GPA1i                                                                         3.164 (.661)
       sample average (sample standard deviation)
Note: See Note Table 1A
High School Grade Point Average not observed for 11 of 325 students in sample.
Table 1C
                        FIRST SEMESTER GPA - BELIEFS AND ACTUAL
                     High School Grade Point Average Less Than Median (n=157)
                                                        Subjective         Sample probability
 1st semester GPA interval
                                                        probability
 [3.5,4.0]                                              .339 (.250)              .121
 [3.0,3.5)                                              .355 (.188)              .236
 [2.5,3.0)                                              .186 (.155)              .248
 [2.0,2.5)                                              .080 (.083)              .153
 [1.0,2.0)                                              .072 (.038)              .191
 [0.0,1.0)                                              .017 (.024)              .051

 prior_meani: Approximate subjective mean of GPA1i       3.161 (.301)
      sample average (sample standard deviation)
 Approximate subjective standard deviation of GPA1i       .538 (.198)
      sample average (sample standard deviation)
 Actual GPA1i                                                                     2.579 (.802)
       sample average (sample standard deviation)
Note: See Note Table 1A
High School Grade Point Average not observed for 11 of 325 students in sample.


Table 2
                                 Correlation Matrix
                                    Prior_Mean         GPA1        Posterior_Mean      GPA2
 Prior_Mean                              1.0            .147             .403           .177
 GPA1                                                    1.0             .585           .605
 Posterior_Mean                                                           1.0           .394
 GPA2                                                                                    1.0

Note: High School Grade Point Average not observed for 11 of 325 students in sample.
  Table 3

                          SECOND SEMESTER GPA - BELIEFS (n=325)
                                                  Subjective
   2nd semester GPA interval
                                                  probability
   [3.5,4.0]                                      .311 (.278)
   [3.0,3.5)                                      .365 (.205)
   [2.5,3.0)                                      .200 (.174)
   [2.0,2.5)                                      .084 (.101)
   [1.0,2.0)                                      .031 (.058)
   [0.0,1.0)                                      .009 (.025)

   posterior_meani: Approximate subjective mean of GPA2i       3.140 (.357)
        sample average (sample standard deviation)
   Approximate subjective standard deviation of GPA2i          .477 (.194)
        sample average (sample standard deviation)



  Table 4 Descriptive statistics for entire sample (n=325) and subgroups



                             Full Sample      Top third      Bottom third        Top third         Bottom third
Variable
                                                GPA1            GPA1          GPA1 -prior_mean   GPA1 -prior_mean
                              mean (s.d.)     mean (s.d.)     mean (s.d.)       mean (s.d.)         mean (s.d.)

prior_mean                     3.220(.292)     3.278 (.291) 3.199 (.295)       3.123 (.311)        3.267 (.267)
posterior_mean                 3.140 (.357)    3.386 (.287) 2.886 (.303)       3.293 (.307)        2.923 (.306)
GPA1                           2.879 (.784)    3.650 (.225) 1.924 (.553)       3.541 (.354)        2.012 (.605)
GPA2                           2.929 (.772)    3.398 (.560) 2.380 (.783)       3.320 (.668)        2.457 (.786)
   Each entry shows sample average (sample standard deviation)
   Students in bottom third of GPA1 distribution have GPA1<2.64
   Students in top third of GPA1 distribution have GPA1>3.30
   Students in top third of GPA1 -prior_mean distribution have GPA1 -prior_mean>.09.
   Students in bottom third of GPA1 -prior_mean distribution have GPA1 -prior_mean<-.56.
Table 5

             DETERMINANTS OF POSTERIOR MEAN(column 1)
                     AND POSTERIOR MEAN* (column 2)
                               dependent variable    dependent variable
 Independent Variable
                                 posterior_mean        posterior_mean*
                               estimate (std. error) estimate (std. error)
                                      n=325                 n=291

 Constant                               1.158 (.166)**             .323 (.040)**
 Prior_Mean                              .396 (.051)**             .597 (.053)**
 GPA1                                    .245 (.019)**
 GPA1 *                                                            .344 (.042)**

 Study equation (8)
 C                                                                3.249 (.110)**
 σ2µ                                                               1.20 (.103)**
 σ2ν                                                               1.56 (.071)**
                                            R2=.445             Log Like =-1338.49
The first column is estimated by OLS and uses all sample observations.
The second column is a measurement error model estimated by Maximum
Likelihood (using approach of Section IV.C.2) and using all observations
for which a person reports legitimate values of Expected_STUDY1i and
Expected_STUDY2i
*significant at .10
**significant at .05
Table 6

      DETERMINANTS OF Posterior_Mean* (Maximum Likelihood)
                     estimate         estimate      estimate
 Independent
 Variable          (std. error)     (std. error)   (std. error)
                      n=191            n=191          n=191
                   .661 (.388)*      .550 (.399)  .814(.370)**
 Constant
 Prior_Meani      .517 (.112)**    .494 (.115)**  .357 (.129)**
 GPA1i*           .316 (.039)**    .176 (.068)**   .446(.064)**
 Prior_Mean x $                    .177  (.085)**
              i   W 1i
 GPA1i*x W$ 2 i                              .198 (.091)**
 Prior_Meani x σ̂   2                                           .248 (.122)**
                     εi
 GPA1i* x σ̂2εi                                                 -.303 (.127)**
 Study equation (8)
 C                        3.524 (.124)**     3.522 (.125)**     3.527 (.125)**
 σ2µ                      1.272 (.121)**     1.270 (.123)**     1.260 (.122)**
 σ2ν                      1.608 (.072)**     1.609 (.072)**     1.611 (.072)**

                             Log Like           Log Like           Log Like
                            !1328.637          !1326.037          !1314.874
The sample contains the 191 students who a) correctly recognized in Question
C.1 whether they had performed better or worse than expected in the first
semester; b) did not have a percentage of 100 on line c of Question C.2 (or C.3);
c) provided legitimate information about Expected_STUDY1i and
Expected_STUDY2i. The first column repeats the results in Column 2 of Table 5
for the smaller sample here. Estimation is by maximum likelihood (using
approach of Section IV.C.2).
*significant at .10
**significant at .05
Table 7

                              DETERMINANTS OF Posterior_Mean (OLS)
                                       estimate            estimate                        estimate
 Independent Variable
                                      (std. error)       (std. error)                    (std. error)
                                         n=211              n=211                           n=211
 Constant                           1.203 (.223)**      1.181 (.223)**                  1.352 (.223)**
 Prior_Meani                         .380 (.068)**      .362 (.069)**                   .221 (.089)**
 GPA1i                               .242 (.022)**      .169 (.045)**                   .387 (.057)**
 Prior_Meani x W$ 1i                                     .083 (.048)*

 GPA1i x W$ 2 i                                                  .101 (.055)*
 Prior_Meani x σ̂2εi                                                                    .225 (.094)**
 GPA1i x σ̂2εi                                                                          -.298 (.102)**

                                           R2=.436                 R2=.445                 R2=.466
The sample contains the 211 students who correctly recognized in Question C.1 whether they had
performed better or worse than expected in the first semester and did not have a percentage of 100 on line
c of Question C.2 (or C.3). Estimation is by Ordinary Least Squares.
*significant at .10
**significant at .05
Table 8

                               RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN W  $ 1i and σ̂2
                                                                    εi
                                    dependent variable
 Independent Variable
                                                $1
                                                W
                                       estimate (std. error)
                                               n=211
 Constant                                  .158 (.063) **
 σ̂2εi                                     .299 (.110)**



For a description of the sample see the note in Table 6.
Table 9 DETERMINANTS OF DROPOUT:
The effect of a student’s state at end of first year


                                        DETERMINANTS OF dropouti (OLS)
                          estimate      estimate estimate estimate estimate           estimate       estimate
 Independent
 Variable                    (std.         (std.    (std.    (std.    (std.          (std. error)   (std. error)
                            error)        error)   error)   error)   error)             n=261          n=260
                            n=262         n=262    n=262    n=245    n=261                (6)            (7)
                              (1)           (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)
                           .671**       1.113**   1.024**  .647**     .015             .920**         .970**
 Constant
                            (.096)        (.176)   (.178)   (.173)   (.039)             (.195)         (.206)
 GPA_Cumulativei           -.182**                -.114**  -.194**                     -.105**        -.110**
                            (.031)                 (.042)   (.112)                      (.042)         (.043)
 EOY_Meani                     .         -.315**  -.177**                              -.171**        -.156**
                                          (.056)   (.075)                               (.076)         (.078)
 RE_EOY_Meani                                                .021
                                                            (.154)
 school_enjoyabilityi                                               .062**           .033* (.019)      .026
                                                                     (.019)                           (.019)
 EOY_healthi                                                                                          -.019
                                                                                                      (.031)
 EOY_returnsi                                                                                         -.029
                                                                                                      (.037)
 parental_job_lossi                                                                                    .077
                                                                                                      (.061)
                           R2=.113      R2=.108        R2=.132   R2=.104   R2=.038     R2=.146       R2=.155
Table shows results of linear probability models with dependent variable dropouti.
Explanatory variables measure student’s state at end of first year.
Sample is as described in Section V.
Column 4 has less observations since, as discussed in Appendix C, constructing
RE_EOY_Meani involves use of HSGPA and ACT which are missing for some
observations.
*significant at .10
**significant at .05
Table 10 Correlation Matrix (n=260)



                      dropouti     GPA_         EOY_        EOY_         parental_job   EOY_healthi   EOY_returnsi
 Variable                                                                   _lossi
                                 Cumulativei    Meani    enjoyabilityi
 dropouti               1.00

 GPA_Cumulativei      -.339**         1.00
                       .0000
 EOY_Meani            -.335**      .676**        1.00
                       .0000        .0000
 EOY_enjoyabilityi    .195**       -.232**     -.251**       1.00
                        .001        .0002       .0000
 parental_job_lossi    .115*         -.048       -.056     .172**           1.00
                        .063         .437        .364
                                                               .005
 EOY_healthi           -.107*         .089       .227**       -.109*        -.103*         1.00
                         .084         .148        .0002        .078          .097
 EOY_returnsi           -.978         .020         .070      -.156**         -.079         -.044         1.00
                         .204         .739         .260        .011          .119          .472
The first number in each box is the sample correlation between two variables. The
second number is a p-value from a test that the population correlation between two
variables is zero.
*significant at .10
**significant at .05
Table 11 DETERMINANTS OF DROPOUT:
The effect of learning during the first year

                    DETERMINANTS OF dropouti (OLS)
                                          estimate                      estimate       estimate
 Independent Variable
                                         (std. error)                  (std. error)   (std. error)
                                            n=259                         n=259          n=248
                                            .302**                        .280**        .272**
 Constant
                                             (.102)                        (.101)        (.103)
 prob_gradi,                                -.242**                      -.230**        -.228**
                                             (.116)                        (.115)        (.117)
 EOY_meani - prior_meani.                  -.251**                        -.107*        -.238**
                                             (.059)                        (.060)        (.061)
 EOY_enjoyabilityi ! prior_enjoyabilityi    .031*                           .023          .029
                                              (.19)                        (.018)        (.018)
 GPA_Cumulativei - prior_meani                                           -.117**
                                                                           (.044)
 EOY_healthi ! prior_healthi                                                             -.042
                                                                                        (.033)
 EOY_returnsi !prior_returnsi                                                            -.004
                                                                                        (.035)
 parental_job_lossi                                                                      .094
                                                                                        (.063)
                                                     R2=.086            R2=.113        R2=.098
Table shows results of linear probability models with dependent variable dropouti.
Explanatory variables measure how much a person has learned during first year.
sample as described in Section V.
*significant at .10
**significant at .05
Table 12A

                                 Percentages from Question C.3
    100 individuals who have GPA1-PRIOR MEAN in bottom third and correctly indicated on
                      Question C.1 that grades were lower than expected
                                                                        mean
 Independent Variable
                                                                (standard deviation)
                                                                    27.1% (30.5)
 a+b) Worse than expected ability/preparation
 c) Lower than expected study effort                                55.1% (35.1)
 d) Worse than expected luck                                        17.7% (27.2)




Table 12B

                                  Percentages from Question C.2
  79 individuals who have GPA1-PRIOR MEAN in top third and correctly indicated on Question
                            C.1 that grades were higher than expected
                                                                         mean
 Independent Variable
                                                                  (standard deviation)
                                                                      67.1% (34.3)
 a+b) Better than expected ability/preparation
 c) Higher than expected study effort                                 21.4% (27.6)
 d) Better than expected luck                                         11.5% (25.0)




Table 13

                   Estimates of actual importance of categories in Question O
    100 individuals who have GPA1-PRIOR MEAN in bottom third and correctly indicated on
                        Question O that grades were lower than expected
                                                                          mean
 Independent Variable
                                                                   (standard deviation)
                                                                           35%
 a+b) Worse than expected ability/preparation
 c) Lower than expected study effort                                       26%
 d) Worse than expected luck                                               39%
Appendix A: Survey Questions

Question A.1. During your first year of college, how many
hours do you expect to spend in the following activities on an
average weekday (Monday-Friday).
        Activity                                       Avg
                                Weekday hours

           1. Studying and Homework                          ____
                                                             ___
           2. Sleeping                                       ____
                                                             ___
           3. School Athletics, Clubs, other school activities
           _______


Question A.2. We realize that you do not know exactly how
well you will do in classes. However, we would like to have
you describe your beliefs about the grade point average that
you expect to receive in the first semester.
          Given the amount of study-time you indicated in
question A.1, please tell us the percent chance that your grade
point average will be in each of the following intervals. That
is, for each interval, write the number of chances out of 100
that your final grade point average will be in that interval.

Note: The numbers on the six lines must add up to 100.


Interval                   Percent Chance (number of chances
                           out of 100).

[3.5, 4.00]                       ____________

[3.0, 3.49]                       ____________

[2.5, 2.99]                        ____________

[2.0, 2.49]                        ____________

[1.0, 1.99]                        ____________

[0.0, .99]                         ____________

Note: A=4.0, B=3.0, C=2.0, D=1.0, F
Question A.3. During the second semester, how many hours do you expect to spend in the following activities
on an average weekday (Monday-Friday).
        Activity                                     Avg Weekday hours

           1. Studying and Homework                               _______
           2. Sleeping                                            _______
           3. School Athletics, Clubs, other school activities    _______


Question A.4. We realize that you do not know exactly how well you will do in classes. However, we would
like to have you describe your beliefs about the grade point average that you expect to receive in the second
semester.
         Given the amount of study-time you indicated in question A.3, please tell us the percent chance that
your grade point average will be in each of the following intervals. That is, for each interval, write the number
of chances out of 100 that your final grade point average will be in that interval.

Note: The numbers on the six lines must add up to 100.


Interval                   Percent Chance (number of chances out of 100).

[3.5, 4.00]                        ____________

[3.0, 3.49]                        ____________

[2.5, 2.99]                        ____________

[2.0, 2.49]                        ____________

[1.0, 1.99]                        ____________

[0.0, .99]                         ____________

Note: A=4.0, B=3.0, C=2.0, D=1.0, F
Question C.1. Circle the one that is true

a). I received grades in the Fall term that were higher than I had expected to get when I came to Berea.
b). I received grades in the Fall term that were lower than I had expected to get when I came to Berea.

If you circled a), GO TO Question C.2 below.
If you circled b), GO TO Question C.3 below.

Question C.2. (Answer this question if you circled that grades better than expected in Question C.1.)

Please circle those reasons why you think you received grades in Fall term that were higher that you had expected.

A)   My ability is better than I thought it was when I came to Berea.                          _____ __
B)    I am better prepared for Berea College than I thought I was when I came to Berea.        _____
C)   I studied harder than I had expected I would when I came to Berea .                       _____
D)   I had better luck than I expected when I came to Berea in that those things that          _____
     influence grades but were out of my control turned out to be very much in my favor.

Now consider the difference between the grades you received in Fall term and the grades you had expected. On the
lines to the right of the reasons, write the percentage of this difference that you would attribute to each of the
reasons you circled. (The items you did not circle should have zero percentage or be left blank.) Note: The
numbers on the lines should add to 100.

Question C.3. (Answer this question if you circled that grades are worse than expected in Question C.1)

Circle those reasons why you think you received grades in Fall term that were lower than what that you had expected.

A)      My ability is not as good as I thought it was when I came to Berea.                    ____
B)      I am not as well prepared for Berea College as I thought I was when I came to Berea.    ____
C)      I did not study as hard as I thought I would when I came to Berea.                       ____
D)      I had worse luck than I expected when I came to Berea in that those things that         ____
       influence grades but were out of my control turned out to be hurting my grades.

Now consider the difference between the grades you received in Fall term and the grades you had expected. On the
lines to the right of the reasons, write the percentage of this difference that you would attribute to each of the
reasons you circled. (The items you did not circle should have zero percentage or be left blank.) Note: The numbers
on the lines should add to 100.
Question D. Your grades are influenced by your academic ability/preparation and how much you decide to study.
However, your grades may also be influenced to some extent by good or bad luck which may vary from term to term
and may be out of your control. Examples of “luck” may include 1) The quality of the teachers you happen to get and
how hard or easy they grade; 2) Whether you happened to get sick (or didn’t get sick) before important exams; 3)
Whether a noisy dorm kept you from sleeping before an important exam; 4) Whether you happened to study the wrong
material for exams; 5) Whether unexpected personal problems or problems with your friends and family made it hard
to concentrate on classes.
        We would like to know how important you think “luck” is in determining your grades in a particular semester.
We’ll have you make comparisons relative to a semester in which you have “average” luck. Average luck means that a
usual number of things go right and wrong during the semester. Assume you took classes at Berea for many semesters.

GOOD LUCK IN A TERM MEANS THAT YOU HAVE BETTER THAN AVERAGE LUCK IN THAT TERM

Assume for this section that you are in a semester in which you have good luck

D.1 In what percentage of semesters that you have good luck would good luck raise your grade point average (GPA)
        by between 0.00 points and 0.25 points compared to a semester in which you received “average” luck.
        ________
Note. (If you are taking four courses, good luck would raise your GPA by 0.25 points if good luck led to a full letter
grade increase in one of your courses).

D.2 In what percentage of semesters that you have good luck would good luck raise your grade point average (GPA)
        by between 0.26 points and 0.50 points compared to a semester in which you received “average” luck.
        ________
Note: (If you are taking four courses, good luck would raise your GPA by .50 points if good luck led to a full letter
grade increase in two of your courses or a two letter grade increase in one of your courses).

D.3 In what percentage of semesters that you have good luck would good luck raise your grade point average (GPA)
by 0.51 or more points compared to a semester in which you received “average” luck. ________
Note: (For a student taking four courses, this would mean that good luck would lead to a full letter grade increase in
three or more courses)

The numbers in the three spaces above in the good luck section should add up to 100 (because if you are in a
semester where you have good luck, good luck must increase your grades by between 0 and .25 points, or by between
.25 and .5 points, or by more than .5 points).
Question E. Circle the one answer that describes your beliefs at this time.
1. I believe that being in college at Berea will be much more enjoyable than not being in college.
2. I believe that being in college at Berea will be somewhat more enjoyable than not being in college.
3. I believe that I will enjoy being in college at Berea about the same amount as I would enjoy not being in
college.
4. I believe that being in college at Berea will be somewhat less enjoyable than not being in college.
5. I believe that being in college at Berea will be much less enjoyable than not being in college.

Question F. Which of the following best describes your beliefs now? Circle the one best answer.
1. I believe that being in college at Berea is much more enjoyable than not being in college.
2. I believe that being in college at Berea is somewhat more enjoyable than not being in college.
3. I have enjoyed being in college at Berea about the same amount as I would have enjoyed not being in college.
4. I believe that being in college at Berea is somewhat less enjoyable than not being P in college.
5. I believe that being in college at Berea is much less enjoyable than not being in college.

Question G. How would you rate your current health?       Poor    Fair   Good      Excellent

Question H. For each of the following possible amounts that you might study, write down the percent chance
that you will study that amount and the grade point average you expect to receive if you study that amount.

Number of Study Hours a Day                          Expected Grade Point Average
0 hours a day                                                  ___________
1 hour a day                                                   ___________
2 hours a day                                                  ___________
3 hours a day                                                  ___________
4 hours a day                                                  ___________
5 hours a day                                                  ___________
6 or more hours a day                                          ___________
Appendix B: Adding study effort to the textbook model

        The motivation for taking into account study effort can be seen directly in two observations. First, a

simple comparison of prior_meani to posterior_meani would produce a misleading view of what a person has

learned about his academic ability if the number of hours that the person expects to study per day in semester

t (Expected_STUDYti) changes between the beginning of the first semester (t=1) and the beginning of the second

semester (t=2). Second, a simple comparison of GPA1i to prior_meani would provide misleading information

about the accuracy of a person’s prior beliefs about his ability if a person’s study effort in the first semester was

different than what he expected at the beginning of the first semester.

        Then, what is needed are modified measures of the prior mean, posterior mean, and first semester grade

performance in which study effort is held constant. Here we hold effort constant at Expected_STUDY1i, the

study effort on which the student is asked to condition when answering the question from which we construct

prior_meani (Question A.2). Then, our modified measure posterior_meani* represents the posterior mean that

the student would have reported if he had planned to study Expected_STUDY1i rather than Expected_STUDY2i

in the second semester, and our modified measure GPA1i* represents the first semester grade point average the

person believes he would have received if he had studied Expected_STUDY1i rather than STUDY1i in the first

semester. Assuming that students believe that study effort affects grade performance in a linear manner,

(B.1) GPAti = αiSTUDYti + θi +εti,

then the modified measures are given by:

(B.2) posterior_meani* = posterior_meani ! αi (Expected_STUDY2i ! Expected_STUDY1i )

(B.3) GPA1i* = GPA1i - αi (STUDY1i ! Expected_STUDY1i ).

        Then, using posterior_meani* in place of posterior_meani and GPA1i* in place of GPA1i, leads to the

updated version of equation (3):

(B.4)   posterior_meani *= W1i·prior_meani + W2i·GPA1i*

(B.5)                  = prior_meani + W2i· [GPA1i - α (STUDY1i ! Expected_STUDY1i )- prior_meani]

Thus, the interpretation of equation (B.5) is similar to (3b) except that W2i can now be interpreted as the

proportion of the GPA1i - prior_meani gap that the student believes will persist into the future after the portion

of the gap that arises because a person studies a different amount than expected in the first semester is removed.

        The use of the new measures in equations (B.2) and (B.3) introduces new demands on the data. We

assume that αi is homogeneous and use an estimate of .36 that is obtained in S&S (2008b) from an identification

strategy in which we exploit exogenous variation in a student’s study effort created by whether his randomly
assigned roommate brought a video game to school.46 Expected_STUDY1i and Expected_STUDY2i are obtained

from survey Question A.1 and Question A.3 (Appendix A), respectively. They have means (standard

deviations) of 3.47 (1.32) and 3.07 (1.27), respectively, for the sample of 291 students who have valid

observations for both of the expected-study variables. STUDY1i represents the average number of hours that

a person actually studies per day over all days in the first semester and is not fully observed. What is observed
      ˆ
is STUDY    the number of hours that students studied on (up to) four particular days during the first semester
         1i

on which we administered the 24-hour time diaries (Appendix A) mentioned in Section II. Using
   ˆ
STUDY    directly in the construction of GPA1i* (equation B.3) leads to an errors-in-variables problem in the
      1i

independent variable GPA1i*. This problem is not easily corrected using textbook methods both because the

number of completed time diaries varies across individuals and because the regression specifications that will

be used in Section IV.B.3.c include multiple regressors that are functions of GPA1i*.

        To address this issue, we take a Maximum Likelihood (MLE) approach of S&S(2004). Defining N(i)

to be the number of time diaries (out of four) that person i completed in the first semester and letting Sji, j=1,...,
                                                                                    ˆ
N(i) represent the N(i) observed daily study amounts for person i, a noisy proxy STUDY    of STUDY1i can be
                                                                                       1i

constructed as:



                     jS .
                           N(i)
         ˆ
(B.6) STUDY      1
            1i'
                N(i) j'1 ji


The MLE approach deals with the measurement error issue under the assumption that Sji is given by the

permanent/transitory process

(B.7)     Sji = µi +νji.

The permanent component µi represents the average amount that person i studies per day and the transitory

component νji represents a daily deviation from this average amount. We assume that in the population µi

-N(C,σ2µ). We assume that νji is independent across both j and i and that νji -N(0,σ2ν). Then, analogous to the

MLE’s derived in the missing data literature, the likelihood contribution for person i is the joint probability of

posterior_meani* and the observed daily study amounts S1i,...,SN(i)i.

        Intuitively speaking, if we knew the value of µi for each person and the distribution of νji, we could

integrate out the effect of the missing information in any outcome equation of interest. Our MLE takes into


   46
     In S&S (2008b) we find that a person’s study effort is strongly influenced by the instrument and find strong
   support in favor of the validity of the instrument by using a wide variety of survey questions that were designed
   specifically to document possible violations of the exogeneity condition.
account that, while we do not know the value of µi for each person i, the observed values of Sji,when viewed

through equation (7), provide evidence about the likelihood of different values of µi.                  More specifically,

analogous to the MLE’s derived in the missing data literature, the likelihood contribution for person i, Li, is the

joint probability of posterior_meani*, and the daily study amounts S1i,...,SN(i)i. Noting that, under our

permanent/transitory assumption in equation (B.7), each of the daily study amounts and posterior_meani* are

independent conditional on µi,

 Li= Ig1(S1i|µi)···g1(SN(i)i|µi) g2(posterior_meani*|µi) h(µi) dµi

where the g’s and h are density functions.

         In practice, we assume normality for all densities of relevance, in which case the assumptions above

about µi imply that h-N(C,σ2µ) and equation (B.7) implies that g1-N(µi,σ2ν). Defining N* to be the total number
                                                 N(           N(           N(
of days in the first semester, STUDY1i' 1 j Sji' 1 j µi% 1 j νji 6 µ i by the Law of Large Numbers as
                                       N ( j'1    N ( j'1   N ( j'1
N* becomes large. Then, g2 is normally distributed with a variance of σ2u (the variance of u in equation 1 of

main text) and a mean of β0 + β1 prior_meani + β2 [GPA1i - α ( µi ! Expected_STUDY1i )] .47



Appendix C: More detail about testing implications



Implication1 To examine Implication 1 we need a measure of the extent to which a person believes that his

better or worse than expected performance is due to permanent factors. This motivated the wording of Question

C (Appendix A) which, between the first and second semesters, elicited individual perceptions about the

percentage of the GPA1i - prior_meani gap that should be attributed to each of the following: better or worse

than expected ability (Line A), better or worse than expected preparation (Line B), higher or lower than

expected study effort (Line C), and better or worse than expected luck (Line D).48




                                                  %lineA%%lineB
 (C.1)                               Ŵ2i '                        ,              Ŵ1i'1&Ŵ2i.
                                              %lineA%%lineB%%lineD


   47
     From equation (1) in main text, the mean is β0 + β1 prior_meani + β2 GPA1i*. Substituting equation (B.2) yields β0
   + β1 prior_meani + β2 [GPA1i - α (STUDY1i ! Expected_STUDY1i )]. The mean is then obtained because STUDY1i6
   µi
   48
     In order to keep this experimental question manageable, if a student performed worse (better) than expected, the
   survey question abstracts from the possibility that the student might have found expected ability to be better (worse)
   than expected or expected preparation to be better (worse) than expected or study effort to be higher (lower) than
   expected or luck to be better (worse) than expected.
           Assuming that Line A and Line B tend to be viewed as persistent and Line D tends to be viewed as

                                                    $ 2i :
transitory yields our measure, which we refer to as W

              Line C plays no role when the modified model with study effort is used because equation B.5 in

Appendix B explicitly takes into account the role of different than expected study effort.49 Because equation

(C.1) does not use information for Line C, estimates of the weights cannot be constructed if a student assigns

a percentage of 100 to line C. Restricting our attention to the 211 students who did not have a percentage of

100 on line C and who correctly recognized in Question C.1 whether they had performed better or worse than

expected in the first semester, we find substantial heterogeneity in students’ interpretations of the reasons for

                                                               $ 2i are .688 and .408, respectively.50
the GPA1i !prior_meani gap; the mean and standard deviation of W

           To see whether the measure from equation (C.1) can succeed in predicting differences in the posterior

mean for students with the same prior mean and same first semester grade performance we use the MLE

approach discussed in Appendix B to estimate

                                                                                         $ 2i +u .
                                                                        $ 1i + β GPA * x W
(C.2) posterior_meani*=β0 + β1 prior_meani+ β2GPA1 i*+ β3 prior_meani x W       4   1i          i


           This specification is estimated for the 191 students of our 211 student subsample who also provided

valid information about study effort that is needed to construct posterior_meani* and GPA1i*.51 In the second

column of Table 6 we find that the point estimates of β3 and β4 are of quantitatively important size. For

example, a student who believes that his better (or worse) than expected performance is caused entirely by

                     $ 2i =1) would put 2.1 times as much weight on GPA1i* as someone who believes that his
persistent factors ( W

                                                                                       $ 2i =0). Further, although
better (or worse) than expected performance is caused entirely by transitory factors ( W

as expected β3 and β4 are not estimated particularly precisely, the null hypothesis that β3=0 is rejected at

significance levels greater than .038 (t-statistic=2.077) and the null hypothesis that β4=0 is rejected at

significance levels greater than .031 (t-statistic=2.160). The second column of Table 7 shows generally similar


   49
     This is beneficial because it is hard to know whether students would tend to think of higher or lower than expected
   study effort as being permanent or transitory (although in theory our data would be helpful for this issue because it
   contains Expected_STUDY1i , Expected_STUDY2i, and information related to STUDY1i. Of course, by omitting C,
   equation (C.1) does make a specific assumption about students’ beliefs about the role that higher or lower than
   expected study effort plays in their better or worse than expected grade performance.
   50
     Two hundred forty-six of 325 correctly identified whether they did better or worse than expected with the majority
   of the incorrect responses coming for individuals whose performance was very close to what they expected. Thirty-
   five individuals attributed 100% of the gap to study effort.
   51
        The first column of Table 6 recomputes the results in the second column of Table 5 for the 191 person subsample.
results when the model without study effort is estimated by OLS.52

Implication 2 In Table 8 we regress W$ 1i on the measure σ̂2εi that was described in Section IV.B.3 and find

strong evidence of a positive relationship consistent with Implication 2, with the null hypothesis of no

relationship being rejected at significance levels greater than .007.53

Implication 3 Examining the third implication requires that we examine the influence of our proxy σ̂2εi

directly. The last column of Table 6 shows results from a regression that is analogous to equation (C.2):

(C.3) posterior_meani* =β0 + β1 prior_meani + β2 GPA1 i*+

                            β3 prior_meani x σ̂2εi + β4 GPA1i* x σ̂2εi +ui.

The null hypothesis that β3=0 is rejected at significance levels greater than .042 (t-statistic=2.029) and the null

hypothesis that β4=0 is rejected at significance levels greater than .018 (t-statistic=-2.376). The last column of

Table 7 shows even stronger results when we estimate, by OLS, the analog to equation (C.3) that does not take

into account study effort.54




   52
    This involves estimating equation (11) with posterior_meani and GPA1 i in place of posterior_meani* and GPA1 i*.
   A student who believes that his better (or worse) than expected performance is caused entirely by persistent factors
   (W$ 2i =1) would put 1.6 times as much weight on GPA1i as someone who believes that his better (or worse) than
   expected performance is caused entirely by transitory factors ( W  $ 2i =0). The null hypothesis that β3=0 is rejected at
   significance levels greater than .087 (t-statistic=1.722) and the null hypothesis that β4=0 is rejected at significance
   levels greater than .069 (t-statistic=1.830).
   53
     Some additional care is perhaps warranted. In this regression we have not held prior_variancei constant. If σ2εi
   and prior_variancei were positively correlated, then Equation (3c) shows that the unconditional correlation between
   W1i and σ2εi might not necessarily be positive even though there would exist a well-defined, positive relationship
   between W1i and σ2εi when prior_variancei is held constant. However, we find no evidence that σ2εi and
   prior_variancei are positively correlated. Specifically, constructing a measure of prior_variancei +σ2εi from the
   uncertainty that a person exhibits about GPA1i = θi +ε1i in survey Question A.2, we find no evidence of a
   relationship between this measure and our proxy for σ2εi. If there was no relationship between σ2εi and
   prior_variancei +σ2εi then prior_variancei and σ2εi would be negatively correlated.
   54
     In this case, the null hypothesis that β3=0 is rejected at significance levels greater than .018 (t-statistic=2.384) and
   the null hypothesis that β4=0 is rejected at significance levels greater than .004 (t-statistic=-2.907).
Appendix D. Computing RE_EOY_Mean

        We construct RE_EOY_meani for each person under the assumption that individuals update in a

Bayesian manner. Rewriting equation (3) to take into account that the observed noisy signal in this exercise

comes from the grade point average for the first full year (instead of just the first semester),

(3a*)           RE_EOY_meani = W1i *·prior_meani + W2i*·GPA_Cumulativei.

        What is necessary is to provide values of prior_meani, W1i, and W2i. The Rational Expectations

assumption would imply that prior_meani is the mean grade point average of students who are deemed to

be similar person i. Here we assume that people are similar if they have the same sex, high school grade

point average, and score on the American College Test (ACT). Thus, prior_meani can be constructed as

a predicted value from a regression of grades on SEXi, HSGPAi, and ACTi.

        Modifying equation (3c) to take into account that GPA_Cumulativei = (GPA1i + GPA2i)/2, the

weights are given by


                                              σ2εi
                                               2                             prior&variancei
(3d*)                    W1i( '                              , W2i( '                             .
                                   σ2εi                                 σ2εi
                                          %prior&variancei                     %prior&variancei
                                    2                                    2


Under the RE assumption, prior_variancei can be thought of as the amount of permanent heterogeneity that

exists in grades across students that are deemed to be like person i. σ2εi can be thought of as the amount

of transitory variation in grades across students that are deemed to be like person i. Then, it is natural to

estimate prior_variancei and σ2εi using a Random Effects estimator which takes advantage of grade

performance in both the first semester and the second semester. Doing so as in the Table Appendix C

below leads to an estimate for prior_variancei of .131 and an estimate for σ2εi of .226. Then, the weights

are .463 and .537, respectively.
Table Appendix D Random Effects Estimation of grade performance



                                           Grade Point Average


                                               estimate std. error

                                                      n=245
 Constant                                         .217 (.289) **
 SEXi                                              -.099 (.067)
 HSGPAi                                           .438 (.075)**
 ACTi                                             .056 (.009)**
 variance of permanent component                      0.131
 variance of transitory component, σ2εi               0.226

Table contains estimates from a Random Effects Estimation of grade performance in the first and second semesters.
*significant at .10
**significant at .05
