NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PREFERENCES FOR REDISTRIBUTION
Alberto F. Alesina
Paola Giuliano
Working Paper 14825
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14825

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2009

¸ The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Alberto F. Alesina and Paola Giuliano. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Preferences for Redistribution
Alberto F. Alesina and Paola Giuliano
NBER Working Paper No. 14825
March 2009
JEL No. I38
ABSTRACT
This paper discusses what determines the preferences of individuals for redistribution. We review
the theoretical literature and provide a framework to incorporate various effects previously studied
separately in the literature. We then examine empirical evidence for the US, using the General Social
Survey, and for a large set of countries, using the World Values Survey. The paper reviews previously
found results and provides several new ones. We emphasize, in particular, the role of historical experiences,
cultural factors and personal history as determinants of preferences for equality or tolerance for inequality.

Alberto F. Alesina
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu
Paola Giuliano
UCLA, Anderson School of Management
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and IZA
paola.giuliano@anderson.ucla.edu

Preferences for Redistribution∗
Alberto Alesina and Paola Giuliano
Harvard University and UCLA
June 2008
Revised January 2009

Abstract
This paper discusses what determines the preferences of individuals for
redistribution. We review the theoretical literature and provide a framework to incorporate various effects previously studied separately in the
literature. We then examine empirical evidence for the US, using the General Social Survey, and for a large set of countries, using the World Values
Survey. The paper reviews previously found results and provides several
new ones. We emphasize, in particular, the role of historical experiences,
cultural factors and personal history as determinants of preferences for
equality or tolerance for inequality.

1

Introduction

Economists traditionally assume that individuals have preferences defined over
their lifetime consumption (income) and maximize their utility under a set of
constraints. The same principle applies to preferences for redistribution. It
follows that maximization of utility from consumption and leisure and some
aggregation of individual preferences determines the equilibrium level of taxes
and transfers.1 Note the inter-temporal nature of this maximization problem:
preferences for redistribution depend not only on where people are today in
the income ladder but also on where they think they will be in the future if
redistributive policies are long-lasting.
The level of inequality of a society may affect some individuals’ income indirectly. For instance the level of inequality may affect crime and some people
may be more or less subject to the risk of criminal activities. But, in addition,
individuals have views regarding redistribution that go beyond the current and
future states of their pocketbooks. These views reflect different ideas about
∗ Prepared for the Handbook of Social Economics.
We thank David Laibson, Romain
Wacziarg and, especially, Alberto Bisin for very useful comments and suggestions.
1 See Persson and Tabellini (2002) and Drazen (2002) for a broad review of political economic models.

1

what an appropriate shape of the income distribution is: in practice, views
about acceptable levels of inequality and/or poverty. Explaining the origin of
these ideas (which eventually translate into policies via some mechanism of
aggregation of preferences) implies bringing into the picture variables that go
beyond the current and expected consumption (and leisure) of the individual
consumer/worker/voter. Needless to say, standard neoclassical general equilibrium theory can accommodate altruism, i.e., a situation in which one agent cares
also about the utility of somebody else. But altruism is not an unpredictable
"social noise" to be randomly sprinkled over individuals. Altruism, or, to put it
differently, preferences for redistribution that do not maximize private benefits
strictly defined, has certain predictable and interesting features. Of course, this
does not mean that we ignore individual income, which is indeed very important.
Where do different preferences for redistribution come from? Note that the
question of whether or not a government should redistribute from the rich to the
poor and how much is probably the most important dividing line between the
political left and the political right at least on economic issues. Therefore, answering this question almost amounts to explaining where ideological preferences
on economics issues come from, certainly an important, fascinating and difficult
task. A few possibilities, non mutually exclusive of course, have been examined
in the literature. First, different preferences may arise from individual history
(as emphasized, for instance, by Piketty (1995)). A history of misfortune may
make people more risk-averse, less optimistic about their future upward mobility and more inclined to equalize everybody’s income, as noted by Giuliano and
Spilimbergo (2008) with reference to historical events such as the Great Depression. Second, different cultures may emphasize in different ways the relative
merits of equality versus individualism, an issue discussed in detail by Alesina
and Glaeser (2004) with reference to a comparison between the US and Europe.
Different historical experiences in different countries may lead to various social
norms about what is acceptable or not in terms of inequality. Third, indoctrination (for instance, in communist dictatorships) may influence people’s views, as
emphasized by Alesina and Fuchs Schundeln (2007) with reference to Germany.
Fourth, sometimes parents may purposely transmit "distorted" views about the
reality of inequality and social mobility to their children in order to influence
their incentives (Benabou and Tirole (2005)). Fifth, the structure and the organization of the family may make people more or less dependent and therefore
favorable to government intervention in distributive matters (Todd (1985), Esping Andersen (1999), Alesina and Giuliano (2007)). Sixt, perception of fairness
matters. Most people do seem to make a distinction between income acquired
by "luck" (broadly defined) and income acquired by "effort" (broadly speaking)
and this distinction matters in shaping preferences for redistribution (Alesina
and Glaeser (2004), Alesina and Angeletos (2005a). Finally, the desire to act
in accordance with public values, or to obtain high social standing could also
play a critical role in the determination of preferences for redistributive policies
(see Corneo and Gruner (2000, 2002)). We will document these differences and
suggest explanations for the persistence of ideologies over time in this area.
In the first part of the paper, we provide a theoretical framework that helps
2

clarify all these various effects in a coherent way. In the second part, we review
evidence discussed by others and provide novel results by using the General
Social Survey (GSS) for the US and the World Value Survey (WVS) for international cross-country evidence. We begin by showing that individual income
indeed matters: richer people are more averse to redistribution. Many other
individual characteristics matter as well. In the US, race is an important determinant of preferences for redistribution, a finding consistent with many other
previous studies.2 An interesting observation is that, after controlling for a variety of individual characteristics, women tend to be more favorable to redistribution than men in many different countries and institutional settings. It is hard
to reconcile this difference using only economic variables as explanations, while
differences in personalities documented by psychologists may be broadly consistent with this empirical observation3 . Education is an interesting variable.
After controlling for income, it is not clear what one should expect. If more
educated individuals prefer less redistribution, one may argue that they think
about prospects of upward mobility resulting from higher education. On the
other hand, education may bias people in favor of more pro-redistributive views
as a result of ideology (left-wing views). We find that the first effect prevails
in the US, but we investigate interesting interactions between education and
political orientation.
We are interested specifically in the determinants of preferences for redistribution, but the modern welfare state has two main objectives: to redistribute
from the richer to the poorer and to provide social insurance. Some aspects
of the welfare state (think of the progressivity of the income tax) are primarily redistributive, others provide primarily, but not exclusively, social insurance
(think of unemployment compensations), others (such as health insurance financed by progressive taxation) have both components, and one could go on.
In theory, one can conceptually distinguish the two. Empirically, it is not so
simple. Often, but not always, survey questions or any other method to extract
individuals’ preferences for redistribution cannot distinguish so clearly whether
the subjects favor the latter or only social insurance. The problem (we feel) is
serious from an empirical standpoint but not fatal, in the sense that preferences
for the two are most likely very highly correlated.
The chapter is organized as follows: Section 2 presents some simple formalization that captures the effects sketched above in a reasonably exhaustive
way. Section 3 reviews the available evidence on the explanations for preferences for redistribution. We organize the discussion around "variables," e.g.,
income, education and race, and we present evidence for the US, cross-national
evidence and experimental evidence, whenever available, on each variable. The
last section concludes.
2 See Alesina and La Ferrara (2005), Alesina and Glaeser (2004) and the references cited
therein.
3 See Pinker (2006) for a survey.

3

2
2.1

Preferences for Redistribution: Theory
The Basic Model

The basic "workhorse" political economic model for preferences for redistribution is provided by Meltzer and Richards (1981), who built upon Romer (1975).
In this well-known static model, individuals care only about their consumption
(income) and have different productivities. The only tax and transfer scheme
allowed is given by lump sum transfers financed with a linear income tax. The
median voter theorem aggregates individual preferences and captures a very
simple political equilibrium. The simplest possible illustration of this model is
as follows. Consider a standard utility function with the usual properties:
ui = u(ci )

(1)

where one unit of labor is inelastically supplied and the individual productivity is αi . Assume that the government uses a linear income tax t on income
to finance lump sum transfers and that there is a wastage equal to wt2 per
person which capture the distortionary cost of taxation.4 Using the government
budget constraint, which establishes that every one receives the same lump sum
transfer, and defining αA the average productivity, one can write:
ci = yi = αi (1 − t) + αA t − wt2

(2)

Equation (2) simply states that consumption is the sum of after tax labor
income (the first term) plus the lump sum transfer obtained by the government
(the second term) reduced by the waste of taxation (the third term).
The equilibrium tax rate is the one that maximizes consumption for the
voter with median productivity (αM ):5
t=

αA − αM
2w

(3)

The distance between average and median is, in this model, the critical
measure of inequality. The tax rate (and therefore the level of the lump sum
redistribution) is higher the larger the difference in productivities (or income,
in simplified versions of the model like this one) between the average and the
median voter6 .
4 This is of course a simplified version of a model in which the distortionary cost of taxation
emerge from an endogenous labor supply.
5 The result that in this model the median voter result applies is due to Romer (1975).
6 The level of taxation is also inversely related to the degree of wastage associated with tax
distortions. Note that with no tax distorsions the tax level chosen by the median voter would
be one.

4

This is only one particular measure of inequality. There are of course many
others measured by different indicators, which would not affect the level of redistribution in this model. In addition the restriction of the type of redistributive
scheme that can be used is also very stringent; a wider available set of policies
would lead to different results. However, as we discuss more in the empirical
section, the main failure of this model relies on the simplistic assumption about
the policy equilibrium, namely the one person one vote rule and the median
voter result. Alesina and Rodrik (1994) and Persson and Tabellini (1995) provide two different adaptations of this model to a dynamic environment with
growth. In these extensions however the ranking of individuals does not change
in the growth process, that is the profile of the income distribution is invariant
over time and the Meltzer-Richards result extends directly.

2.2

Expected Future Income and Social Mobility

A departure from the basic model is one in which the ranking of individuals in
the income ladder can change, i.e. a model where we allow for social mobility,
as in Benabou and Ok (2001). In their model, individuals care about not only
current but also future income. If redistributive policies are long-lasting, future
income prospects which determine future positions in the income ladder matter
in determining current preferences for redistribution. We need at least two
periods in the utility function:
ui = u(ci1, ci2 )

(4)

where the second subscript indicates the periods. Individual income is now
perturbed by shocks to individual productivity (yi2 = αi + εi2 ), where the
properties of these shocks are discussed below. 7 The budget constraint for the
consumer (ignoring discounting) is:

(yi1 + E(yi2 ))(1 − t) + ty1A + tE(y2A ) − 2wt2 = ci1 + ci2

(5)

which generalizes (2) Note the assumption that the tax rate is decided at the
beginning of period 1 and is fixed for period 2. Also period 2 income (productivity) is uncertain so individual i has to vote based upon his expectation about
his income relative to average and median income of period 1, which are known,
and of period 2, when his position in the income ladder is unknown. In particular, prospects of upward mobility should make somebody below the median
of today’s income be more averse to redistribution than otherwise. In principle, this effect could be counter-balanced by the prospect of downward mobility,
but Benabou and Ok (2001) show that, under certain conditions, prospects
7 If the shock in period 1 is known before voting for redistribution it is of course irrelevant
for the analysis and we assume it away.

5

of upward mobility (POUM) reduce the demand for redistribution relative to
the basic Meltzer-Richards case. They present not only a two period model
but an infinite horizon one. The three key assumptions that deliver this result
are: i) tomorrow’s expected income is a concave function of today’s income,
ii) limited risk aversion and iii) skewed distribution of the random shocks to
income. The concavity of the function of tomorrow’s income relative to today’s
income implies that some of the families that are poorer than the median today
will become richer than the median tomorrow, but this effect is declining at
an increasing rate with today’s income. The assumption on the income shocks
prevents the distribution of income to degenerate. The role of low risk aversion
is fairly obvious: excessive risk aversion makes too many people too worried
about downward mobility.
There are two ways of interpreting the POUM hypothesis. One is as a reminder that people vote on redistribution not only based upon their current
income but also based on expected income and that, therefore, social mobility
deeply interacts with preferences for redistribution. This is an important point,
and we will discuss social mobility extensively below and in the empirical part
of this paper. The more stringent interpretation of the POUM hypothesis is
an explanation based upon full rationality, and in the median voter spirit, that
explains why redistribution is relatively limited despite a relatively poor median
voter. This is harder to believe. There are many other reasons why redistribution is limited even in very unequal societies (like the US), and we will examine
many of these reasons below. Also, the prediction of the theory seems to be
based on a set of fairly restrictive assumptions and functional forms that are
very difficult to test empirically. Even remaining in the context of social mobility, other explanations may be more appealing than the POUM hypothesis.
One is over-optimism, driven by the fact that many people expect to be richer
tomorrow than in a rational equilibrium. Another option is over-optimism as
derived from self induced "indoctrination" to convince yourself (or your children) to work hard (Benabou and Tirole (2006)); third, over-optimism about
upward mobility may be the result of social indoctrination precisely to prevent
the adoption of excessive redistributive policies or the other way around (Alesina
and Glaeser (2004)).

2.3

Inequality Indirectly in the Utility Function

A more radical departure from models in which individuals care only about
their income/consumption is the one in which the utility function includes some
measure of income distribution:
Uit =

T


u(cit (. . . Qt ))

t=p

where cit is individuals’ consumption, Qt some measure of income inequality
and the summation is taken from the present "p" to a final period (possibly in6

finity). In other words, consumption depends upon a host of standard variables
(like labor supply or productivity) and inequality.
This argument in the utility function captures the fact that individual i does
not care about inequality per se but only about its effect on her consumption
flow. Two observations: First, the dependency of consumption over inequality
might be much richer if the model were made dynamic: current consumption
may depend on past inequality or even on expected future inequality, but the
basic qualitative argument would not change. Second, different individuals may
care differently about different measures of inequality, a very important theoretical consideration that will be very hard to take into consideration empirically.
More generally, each individual consumption may depend on the entire shape of
the income distribution, but for the sake of simplicity of exposition and (especially) of testing, we focus our attention on one specific measure of inequality,
say the Gini coefficient.
What would be the sign of the first derivative of that function (i.e., the sign
t
of ∂C
∂Q at different levels of Ct )? In particular, is it possible that even the "rich"
may be affected negatively by inequality so that, purely for selfish reasons, they
would vote for redistribution? Two arguments have been suggested to justify a
negative derivative for the rich:
1) Externalities in education. Assume that the average level of education in a country increases the aggregate productivity in the country and that
education has positive externalities. Also assume that more inequality implies
that more people are below a level of income that does not allow them to acquire
an education (an assumption about imperfection of credit markets is typically
needed here). Then, even the rich may favor some redistribution because they
would also benefit from an increase in the average level of education8 . Strictly
speaking, the rich should be in favor not of redistribution tout court but especially of publicly supported education, but these models can be also suggestive
of conclusions to more general types of redistribution.9
2) Crime and property rights. A commonly held view is that more
inequality leads to more crime, and therefore, by reducing it, the rich would
have to spend less on security, since generally their property would be safer.
Note that this argument implies that one should observe more redistributions
than predicted by both the basic Meltzer-Richards model and its extensions with
POUM. However, the implicit assumption to make this work is that it should
costs less to the rich to redistribute than to increase spending on security.
3) Incentive effects. This channel goes in the opposite direction, that is
more inequality has an aggregate social value. In fact one may argue that more
inequality creates incentives to work hard and exercise more effort for most
people below the top. To the extent that there are externalities in effort and
education acquisition, this may work in favor of society as a whole, since the
8 See Perotti (1999), Galor and Zeira (1993) and the survey by Benabou (1996) on the issue
of redistribution and externalities in education.
9 Lizzeri and Persico (2004) use a similar argument to justify why the "rich" allowed an
extension of the franchise in nineteenth century England even though such extensions would
have lead to more redistribution

7

aggregate level of effort/investment in education would go up. The strength of
this incentive effect is, of course, a very hotly debated empirical question.
Whether channel 3) dominates or not on the other two is of course critical
in determining the relationship between inequality and economic efficiency. If
channel 3) dominates there is a trade off between equality and economic efficiency (aggregate level of income/consumption); if channel 1) and 2) dominate
there is no such a trade off. Needless to say the trade off does not need to be neither linear nor monothonic, namely it may change shape and its derivative may
change sign at different levels of inequality. For a model where this potential
non linearities are important see Perotti (1993).

2.4

Inequality Directly in the Utility Function

Individuals may have views about "social justice," namely, what constitutes
a justifiable level of inequality, or poverty or, generally speaking, views about
the distribution of income above and beyond how the latter affects their own
income.
One way of expressing these preferences that would be useful for our discussion is as follows:

Ui =

T

(β t (u(cit (. . . Qt )) − δ i (Q − Q∗i )2 )

(6)

p=t

where Q∗i represents the ideal level of inequality for individual i and δ i
his/her weight on deviations from it. Needless to say, the quadratic specification
is used only for convenience of exposition. The first term in the utility function
is the same as in the previous section.
Much of our empirical discussion will be on what determines Q∗i and δ i
for different individuals. From a theoretical standpoint, we could characterize
various possibilities:
a) a "libertarian" view Q∗ = QL considers a distribution of income (captured by a measure of inequality in short) as determined purely by the market
and with no redistribution of any kind from the government.
b) an "efficieny maximizing view" Q∗ = QE , where QE ≷ QL depending
on which one of the three channels discussed in the previous section dominates.
b) a "communist view" QC
i = 0 considers everybody identical; that is this
is the distribution obtained by a government who equalizes everybody’s income
with appropriate tax/transfer schemes.10
c) a "Rawlsian view" Q∗R
is the distribution obtained ex post after the
i
government has implemented all the policies that equalize everybody’s utility
behind a veil of ignorance.
10 Needless to say, actual Communist regimes never achieved that and in fact guaranteed
extreme privileges for party members.

8

Obviously a fascinating empirical question if what determines preferences,
in particular what determines Q∗ . We will devote much space to this point in
the empirical section.

2.5

Trade Offs

Note that someone may face a trade off: on the one hand, excessively marketgenerated income inequality may reduce his consumption through the effects of
ci (Q) in the first part of the utility function. But if he has the "libertarian"
view he may be willing to give up some consumption to satisfy his ideological
goals. In practice individuals often adjust their beliefs or views in ways that
limit these trade offs. Rich people for instance are likely to believe strongly in
the beneficial incentive effects of inequality so as to justify in terms of efficiency
their preferences for less equality. The opposite applies for those less wealthy
and/or left leaning individuals. They tend to disregard the incentive effects of
inequality to justify their ideological preferences for equality. This is a more
general phenomenon in which when there is uncertainty about the efficiency
effects of certain policies, ideological preferences lead people to lean towards
the estimates of certain economic parameters that justify their ideologies. For
instance, right wingers tend to believe that the elasticity of labor supply to
taxes is high and the other way around. A fascinating issue of causality here
is obvious, and further research on this point at the border of economics and
psychology would be fascinating.11

2.6

Fairness

Individuals’ views about an acceptable level of inequality are often intertwined
with a (possibly vague) sense of what is "fair" and "unfair." As we will show
empirically below, people feel that there is a difference between wealth accumulated, for instance, by playing the roulette tables in Las Vegas and wealth
accumulated by working one’s way up from an entry-level job to a higher-level
one with effort, long days at the office and short hours of sleep.
Suppose that individuals’ income is due to a combination of effort (e) and
luck (l), so that:
yi = ei + li

(7)

The overall measure of income inequality Q can now be decomposed in Qe
and Qf , the inequality in the distribution of the effort and the luck parts of
income, respectively. Therefore:
Q = F (Qe , Qf )

(8)

11 The work by Benabou and Tirole (2006) is related to the issue of adopting certain beliefs
because they are useful in order to increase efficiency.

9

that is the overall inequality is a function of inequality in income derived
from effort and luck. In the previous subsection, we assumed that individuals
had an ideal level of Q and no preferences over its two components. But it is
also possible (and indeed, it will be the case empirically) that individuals have
preferences defined over the two components for a sense of fairness, namely
a sense that one is more entitled to retain the sources of his/her effort than
income acquired by chance. In this case, we could rewrite the utility function
of individual i as follows:

Ui =

T

l
2
l
l∗ 2
(β t (u(. . . cit (Qt )) − δ ei (Qe − Qe∗
i ) − δ i (Q − Q ) )

(9)

t=p

e∗
l∗
where QM
i ≥ Qi > Qi ≥ 0 for some, and perhaps all, i. These inequalities
capture the fact that, at least for some individuals (possibly all of them), a lower
level of inequality induced by luck is deemed more desirable than inequality
induced by effort. Also, possibly δ ei ≥ δ li , if individuals feel more strongly about
deviations from optimality for one or the other type of inequality. Note that it
makes sense to maintain total inequality in the first part of the utility function,
since externalities due to, say, crime and education depend on total externality
rather than its components.
Obviously, what is luck and what is effort is, in practice, an issue on which
people may strongly disagree. Is being born smart purely luck? If so, how do
we disentangle success in life that results from some combination of effort and
intelligence? Being born in a wealthy family is luck, but what if the wealth
accumulated by our parents (perhaps at the expenses of care given to us) is the
result of great effort?
As we will see below, many people seem to consider this distinction (between
effort and luck) relevant to their preferences about social policies and redistribution, even though, if one could investigate people’s minds more thoroughly
above and beyond simple survey questions, one would discover deep differences
in definitions of luck and effort. In addition, the terms effort and luck need to
be interpreted broadly. By effort, we mean all activities that require "pain"
or a utility cost for the individuals, while luck represents all those factors that
deliver income to the individuals without any pain or loss of utility to obtain it.
Incidentally, social policies that depend on people’s views about luck and effort
may in turn create incentives for individuals to put forth more or less effort and
therefore generate endogenously different shares of luck-dependent and effortdependent income. This is the point raised by Alesina and Angeletos (2005a).
They derive a multiple equilibria model that is meant to capture a low redistribution (US-style) equilibrium and a high redistribution (European-style) equilibrium. In the former, taxes are low, people invest more in effort/hard work, and
a higher fraction of income differences amongst people is due to effort. Thus,
in equilibrium, people want low redistribution and relatively low taxes. In the
European equilibrium, taxes are high, effort and labor supply are low, a larger

10

fraction of income differences is due to differences in luck, and therefore, high
taxes and large redistributions are desirable.12 Note that in equilibrium beliefs
about the share of luck and effort in the determination of income differences
are correct: in the US the equilibrium tax is lower, effort is higher and a larger
fraction of income is determined by effort rather than luck, and the other way
around.

3

Empirical Evidence

The goal of this section is to study what determines preferences for redistribution illustrating what we know about the various channels and mechanisms
highlighted above. We conduct our analysis using individual level data, as a
result we do not provide any evidence on the aggregate relationship between
inequality and economic outcomes. Our results focus mostly on the subset of
channels with fewer preexisting research; we, however, review available evidence
for the most studied determinants of preferences for redistribution. We present
two sets of evidence: one for the United States based on results from the General Social Survey and cross-country evidence based on results from the World
Value Survey. We begin by illustrating these two datasets.

3.1

Data

Starting from 1972, the General Social Survey interviewed a large number of
individuals in the US, asking questions about a wide range of opinions, including
political behavior, religious preferences and a wide range of economic beliefs, as
well as standard demographics. Each year’s sample is an independent crosssection of individuals living in the US, ages 18 and up. We use all data available
from 1972 to 2004.
For the cross-country evidence, we use individual data from the World Value
Survey (WVS). The WVS covers four waves (1981-84, 1990-93, 1995-97, 19992004) and provides questions on beliefs and a large set of demographic and
socioeconomic variables. The number of countries varies by wave and goes from
a minimum of 20 to a maximum of around 80. We choose questions similar to
those in the GSS (exact wording is reported below).
Our variable on preferences for government redistribution is based on the
following question from the General Social Survey:13 “Some people think that
the government in Washington should do everything to improve the standard
of living of all poor Americans (they are at point 1 on this card). Other people
think it is not the government’s responsibility, and that each person should take
care of himself (they are at point 5). Where are you placing yourself in this
12 Alesina and Angeleots (2005b) present a different version of a similar model in which
corruption and connections take the role of luck.
13 This is the same variable used by many others for this purpose; see, for instance, Alesina
and La Ferrara (2005).

11

scale?” We recode this question so that a higher number means one is more
favorable to redistribution.
We measure preferences for redistribution in the World Value Survey by
looking at several questions. The closest to the General Social Survey asks the
respondent an opinion about the following statement (this question also has the
largest coverage, since it has been asked in the last three waves).
a. "Now I’d like you to tell me your views on various issues. How would
you place your views on this scale? 1 means you agree completely with the
statement on the left; 10 means you agree completely with the statement on the
right; and if your views fall somewhere in between, you can choose any number in
between. ’People should take more responsibility to provide for themselves’ (1)
versus ’The government should take more responsibility to ensure that everyone
is provided for’ (10).”
We also rely on the following questions for the descriptive evidence (these
questions have been asked only in the third wave of the World Values Survey):
b. "Why, in your opinion, are there people in this country who live in need?
Here are two opinions: Which comes closest to your view? ’Poor because of
laziness and lack of will power’ (1) and ’Poor because of an unfair society’ (2)."
c. "In your opinion, do most poor people in this country have a chance of
escaping from poverty (1), or is there very little chance of escaping it (2)?"
d. "Do you think that what the government is doing for people in poverty
in this country is about too much (1), the right amount (2) or too little (3)?"

3.2
3.2.1

Results
The basic model

The basic Meltzer-Richards model has received scant empirical support. Two
papers by Alesina and Rodrik (1994) and Persson and Tabellini (1995) noted an
inverse correlation between inequality and growth, and they derived this result
from a dynamic version of the Meltzer-Richards model. However work by Benabou (1996) and Perotti (1996) confirmed the negative correlation but found
very little evidence that the channel was indeed the tax and transfer scheme
suggested by the Meltzer-Richards framework. In fact the US offers an interesting case in point. This is a country with much (and increasing) inequality and
relatively little (and, if anything, decreasing) redistribution, at least until the
time of this writing (winter 2009). Alesina and Glaeser (2004) and McCarty,
Poole and Rosenthal (2007) discuss in detail the evolution of inequality and
redistribution in the US and the political economy of these phenomena. These
rejections, however, do not imply immediately that people care about something
other than their current income. The political mechanism used by Meltzer and
Richards (1981) could be too simplistic if not unrealistic. For instance, with
campaign contributions, the rich could count more and tilt the one person/one
vote rule in their favor. For recent theoretical and empirical discussions of this
point, see Rodriguez (2004), Campante (2007) and Beremboim and Karabarbounis (2008). The latter paper documents how the basic Meltzer-Richards

12

model fails empirically because it does not account for the fact that the very
rich may have more weight in the political process, above and beyond the one
person/one vote rule and the very poor do not vote so they do not have a weight.
However, the authors argue that the Meltzer Richards model could be a good
approximation of the evolution of redistributive policies amongst the remaining
part of the population.
To put it differently: the rejection of the Meltzer Richards model does not
imply that income is not a strong determinant of preferences for redistribution.
The relative failure of the model probably relies on the failure of the median
voter assumption as an aggregator of social preferences. In fact in the next
section we document that individual income is indeed a strong determinant of
preferences for redistribution. As we will see, it is not the only one, and, at
least for the US, other determinants, like race, are also important.
3.2.2

Individual characteristics

We start our analysis by examining the individual determinants of preferences
for redistribution in the United States (Table 1). Column one presents our basic specification. All regressions are estimated using OLS for simplicity (similar
results are obtained with ordered logit). Results of this type of regression are
by now well known, but it is worth briefly reviewing some of the basic facts.
First of all, the richer you are, the less you favor redistribution, which is, of
course, not surprising. The second striking result from this regression is that,
even after controlling for income, marital status, employment status, education
and age, race has a very strong effect: blacks are much more favorable to redistribution than whites14 . In order to get some sense of the size of the effect of
these individual characteristics, note that a one standard deviation of the black
dummy is associated with an increase of preference for redistribution of 17% of
a standard deviation of this variable. An increase in a standard deviation of the
educational variable (in particular of being in high school) implies an increase
of 13% of a standard deviation of preferences for redistribution. Income has a
similar impact (10%), while gender could explain only 6% (an increase in standard deviation in the unemployed and married dummy could decrease/increase
roughly 2% of the standard deviation of preferences for redistribution.)
Women are more pro-redistribution then men, even though the effect of gender is much smaller than that of race. The fact that, in the US, women are
more left-wing than men is well known15 , but note that the significant positive
coefficient on women remains even when we control in column 3 for political
ideology. Thus, there is something about women in addition to ideology that
makes them more socially generous than men. The pro-redistributive behavior
of women compared to men has also been confirmed in the experimental lit14 The importance of race for redistributive policies in the US is well known, as discussed in
detail in Alesina and Glaeser (2004) and many references cited therein.
15 Alesina and La Ferrara (2005), Inglehart and Norris (2000), Montgomery and Stuart
(1999), Shapiro and Mahajan (1986).

13

erature16 . Differences in redistributive behavior, however, do not seem to be
driven by differences in altruism. Andreoni and Vesterlund (2001) found that,
when altruism is expensive, women are kinder, but when altruism is cheap, men
are more altruistic. They also find evidence that men are more likely to be
perfectly selfish or perfectly selfless, whereas women tend to be "equalitarians"
who prefer to share evenly.
Even after controlling for income, education enters with a significant and
negative coefficient: more educated individuals are more averse to redistribution.
Perhaps this captures prospects for upward mobility: people invest more in
education, holding income constant, to be upwardly mobile. More left-wing
individuals are more pro-redistribution even after controlling for income, which
already points in the direction of models highlighted above where an ideological
dimension matters17 . Holding income and education constant, people’s view
about an acceptable level of inequality vary; they care about inequality per se.
The interaction between education and ideology is suggestive. Being more leftwing makes people more favorable to redistribution (column 2); moreover, when
we do interact education with political ideology, the effect of education reinforces
that of political orientation, i.e., having a higher level of education makes more
left-wing people even more favorable to redistribution (column 3). Probably we
are capturing here the left-wing wealthy Democrats made so "famous" in the
recent Obama versus Clinton primary contest. Self-identified ideology also plays
a role in determining giving behavior in experimental evidence, where right-wing
individuals redistribute less and reduce efficiency losses caused by redistribution
(Fehr et al. (1996)).
In column 1, unemployed individuals are more favorable to redistribution,
but this effect is not robust to alternative specifications. The weakness of this
result is interesting: it suggests that the American unemployed may not feel as
trapped in poverty as those in other countries (see Alesina and Glaeser (2004)
on this point). Age shows an inverted U curve. Individuals are first more favorable, then less favorable, to redistribution. Marital status has an insignificant
coefficient.
3.2.3

Expected Future Income and Social Mobility

The first extension which we consider of the basic model is the fact that individuals may look at their future prospects of upward mobility. In Table 2,
we look at rough proxies for prospects of upward mobility. All the individual
controls of column 1 of Table 1 are included; moreover, in column 1, we control
for the education of the father, in column 2, for the income of the family when
the respondent was 16 and, in columns 3 and 4, for two different measures of
16 For a review on experimental evidence on gender differences in preferences, see Crason
and Gneezy (2004).
1 7 Mc Carty Poole and Rosenthal (2007) argue emphatically that income is the only variable
that matters in determining political orientation and, therefore, preferences for redistribution,
but this result together with all the other significant coefficients in this regression suggests
that reality is a bit more complicated.

14

social mobility, one based on differences in the years of education between the
individual and his/her father and the other defined as a dummy if the occupational prestige of the individual is greater than the one of his/her father18 .
Having a highly educated father reduces the desire for redistribution; the same
is true for having a higher income during youth. Social mobility appears to
decrease preferences for redistribution, but only when measured by looking at
occupational prestige; this result is also found in Alesina and La Ferrara (2002).
The impact of father’s education is lower than individual education and in the
order of 4% of the standard deviation of preferences for redistribution (for a
person with a father with a high school degree as compared to a person with
a father with less than a high school degree). The impact of family income at
16 is similar (an increase in a standard deviation in the income of the family
at 16 is associated with an increase of preferences for redistribution of 4% of a
standard deviation of this variable). A one standard deviation increase in social
mobility will also decrease preferences for redistribution by 3%.
An experimental test of the POUM hypothesis shows that the preferred
taxation declines when the transition matrices are characterized by prospects
of upward mobility (Checchi and Filippin (2003)). The authors show that a
longer time horizon calls for reduced taxation, because individuals appreciate
the freedom of changing the optimal tax when confronted with a different income
in the future. Their results are robust when individual factors (such as risk
aversion) and framing effects are taken into account.
A history of misfortune in the recent past can change people’s views of redistribution. It may make them more risk-averse and less optimistic about upward
mobility. This could be interpreted as a learning experience: people realize the
importance of government intervention more after experiencing a negative shock.
We explore this effect in Table 3. As always, we control for the basic individual
determinants of column 1 of Table 1. We look at different negative experiences:
a history of unemployment (defined as a variable equal to 1 if the person has
been unemployed in the last 10 years) and two variables indicating the number of personal traumas (including death of a relative, divorce, unemployment
and hospitalization) that the person experienced during the last year/last five
years. All these variables always have a positive and significant coefficient. An
increase in one standard deviation in the "unemployed in the last ten years"
dummy is associated with a 5% decline in the standard deviation of preferences
for redistribution; the magnitude of the number of traumas last year/last five
years is 4% (3%), respectively.

3.3

Inequality Indirectly in the Utility Function

In this subsection of the theoretical discussion wee have highlighted several channels through which inequality may affect the level of income of some individuals
and as a result the level of aggregate income for a country. The first channel we
18 For a description of occupational prestige scores in the General Social Survey, see Hodge
et al. (1990).

15

discussed was that of inequality on education. Perotti (1996) does indeed note
a negative correlation in a cross sample of countries between inequality and
secondary schooling, a correlation also verified by others especially for poorer
countries (see Benabou (1996) for a survey.) The size of aggregate human capital externalities is a hotly debated issue that underlies much of the discussion
in the literature on endogenous growth models and it goes beyond the scope of
this paper to review this literature. To the extent that there are some positive
externalities from aggregate education and if inequality reduces secondary education then this could be a channel of an inverse relationship between inequality
and growth.19
The second channel emphasizes a direct causation between crime and inequality. Fajnzylber et al. (2002) review the literature and argue that indeed
inequality is positively associated with crime. Beremboim and Campante (2008)
use Brazilian data and try to disentangle causality. In their data they do indeed
observe a correlation between crime and inequality, but the causality is open to
debate. The reverse causality channel goes as follows: those who are more likely
to be subject to criminal activities are those who cannot protect their property
rights, perhaps the lower middle class or even the very poor (especially in poor
countries most of the crime is amongst the poor.) As a result more crime may
actually increases inequality because it does not affect the rich but impoverishes
(directly and indirectly) some of the poor. This a topic which requires further
original research.
The third channel emphasizes the incentive effects of inequality. While
(almost) nobody would deny some beneficial effects of pay scales at the micro
level, the fact that in the aggregate more inequality leads to more efficiency
has received relatively little attention. Bell and Freeman (1999, 2001) present
evidence on this point and argue that more inequality has lead to stronger
incentives to work longer hours; they argue that this may be an explanation of
the longer working hours in the US than in Europe.20

3.4

Inequality Directly in the Utility Function

Next we turn to the determinants of preferences for redistribution in which individuals care not only about their income but also about their ideal profile
of inequality in society. We have already seen some indirect evidence of this
effect in Table 1 when we discussed the role of ideological preferences. Left
leaning individuals tend to prefer less inequality (in fact it is almost a definition
of being left leaning rather than right leaning). But self proclaimed ideological
preferences are only one of the possible determinants of the ideal level of inequality which we have labeled Q∗i in our theoretical illustration. Other factors
are at play and below we examine several of the possible determinants of Q∗i .
19 Rauch (1993) presents evidence consistent with large externalities. Opposite results are
discussed in Acemoglu and Angrist (2000) and Rudd (2008) which also includes a survey of
the literature. On British data see a recent contribution by Metcalfe and Sloane (2007)
2 0 For an overview of the discussion on comparing work hours in the US and Europe see
Alesina, Glaeser and Sacerdote (2005).

16

In particular we will focus our analysis on the importance of religion and race
and other long lasting determinants of preferences for redistribution, such as
differences in historical experiences and cultural differences more generally.
3.4.1

Religion

We begin with religion in Table 4. As above, we include all the individual
determinants of column 1 of Table 1. We look not only at the respondent’s
religion but also at the religious denomination in which he or she was brought
up. Overall, compared to atheists, Protestants appear to be less favorable to
redistribution (column1). On the other hand, being raised Catholic or Jewish
increases the desire for redistribution (but the effect is not significant). Being
brought up religiously has the effect of increasing tastes for redistribution independently of the religious denomination (columns 3 and 4). Note that, when
we control for political ideology, all religious denominations appear to be more
favorable to redistribution (column 2); being Protestant still has a negative sign
but not a significant one. An increase in the standard deviation in the Catholic
dummy increases preferences for redistribution of 3% of a standard deviation
of this variable. The impact of being raised religiously goes from 3% of a standard deviation of preferences for redistribution for Jewish and other religions
to 6% for Catholic. Religious affiliation and participation in religious services
(elicited with a multi-item questionnaire) yields no significant influence on social
preferences in an experimental setting (Tan (2006)).
3.4.2

Race

A large body of experimental and statistical evidence shows that altruism travels less across racial and ethnic lines. In fact, as it tuns out, this is an extremely
important determinant of preferences for redistribution. When the poor are disproportionately concentrated in a racial minority, the majority, coeteris paribus,
prefer less redistribution. The underpinning of this observation relies in a perhaps unpleasant but nevertheless widely observed fact that individuals are more
generous toward others who are similar to them racially, ethnically, linguistically, etc. (see also Luttmer (2001) and Fong and Luttmer (2008)). Evidence
for the strength of this channel is quite striking simply looking at our previous
regressions on individual characteristics: even after controlling for income, education, gender, age, etc., the race of the respondent is a critical (and large)
determinant of preferences for redistribution. In the US the racial majority
(whites) is much less favorable to redistribution than minorities. A large body
of literature both in political science and in economics has documented this fact
both with reference to the US and as an explanation for cross country comparisons. Alesina and Glaeser (2004) review this literature and make the racial
argument a critical determinant of the differences in the more generous redistributive policies of more homogeneous European countries relative to the less
racially homogeneous US. But even within the US the comparison of different
redistributive policies in more or less racially homogeneous states is very telling

17

(see Alesina and Glaeser (2004)).
In the language of our approach the acceptable income inequality Q∗i for
individual i in the racial majority is higher if the lower tail of the income ladder
is disproportionately filled by racial minorities. Note that this consideration has
important consequences for the relationship between immigration and redistribution. To the extent that new immigrants are near the bottom of the income
ladder, their arrival should decrease the desired level of redistribution for the
locals. This has certainly been a phenomenon at work in the US (Alesina and
Glaeser (2004)) but is also beginning to happen in Europe as well with new
waves of immigration from Africa and the Middle East. The topic of immigration and redistribution is an excellent one for future research.

3.4.3

Cultural Norms and Differences in Macroeconomic Experiences

Preferences for redistribution display large differences across countries, as we
discuss below. In this section, we focus on long lasting determinants of preferences for redistribution. In particular, we first focus on the general question
of whether individuals bring with themselves the preferences for redistribution
of their country of origin. Second, we look at some of the long term differences, including the importance of macroeconomic history or the structure of
the family. We examine the importance of culture in the determination of preferences for redistribution by looking at the behavior of immigrants in the US.
The approach of using immigrants’ behavior has become a common way to isolate the importance of cultural norms.21 We use as a measure of culture the
preferences for redistribution in the immigrants’ country of origin. We calculate
the mean preferences for redistribution in the immigrant country of origin by
using a similar question on preferences for redistribution from the World Values
Survey. Table 5 presents a variety of specifications, controlling for the usual set
of controls (column 1), father education (column 2), income of the family at
16 (column 3) and the two previously described measures of mobility (columns
4 and 5). We specifically control for family background, because a lower level
of income or human capital could be the main omitted variable captured by
preferences for redistribution in the country of origin. In all our specifications,
culture appears to be an important variable in the determination of preferences
for redistribution. Our results are in line with those by Luttmer and Singhal
(2008), who specifically study the importance of culture in the determination of
preferences for redistribution, using evidence drawn from the European Social
Survey. A one standard deviation increase in preferences for redistribution in
the country of origin is associated with an increase in the standard deviation of
preferences for redistribution of about 4%.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that difficult times leave a mark in an individual’s beliefs and attitudes. Moreover, research in social psychology points out
21 See also Giuliano (2007), Alesina and Giuliano (2007), Antecol (2000), Carroll, Rhee and
Rhee (1994) and Fernandez and Fogli (2005)

18

that differences in historical experiences, especially during youth, can leave a
permanent mark in individuals’ political and economic beliefs. In particular,
social psychologists point out that there is a socialization period in the lives of
individuals during which socializing influences have the most profound impact:
values, attitudes and world-views acquired during this time period become fixed
within individuals and are resistant to change. Evidence of significant socialization has been found between 18 and 25 years of age (the so-called "impressionable years hypothesis".) In order to investigate the validity of this position
(that beliefs that are formed during the initial years of adulthood may change
within a generation, but, at the same time, once past a critical age they are
more difficult to modify), we follow Giuliano and Spilimbergo (2008) and test
whether differences in a history of macroeconomic volatility during youth can
have a permanent effect in the determination of preferences for redistribution.
In order to do so, we match individual beliefs with the macroeconomic volatility
of the region in which the person was living when she was 16. Using the information location of respondents during critical age (the GSS provides the location
of the respondent at 16), we construct a measure of macroeconomic volatility
during the "impressionable years" range (when the individual was between 18
and 25). For instance, we consider the macroeconomic volatility in New England
in the fifties for an individual who was living in Boston at the age of 16 even if
she/he is currently living in Los Angeles. A cohort of individuals shares a large
amount of experiences, ranging from economic shocks to technological progress
to a multitude of unobservable characteristics. This identification strategy, that
mainly uses cross-regional variation in individual experiences during critical age,
allows to distinguish the impact of a personally experienced macroeconomic history from unrestricted cohorts effects. Macroeconomic volatility, being specific
to a given region, vary also within cohorts and not only across cohorts. The
specification follows the one of the previous section but also adds "region at
16" fixed effects and clusters the standard errors at the "region at 16 level." In
all different specifications, a history of macroeconomic volatility during youth
appears to be an important component in the determination of preferences for
redistribution. We repeat the same exercise for other age ranges22 . Similarly
to Giuliano and Spilimbergo (2008), we do not find evidence of an impact of
macroeconomic volatility in the formation of beliefs when the person is older
than 26. A one standard deviation increase in macroeconomic volatility during
youth is associated with an increase of 3% of a standard deviation of preferences
for redistribution (Table 6).
3.4.4

The Structure of the Family

The organization of the family varies a lot around the world. Family ties are
strong in some countries, weak in others. In certain countries nuclear families
have been the natural arrangement for decades, in other large families with
several generations living together are more common. The relationship between
22 The other age ranges considered are: 10-17, 26-33, 34-41. 42-49 and 50-57. We maintain
a period lenght of 8 years for consistency with the "impressionable years range."

19

siblings can be more or less even or unequal23 Different family structures can
affect preferences of the desired level of government intervention in redistributive
policies, directly or indirectly. Esping Andersen (1999) for instance argues that
in societies with close family ties, certain welfare policies are internalized by
the family rather than being delegated to the State. Unlucky or even "lazy"
youngsters are supported by their parents more in certain societies than in others
because of the different family structures. The same applies to impoverished
elderly, the sick and disabled etc. Thus in societies where the family performs
these functions the preferences for government intervention are different (i.e.
there is less demand for it) than in countries where the family does not perform
such functions. There is obviously an important issue of causality here but
family traditions and cultural factors affecting family values are most likely more
long lasting and certainly older than the modern welfare state, a post second
World War phenomenon by and large. Alesina and Giuliano (2007) present
evidence consistent with the role of family ties and preferences of government
intervention.
In his fascinating work Todd (1985) argues that the structure of the family, in
particular the nature of the hierarchal relations between parents and children,
and the nature of the siblings relations is an important determinant of the
tendency for certain societies to be more or less receptive of certain ideologies,
say liberalism versus socialism. The latter has of course important implications
on the preferences for redistribution. For instance Todd (1985) argues that it
is not an accident that a communist dictatorship took a solid root in Russia
rather than in other parts of western Europe. A family structure based on an
authoritative head of the family but communal and egalitarian amongst siblings
made it easier for a society based upon a dictator and egalitarian policies to be
acceptable.
3.4.5

Fairness

The final effect which we emphasized in the theoretical part is the role of fairness
and the perception of whether inequality emerges from efforts and ability of
different individuals or luck, connections, perhaps corruption etc. In Table 7,
we study the impact of attitudes toward the importance of work versus luck as a
driver of success in life and the relevance of fairness in determing prefereces for
redistribution. These two beliefs are measured using the following two questions:
“Some people say that people get ahead by their own hard work; others say that
lucky breaks or help from other people are more important. Which do you think
is most important?” Hard work (1) or luck (3); the question takes the value of
2 if hard work and luck are considered equally important" and “Do you think
most people would try to take advantage of you if they got a chance (2), or would
they try to be fair (1)?". We add these variables to our basic specification of
column 1 of table 1. Both beliefs seem to be relevant in determining preferences
for redistribution when included separately. When included jointly, only the
23 Todd

(1985)

20

"work versus luck" variable remains significant. These results are consistent
with those of Alesina and La Ferrara (2002) and Fong (2001). Obviously, the
questions asked in the GSS do not allow us to disentangle exactly what part of
income is attributable to luck or effort according to various individuals. Note
also that, controlling for political ideology, does not change the importance of
work and luck as a determinant of preferences for redistribution. On the other
hand, it seems to undermine the relative importance of fairness, which becomes
insignificant.24 Extensive experimental literature shows that preferences for
redistribution may be dictated by a sense of fairness or aversion to inequality
(see Durante and Putterman (2007), Frohlich and Oppenheimer (1992), Cowell
and Schokkaert (2001), Hoffman and Spitzer (1985)).

3.5

Evidence from the World Values Survey

In this section, we briefly look at preferences for redistribution using crosscountry evidence. Figure 1 presents correlations among several measures of
preferences for government redistribution (as defined in the data session) at
the country level. All the measures are very strongly correlated; therefore, our
results are not simply due to one specific question but are consistent across
definitions. It is also apparent from the table that there is a consistent ranking of countries for preferences for redistribution. Eastern European countries
are the most pro-government redistribution (a not surprising effect of left-wing
ideology), followed by Latin America and Northern European countries. Asian
countries, the US, Australia and New Zealand are in the bottom part of the
distribution.25
As a final step, we perform a within-country analysis to generalize the results
outside of the US context. By controlling for country and wave fixed effects,
we can limit the possibility that some of the US results depend highly upon
the social and historical context of this specific country. Results (reported in
Table 8) broadly confirm the US evidence. Women, youth, the unemployed and
left-wing people are more pro-redistribution. Income and education reduce the
desire for redistribution, but, as in the US, education has a positive effect on
redistribution when interacted with political ideology. Believing that luck is
more important than work increases the desire for redistribution. Fairness also
matters (whereas, in the US, the coefficient has the right sign, but it is not
significant). The only measure of personal misfortune found in the World Value
Survey asks the respondent if she has ever been divorced (this question was,
however, asked only in one wave; therefore, we have a very limited number of
observations). We do not find any effect of personal misfortune. Macroeconomic
volatility is positively associated with preferences for redistribution but has an
insignificant effect. Results for religious denomination are different than in the
US. With the exception of the Orthodox, who are strongly pro-redistribution, all
24 This could be due only to a difference in the sample, since when we restrict the sample to
those observations for which we do have data on political ideology, fairness is not significant.
2 5 Note that preferences for redistribution were not asked for many countries in Continental
and Southern Europe.

21

the other religious denominations appear to be less favorable to redistribution
than atheists.26

4

Conclusions

This paper provides a comprehensive review of the determinants of preferences
for redistribution. Our analysis is guided by a theoretical framework and complemented by empirical evidence mostly for the US and (briefly) across countries.
Within country analysis is much less likely to be subject to measurement error
due to changes in institutional structures of redistributive policies. Preferences
for redistribution are determined by personal characteristics such as age, gender,
race and socioeconomic status, but they are also a product of history, culture,
political ideology and a perception of fairness. In particular, women, youth and
African-Americans appear to have stronger preferences for redistribution. Individuals who believe that people try to take advantage of them, rather than
being fair, have a strong desire for redistribution; similarly, believing that luck
is more important than work as a driver of success is strongly associated with
a taste for redistribution.
Preferences for redistribution vary substantially across countries. We show
that these differences could be the result of differences in religion, histories of
macroeconomic volatility and more generally defined culture.

References
[1] Acemoglu D. and J. Angrist (2001) "How Large are Human Capiutal
Externalities", NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, Volume 15, Ben S.
Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, editors, 9-74.
[2] Alesina, A. and G.M. Angeletos (2005a), "Fairness and Redistribution: US
vs. Europe," American Economic Review, 95: 913-35.
[3] Alesina, A. and G.M. Angeletos (2005b), "Redistribution, Corruption and
Fairness," Journal of Monetary Economics, 1227-44.
[4] Alesina, A. and N. Fuchs-Schuendeln (2007), "Good Bye Lenin (or not?)
The Effect of Communism on People’s Preferences," American Economic
Review, 97:1507-1528.
[5] Alesina, A. and E. Glaeser (2004), Fighting Poverty in the US and Europe:
A World of Difference, Oxford University Press, Oxford UK.
[6] Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano (2007), "The Power of the Family," NBER
Working Paper 13051.
26 We also run an alternative specification in which we interact all religious denomination
with political ideology. In this case, all religions appear to be less pro-redistribution than
atheists. The interaction with ideology is positive, however.

22

[7] Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara (2005), “Preferences for Redistribution in
the Land of Opportunities,” Journal of Public Economics, 89: 897-931.
[8] Alesina A. and D. Rodrik (1994) "Dostributive Polcies and Economic
Growth" Quarterly Journal of Economics,
[9] Andreoni, J. and L. Vesterlund (2001), "Which is the Fair Sex? Gender
Differences in Altruism," Quarterly Journal of Economics.
[10] Antecol, H. (2000), "An Examination of Cross-Country Differences in the
Gender Gap in Labor Force Participation Rates," Labour Economics 7,
409-426.
[11] Baremboim I. and F. Campante (2008), "Does Crime Breed Inequality?
Evidence from the Favelas in Rio de Janeiro," unpublished.
[12] Baremboim I. and L. Karabarbounis (2008), "One Dollar One Vote," unpublished.
[13] Bell, L. and R. B. Freeman (2001) "The Incentive For Working Hard: Explaining Hours Worked Differences In The US And Germany," Labor Economics, v8(2), 181-202.
[14] Bell L. and R. Freeman (1999) "Does Inequality Induce Us to Work More"
unpublished manuscript
[15] Benabou, R. (1996), "Inequality and Growth," NBER Macroeconomic Annual, MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
[16] Benabou, R. (2002), "Tax and Education Policy in a Heterogeneous Agent
Economy: What Levels of Redistribution Maximize Growth and Efficiency?," Econometrica, 70 (2002), 481-517.
[17] Benabou, R. and E. Ok (2001), "Social Mobility and the Demand for Redistribution: the POUM Hypothesis," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116
(2001), 447-487.
[18] Benabou, R. and J. Tirole (2006), "Beliefs in a Just World and Redistributive Politics," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2), 699-746.
[19] Campante F.(2007), "Redistribution in a Model of Voting and Campaign
Contributions," unpublished.
[20] Carroll, C., Rhee, B. and C. Rhee (1994), "Are There Cultural Effects on
Saving? Some Cross-Sectional Evidence," Quarterly Journal of Economics
109(3), 685-699.
[21] Checchi, D. and A. Filippin (2003), "An Experimental Study of the POUM
Hypothesis," IZA DP 912.

23

[22] Corneo, G. and P.H. Gruner (2000), "Social Limits to Redistribution",
American Economic Review 90, 1491-1507.
[23] Corneo, G. and P.H. Gruner (2002), "Individual Preferences for Political
Redistribution", Journal of Public Economics 83, 83-107
[24] Cowell, F., A. Schokkaert (2001), "Risk Perceptions and Distributional
Judgements," European Economic Review, 45, 941-952.
[25] Crozon, R. and U. Gneezy (2008), "Gender Differences in Preferences,"
Journal of Economic Literature (forthcoming).
[26] Drazen, A. (2002), Political Economy in Macroeconomics, Princeton University Press.
[27] Durante, R. and L. Putterman (2007), "Preferences for Redistribution and
Perception of Fairness: An Experimental Study," Brown University, mimeo.
[28] Edlund, L. and R. Pande (2002), "Why Have Women Become Left-Wing:
The Political Gender Gap and the Decline in Marriage," The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 117, 917-961.
[29] Esping- Andersen (1999) Social Foundations of Poist Industrial Economices
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK>
[30] Fajnzylber, P, Lederman, D. and N. Loayza (2002), "Inequality and Violent
Crime," The Journal of Law and Economics, 45(1), 1-40.
[31] Fernandez, R. and A. Fogli (2005), "Culture: An Empirical Investigation
of Beliefs, Work and Fertility," NBER Working Paper 11268.
[32] Fehr, E., Naf, M. and K. Schmidt (2006), "Inequality Aversion, Efficiency,
and Maximin Preferences in Simple Distribution Experiments: Comment,"
American Economic Review 96, 1912-17.
[33] Fong, C., "Social Preferences, Self-Interest, and the Demand for Redistribution," Journal of Public Economics, 2001, 82, 225-246.
[34] Frohlich, N. and Oppenheimer, J., Choosing Justice: An Experimental Approach to Ethical Theory, Berkeley, 1992, University of California Press.
[35] Galor, O. and J. Zeira (1993), "Income Distribution and Macroeconomics,"
Review of Economic Studies, 60, 35-52.
[36] Giuliano, P. (2007), "Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural Origin Matter?" Journal of the European Economic Association, 5,
927-52.
[37] Giuliano, P. and A. Spilimbergo (2008), "Growing Up in Bad Times:
Macroeconomic Volatility and the Formation of Beliefs," UCLA mimeo.

24

[38] Hoffman, E., Spitzer, L., "Entitlements, Rights and Fairness: An Experimental Examination of Subjects Concepts of Distributive Justice," The
Journal of Legal Studies, 1985, 14, 2, 259-297.
[39] Inglehart, R. and P. Norris (2000), “The Developmental Theory of the
Gender Gap: Women and Men’s Voting Behavior in a Global Perspective,”
International Political Science Review, XXI, 441—463.
[40] Lizzeri A. and N. Persico(2004) "Why Did the Elite Extend the Suffrage?
Democracy and the Scope of Government with an Application to Britain’s
Age of Reform" Quartrely Journal of Economics, May, 451-498.
[41] Luttmer, E. (2001), "Group Loyalty and the Taste for Redistribution,"
Journal of Political Economy, 109 (3), 500-528.
[42] Luttmer, E. and M. Singhal (2008), "Culture, Context and the Taste for
Redistribution," Harvard University, mimeo.
[43] McCarty, N, K. Poole and H. Rosenthal (2006), Polarized America: The
Dance of Ideology and Unequal Riches, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
[44] Meltzer and Richard (1981), "A Rational Theory of the Size of Government," Journal of Political Economy, 89, 914-27.
[45] Metcalf R. and P. Sloane (2007) "Human Capital Spillovers and Economci
performancre in the WQorkplace i2204: Some BRtosh Evdeince"
[46] Montgomery, R. and C. Stuart (1999), “Sex and Fiscal Desire,” University
of California Santa Barbara.
[47] Perotti R. (1993), "Political Equilibrium, Income Distribution and
Growth", Review of Economic Studies, 60(4), 755-776.
[48] Perotti, R. (1996), "Growth, Income Distribution, and Democracy: What
the Data Say," Journal of Economic Growth, 1(2), 149-187.
[49] Persson T. and G. Tabellini (1995) "Is ineqwualty Harmful for Growth?"
[50] Personn, T. and G. Tabellini (2002), Political Economics: Explaining Economics Policy, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
[51] Pinker, S. (2006) The Blank Slate, Penguin Books
[52] Piketty, T. (1995), "Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, 551-84.
[53] Rauch J. (1993) "Productivity Gains from Geographic Concentration of
Human Capital" Journal of Urban Economics, 34, 380-400
[54] Rudd J. (2008) "Empirical Evidence un Human Capuital Spillovers" Unpublished
25

[55] Rawls, J. (1971) A Theory of Justice, Belknap Press of Harvard University
Press,Cambridge, Massachusetts.
[56] Rodriguez F. (2004) "Inequality, Redistribution and Rent Seeking" Economics and Politics, 224-247
[57] Romer, T. (1975), "Individual Welfare, Majority Voting and the Properties
of a Linear Income Tax," Journal of Public Economics, 7: 163-188.
[58] Shapiro, R. and H. Mahajan (1986), “Gender Differences in Policy Preferences: A summary of trends from the 1960s to the 1980s,” Public Opinion
Quarterly, 42—61.
[59] Tan, J. (2006), "Religion and Social Preferences: An Experimental Study,"
Economics Letters, vol. 90 (1), 60-67.
[60] Todd E. (1985) The Eplanation of Ideology: Family Structures and Social
Systems, Oxford: Basil Blackwell

26

Table 1.
Preferences for Redistribution and Individual Characteristics
General Social Survey 1972-2004
Preferences for
Preferences for
Preferences for
redistribution
redistribution
redistribution
Age
0.061
0.069
0.068
(0.029)**
(0.030)**
(0.030)**
Age squared
-0.014
-0.013
-0.013
(0.003)***
(0.003)***
(0.003)***
Female
0.156
0.141
0.134
(0.017)***
(0.017)***
(0.017)***
Black
0.588
0.560
0.565
(0.026)***
(0.027)***
(0.027)***
Married
-0.049
-0.012
-0.004
(0.018)***
(0.018)
(0.018)
Unemployed
0.111
0.073
0.072
(0.052)**
(0.054)
(0.054)
High school
-0.308
-0.289
-0.464
(0.025)***
(0.026)***
(0.079)***
College and more
-0.378
-0.375
-0.984
(0.028)***
(0.029)***
(0.081)***
Family income
-0.043
-0.040
-0.041
(0.004)***
(0.004)***
(0.004)***
Political ideology
0.152
0.082
(0.007)***
(0.017)***
Political ideology*
0.044
high school
(0.019)**
Political ideology*
0.155
college and more
(0.019)***
Observations
19512
18135
18135
R-squared
0.09
0.12
0.13
Notes:
[1] Robust standard errors in parentheses. *significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%; all regressions control for year and region fixed effects
[2] Political ideology is a general measure of ideological self-placement on a 1-7 scale, where 1 is
extremely conservative and 7 is extremely liberal.

27

Table 2.
Preferences for Redistribution, Family Background and Social Mobility
General Social Survey 1972-2004
Age
Age squared
Female
Black
Married
Unemployed
High school
College and more
Father with
high school
Father with
college and more
Family income
Family income at 16

Preferences for
redistribution

Preferences for
redistribution

Preferences for
redistribution

Preferences for
redistribution

0.042
(0.034)
-0.013
(0.003)***

0.022
(0.043)
-0.013
(0.004)***

0.046
(0.037)
-0.014
(0.004)***

0.034
(0.053)
-0.013
(0.005)**

0.157
(0.018)***
0.565
(0.032)***
-0.059
(0.020)***
0.091
(0.061)
-0.314
(0.030)***
-0.347
(0.034)***
-0.090
(0.022)***
-0.129
(0.029)***
-0.047
(0.004)***

0.146
(0.022)***
0.560
(0.038)***
-0.042
(0.024)*
0.090
(0.069)
-0.328
(0.034)***
-0.357
(0.039)***
-0.081
(0.026)***
-0.109
(0.037)***
-0.046
(0.005)***
-0.052
(0.015)***

0.166
(0.019)***
0.559
(0.034)***
-0.059
(0.021)***
0.114
(0.064)*
-0.328
(0.034)***
-0.377
(0.043)***
-0.062
(0.030)**
-0.080
(0.045)*
-0.047
(0.005)***

0.117
(0.027)***
0.623
(0.046)***
-0.013
(0.031)
0.136
(0.088)
-0.284
(0.042)***
-0.270
(0.049)***
-0.080
(0.033)**
-0.170
(0.047)***
-0.054
(0.006)***

Mobility (diff. in
0.006
years of education)
(0.004)
-0.078
Mobility (diff. in
(0.028)***
occupational prestige)
Observations
15339
10920
14104
7194
R-squared
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09
Notes:
[1] Robust standard errors in parentheses. *significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%;
all regressions control for year and region fixed effects
[2] Mobility measures are defined as a difference in the years of education between the individual and
his/her father and as a dummy for whether the occupational prestige of the individual is greater than the
one of his/her father

28

Table 3.
Preferences for Redistribution and a History of Misfortune
General Social Survey 1972-2004
Preferences for
Preferences for
Preferences for
Redistribution
redistribution
redistribution
Ever unemployed
0.121
in the last ten years
(0.020)***
Trauma last year
0.073
(0.018)***
Trauma last 5 years
0.039
(0.013)***
Age
0.060
0.028
0.021
(0.031)**
(0.042)
(0.042)
Age squared
-0.012
-0.011
-0.010
(0.003)***
(0.004)**
(0.004)**
Female
0.173
0.144
0.144
(0.017)***
(0.023)***
(0.023)***
Black
0.579
0.595
0.599
(0.028)***
(0.035)***
(0.035)***
Married
-0.047
-0.003
-0.002
(0.019)**
(0.025)
(0.025)
Unemployed
0.053
0.069
0.091
(0.055)
(0.075)
(0.074)
High school
-0.309
-0.278
-0.281
(0.026)***
(0.033)***
(0.033)***
College and more
-0.377
-0.358
-0.359
(0.029)***
(0.038)***
(0.038)***
Family income
-0.041
-0.049
-0.050
(0.004)***
(0.005)***
(0.005)***
Observations
17811
9948
9948
R-squared
0.09
0.10
0.10
[1] Robust standard errors in parentheses. *significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%; all regressions control for year and region fixed effects
[2] Ever unemployed in the last 10 years is a dummy indicating whether the person has ever been
unemployed in the last 10 years; trauma last year/last five years indicate the number of personal
traumas (including death of a relative, divorce, unemployment and hospitalization) that the person
experienced during the last year/last five years.

29

Table 4.
Preferences for Redistribution and Religion
General Social Survey 1972-2004
Age
Age squared
Female
Black
Married
Unemployed
High School
College and more
Father with high school
Father with college and more
Protestant
Catholic
Jewish
Other religion
Family income

Preferences for
redistribution
0.045
(0.034)
-0.013
(0.003)***
0.166
(0.018)***
0.593
(0.033)***
-0.049
(0.020)**
0.080
(0.061)
-0.308
(0.030)***
-0.351
(0.034)***
-0.091
(0.022)***
-0.132
(0.029)***
-0.136
(0.034)***
0.012
(0.036)
0.059
(0.070)
0.080
(0.059)
-0.047
(0.004)***

Preferences for
redistribution
0.042
(0.035)
-0.012
(0.004)***
0.142
(0.019)***
0.542
(0.034)***
-0.011
(0.020)
0.048
(0.064)
-0.288
(0.032)***
-0.337
(0.035)***
-0.084
(0.022)***
-0.131
(0.029)***
-0.035
(0.034)
0.083
(0.036)**
0.058
(0.070)
0.098
(0.059)*
-0.046
(0.005)***
0.155
(0.008)***

Preferences for
redistribution
0.043
(0.034)
-0.013
(0.003)***
0.163
(0.018)***
0.593
(0.033)***
-0.052
(0.020)***
0.092
(0.061)
-0.310
(0.030)***
-0.354
(0.034)***
-0.090
(0.022)***
-0.131
(0.029)***

-0.046
(0.005)***
Ideology
0.155
(0.007)***
Protestant at 16
0.005
0.053
(0.048)
(0.048)
Catholic at 16
0.129
0.154
(0.050)***
(0.050)***
Jewish at 16
0.271
0.210
(0.080)***
(0.080)***
Other religion at 16
0.166
0.158
(0.079)**
(0.079)**
Observations
15301
14283
15278
14260
R-squared
0.09
0.12
0.09
0.12
[1] Robust standard errors in parentheses. *significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%; all
regressions control for year and region fixed effects

30

-0.047
(0.004)***

Preferences for
Redistribution
0.041
(0.035)
-0.012
(0.004)***
0.143
(0.019)***
0.544
(0.034)***
-0.009
(0.020)
0.055
(0.064)
-0.288
(0.032)***
-0.340
(0.035)***
-0.084
(0.022)***
-0.132
(0.029)***

Table 5.
Preferences for Redistribution and Cultural Origin
Immigrants’ Regressions
General Social Survey 1972-2004
Preferences for redistrib.
in the country of origin
Age
Age squared
Female
Black
Married
Unemployed
High school
College and more
Family income
Father with high school
Father with college and
more
Family income at 16

Preferences for
redistribution
0.063
(0.032)*
0.043
(0.033)
-0.013
(0.004)***
0.145
(0.025)***
0.360
(0.114)***
-0.011
(0.039)
0.201
(0.102)*
-0.271
(0.050)***
-0.313
(0.041)***
-0.055
(0.006)***

Preferences for
redistribution
0.059
(0.031)*
0.009
(0.037)
-0.010
(0.004)**
0.143
(0.030)***
0.365
(0.167)**
-0.031
(0.035)
0.203
(0.084)**
-0.232
(0.062)***
-0.230
(0.042)***
-0.055
(0.006)***
-0.079
(0.041)*
-0.110
(0.033)***

Preferences for
redistribution
0.057
(0.032)*
-0.025
(0.050)
-0.008
(0.005)
0.147
(0.034)***
0.637
(0.182)***
0.011
(0.040)
0.192
(0.087)**
-0.255
(0.068)***
-0.222
(0.055)***
-0.056
(0.007)***
-0.111
(0.045)**
-0.133
(0.040)***
-0.046
(0.025)*

Preferences for
redistribution
0.067
(0.031)**
-0.010
(0.042)
-0.008
(0.005)
0.165
(0.034)***
0.428
(0.216)*
-0.027
(0.040)
0.222
(0.086)**
-0.252
(0.063)***
-0.261
(0.046)***
-0.054
(0.007)***
-0.046
(0.041)
-0.053
(0.039)

Preferences for
Redistribution
0.068
(0.036)*
0.022
(0.062)
-0.013
(0.006)**
0.109
(0.039)***
0.807
(0.174)***
0.005
(0.040)
0.201
(0.096)**
-0.199
(0.085)**
-0.115
(0.063)*
-0.059
(0.011)***
-0.122
(0.043)***
-0.259
(0.051)***

0.006
Mobility (diff. in years of
education)
(0.004)
Mobility (diff. in
-0.109
occupational mobility)
(0.036)***
Observations
7005
5650
4149
5216
2928
R-squared
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
[1] Standard errors are clustered at the country of origin level. *significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%; all regressions control for year and region fixed effects
[2] Preferences for redistribution in the country of origin are defined as the average at the country level of the following
World Value Survey question: “Now I'd like you to tell me your views on various issues. How would you place your
views on this scale? People should take more responsibility to provide for themselves (1) vs The government should
take more responsibility to ensure that everyone is provided for (10)"

31

Table 6.
Preferences for Redistribution and a History of Macroeconomic Volatility during Youth
General Social Survey 1972-2004
Macro-volatility
during 18-25
Age
Age squared
Female
Black
Married
Unemployed
High school
College and more
Family income
Father with high
school
Father with
college and more
Family income at 16

Preferences for
redistribution
0.740
(0.286)***
0.044
(0.078)
-0.009
(0.010)
0.180
(0.020)***
0.562
(0.030)***
-0.075
(0.021)***
0.061
(0.057)
-0.287
(0.034)***
-0.392
(0.037)***
-0.038
(0.005)***

Preferences for
redistribution
0.653
(0.315)**
0.059
(0.087)
-0.012
(0.012)
0.200
(0.021)***
0.555
(0.038)***
-0.073
(0.023)***
0.038
(0.066)
-0.312
(0.042)***
-0.410
(0.044)***
-0.044
(0.005)***
-0.062
(0.022)***
-0.077
(0.068)

Preferences for
Redistribution
0.671
(0.377)*
0.085
(0.109)
-0.018
(0.015)
0.196
(0.026)***
0.526
(0.045)***
-0.051
(0.029)*
0.051
(0.075)
-0.283
(0.049)***
-0.375
(0.051)***
-0.038
(0.006)***
-0.075
(0.027)***
-0.114
(0.087)
-0.080
(0.017)***

Preferences for
redistribution
0.736
(0.322)**
0.015
(0.090)
-0.007
(0.012)
0.201
(0.022)***
0.550
(0.040)***
-0.079
(0.024)***
0.050
(0.069)
-0.336
(0.045)***
-0.449
(0.048)***
-0.042
(0.006)***
-0.047
(0.022)**
-0.048
(0.069)

Preferences for
redistribution
1.222
(0.637)*
0.046
(0.233)
-0.005
(0.036)
0.177
(0.034)***
0.578
(0.057)***
-0.014
(0.037)
0.076
(0.101)
-0.286
(0.063)***
-0.358
(0.067)***
-0.050
(0.008)***
-0.070
(0.034)**
-0.191
(0.138)

Mobility (diff. in
0.012
years of education)
(0.003)***
Mobility (diff. in
-0.023
occupational mobility)
(0.035)
Observations
12754
10136
6907
9677
4210
R-squared
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.08
[1] Standard errors are clustered at the “region of residence at 16” level. *significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%; all regressions control for year, actual region of residence and region of residence at 16 fixed effects
[2] Macro-economic volatility is measured as the standard deviation of the regional income when the person was
between 18 and 25 years old.

32

Table 7.
Preferences for Redistribution, Work versus Luck as a Driver of Success, and Fairness
General Social Survey 1972-2004
Preferences for
redistribution
0.038
(0.019)**
0.066
(0.030)**
-0.014
(0.003)***
0.158
(0.017)***
0.587
(0.027)***
-0.052
(0.019)***
0.113
(0.055)**
-0.303
(0.026)***
-0.375
(0.029)***
-0.043
(0.004)***

Preferences for
redistribution
0.029
(0.019)
0.074
(0.031)**
-0.014
(0.003)***
0.142
(0.017)***
0.557
(0.028)***
-0.014
(0.019)
0.075
(0.057)
-0.286
(0.027)***
-0.373
(0.030)***
-0.041
(0.004)***
0.150
(0.007)***

Preferences for
redistribution

Preferences for
redistribution
Fairness
0.027
(0.026)
Age
0.006
0.009
0.019
(0.042)
(0.042)
(0.044)
Age squared
-0.008
-0.007
-0.009
(0.004)*
(0.004)*
(0.004)*
Female
0.131
0.115
0.109
(0.024)***
(0.023)***
(0.024)***
Black
0.560
0.544
0.536
(0.036)***
(0.037)***
(0.038)***
Married
-0.022
0.005
-0.003
(0.026)
(0.026)
(0.026)
Unemployed
0.109
0.119
0.129
(0.076)
(0.076)
(0.080)
High school
-0.371
-0.359
-0.351
(0.036)***
(0.037)***
(0.038)***
College and more
-0.430
-0.427
-0.420
(0.039)***
(0.040)***
(0.042)***
Family income
-0.040
-0.039
-0.041
(0.006)***
(0.006)***
(0.006)***
Ideology
0.128
0.130
(0.009)***
(0.010)***
Work and luck
0.074
0.056
0.070
0.053
(0.017)***
(0.017)***
(0.017)***
(0.017)***
Observations
18224
16961
9130
8784
8565
8263
R-squared
0.09
0.12
0.10
0.12
0.10
0.12
[1] Robust standard errors in parentheses. *significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%; all regressions control for year and region fixed
effects
[2] Fairness is a categorical variable that is the answer to the question: “Do you think most people would try to take advantage of you if they got a chance
(2), or would they try to be fair (1); Work versus luck is a categorical variable that is the answer to the question: “Some people say that people get ahead by
their own hard work; others say that lucky breaks or help from other people are more important. Which do you think is most important? Hard work (1),
hard work and luck equally important (2), Luck most important (3)

33

Preferences for
redistribution

Preferences for
redistribution
0.027
(0.026)
0.015
(0.043)
-0.009
(0.004)**
0.126
(0.024)***
0.561
(0.037)***
-0.031
(0.026)
0.121
(0.079)
-0.365
(0.037)***
-0.427
(0.041)***
-0.041
(0.006)***

Table 8.
Determinants of Preferences for Redistribution
World Values Survey
Age
Age squared
Female
Married
Unemployed
High school
College and more
Income
Ideology
Ideology*
high school
Ideology*
college and more
Roman Catholic
Protestant
Orthodox
Jews
Muslim
Hindu

Pref. for
Pref. for
Pref. for
Pref. for
Pref. for
Pref. for
Pref. for
Pref. for
redistribution redistribution redistribution redistribution redistribution redistribution redistribution redistribution
0.067
0.026
0.025
0.023
-0.003
0.014
0.161
0.067
(0.025)***
(0.028)
(0.028)
(0.028)
(0.037)
(0.068)
(0.075)**
(0.025)***
-0.007
-0.003
-0.003
-0.003
0.002
-0.005
-0.014
-0.007
(0.003)***
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.007)
(0.007)**
(0.003)***
0.181
0.155
0.154
0.158
0.134
0.144
0.188
0.159
(0.013)***
(0.015)***
(0.015)***
(0.015)***
(0.019)***
(0.034)***
(0.036)***
(0.029)***
-0.064
-0.060
-0.060
-0.052
-0.089
-0.019
-0.071
-0.042
(0.015)***
(0.018)***
(0.018)***
(0.018)***
(0.023)***
(0.042)
(0.056)
(0.029)
0.305
0.304
0.305
0.300
0.363
0.152
0.404
0.325
(0.026)***
(0.030)***
(0.030)***
(0.030)***
(0.043)***
(0.057)***
(0.083)***
(0.046)***
-0.385
-0.363
-0.279
-0.369
-0.315
-0.212
-0.189
-0.386
(0.018)***
(0.021)***
(0.050)***
(0.021)***
(0.032)***
(0.044)***
(0.044)***
(0.118)***
-0.542
-0.509
-0.715
-0.513
-0.490
-0.330
-0.389
-0.520
(0.021)***
(0.024)***
(0.059)***
(0.024)***
(0.035)***
(0.052)***
(0.054)***
(0.141)***
-0.258
-0.238
-0.237
-0.237
-0.242
-0.215
-0.329
-0.246***
(0.009)***
(0.010)***
(0.010)***
(0.010)***
(0.013)***
(0.023)***
(0.026)***
(0.039)
0.112
0.110
0.011
0.122
0.063
(0.004)***
(0.005)***
(0.004)***
(0.005)***
(0.008)***
-0.016
(0.008)*
0.038
(0.010)***
-0.068
(0.024)***
-0.210
(0.030)***
0.174
(0.042)***
-0.106
(0.120)
-0.040
(0.051)
-0.053

34

(0.098)
-0.121
(0.070)*
-0.144
(0.038)***

Buddhist
Other religion
Hard work

0.076
(0.004)***

Fairness

0.026
(0.037)

Ever been divorced
Macrovolatility
during youth (18-25)
Observations
R-squared

-0.046
(0.067)
193956
0.12

146166
0.13

146166
0.13

141285
0.13

84028
0.15

29556
0.11

23320
0.09

0.032
(0.273)
125128
0.11

[1] Robust standard errors in parentheses (clustered at the country level in the last column). *significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%; all regressions control for wave and country fixed effects.
[1] Preferences for redistribution are measured using the following question (on a scale from 1 to 10): "People should take more responsibility to provide for
themselves (1) vs The government should take more responsibility to ensure that everyone is provided for (10)". Ideology measures the political
orientation of the respondent (on a scale from 1 to 10) and it is an answer to the following question: “In political matters, people talk of the left and the
right. How would you place your views on this scale, generally speaking? Right (1) versus Left (10). Work versus luck is a categorical variable (on a scale
from 1 to 10) that is the answer to the question: “Now I would like to tell me your views on the following statement: In the long run, hard work usually
brings a better life (1) versus Hard work does not generally bring success – it is more a matter of luck and connections”. Fairness is a categorical variable
that is the answer to the question: “Do you think most people would try to take advantage of you if they got a chance (2), or would they try to be fair
(1).

35

peru

1.4

australia
china

US

slovenia
norway slovakia
south africa
chile czech rep
india bangladesh
venezuel
new zealand rep. of korea

bosnia-herz.

finland

japan

ukraine
germany
uruguay
moldova
nigeria
macedonia
russian fed.
hungary
georgia
croatia
bulgaria
turkey
spain belarus
colombia
lithuani
brazil
pakistan albania
armenia
sweden
latvia
serbia-montenegro
azerbaijan
mexico
dom.estonia
rep. romania
argentina

slovenia
slovakia
peru
south africa
czech rep
chile
india
bangladesh

norway

australia
new zealand
china

1.4

Why people in need
1.6
1.8

bosnia-herz.
ukraine
germanynigeria
uruguay
moldova
macedonia
russian fed.
hungary
georgia
croatia
bulgaria
turkey
spain
colombia
belarus
albania
lithuani
brazil armenia
sweden
latvia
finland serbia-montenegro
azerbaijan
romania
mexico
argentina
estonia
dom. rep.

Why people in need
1.6
1.8

2

2

Figure 1. Preferences for redistribution and beliefs about the poor

japan

philippines

poland

venezuel

US

philippines
taiwan

taiwan
puerto rico

1.2

1.2

puerto rico

2.2

2.4
2.6
Government and poverty

2.8

3

1

1.2

1.4
1.6
Escape from poverty

1.8

2

8

2

2

hungary

peru
australia
US
puerto rico

philippines

china
peru
australia
puerto
rico

nigeria
czech
rep
slovenia
bulgaria
lithuani
spain
india
chile
southbangladesh
africa
romania
germany
mexico
colombia
turkey
argentina
venezuel
dom.
rep.
taiwan
brazil
norway
finland
new zealand

US

sweden

taiwan

3

1

china

norway
japan

japan

rep. of korea
moldova
croatia
hungary ukraine
serbia-montenegro
slovakia
armenia
macedonia
azerbaijan
georgia
estonia
belarus
bosnia-herz.
russian fed.
latvia
albania
uruguay

4

1.2

philippines

7

lithuani
russian fed.
moldova
ukraine
macedonia
bulgaria
belarus
uruguay
argentina
nigeria
latvia
spain
romania
brazil armenia
serbia-montenegro
albania
estonia
georgia
croatia
slovakia
slovenia
bosnia-herz.
dom. rep.
czech
rep
mexico venezuel
chile
colombia
turkey
sweden
azerbaijan
south africa
india
finland
newbangladesh
zealand

Govern. responsibility
5
6

Escape from poverty
1.4
1.6

1.8

germany

2

2.2

2.4
2.6
Government and poverty

2.8

3

2

36

2.2

2.4
2.6
Government and poverty

2.8

3

Table A1
Descriptive Statistics
General Social Survey 1972-2004
Obs

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

Preferences for redistribution
Age
Female
Black
Married
Unemployed
High School
College and more
Income
Polit. Ideology
Father with high school
Father with college and more
Income at 16
Mobility (diff. in years of educ.)
Mobility (diff. in occupat. prestige)
Protestant
Catholic
Jewish
Other religion
Protestant at 16
Catholic at 16
Jewish at 16
Other religion at 16
Fairness
Work and luck
Unemployed in the last ten years
Number of traumas last year
Number of traumas in the last 5 years
Macrovolatility during youth

19512
19512
19512
19512
19512
19512
19512
19512
19512
18135
15339
15339
13620
14401
7724
19464
19464
19464
19464
19432
19432
19432
19432
18224
9130
17811
9948
9948
12754

3.12
44.54
0.55
0.13
0.54
0.03
0.53
0.27
10.10
3.88
0.36
0.16
2.79
2.64
0.47
0.60
0.25
0.02
0.03
0.63
0.28
0.02
0.02
1.39
1.45
0.32
0.47
1.07
.0855

1.18
16.93
0.50
0.34
0.50
0.17
0.50
0.44
2.77
1.35
0.48
0.37
0.86
3.87
0.50
0.49
0.43
0.14
0.18
0.48
0.45
0.14
0.14
0.49
0.71
0.47
0.65
0.88
.0423

1
18
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
-16
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0

5
89
1
1
1
1
1
1
12
7
1
1
5
20
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
3
1
4
4
.179

Pref. for redistr. in the country of origin

7005

4.99

.667

3.476

7.50

Variable

37

Table A2
Descriptive Statistics
World Values Survey
Variable
Preferences for redistribution
Age
Female
Married
Unemployed
High school
College and more
Income
Ideology
Roman Catholic
Protestant
Orthodox
Jews
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Other religion
Work and luck
Fairness
Ever divorced

Obs

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

193956
193956
193956
193956
193956
193956
193956
193956
146166
141285
141285
141285
141285
146166
146166
146166
146166
84028
29556
23320

5.80
41.27
0.51
0.65
0.08
0.33
0.17
1.97
5.43
0.34
0.14
0.08
0.01
0.11
0.03
0.01
0.06
4.35
1.59
0.08

3.04
15.94
0.50
0.48
0.27
0.47
0.38
0.79
2.29
0.47
0.35
0.27
0.09
0.31
0.16
0.12
0.24
2.84
0.49
0.27

1
15
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0

10
99
1
1
1
1
1
3
10
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
10
2
1

38

