NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NEW-KEYNESIAN ECONOMICS:
AN AS-AD VIEW
Pierpaolo Benigno
Working Paper 14824
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14824
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2009

I am grateful to Bernd Kempa and Mike Woodford for helpful discussions and comments and to Roger
Meservey for professional editing. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Pierpaolo Benigno. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

New-Keynesian Economics: An AS-AD View
Pierpaolo Benigno
NBER Working Paper No. 14824
March 2009, Revised May 2013
JEL No. E0
ABSTRACT
A simple New-Keynesian model is set out with AS-AD graphical analysis. The model is consistent
with modern central banking, which targets shortterm nominal interest rates instead of money supply
aggregates. This simple framework enables us to analyze the economic impact of productivity or markup
disturbances and to study alternative monetary and fiscal policies.
The framework is also suitable for studying a liquidity-trap environment, the economics of debt deleveraging,
and possible solutions.
The impact of the fiscal multipliers on output and the output gap can be quantified. During normal
times, a short-run increase in public spending has a multiplier less than one on output and a much smaller
multiplier on the output gap, while a decrease in short-run taxes has a positive multiplier on output,
but negative on the output gap. When the economy is depressed because some agents are deleveraging,
fiscal policy is more powerful and the multiplier can be quite big.
In the AS-AD graphical view, optimal policy simplifies to nothing more than an additional line, IT,
along which the trade-off between the objective of price stability and that of stabilizing the output
gap can be optimally exploited.
Pierpaolo Benigno
Dipartimento di Economia e Finanza
Luiss Guido Carli
Viale Romania 32
00197 Rome
ITALY
pierpaolo.benigno@eief.it

1

Introduction

This work presents a simple New-Keynesian model illustrated by Aggregate Demand
(AD) and Aggregate Supply (AS) graphical analysis. In its simplicity, the framework
features most of the main characteristics emphasized in the recent literature. The AD
and AS equations are derived from an intertemporal model of optimizing behavior
by households and firms respectively.
The AD equation is derived from households’ decisions on intertemporal consumption allocation. A standard Euler equation links consumption growth to the
real interest rate, implying a negative correlation between prices and consumption.
A rise in the current price level increases the real interest rate and induces consumers
to postpone consumption. Current consumption falls.
The AS equation derives from the pricing decisions of optimizing firms. In the
long run, prices are totally flexible and output depends only on real structural factors.
The equation is vertical. In the short run, however, a fraction of firms keep prices
fixed at a predetermined level, implying a positive relationship between other firms’
prices, which are not constrained, and marginal costs, proxied by the output gap.
The AS equation is a positively sloped price-output function.
As in Keynesian theory, the model posits some degree of short-run nominal rigidity. Nominal rigidity can be explained by the fact that price setters have some
monopoly power, so that they incur only second-order costs when they do not change
their prices. In the long run, the model maintains the classical dichotomy between
the determination of nominal and real variables, with a vertical AS equation.
The analysis is consistent with the modern central banking practice of targeting
short-term nominal interest rates, not money supply aggregates. The mechanism
of transmission of interest rate movements to consumption and output stems from
the intertemporal behavior of the consumers. By moving the nominal interest rate,
monetary policy aﬀects the real interest rate, hence consumption-saving decisions.
This simple framework allows us to analyze the impact of productivity or mark-up
disturbances on economic activity and to study alternative monetary and fiscal policies. In particular, we can analyze how monetary policy should respond to various
shocks. That is, a microfounded model yields a natural objective function that monetary policy could follow in its stabilization role, namely the utility of consumers. This
objective is well approximated by a quadratic loss function in which policymakers are
penalized, with certain weights, by deviating from a price-stability target and at the
same time by the fluctuations of output around the eﬃcient level. In the AS-AD
graphical plot, optimal policy simplifies to just an additional curve (labelled IT for
“Inflation Targeting”) along which the trade-oﬀ between the two objectives can be
optimally exploited.
As Hicks (1937) observed, Keynesian economics is the “economics of the Depression”. The LM is flat because interest rates are too low and any injection of liquidity
is absorbed by the public. Monetary policy is ineﬀective and fiscal policy is the only
1

possible escape from this “liquidity trap”. A New-Keynesian model gives a new sense
to the trap and a new way out. A liquidity trap might arise when the economy is
marked by a low nominal interest rate, but in an equilibrium in which the real interest
rate is too high. Consumers have a strong incentive to save and postpone consumption. This might be the consequence of debt overhang where some agents are forced
to deleverage. The economy is in a slump. But although monetary policy has lost its
standard instrument, it can still lower the real interest rate to stimulate consumption
by creating inflationary expectations. This new view on the liquidity trap and the
escape can be represented within the same AS-AD graphical framework.
Moreover, it is possible to quantify the eﬀect of the fiscal multipliers on output
and on the output gap. During normal times, an increase in short-run public spending
improves output with a multiplier of less than one and the output gap with a much
lower multiplier, in the range of 0.1-0.2. A short-run reduction in taxes improves
output but worsens the output gap; moreover, short-run fiscal policy changes in
either expenditure or taxes do not aﬀect the output gap if they become permanent.
However, a reduction in long-term taxes or spending can benefit short-run output
and the output gap and still be consistent with fiscal sustainability. In a liquidity
trap, when some agents are deleveraging, fiscal policy can be more powerful and the
multiplier becomes bigger than one.
The structure of the article is the following. Section 2 discusses the literature.
Section 3 derives the AD equation and Section 4 the AS equation. Section 5 presents
the AS-AD model and its graphical representation. Readers not interested in technicalities can skip Sections 3 and 4 or just grasp a few highlights from them and
concentrate on Section 5 onward. Sections 6 and 7 analyze the way the equilibrium
changes when there are productivity shocks and mark-up shocks. Section 8 studies
the fiscal multiplier, and Section 9 analyzes the liquidity-trap solution. Section 10
discusses the economics of deleveraging while Section 11 sets out a graphical interpretation of the optimal monetary policy.

2

Background literature

This small essay stands on the giants’ shoulders of a literature that has developed
since the 1980s. A comprehensive review, naturally, is well beyond our scope here. A
brief survey must include the menu cost models of Mankiw (1985), the monopolisticcompetition model of Blanchard and Kyotaki (1987) and the dynamic models of Yun
(1996), Goodfriend and King (1997), Rotemberg and Woodford (1997) and Clarida
et al. (1999) and culminate with the comprehensive treatments of Woodford (2003)
and Galí (2008). For the general readership of this paper, technicalities are kept
to the lowest possible level; for a thorough analysis, interested readers are referred
to the various chapters of Woodford. The section on optimal policy draws on the
work of Giannoni and Woodford (2002), also borrowing ideas and terminology from
Svensson (2007a,b). The reference point for the liquidity-trap solution using uncon2

ventional monetary policy is Krugman (1998). The section on the economics of debt
deleveraging is drawn from the work of Eggertsson and Krugman (2010).
There are some obvious limitations to the analysis, essentially the price paid
for the simplifications needed for a graphical analysis (chiefly the assumption of a
two-period economy). It follows that the short-run AS equation resembles the NewClassical Phillips familiar to undergraduates more than a New-Keynesian Phillips
curve with forward-looking components. The model cannot properly analyze inflation
dynamics, disinflation and related questions. The AD equation can dispense with
interest-rate rules, which might be an asset or a liability, since long-term prices are
anchored by monetary policy and current movements in the interest rate are suﬃcient
to determine equilibrium with no need of feedback eﬀects on economic activity. The
dynamic aspects of the stabilizing role of monetary policy are missing, but not their
qualitative results.
One theory beats another by demonstrating superiority in practical application.
This essay is motivated in part by the fact that New-Keynesian economics has not
changed the small models used for undergraduate courses. Indeed, variations on the
Hicksian view of the Keynes’s General Theory are still present in the most widely
used textbooks. Most of the critiques of current models come from within. Mankiw
(2006) argues that New Keynesian research has little impact on practical macroeconomics. This view is even more forceful given that the recent policy debate on the
eﬃcacy of fiscal policy stimulus has mostly been couched in terms of Keynesian multipliers. “New Classical and New Keynesian research has had little impact on practical
macroeconomists who are charged with the messy task of conducting actual monetary and fiscal policy. It has also had little impact on what teachers tell future voters
about macroeconomic policy when they enter the undergraduate classroom. From
the standpoint of macroeconomic engineering, the work of the past several decades
looks like an unfortunate wrong turn.” (Mankiw, 2006, p.21)
Krugman (2000) has argued instead that it would be a shame to excise IS-LM
model from the undergraduate curriculum, because current models have not lived up
to their promise. “The small models haven’t gotten any better over the past couple
of decades; what has happened is that the bigger, more microfounded models have
not lived up to their promise. The core of my argument isn’t that simple models
are good, it’s that complicated models aren’t all they were supposed to be. (...) It
would be a shame if IS-LM and all that vanish from the curriculum because they
were thought to be insuﬃciently rigorous, replaced with models that are indeed more
rigorous but not demonstrably better.” (Krugman, 2000, p.42)
Indeed, the large-scale dynamic stochastic general equilibrium DSGE models
adopted by many national central banks and international institutions are often too
complicated for even the sophisticated reader to grasp the essence of monetary policy
making.1
1

In 2007, Bernanke argued that DSGE models “are unlikely to displace expert judgment”; and
after the recent turmoil, this statement might be phrased even more strongly.

3

Other works have analyzed simplified versions of New Keynesian models. Romer
(2000) presents a modern view of a Keynesian non-microfounded model without the
LM equation. The demand side is represented by an aggregate demand-inflation
curve derived from the Euler equation and a monetary policy rule. In the model
presented here, by contrast, the Euler equation is interpreted as an AD equation
without an interest-rate rule. Walsh (2002) presents a two-equation model in which
the AD equation is derived from the optimal transformation between prices and
output desired by an optimizing central bank. This is close to the IT equation used
here in the analysis of the optimal monetary policy. Finally, Carlin and Soskice (2005)
present a simple three-equation non-microfounded model using a modern approach to
central bank operational targets, but it lacks an AD equation and needs two graphs
to be displayed.2

3

Aggregate Demand

An important diﬀerence between New-Keynesian models and the standard Keynesian
IS-LM model is the introduction of optimizing behavior of households and firms.
In our simple model, aggregate demand is obtained from households’ decisions on
optimal allocation of consumption and aggregate supply from the firm’s optimization
problem given households’ labor-supply decisions.
Households get utility from consumption and disutility from work. They optimally
choose how to allocate consumption and hours worked across time under a natural
resource constraint that bounds the current value of expenditure with the current
value of resources available. We develop the analysis in a two-period model, which
is enough to characterize intertemporal decisions —another novelty with respect to
Keynesian models. The first period represents the short run, the second the long run.
In particular, the long run will be such because it displays the classical dichotomy
between real and nominal allocations, with monetary policy influencing only long-run
prices. In the short run monetary policy is not neutral, owing to the assumption of
price rigidity.
Households face an intertemporal utility function of the form
() − () + {(̄) − (̄)}

(1)

where (·) and (·) are non-decreasing functions of consumption, , and hours
worked, .  and  denote consumption and hours worked in the short run, ̄
and ̄ the same variables in the long run. Households derive utility from current and
future consumption and disutility from current and future hours worked;  is the
factor by which households discount future utility flows, where 0    1.
2

Corsetti and Pesenti (2005) and Goodfriend (2004) also present simple analyses, but with less
conventional diagrams.

4

Households are subject to an intertemporal budget constraint in which the current
value of goods expenditure is constrained by the value of incomes
 +

̄ ̄
̄ ̄
=  +
+
1+
1+

(2)

where  and  are nominal prices and wages and  is the nominal interest rate, while
 denotes lump-sum transfers from the government.3
Households choose consumption and work hours to maximize utility (1) under the
intertemporal budget constraint (2). In each period the marginal rate of substitution
between labor and consumption is equated to the real wage

 ()
=

 ()

 (̄)
̄
=

 (̄)
̄
where  (·) and  (·) denote the marginal utility of consumption and the marginal
disutility of hours worked, respectively. The intertemporal dimension of the optimization problem is captured by the Euler equation, which characterizes how households
allocate consumption across the two periods
 ()

= (1 + ) = 1 + 
 (̄)
̄

(3)

The optimality condition (3) describes the equilibrium relationship between the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution in consumption and the intertemporal relative price of consumption, given by the real interest rate, . We can obtain further in−1
sights into equation (3) by assuming isoelastic utility of the form () =  1−̃ (1−
−1
̃−1 ), in which the marginal utility of consumption is given by  () =  −̃ where
̃ is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consumption with ̃  0. The log
of (3) can be simply written as
̄ −  = ̃ + ̃ ln 

(4)

(the lower case letter denotes the log of its respective variable, and we have used the
approximation ln(1 + ) ≈ ).
Equation (4) shows how the real interest rate aﬀects the intertemporal allocation
of consumption. Other things being equal, a rise in it induces households to save
more and postpone consumption. Consumption growth is positively correlated with
the real interest rate. Low real interest rates are a disincentive for saving and fuel
current consumption. We can also write (4) as
̄ −  = ̃[ − (̄ − )] + ̃ ln 
3

Firms’ profits are also included in  for simplicity.

5

(5)

in which the real rate is expressed explicitly as the nominal interest rate less inflation,
between the long- and the short-run. This Euler equation (5) will be interpreted as
an aggregate-demand equation, in that it marks the negative relationship between
current consumption, , and prices, . When current prices rise so does the real
interest rate, which implies higher savings and lower current consumption.
We can elaborate further on the previous equation by noticing that in each period
equilibrium output is equal to consumption plus public expenditure
 =  + 
̄ = ̄ + ̄
where  denotes output and  is public expenditure. These equations imply in a
first-order approximation that
 =   + 
and
̄ =  ̄ + ̄
where  denotes the steady-state share of consumption in output and  that of public
spending. Substituting these equations into (5), we obtain
 = ̄ + ( − ̄) − [ − (̄ − )] −  ln 

(6)

which thus becomes a negative relation between current output and current prices,
where  = ̃ .
Before moving to the AS equation, let us further investigate the implications of
enriching the model by considering taxes both on consumption and on wages. The
intertemporal budget constraint becomes
(1 +   )  +

(1 + ̄  )̄ ̄
(1 − ̄  )̄ ̄
= (1 −   )  +
+
1+
1+

where   denotes the tax rate on consumption expenditure,   that on labor income.
The optimality condition between consumption and labor is now
(1 −   ) 
 ()
=

 ()
(1 +   ) 

(7)

Similarly for the long run. The Euler equation too changes to imply a log-linear AD
equation of the form
 = ̄ + ( − ̄) − [ − (̄ − ) − (̄  −   )] −  ln 
which is also shifted by movements in consumption taxes.

6

(8)

4

Aggregate Supply

The aggregate supply side of the model is derived from firms’ pricing decisions, given
labor supply. There are many producers oﬀering goods diﬀerentiated according to
consumers’ tastes. Producers have some monopoly power in pricing, as the market is
one of monopolistic competition. That is, firms have some leverage on their price but
are small with respect to the overall market. The generic producer  faces demand
¶−
µ
 ()
 () =
( + )
(9)

where , with   0, is the elasticity of substitution of consumer preferences among
goods and  () is the price of the variety  produced by firm 4 The only factor of
production is labor, which is utilized by a linear technology  () = () where 
is a productivity shock. In the short run, the profits of the firm  are given by
Π() = (1 −   ) () () − (1 +   ) ()

(10)

where   is the tax rate on sales and   that on labor costs.
Equations (9) and (10) apply both to the short and to the long run. However, in
the short run, a fraction  (with 0    1) of firms are assumed to maintain their
prices fixed at the predetermined level    At this level, firms adapt production to
demand (9). The remaining fraction 1 −  of firms maximize profits (10) But in the
long run all firms can adjust their prices in an optimal way.
The assumption of sticky prices, a classic in the Keynesian tradition, has its rationale in a New-Keynesian model because of monopolistic competition. Firms make
positive profits, and losses from not changing prices are of second-order importance
compared to unmodelled menu costs (see Mankiw, 1985).

4.1

The short run

Under monopolistic competition the firms can influence demand (9) by choosing the
prices of their goods, but each one is too small to influence the aggregate price level
 or aggregate consumption . Prices,  () of the “adjusting” firms (of measure
1 − ) are set to maximize (10) given demand (9). At the optimum, pricing is a
markup over marginal costs

(11)
 () = (1 + ̃) 

where the mark-up ̃ is defined as
̃ ≡

 (1 +   )
− 1
 − 1 (1 −   )

4

The demand equation (9) can be obtained in a rigorous way by positing that  is a Dixit-Stiglitz
aggregator of all the goods produced in the economy. See Dixit and Stiglitz (1977) and Woodford
(2003, ch. 3).

7

The remaining fraction  of firms fixes prices at the predetermined expected level   .
We can write equation (11) as

 ()
= (1 + ̃)



and substitute in real wages using equation (7) to obtain
(1 + )  ()
(1 + ) 
 ()
=
=


  ()
  −̃−1

(12)

Notice that  () is diﬀerent from the general price index  because the latter accounts
also for the fixed prices   . In equation (12),  represents an aggregate measure of
the mark-up in the economy, given by a combination of the mark-up, defined as
 ≡ ( − 1) and the tax rates, as:
 ≡ 

(1 +   ) (1 +   )
− 1
(1 −   ) (1 −   )

(13)

In (12) an isoelastic disutility of labor of the form () = 1+ (1 + ) is also
assumed.
At this point, it is important to define the natural level of output,  , as the level
that would obtain in a model in which all firms can adjust their prices in a flexible
way. In this case, the marginal rate of substitution between labor and consumption
is proportional to productivity. Indeed, using the resource constraint  =  +  and
the production function  =  into (7), we get
(1 −   ) 

 ( )
=
=
 ( − )
(1 +   ) 
(1 + )
where the last equality follows from (11) since all firms freely set the same price
 = (1 + ̃) Notice that, when all prices are flexible,  () =  for each  With
isoelastic preferences, we further obtain that

( )

−1 =
−̃
(1 + )
( − )

(14)

and in a log-linear approximation
 =

 −1
1
1+

+
 − −1

−1
−1
 +
 +
 +

(15)

The natural level of output rises with productivity and public expenditure and
falls when the aggregate mark-up increases because of an increase in taxes or in
monopoly power.
8

Now let us turn to equation (12), which can be written using the definition of the
natural rate of output (14), the resource constraint and technology, as
̃
=


µ




¶ µ

 −
 − 

¶̃−1

in which it is assumed that  () = ̃ for all the firms, of measure 1 −  that can
adjust their prices. In a log-linear approximation, we can write
̃ −  = ( −1 + )( −  )

(16)

Noticing that the general price level is a weighted average of the fixed and the flexible
prices
 =  + (1 − )̃
(16) can be written as
 −  = ( −  )

(17)

a short-run aggregate-supply equation relating unexpected movements in prices with
the output gap (the diﬀerence between the actual and natural level of output). When
output exceeds the natural rate level— a positive output gap— there is upward pressure
on prices, driving them above their predetermined levels. The parameter  ≡ (1 −
)( −1 +) measures the slope of the AS curve. The AS will be flatter —movements
in the output gap create less variation in prices— when the fraction of sticky-price firms
is larger. On the other side, it will be steeper when there are more flexible-price firms.
The natural level of output,  , is reached when all firms have flexible prices or, in a
sticky-price environment, when actual prices are equal to expected prices,  =  .
The AS equation (17) is not really a novel feature of New-Keynesian models. It
is known in undergraduate textbooks as New-Classical Phillips curve. Phelps (1967)
and Lucas (1971) have derived a similar equation on diﬀerent principles based on
imperfect information for firms’ decisions.5

4.2

The long run

In the long run, all firms can freely set their prices. Output and consumption will
find their natural level, namely
 −1
1
1+
̄ + −1
̄ − −1
̄
̄ = −1
 +
 +
 +
5

See Ball et al. (1988) for a New Keynesian interpretation. The most recent New Keynesian
literature has focused on forward-looking and staggered price-setting behavior following Calvo (1983)
to derive a New Keynesian Phillips curve that incorporates future expectations. This complication
goes beyond our present pedagogical scope and in any case would not aﬀect the qualitative results
of the following sections. Others have assumed staggered pricing using overlapping contracts as in
Taylor (1979) or the costly-adjustment model of Rotemberg (1982).

9


1
1+
̄ −
̄ −
̄
−1
−1
−1
 ( + )
 ( + )
 ( + )
The long-run Phillips curve is vertical and the model displays the classical dichotomy
between nominal and real variables. Monetary policy is neutral with respect to the
determination of real variables, but fiscal policy is not. A rise in tax rates, in any
form, increases the mark-up and reduces both output and consumption. More public
spending increases output but in general reduces consumption. When the disutility
of labor is linear, i.e.  = 0, output rises one-to-one with public expenditure, while
consumption remains unchanged. Greater long-run productivity growth will raise the
natural level of both output and consumption.
̄ =

4.3

Policies

A number of diﬀerent monetary and fiscal policy instruments are available and the
model should be closed to determine all the relevant macro variables by specifying a
path for those instruments. In the long run, we assume that monetary policy controls
and determines ̄ in line with the result of long-run neutrality. In the short run, we
assume that it controls the nominal interest rate, . Fiscal policy instead sets the
path of taxes for the short and the long run,{  ,      ,    ̄  , ̄   ̄  , ̄  } and public
expenditure, for the short and the long run { ̄} together with the transfer  to
balance the intertemporal budget constraint of the government
̄  ̄ ̄ + ̄  ̄ ̄ + (̄  + ̄  )̄ ̄
̄ ̄
=  +
+ (18)
1+
1+
Given these policies, in the short run prices and output are determined by the AD
equation (8) and the AS equation (17). Movements in the monetary policy instrument
 are now not neutral with respect to output because of price rigidity.
    +   +(  +  ) +

4.4

The eﬃcient level of output

The “eﬃcient” level of output is that which maximizes the utility of consumers under
the resource constraints of the economy. It is the level that maximizes
() − ()
under the resource constraint
 =  + 
and technology
 = 
The optimality condition defines the eﬃcient level of output,  , as a function of
technology and public spending:
1
 ( − )
= 
 ( )

10

In log-linear form, it reads
 =

 −1
1+

+

 −1 + 
 −1 + 

(19)

A comparison of (19) with (15) shows that productivity and public spending shift the
two definitions of output in equal proportion. Mark-up shocks, however are a source
of ineﬃciencies, as they shift the natural but not the eﬃcient level of output. As
is discussed later, the eﬃcient level of output is the welfare-relevant measure under
certain conditions.

5

The AS-AD model

Now our short-run equilibrium can be interpreted through graphical analysis with the
AS and AD equations. The AS equation is given by a sort of New Classical Phillips
curve
 −  = ( −  )
(20)

which shows a positive relationship between prices and output. An increase in output
leads to higher real marginal costs. Firms can protect profit margins by price hikes.6
Figure 1 plots the AS curve with prices on the vertical and output on the horizontal
axis. There is a positive relationship between prices and output. The slope is . Since
 depends on the fraction of sticky-price firms, the larger this fraction, lower the slope
and the flatter the AS equation. In this case, movements in real economic activity
produce small changes in the general price level. A useful observation in plotting
the AS equation and understanding its movements is that it crosses the point ( ,
 ) In particular, we have seen that the natural level of output depends on public
expenditure, productivity and the mark-up. An increase in productivity or in public
expenditure or a reduction in the mark-up through lower taxes all raise the natural
level of output. In these cases, Figure 2 shows that the vertical line corresponding
to  shifts rightward to the new level 0 . The AS equation shifts to the right and
crosses the new pair ( , 0 ) Viceversa in the case of a fall in the natural level of
output.
In the traditional AS-AD textbook model, the AD equation represents the combination of prices and output such that goods and financial markets are in equilibrium.
The cornerstone of the building block behind the AD equation is the IS-LM model.
In that framework, the AD curve is negatively sloped, because a rise in prices increases the demand for money. For a given money supply, interest rates should rise
to discourage the increased desire for liquidity. Investment falls along with demand
and output.
The AD equation of our New-Keynesian model originates from diﬀerent principles.
First, there is no LM equation, since the instrument of monetary policy is the nominal
6

Sticky-price firms will meet the higher demand by increasing production.

11

Figure 1: The AS equation is a positive relationship between prices and output.
Higher output increases real wages and firms’ real marginal costs. The firms that can
adjust their prices react by increasing them. AS crosses through the point ( ,  ).

12

Figure 2: The AS curve shifts to the right when the short-run current natural rate
of output increases ( ↑) because of an increase in short-run productivity ( ↑), an
increase in short-run public spending ( ↑), or a fall in short-run mark-up ( ↓), itself
due to either a fall in short-run monopoly power ( ↓ ) or in short-run tax rates ( 
↓,   ↓,   ↓,   ↓).

13

interest rate and not money supply. Second, the model posits intertemporal and
optimizing decisions by households, which show up directly in the specification of the
AD equation. As the previous section has shown, the New Keynesian AD equation is
 = ̄ + ( − ̄) − [ − (̄ − ) − (̄  −   )] −  ln 

(21)

which is a negative relationship between prices and output, with slope of −1.
When prices rise, for a given path of the other variables and in particular of the
nominal interest rate, the real interest rate rises. This prompts households to increase
saving and postpone consumption. Current consumption falls along with current
production. When  is high, small movements in prices and in the real rate produce
larger movements in savings and a larger fall in consumption and output: the AD
equation becomes flatter; and conversely when  is low. To simplify the AD graph,
we assume to start with that ̄ =  and that the curve also crosses the natural level
of output. This assumption requires setting the nominal and real interest rate at the
natural level — the level that would occur under flexible prices. Figure 3 plots the AD
equation under these assumptions.
Several factors can move AD. First, monetary policy can shift the curve by affecting the nominal interest rate. A lower nominal interest rate ( ↓) shifts the curve
to the right, since it lowers the real interest rate proportionally. Consumers reduce
saving and step up current consumption, given prices (see Figure 4). Short-run movements in fiscal policy can also move the AD equation by altering public expenditure
and consumption taxes. In particular, an increase in short-run public spending ( ↑)
shifts the equation to the right because, for given prices, it increases current output.
A similar movement follows a lowering of short-run consumption taxes (  ↓) In this
case, the current relative to the future cost of buying goods is diminished inducing higher consumption. The long-run monetary and fiscal policy stances aﬀect the
short-run movements in the equation. An increase in long-run prices (̄ ↑) lowers the
real interest rate and drives current consumption and output up, shifting the curve
to the right. Long-run fiscal policy works through its impact on the long-run natural
level of consumption, since ̄ = −1
 (̄ − ̄). A reduction in future payroll and sales
taxes, (̄  ↓, ̄  ↓, ̄  ↓) reduces the long-run mark-up and so increases the natural
level of consumption, shifting AD upward. A decrease in consumption taxes (̄  ↓)
has a similar eﬀect on the mark-up, but a diﬀerent impact on current consumption
because of consumers’ desire to postpone consumption so as to exploit the lower future taxation. This second channel dominates Changes in long-run productivity can
also cause an increase in the long-run natural level of consumption and an upward
shift in the AD equation.

6

Productivity shocks

We start some comparative static exercises, assuming that in the initial equilibrium
AS and AD cross at point  as shown in Figure 5, in which  =  = ̄ and
14

Figure 3: AD is a negative relationship between prices and output. As current prices
increase, the real interest rate rises and consumers save more. Current consumption
falls along with production.

15

Figure 4: The AD curve shifts upward when the short-run nominal interest rate falls
( ↓), short-run consumption taxes fall (  ↓), short-run public spending increases
( ↑), long-run prices increase (̄ ↑) or the future natural level of consumption rises
(̄ ↑) due to an increase in long-run productivity (̄ ↑), a reduction in long-run
public spending (̄ ↓), a fall in long-run monopoly power (̄ ↓) a fall in long-run
payroll and income taxes (̄  ↓, ̄  ↓, ̄  ↓), or an increase in long-run consumption
taxes (̄  ↑).

16

Figure 5: The initial equilibrium is in  where  and  intersect.
the economy is at the natural level of output. It is also assumed that the natural
and eﬃcient levels of output initially coincide,  =  . The way the equilibrium
changes in response to diﬀerent shocks and how monetary policy should react to
restore stability in prices and output gap, if possible, are then analyzed. Let us begin
with the analysis of productivity shocks.

6.1

A temporary productivity shock

First, we analyze the case in which the economy undergoes a temporary productivity
gain, meaning that productivity rises in the short run but does not vary in the long
run. Starting from the equilibrium  shown in Figure 6, the short-run natural level
of output rises to 0 and AS shifts downward, crossing  00 , as discussed in the previous
section. The AD equation is not aﬀected by movements in current productivity, and
the new equilibrium is found at the intersection,  0  of the new AS equation, AS0 
with the old AD equation.
The adjustment from equilibrium  to  0 occurs as follows. A temporary increase
17

Figure 6: A temporary productivity shock:  ↑   shifts to  0 and the equilibrium
moves from  to  0 . If monetary policy lowers the nominal interest rate,  moves
to 00 and equilibrium  00 is reached with stable prices and zero output gap.

18

in productivity lowers real marginal costs. The firms that can adjust their prices lower
them. The real interest rate falls, stimulating consumption. Output increases, but
not enough to match the rise in the natural level, because of sticky prices. The
economy reaches the equilibrium point  0 with lower prices and higher output, but
a negative output gap. The eﬃcient level of output rises in the same proportion as
the natural level.
This is the new equilibrium without any policy intervention. An interesting question is how monetary policy should respond to the shocks in order to close the output
gap and/or stabilize prices, if both objectives can be reached simultaneously. In this
case, monetary policy can attain both by bringing the economy to equilibrium  00 .
By lowering the nominal interest rate, monetary policy shifts AD upward to the point
at which it crosses  00  The curve thus shifts to 00  The rise in output also increases
firms’ marginal costs, driving prices up. Production expands. In  00 prices are stable
at the initial level. An accommodating monetary policy can thus achieve both the
natural level of output and stable prices. As will be discussed later, this is also the
optimal policy, maximizing the utility of the consumers.

6.2

A permanent productivity shock

Figure 7 analyzes the case of a permanent productivity shock. As in the previous
case, the short-run natural and eﬃcient level of output increases and the  curve
shifts downward through  0 . However, now the  equation shifts upward, because the future natural level of consumption rises along with long-run productivity.
Households want to increase current consumption because they want to smooth the
future increase. The  equation shifts exactly to intersect  0 . And this is the new
equilibrium.
In the initial equilibrium, the nominal interest rate was set equal to the natural
real rate of interest
 =  = −1 (̄ −  ) +  −1 ( − ̄) + (̄  −   ) − ln 
A permanent gain in productivity does not change the natural real rate of interest,
because both ̄ and  increase in the same proportion: this is why the new equilibrium requires no change in monetary policy to achieve price stability while closing
simultaneously the output gap. Later, we will show that this equilibrium outcome
corresponds to the optimal monetary policy.

6.3

Optimism or pessimism on future productivity

Consider now the case of an expected increase in long-run productivity. This can be
taken either as an increase that will really occur, or just an optimistic belief about
future output growth or a combination of the two. Conversely, a decrease in long-run

19

Figure 7: A permanent productivity shock:  ↑ and ̄ ↑ .  shifts to  0 and  to
0 . The equilibrium moves from  to  0 without any monetary policy intervention.

20

Figure 8: An increase in long-run productivity: ̄ ↑.  shifts up to 0 . The
equilibrium moves from  to  0 . An increase in the nominal interest rate can bring
the equilibrium back to the starting point.

21

productivity can also be interpreted as a pessimistic belief on future growth. The
case of optimism is analyzed in Figure 8.
 does not move, since there is no change in current productivity.  does
shift upward, because households expect higher consumption in the future and for
the smoothing motive they want to increase their consumption immediately. Output
expands driving up real wages and real marginal costs, so that firms adjust prices
upward. The economy reaches the equilibrium point  0 with higher prices and production higher than the natural and eﬃcient, level. What should monetary policy do
to stabilize prices and close the output gap? It should counter future developments
in productivity or such optimistic beliefs by rasing the nominal interest rate so as to
bring  back to the initial point .
Some lessons can be drawn from these analyses. Regardless of the properties of
the shock —temporary, permanent or expected— monetary policy can always move
interest rates to stabilize prices and the output gap simultaneously. But the direction
of the movement depends on the nature of the shock. When shocks are transitory,
monetary policy should be expansionary; when permanent, it should be neutral; and
with merely expected productivity shocks, it should be restrictive.

7

Mark-up shocks

When there are productivity shocks, monetary policy does not face a trade-oﬀ between
stabilizing prices and oﬀsetting the output gap. With mark-up shocks, things are
diﬀerent. First, the eﬃcient level of output does not move, while the natural level
does. Second, there is a trade-oﬀ between stabilizing prices and reaching the eﬃcient
level of output.
This section considers only temporary mark-up shocks, leaving other analyses to
the reader. Among such shocks, we concentrate on those that move the AS equation.
The shock envisaged here is a short-run increase in the mark-up ( ↑), due to an
increase in monopoly power ( ↑ ) or a rise in tax rates (   ↑,   ↑,   ↑). Another
appealing interpretation of such a mark-up shock is as of a variation in the price of
commodities that are inelastically demanded as factors of production. An important
example is oil.
Consider then a temporary increase in the mark-up (see Figure 9). The  curve
shifts upward following the fall in the natural level of output, but the eﬃcient level
of output is unchanged. Firms raise prices because of the higher mark-up. The real
interest rate goes up and households increase savings and postpone consumption. Demand falls along with output. The economy reaches equilibrium  0 with a contraction
in output and higher prices: a situation dubbed “stagflation”. Now, monetary policy
does face a dilemma: between maintaining stable prices and keeping the economy at
the eﬃcient level of production. To attain the price objective the nominal interest
rate should be raised so as to further increase the real rate and damp down economic
activity. In this case,  shifts downward to 00 and the economy reaches equi22

Figure 9: A temporary increase in the mark-up:  ↑  The natural level of output
 falls while the eﬃcient level of output  does not move.  shifts to  0 . The
equilibrium moves from  to  0 . By raising the nominal interest rate, monetary
policy can stabilize prices and reach equilibrium  00  By lowering it, the eﬃcient level
of output can be achieved at equilibrium point  000 . There is a trade-oﬀ between the
two objectives, stabilizing prices and reaching the eﬃcient level of output.

23

librium  00 . To obtain the output objective, policymakers should cut the nominal
interest rate to stimulate economic activity and consumption. In this case,  shifts
to 000 and the economy reaches equilibrium  000 

8

Fiscal multipliers

So far, we have conducted exercises in comparative statics through perturbations originating from productivity or mark-up shocks, to examine how monetary policymakers
should react in order to stabilize prices or close the output gap. In this section, the
focus is instead on fiscal policy and in particular on the impact of alternative fiscal
policy stances on output and the output gap.
To shed light on the fiscal multipliers, let us consider only the components of the
equation (21) that are influenced by fiscal policy
 =  + ̄ − ̄ − [ − (̄  −   )]
in which we can substitute (20) for  to obtain
=

[ + ̄ − ̄ +  + (̄  −   )]

1 + 

again disregarding the terms unaﬀected by fiscal policy. Recalling the definition of
the natural level of output and noting that
 ≈  +   +   +   +  
and
̄ ≈ ̄ + ̄  + ̄  + ̄  + ̄  
we can write (disregarding the terms unaﬀected by fiscal policy) that
 =   − ̄ ̄ −   − ̄ ̄ −     + ̄  ̄  

(22)

where the parameters are all defined in terms of the primitives of the model, as shown
in Table 1. Moreover, all the tax rates except for consumption taxes are collapsed
in   so that  =   +   +   ; similarly for ̄ . We call the coeﬃcients in (22)
“multipliers”, but actually most if not all do not have multiplying eﬀects on output
in the Keynesian sense. In particular, an increase in current public expenditure,  ↑,
increases output. The increase is one-to-one in the special case of linear disutility of
labor, i.e.  = 0; otherwise the increase is less than proportional.
Greater short-run public expenditure ( ↑) increases output because it stimulates
aggregate demand. But, prices rise as demand increases, producing an increase in
the real interest rate and a decrease in consumption. There is a crowding out eﬀect
of public spending on private spending, except when the disutility of labor is linear,
 = 0.
24

By contrast, higher long-run public expenditure, ̄ ↑, decreases current output,
because it depresses the long-run natural level of consumption. Anticipating this,
households reduce current consumption, and production contracts. Higher short-run
and long-run sales and payroll taxes have also depressing eﬀects on current output, but
through diﬀerent channels. An increase in short-run taxes,  ↑ moves the AS curve
upward and pushes up prices along AD, raising the real interest rate and reducing
current consumption and thus output.
An increase in long-run taxes, ̄ ↑, reduces the long-run natural level of consumption and thus aﬀects current consumption. This produces a downward shift in
AD.
An increase in short-run consumption taxes,   ↑, reduces current output through
two channels. First, the increase acts as a mark-up shock, driving up prices and
shifting the AS curve upward. Second, the relative price of current consumption rises
with respect to future consumption, so the AD curve shifts as savings increase and
current consumption falls. An increase in future consumption taxes, ̄  ↑, also aﬀects
the long-run natural level of consumption adversely, but it reduces the relative price
of current against future consumption. Both channels now operate through the AD
equation, and the latter dominates, implying that a rise in long-run consumption
taxes increases current output. With linear disutility,  = 0 the two channels oﬀset
one another.
Table 1: Fiscal multipliers

( −1 +)(1+)

 =

1
(1+)

̄ =


( −1 +)(1+)

 =


( −1 +)(1+)

̄ =

1
( −1 +)(1+)

+

  = 
̄  = ̄
Whether these parameters are multipliers or not depends on the value of the
primitive parameters. To pin these values down, let us use some calibrations from the
literature. In our model,  measures the fraction of price setters who have fixed prices.
In Calvo’s model, this is related to the duration of prices , given by  = 1(1 − ),
which is usually assumed to be three quarters for the United States. We can loosely
calibrate  = 066 We also experiment with greater price rigidity, setting  = 075.
25

The intertemporal elasticity of substitution is usually assumed between one half and
one. We set  = 05 and experiment for a unitary elasticity of substitution  = 1. The
parameter  can be interpreted as the inverse of the Frisch elasticity of labor supply.
Values around 5 are reasonable in micro studies while estimates of DSGE models
point to 1, as in Smets and Wouters (2003). We set  equal to 02 and experiment
for 1.
Table 2 evaluates the multipliers of (22) using the several combinations of the
above parameters. Interestingly, all the multipliers are less than one, and each fiscal
instrument has a less than proportional impact on output. In particular a 1% increase
in public expenditure with respect to GDP, in the short run, increases output by
between 0.75% and 0.96%, depending on the calibration of the parameters. A shortrun increase in taxes reduces output by a factor ranging from 0.1 to 0.3 while the
impact of an increase in the consumption taxes, in the short run, depends greatly
on the value taken by the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. With a low value,
this factor ranges around 0.5, while with a unitary elasticity of substitution it rises
to 0.95. The factors of proportionality of long-run taxes and public spending are
smaller, ranging from 0.05 to 0.30 depending on the calibration. In some calibrations,
the multiplier on long-run taxes is as high as 060.
Table 2: Evaluation of the multipliers in (22)


̄



̄

 

̄ 

 = 066  = 05,  = 02

0.96

0.06

0.16

0.29

0.48

0.03

 = 075  = 05,  = 02

0.98

0.06

0.12

0.33

0.49

0.03

 = 066  = 1,  = 02

0.94

0.10

0.32

0.52

0.94

0.10

 = 075  = 1,  = 02

0.95

0.12

0.24

0.60

0.95

0.12

 = 066  = 1,  = 1

0.75

0.25

0.25

0.25

0.75

0.25

 = 075  = 1,  = 1

0.80

0.30

0.20

0.30

0.80

0.30

 = 066  = 05,  = 1

0.86

0.18

0.15

0.19

0.43

0.09

 = 075  = 05,  = 1

0.88

0.22

0.11

0.22

0.44

0.11

So far we have considered the impact of fiscal policy on output, showing the conditions
under which it is expansionary or not. However, it is not solely in terms of output
26

that a policy can be judged to be expansionary or not. It is surely more appropriate
to look at the impact of the multipliers on the output gap and see which policy widens
or narrows it the most. Subtracting (15) from (22) and focusing on the terms relevant
to fiscal policy, we get
 −  = ̄ ( − ̄) + ̄ ( − ̄ ) − ̄  (  − ̄  )

(23)

Permanent changes in fiscal policy, whatever the source, do not alter the output
gap. Short and long-run movements in any fiscal policy instrument have equal and
opposite eﬀects on the gap; the magnitude is given by the long-run multipliers in
(22) An increase in public spending, in the short run, raises output more than the
natural level, narrowing the output gap. An increase in sales and payroll taxes, in
the short run, reduces output but reduces the natural level still more, thus ultimately
narrowing output gap. An increase in consumption taxes also reduces output, but
now the contraction is larger then the fall in the natural level, widening the output
gap. The eﬀects of long-run fiscal policies on the short-run output gap are exactly
opposite; that is, they are of the same sign and magnitude as those on output, since
they do not move the current natural level. Table 2 quantifies these multipliers. A
short-run —not permanent— increase in public spending narrows the short-run output
gap by a factor which ranges between 0.06 and 0.30. But in the more realistic case
of a high Frisch elasticity of substitution,  = 02, this factor does not exceed 0.12;
that is, an increase of 1 percentage point in the ratio of public spending to GDP
diminishes the output gap by 0.12%.
We can also analyze the fiscal multipliers and the output gap, computed with
respect to the eﬃcient allocation, obtaining
 −  = ̄ ( − ̄) −   − ̄ ̄ −     + ̄  ̄  
which has the same short- and long-run public-spending multipliers as equation (22)
and the same taxation multipliers as equation (23). Distorting taxes are ineﬃcient
and do not shift the eﬃcient level of output; a short-run spending shock moves the
natural and the eﬃcient level of output, proportionally.
Having analyzed the impact of fiscal policy on the output gap, we can now investigate the equilibrium movements using the AS-AD view. Here we consider a short-run
increase in public spending, leaving all the other comparative static exercises to the
reader. A qualification at this point is that the experiment assumes government can
comply with intertemporal solvency constraints by curbing lump-sum transfers as
in (18). If lump-sum transfers are not available, one might envisage a scenario in
which public spending increases in the short-run while some distorting tax, either in
the short or in the long run, is adjusted to oﬀset that increase. A proper analysis
requires going beyond the simple model presented here, but we can give a qualitative and loose account of the final results even in our simple model, by studying the
combined eﬀects of movements in alternative fiscal instruments.
27

Figure 10: A temporary increase in public spending:  ↑  The natural and eﬃcient
level of output  increases.  shifts to  0 .  moves to 0 because public
spending increases output for given consumption. The equilibrium moves from  to
 0 with a positive output gap. By raising the nominal interest rate, monetary policy
can stabilize prices and the output gap, reaching equilibrium  00  0 moves to 00 .

28

As shown in Figure 10, an increase in current public spending expands aggregate
demand and thus current output, shifting the aggregate demand equation upward
from  to 0 . At the same time, the natural rate of output increases, together with
the eﬃcient level shifting  downward. From equation (23), we know that short-run
movements in public spending narrow the output gap. Starting from no gap, public
spending creates a positive output gap. This means that 0 and  0 cross to the
right of the new natural level of output 0 . Prices rise from the initial equilibrium;
the real interest rate rises, reducing consumption as equilibrium  becomes  0  On
the one hand the economy is overheated by a positive output gap, on the other
side private consumption is crowded out. To close the output gap and stabilize
prices, policymakers should raise nominal interest rates to increase the real rate,
which further dampens private consumption. In this case,  moves from 0 to
00  reaching equilibrium  00 7

9

Liquidity trap

Hicks (1932) describes the General Theory as the “economics of depression,” the
reason being that Keynes had said something about an increase in investment not
raising the nominal interest rate. In the traditional Keynesian world, the LM equation
is a positive relationship between nominal interest rates and sales, given money supply.
However, the curve is nearly flat on the left and nearly vertical on the right. In
particular it is horizontal on the left because there is a minimum below which the
nominal interest is unlikely to go. For low income, then movements in the IS curve
do increase employment without aﬀecting the rate of interest. On the other hand, a
monetary expansion cannot further reduce the nominal interest rate. The economy
is in a trap: whatever liquidity the authorities inject is absorbed by agents without
aﬀecting the nominal interest rate and hence income.
In a New Keynesian model, the nominal interest rate is the policy instrument and
there is no explicit reference to the liquidity of the economy. Still, the interest rate has
a lower bound, because otherwise agents could borrow to run infinite consumption.8
A liquidity trap can be defined as the situation in which the nominal interest rate is
zero, so monetary policy loses its standard tool.
The zero lower bound has a direct implication for our AS-AD graphical analysis.
7

When  = 0  and  shift proportionally to cross the new natural level of output, closing
the output gap, with stable prices ( =  ) without any monetary policy intervention.
8
In a model with monetary frictions, the lower bound on short-term interest rates is the remuneration of money. If this is zero, then there is a zero lower bound. The analysis of this paper
would be valid even if monetary frictions were assumed, with some caveats on how those frictions
are introduced. In the pure cashless economy, money is remunerated at the same rate as bonds and
there is no zero lower bound since the two interest rates always coincide. However, one can imagine
that, at zero or at lower nominal interest rates, money could still preserve its function as store of
value. In this case a zero lower bound would again become binding.

29

Figure 11: Zero lower bound on the nominal interest rate:  cannot move upward
above 0 because of the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates.
Lowering the nominal interest rate shifts the AD curve upwards but only to the zero
lower bound limit. As Figure 11 shows there is an 0 equation that corresponds to
the lower bound and constrains any movement of AD upward.
As in the Keynesian model, the liquidity trap is a state of depression. But the
intertemporal side of the New Keynesian model oﬀers an alternative interpretation
of the origin of a slump cum liquidity trap. As noted by Krugman (1998), in a
liquidity trap the equilibrium real rate can be negative because of poor long-run
growth prospects or because some agents are forced to deleverage, as it will be shown
in the next section. The  shifts downward, as shown in Figure 12. The contraction
can be deep enough to leave very little scope for bringing the economy back up to the
initial equilibrium, since 0 equation becomes binding. The best that can happen
is to reach 0 by lowering the nominal interest rate to zero. But in the equilibrium
 0 , the real interest rate is too high, household consumption too low and the economy
still in a slump with output far below potential.
Which kind of monetary and fiscal policy can bring the economy back up to
potential?
Although conventional monetary policy is constrained, the model still provides
30

Figure 12: Liquidity trap. Starting from equilibrium  by lowering the nominal
interest rate monetary policy can at most reach equilibrium  0 . But it can also lower
the real interest rate by creating expectations of future inflation. In this case both
 and 0 shift up and equilibrium  00 can be reached.
for one more instrument: the determination of long-run prices. The critical insight
of the New-Keynesian solution to the liquidity trap, discussed in Krugman (1998),
is that policymakers still have a policy tool namely acting on expectations of future
policy actions.9
In a liquidity trap, agents save too much because the current real interest rate
is too high. By increasing expected prices and creating inflationary expectations,
monetary policy can actually lower the real rate of interest and shift both  and
0 up increasing consumption and production. This channel is the stronger, the
greater households’ preferences for intertemporal consumption substitution. But how
can a central bank succeed in this policy or in general in a policy of moving aggregate
spending, when it is denied short-term nominal interest rate maneuvers?
One possibility is “quantitative easing”, a strategy of expanding the balance sheet
9

See Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) for a solution in a fully dynamic model.

31

of the central bank and injecting liquidity into the economy until there is a reversal
in prices and in particular in the relative intertemporal price of consumption. Since
the general price index is the value of money in terms of other goods, there ought to
be an amount of money in the system such as to prompt the right correction of the
price level.
Bernanke (2002) discusses several of the instruments available to monetary policymakers in a liquidity trap. The central bank can: 1) expand the scale of its asset
purchases and its menu, 2) commit to holding nominal interest rates to zero for a
long period of time, 3) announce explicit ceilings for yields on long-maturity Treasury
debt and enforce them by committing itself to unlimited purchases, 4) oﬀer fixed-term
loans to banks at zero or near interest, with an ample spectrum of collateral, 5) buy
foreign debt. All these policies are now being tried in the United States to counteract
the real economic repercussions of the subprime crisis.
The traditional IS-LM model, by contrast, implies that fiscal policy is the only
eﬀective policy instrument in a liquidity trap. In the simple New-Keynesian model
presented here, let us now analyze the role of fiscal policy considering the fiscal
multipliers as discussed in the previous section. We seek to determine which fiscal
instrument is most eﬀective in increasing output and at the same time narrowing
the output gap vis á vis the natural level.10 As is shown in equations (22) and (23),
the set of policies that increase output is  ↑, ̄ ↓,  ↓ ̄ ↓,   ↓ ̄  ↑, while those
that narrow the output gap are  ↑, ̄ ↓,  ↑ ̄ ↓,   ↓ ̄  ↑. According to the two
desiderata, a policy of lowering sales and payroll taxes in the short-run  ↓ should be
avoided, because although it does increase output it worsens the output gap.11 All
the other policies, considered separately, increase output and simultaneously diminish
the gap, so they are good candidates for further investigation.
A rise in short-run public spending expands output more than a long-run reduction, while it narrows the output gap in the same proportion. However, the long-term
expenditure cut has some advantages. First, an increase in  ↑ shifts the natural level
of output, and AS moves downward, keeping prices down. In a depression with low
inflation or deflation, keeping prices down might heighten the risk of worsening the
balance sheets of firms in the presence of downward nominal wage rigidities or debt.
Next section studies the eﬀects of fiscal policy when some agents are borrowing constrained. A lowering in ̄ ↓ by contrast only moves AD upward; it puts no downward
pressure on prices. Second, a short-run increase in public spending crowds out private
consumption, whereas a cut in long-run public spending increases current private consumption. This might be desirable in a slump in which consumption contracts, given
10
The analysis might also be conducted with reference to the eﬃcient level of output, but in a
depression the eﬃcient level might be far enough away to make it a secondary objective, subordinate
to bringing the economy up to potential.
11
In a New-Keynesian multi-period model, Eggertsson (2011) shows that the multiplier on tax
cuts goes from positive to negative once the interest rate hits zero. Instead, the multiplier on public
spending becomes larger than one.

32

the large portion of GDP usually accounted for by consumption. Third, increasing
short-run public spending is eﬀective if it is not permanent, which might require more
political eﬀort than a policy of just trying to reduce fiscal expenditure in the long run.
Finally, if there are problems of fiscal sustainability or if lump-sum transfers are not
available, then a short-run increase in public spending will have to be accompanied
by a rise in taxes, which undercuts its eﬀectiveness.
Reducing short-run consumption taxes   ↓ and increasing long-run consumption
taxes ̄  ↑ both produce similar eﬀects on the output gap but the former policy also
moves AS downward, with the problems pointed out above, while the latter shifts
only the AD. A reduction in long-run taxes, ̄ ↓, shifts the AD curve only.
In general, what this analysis indicates is that there is a better mix of fiscal policy
instruments that can stimulate demand and get out of the recession cum liquidity
trap. This mix includes mainly long-run fiscal policies with expansionary eﬀects
on short-run consumption: cut in future taxes and future public expenditure and
an increase in future consumption taxes work in the same direction.12 Moreover,
such policies are sustainable as they comply with the government budget constraint.
By contrast, an increase in current public expenditure or a decrease in current taxes
should be accompanied by higher taxes or lower public expenditure in the future. But
higher taxes in the future are among the policies that most sharply reduce current
output and the output gap. Moreover, if it is to be eﬀective on the output gap,
expansionary short-run fiscal policy has to be reversed in the long run.
In the next section, we repeat the same analysis in an economy in which a fraction
of agents is debt constrained. Under these new circumstances, the multiplier can be
quite big.

10

The economics of debt deleveraging

In this section, we show that a deleveraging shock can depress aggregate demand
and bring the economy into a liquidity trap. The model is drawn from Eggertsson
and Krugman (2012) where an economy with two types of agents, borrowers and
savers, is modelled. Imagine that there is fraction  of savers and 1 −  of borrowers
maximizing the intertemporal utility
( ) − ( ) +   {(̄ ) − (̄ )}

(24)

for  =   with  denoting the borrowers and  the savers. Borrowers are more
impatient than savers since they have a lower discount factor,      .
12

Similarly, Eggertsson (2011), in a more sophisticated model, argues for policies that shift the
AD equation. In a multi-period model with a persistent state of liquidity trap and sticky prices,
Eggertsson (2012) finds that even policies that increase the mark-up can expand output since they
create expectations of inflation and lower the real rate of interest, stimulating demand. Next section
studies this and other paradoxes.

33

The short-run budget constraint is
̄ = (1 + 0 )0 +   −   − Π + 

(25)

where a positive  denotes debt, while 0 is the initial level of debt borrowed at
the predetermined nominal interest rate 0 . Wages,  , and labor,  , are specific to
the type of agent. The other variables have the same interpretation as in previous
sections where now we have decoupled profits, Π from lump-sum taxes,  .13 In the
long run
̄2 = (1 + )̄ + ̄ ̄ − ̄ ̄ − Π̄ + ̄
(26)

where 2 denotes end-of-period debt.14 There is a limit on the amount of debt that
can be borrowed which can be interpreted as the threshold under which debt can be
considered as safe
̄
≤ ̄
(27)
(1 + )

This borrowing limit applies in each period. A reduction in ̄ from the initial level
0 represents the deleveraging shock of interest in this section. For reasons not modelled here, borrowers suddenly realize that they have to reduce their debt exposure.
This shock brings about a sharp contraction in aggregate demand and therefore the
economy can fall in a liquidity trap.
Households choose consumption and work hours to maximize utility (24) under
the flow budget constraints (25) and (26) taking into account the debt limit (27).
Imagine that borrowers start from a steady state in which they are debt-constrained
because of their impatience to consume, and remain constrained during and after
deleveraging. The standard Euler equation does not apply in their case.
First, we solve for the long run. The marginal rate of substitution between labor
and consumption is equated to the real wage for each type of agent
 (̄ )
̄
=

 (̄ )
̄

(28)

As in the previous model, there is a continuum of firms, of measure one, producing the
diﬀerentiated goods with a production function  =  where now  is an aggregator
. Given this technology, labor compensation for
of the two types of labor,  =  1−

each type of worker is equal to total compensation   =   where the aggregate
wage index is appropriately given by  =  1− . We continue to assume isoelastic
disutility of working, ( ) = 1+
(1 + ) but now the utility from consumption is

exponential ( ) = 1 − exp(− ) for some positive parameter . This is a very
convenient assumption for aggregation and to keep tractability. These features can
13

Profits are distributed in equal shares among agents.
We allow for the possibility that debt remains positive at the end of period 2. The model of
this section can be easily interpreted as an infinite-horizon model in which after the second period
the economy reaches a new steady state.
14

34

be easily discovered by taking a weighted average of (28), for  =   with weights
 and 1 −  respectively
̄
̄
=

exp[−(̄ + (1 − )̄ )]
̄

(29)

By using the production function, ̄ = ̄̄ and the aggregate resource constraint,
̄ = ̄ + (1 − )̄ + ̄ into equation (29) and noting that in the long run prices
are flexible and set as a mark-up over marginal costs, ̄ = (1 + ̄ )̄ ̄, we find that
the long-run natural level of output is independent of the distribution of wealth and
can be simply defined as
(̄ ̄)
̄
=
(1 + ̄ )
exp[−(̄ − ̄)]
which in a log-linear approximation coincides with (15) where now the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution  is instead given by  ≡ 1( ̃ ) with ̃ representing the
steady-state level of output around which the approximation is taken. To get this
result, the assumption of exponential utility is critical. A further useful implication
is that the short-run AS equation will be of the same form as in (20).
We now derive the short-run AD equation. Like in the previous model, the longrun price level is controlled by monetary policy, while the short-run instrument is the
nominal interest rate.
Savers allocate consumption intertemporally according to the standard Euler
Equation
(30)
 = ̄ − ̃[ − (̄ − )] − ̃ ln 
where lower-case letters are logs of the respective variables as in the previous sections
and ̃ ≡ 1. Notice that  and ̄ are in levels because of exponential utility in
consumption. After using short- and long-run aggregate resource constraints into
(30), the AD equation follows
 =  + (̄ − ̄) − ̃[ − (̄ − )] − ̃ ln  + (1 − )( − ̄ )
which can be written as
 =  + (̄ − ̄) − [ − (̄ − )] −  ln  + (1 − )(

 − ̄
)
̃

(31)

showing that the diﬀerence between short and long-run consumption of the borrowers
acts as a shifter in the AD schedule.15 In particular, if deleveraging sharply reduces
short-run consumption for the borrowers, this depresses aggregate demand. To complete the characterization of the AD equation we need to solve for the consumption
15

Again lower-case letters are logs of the respective variables while as before  = ( − ̃ )̃ where
̃ is the steady-state level of output

35

of the borrowers. Using the flow budget constraints (25) and (26) and assuming that
borrowers remain constrained by their debt limit, we obtain their short and long-run
consumption levels
 = −

(1 + 0 ) 0
̄
0 +
+  − 
(1 + 0 ) 
1+

̄ = −

(1 + ) 
̄
+ ̄ − ̄
̄ +
(1 + ) ̄
1 + ̄

where we have used the fact that the Cobb-Douglas production function implies
  + Π =   , both in the short and in the long run. We can approximate the
above two equations around the initial debt position and substitute them in (31) to
derive the short-run AD equation in its final form
1
(1 − ) ˆ
[( − ̄) − (1 − )(  − ̄  )] +
[ + 0 ( −  )]


(32)
∗
where long-run prices are anchored to ̄  the parameter  is non-negative and defined
as  ≡ [ + (1 − )0 ]. We have used the following definitions 0 ≡ 0 ̃ ,
  = ( − ̃ )̃ and ˆ = (̄ − 0 )̃ where ̃ is the steady-state level of output.
The short-run AD equation describes again a relationship between current output
and prices where now the slope can change in an interesting way because of the
presence of debt-constrained agents. There are two new channels pushing in diﬀerent
directions. On the one side, an increase in the current price level, everything else being
equal, raises the current real rate, lowering the amount of debt that borrowers can
borrow in the short run to carry, therefore lowering their short-run consumption and
depressing aggregate demand. Through this mechanism the AD equation becomes
flatter. On the opposite side, an increase in the current price level reduces the real
value of the current debt and therefore raises short-run consumption of the borrowers
and expands aggregate demand. This is due to a Fisher eﬀects through which prices
aﬀect the real value of nominal debt. This second channel prevails on the first, since
(1 − )0 (1 − ) is positive. For a given , the presence of debt-constrained agents
makes the AD steeper than in the previous model. Interestingly the curve can now
slope upward when the initial level of debt is high, 0 is high, or the fraction of savers
is low,  is low. However, for plausible values of the parameters the overall slope,
given by − where  ≡  − 0 (1 − )(1 − ) is still negative. The slope, however,
can depend on the relationship between long-run and short-run prices. Eggertsson
and Krugman (2012) assume that inflation between short and long run is tied to zero
(or constant) and, in this case, the slope becomes positive driven purely by the Fisher
eﬀect. Here unambiguously lower prices increase the real value of debt, reducing the
consumption of the borrowers and therefore aggregate demand and output.
In Figure 13, under the assumption that the inflation rate between short- and longrun is constant, we plot the AD equation, in its new upward-sloping version, together
 = ̄ − [ − (̄∗ − ) + ln ] +

36

Figure 13:  and  equation with debt-constrained agents. The  equation can
be upward sloping, in particular when inflation between short and long run is zero.

37

with the AS equation.16 Several interesting implications can be drawn. Deleveraging,
interpreted as a reduction in the amount of debt which can be considered safe, acts
ˆ This shock
as a left-shifter of the AD equation, as it is shown in (32) by a negative .
pushes output and prices down even up to the point in which the economy reaches
the liquidity trap, where lowering interest rates to zero does not bring back the
economy to the initial equilibrium, as discussed in the previous section. Eggertsson
and Krugman (2012) recover in this the Keynesian paradox of thrift for which a
higher saving rate for the borrowers, which is used to pay debt, depresses aggregate
demand and output and results at the end in lower savings. Another paradox, of
"toil", appears since a downward movement of the AS equation, which in normal
conditions would be expansionary, is here contractionary. This shift can be driven by
a temporary increase in productivity or a fall in the mark-up or even a fall in the tax
rate, even one that should induce more work. Finally, there is also the paradox of
"flexibility" for which more price flexibility, a steeper AS equation, leads to a larger
contraction in output when deleveraging occurs. Indeed, the larger fall in prices
depresses demand because it inflates the stock of debt to be repaid.17
More insights can also be drawn on how to escape from the liquidity trap. The
solution given in the previous section —to raise the future price level— applies here in
a reinforced way since the parameter  in (32) is larger than before. By increasing
the future price level, the real rate falls and savers raise their consumption. At the
same time, the fall in the real rate provides a relief for the borrowers, in the short
run, pushing up their consumption. Policies that increase the long-run output level
are also expansionary shifting to the right the AD equation.
Finally, this richer framework provides a new role for fiscal policy. First, Ricardian
equivalence does not hold, since lump-sum transfers of the borrowers enter the AD
equation. The distribution of taxes between the two type of agents matter for the
equilibrium and therefore the way government spending is financed. New values for
the government-spending multipliers are derived, now even larger than one, which
was instead the upper limit in Section 8. In the case in which long-run prices are well
anchored, independently of short-run prices, the multiplier on short-run government
spending is
1

+ 1+

1 + 
which for the parametrization ( = 066  = 05,  = 02) results in a multiplier
equal to 1.29, assuming a fraction of borrowers (1 − ) equal to 1/3 and the initial
debt position, 0 , to 120% of GDP. The multiplier reaches 1.62 when the fraction of
borrowers raises to 1/2. When instead long-run inflation is set to zero (or is constant),
16

The AS equation is assumed flatter than the AD equation for the stability of the equilibrium.
If the long-run price level is well anchored irrespective of the movements of short-run prices, the
AD equation should be drawn as a downward sloping schedule for given future price level. In this
case, the paradoxes of “toil” and “flexibility” disappear.
17

38

the multiplier is simply given by
1−

0 (1−)
1+

 − 0 (1 − )
and, in this case, an expansionary fiscal policy is even more powerful reaching a
multiplier of even 2.75, when the fraction of borrower is just 1/3 

11

Optimal monetary policy

Having seen how to escape from the liquidity trap, we can now return to normal
conditions, to characterize the way in which monetary policy should react to disturbances. Our New Keynesian model provides an obvious solution as microfoundations
oﬀer a natural welfare criterion, based on consumers’ utility that serves to evaluate
alternative allocations following from diﬀerent policy rules. Interestingly, the resulting objective can be written similarly to those that have been assumed on an ad-hoc
basis by the literature on monetary policy in the 1980s.
Woodford (2003, ch. 3) shows that a second-order approximation of (1) implies a
loss function of the form
1
1
( −  )2 
 = ( −  )2 +
2
2

(33)

To serve consumers’ interests, monetary policymakers should choose their instrument
to minimize deviations of output from the eﬃcient level and fluctuations of prices
from the expected level. The relative weights to assign to the two objectives depends
significantly on the fraction of firms that adjust.18 The smaller the fraction, the
greater the weight to give to price stability. The greater the elasticity , the greater
the weight to assign to the price stability objective. A similar relationship holds for
the intertemporal elasticity of substitution  According to Svensson (2007a), (33)
represents a flexible inflation-targeting objective with price and output targets.19
But, how can an inflation-targeting central bank achieve a minimum target for the
loss function? One way could be to specify a rule for the instrument (the interest
rate) as a function of observable variables. An appropriate “Taylor rule” of this sort
for our model would be
 = ̄ +  ( −  ) +  ( −  )
18

The approximation holds around an eﬃcient steady state in which  = 0 In the more general
case, treated in Benigno and Woodford (2005), the welfare-relevant output does not necessarily
coincide with  and obviously the conclusions of this section are going to change. This aﬀects
mostly the analysis of the optimal response with respect to mark-up shocks. Benigno and Woodford
(2003) study the more general case in which lump-sum taxes are not available.
19
For a discussion of inflation targeting, see also Bernanke and Mishkin (1997).

39

for non-negative parameters ̄,  and   20 The monetary policymakers could then
choose the parameters  and  so such that the equilibrium outcome given by the
interaction of the interest rate rule together with the AS-AD model will minimize
the loss function. But it would be a fortuitous if this policy were optimal for all
circumstances. Indeed, the optimal parameters   and  are likely to depend on
the properties of the shocks. Yet there is a more direct way to characterize optimal
policy, which delivers a simple operational targeting rule to follow under any and all
circumstances, discussed in detail in Giannoni and Woodford (2002).
Optimal policy can be simply characterized by substituting (17) into (33) to obtain
1

 = ( −  )2 + ( −  )2 
2
2
which can be easily minimized with respect to  to obtain
( −  ) + ( −  ) = 0
and re-written as
( −  ) + ( −  ) = 0

(34)

This is a linear relationship between the output gap and the price-stability objective.
Svensson (2007a) calls (34) an optimal targeting rule that describes the “equality of
the marginal rates of transformation and substitution between the target variables in
an operational way”. This rule is robust to all types of shock and does not depend
on their properties. To put it simply, the policy instrument, i.e. the nominal interest
rate, should be moved in a way to achieve equation (34) in any case, whether the
shock is hit to mark-up, productivity or public spending and whether it is temporary,
permanent, or expected.
The monetary policymaker is willing to tolerate price inflation insofar as it coincides with a contraction in output, and viceversa. It is a nice coincidence that this
targeting rule involves a negative relationship between prices and output that can be
plotted in the same graph as AS and AD. Let us call (34) the  equation. The slope
is given by −1 and  crosses the point ( ,  ). In particular  is flatter than
 whenever   . And this is the empirically relevant case.21
While it is natural in a microfounded model to assume consumers’ utility as the
gauge of welfare, in practice this assumption is not self-evident or automatic. Society
may well give the central bank diﬀerent set of preferences and objectives. A central
banks might have a general mandate for price stability, but no explicit guidance on
the relative weights of output stabilization and price stability. In fact, at the level
of the monetary policy committee there may be diﬀerent preferences that shape the
20

See Taylor (1993).
Indeed,  is related to the mark-up: a value around 8 gives a 15% mark-up;  is the elasticity
of substitution in consumption which is usually assumed close to 1.
21

40

final policy decision. To account for this, we can define a general flexible inflation
targeting policy of the form
1
1
( −  )2 
 = ( −  )2 +
2
2

(35)

for a generic non-negative parameter  that measures the preferences of the policymaker on the inflation-output trade-oﬀ. In this case the optimal targeting rule
requires
( −  ) + ( −  ) = 0
where the parameter  governs the slope of  . A central bank with great concern
for price stability will have a flatter  curve, while one mainly worried about output
stability would have a steeper curve.
Coming back to mark-up shocks (Section 7), let us focus on a central bank concerned for price stability, as it should be under the metric given by the welfare of the
consumer, with a relatively flat  Following a temporary increase in the mark-up,
without monetary policy intervention the economy reaches equilibrium  0 in Figure
14.
Optimal monetary policy should place the economy on the  curve, which in
this case does not move since  did not move, at the intersection with . It should
reach  00 by raising the nominal interest rate. A central bank less concerned for price
stability, with  steeper than  should lower the nominal interest rate to achieve
its own optimal allocation.
The optimal policy analysis of this section can be repeated for productivity shocks,
in which  shifts to cross the optimal equilibrium point of stable prices and contemporaneous closure of the output gap, as discussed, and for public-spending shocks as
well. All the other cases are left to the reader.

41

Figure 14: A temporary mark-up shock:  ↑.  shifts to  0 . The equilibrium
moves from  to  0 .  equation describes the optimal combination of prices and
output according to the preferences of the monetary policymakers. The optimal
equilibrium is  00 where  intersects  0 . Monetary policy should raise the nominal
interest rate to move the equilibrium from  0 to  00 .

42

References
[1] Ball, L., Mankiw, N. G. and Romer, D. (1988), “The New Keynesian Economics
and the Output-Inflation Trade-Oﬀ,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
Vol. 1988 No. 1, pp. 1-82.
[2] Benigno, P. and Woodford, M. (2003), “Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy: A
Linear-Quadratic Approach,” in M. Gertler and K. Rogoﬀ, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003, vol. 18, Cambridge (US): MIT Press, pp. 271-333.
[3] Benigno, P. and Woodford, M. (2005), “Inflation Stabilization And Welfare:
The Case Of A Distorted Steady State,” Journal of the European Economic
Association Vol. 3, No. 6, Pages 1185-1236.
[4] Bernanke, B.S. (2002), “Deflation: Making Sure ”It” Doesn’t Happen Here,”
speech at the National Economists Club, Washington, D.C..
[5] Bernanke, B. S. (2007), “Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting,”
speech at the Monetary Economics Workshop of the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
[6] Bernanke, B. S. and Mishkin, F. S. (1997), “Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for Monetary Policy?” in The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 11,
No. 2, pp. 97-116.
[7] Blanchard, O.J. and Kiyotaki, N. (1987), “Monopolistic Competition and the
Eﬀects of Aggregate Demand,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 77, No. 4,
pp.647-666.
[8] Calvo, G. A. (1983), “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 12, pp. 383-398.
[9] Carlin W., Soskice D. (2005), “The Three-Equation New Keynesian Model: A
Graphical Exposition,” Contributions to Macroeconomics: Vol. 5 : Iss. 1, Article
13.
[10] Clarida, R., Gali, J. and Gertler, M., (1999), “The Science of Monetary Policy:
A New Keynesian Perspective.” Journal of Economic Literature, December 37:4,
pp. 1661-1707.
[11] Corsetti, G. and Pesenti, P. (2005), “The Simple Geometry of Transmission and
Stabilization in Closed and Open Economies,” Federal Reserve Bank of New
York Research Paper No. 209.
[12] Dixit A. K. and Stiglitz, J.E. (1977), “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum
Product Diversity,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 67, No. 3, pp. 297-308.
43

[13] Eggertsson, G. (2011), “What fiscal policy is eﬀective at zero interest rates?”
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 25, pp. 59-112.
[14] Eggertsson, G. (2012), “Was the New Deal Contractionary?” The American
Economic Review, Vol. 102, No. 1, pp. 524-555.
[15] Eggertsson, G. and Krugman, P. (2012), “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
127(3), pp. 1469-1513.
[16] Eggertsson, G. and Woodford, M. (2003), “The Zero Interest-Rate Bound and
Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 139-211.
[17] Galí, Jordi (2008), Monetary Policy, Inflation and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework, Princeton University Press.
[18] Giannoni, M. and Woodford, M. (2002), “Optimal Interest-Rate Rules: I. General Theory” NBER working paper no. 9420.
[19] Goodfriend, M. (2004), “Monetary Policy in the New Neoclassical Synthesis: A
Primer,” Economic Quarterly, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Vol. 90 No.
3.
[20] Goodfriend, M. and King, R. (1997), “The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the
Role of Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 12, pp. 231-283.
[21] Hicks, J.R. (1937), “Mr. Keynes and the Classics,” Econometrica 5, 147-159.
[22] Krugman, P. (1998), “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 1998, No. 2, pp. 137-205.
[23] Krugman, P. (2000), “How Complicated Does the Model Have to Be?” Oxford
Review of Economic Policy 16, No. 4, pp. 33-42.
[24] Lucas, Robert E. (1972), “Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation
Tradeoﬀs”, The American Economic Review, Vol. 63, No. 3, pp. 326-334
[25] Mankiw, N.G. (1985), “Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles: A Macroeconomic Model of Monopoly,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100, 529-539.
[26] Mankiw, N.G. (2006), “The Macroeconomist as Scientist and Engineer,” NBER
Working Paper No. 12349.
[27] Phelps, E. S. (1967), “Phillips Curve, Expectations of Inflation and Optimal
Unemployment over Time,” American Economic Review 91: pp. 964-985.
[28] Romer, D. (2000), “Keynesian Macroeconomics without the LM Curve,” The
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 14, No. 2, pp. 149-169.
44

[29] Rotemberg, J.J. (1982), “Monopolistic Price Adjustment and Aggregate Output,” The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 49, No. 4., pp. 517-531.
[30] Rotemberg, J.J and Woodford, M. (1997), “An Optimization-Based Econometric
Model for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual
12: 297-346.
[31] Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2003), “An Estimated Stochastic Dynamic General
Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of Economic Association, Vol 1
(5), pp. 1123-1175.
[32] Svensson, L. (2007a), “Optimal Inflation Targeting: Further Developments of
Inflation Targeting,” in F. Mishkin and K. Schmidt-Hebbel eds. Monetary Policy
under Inflation Targeting, pp. 187-225.
[33] Svensson, L. (2007b), “Inflation Targeting,” in L. Blum and S. Durlauf The New
Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd edition.
[34] Taylor, J. (1979), “Staggered Wage Setting in a Macro Model,” American Economic Review 69(2): 108-113.
[35] Taylor, J. (1993), “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 39, pp.195-214.
[36] Walsh, Carl E. (2002) “Teaching Inflation Targeting: An Analysis for Intermediate Macro” Journal of Economic Education 33 (4), pp. 333-347.
[37] Woodford, M. (2003), Interest and Prices. Princeton University Press.
[38] Yun, T. (1996), “Nominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogeneity, and Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 37: 2-3 pp. 345-370.

45

