NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIVE DECADES OF CONSUMPTION AND INCOME POVERTY
Bruce D. Meyer
James X. Sullivan
Working Paper 14827
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14827

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2009

We would like to thank the Annie E. Casey Foundation, the Earhart Foundation, and the National Poverty
Center for support and Cristobal Gacitua, Matt Gunden, Tom Murray, Vladimir Sokolov, Laura Wherry,
and April Wu for excellent research assistance. We have also benefited from the comments of Steven
Haider, Kathleen McGarry, Doug McKee, and seminar participants at Colby College, Harvard University,
the Institute for Research on Poverty at the University of Wisconsin, the National Bureau of Economic
Research, the University of California, Davis, the University of California, Los Angeles, the University
of California, Santa Cruz, the University of Chicago, the University of Notre Dame, and the W.E.
Upjohn Institute for Employment Research. A previous version of this paper circulated as “Three
Decades of Consumption and Income Poverty”. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Bruce D. Meyer and James X. Sullivan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Five Decades of Consumption and Income Poverty
Bruce D. Meyer and James X. Sullivan
NBER Working Paper No. 14827
March 2009
JEL No. D12,I32
ABSTRACT
This paper examines poverty in the United States from 1960 through 2005. We investigate how poverty
rates and poverty gaps have changed over time, explore how these trends differ across family types,
contrast these trends for several different income and consumption measures of poverty, and consider
explanations for the differences in trends. We document sharp differences, particularly in recent years,
between different income poverty measures, and between income and consumption poverty rates and
gaps. Moving from the official pre-tax money income measure to a disposable income measure that
incorporates taxes and transfers has a substantial effect on poverty rate changes over the past two decades.
Furthermore, consumption poverty rates often indicate large declines, even in recent years when income
poverty rates have risen. We show that bias in the CPI-U has a sizable effect on changes in poverty.
Between the early 1960s and 2005, an income poverty measure that corrects for bias in this price index
declines by 14 percentage points more than a comparable measure based on the CPI-U. The patterns
are very different across family types, with consumption poverty falling much faster than income poverty
for single parents and the elderly, but more slowly for married couples with children. Income and
consumption measures of deep poverty and poverty gaps have generally moved sharply in opposite
directions in the last two decades with income deep poverty and poverty gaps rising, but consumption
deep poverty and poverty gaps falling. While relative poverty rose in the early 1980s, changes in relative
poverty have been fairly small since 1990. We examine the role that demographics, taxes, and transfers
play in explaining changes in poverty over the past three decades. We also consider whether measurement
error, saving and dissaving, and other explanations can account for income and consumption differences.

Bruce D. Meyer
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
bdmeyer@uchicago.edu
James X. Sullivan
Department of Economics
and Econometrics
447 Flanner Hall
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
James.X.Sullivan.197@nd.edu

1. Introduction
Few measures of economic well-being receive greater attention and scrutiny than
poverty. Poverty rates indicate the extent of deprivation in an economy and changes in poverty
are an important measure of success or failure of our economic system and government policies.
The official poverty rate based on pre-tax money income is the most cited measure of the wellbeing of those with few resources. In 2005 the official poverty rate was 12.6 percent, virtually
the same as it was in 1970. This measure is still relied upon despite its well-known flaws, which
include a narrow definition of income, an odd adjustment for family size, and a biased
adjustment for price changes (Citro and Michael 1995; Besharov and Germanis 2004, Jencks,
Mayer and Swingle 2004a). While past work has examined some modifications to the official
poverty rate, the effect that alternative measures have on changes over time remains unclear.
Some have found that the change in poverty is sharply altered, while others have argued that
alternative measures differ in levels but not trends. This paper examines changes in a number of
income and consumption measures of poverty in the United States from the 1960s to the 2000s.
In addition to the standard poverty rate, we examine changes in several other poverty measures
including relative poverty, poverty gaps (the difference between family resources and the
poverty line), and how these measures differ across family types. Our analyses incorporate many
methodological improvements and address several critical issues related to measurement and
data quality.
A better understanding of recent changes in poverty is important to both policy makers
and researchers. First, the poverty rate is frequently cited by those who are evaluating the need
for and consequences of social programs. Together, these programs account for a substantial
amount of government spending. In 2002, government expenditures for means-tested state and
federal transfer programs exceeded $522 billion (U.S. Census Bureau 2004, p. 347). A large
body of research examines poverty rates and poverty gaps (Burtless and Smeeding 2001), or uses
these measures to argue in support of or in opposition to specific government policies (Murray
1984; Sawhill 1988; Blank 1997; Scholz and Levine 2001; Joint Economic Committee
Democrats 2004).1 Over the past few decades, we have seen dramatic changes in policies that
1

A pointed use of poverty statistics comes from former House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Bill Archer’s
opening comments in the debate on the bill that became the 1996 welfare reform law. He stated that “Government
has spent $5.3 trillion on welfare since the war on poverty began, the most expensive war in the history of this
1

target poor families including welfare reform and expansions of the Earned Income Tax Credit
(EITC). However, there is little consensus on how these reforms have affected poverty. Second,
poverty rates are a key determinant of the allocation of federal funds to states and localities for
use in education and other programs for the disadvantaged. The poverty line or a multiple of the
poverty line is also used as an eligibility criterion for dozens of assistance programs (Citro and
Michael 1995). Third, an accurate assessment of the material well-being of the worst off helps to
gauge the performance of our economy. The degree of poverty and inequality is cited in
discussions of the benefits of growth and trade and the merits of government interventions.
Within the literature on alternative measures of poverty there is considerable
disagreement regarding whether using different measures affects trends in poverty. Many have
argued that while the level of poverty differs significantly for different measures, the trends are
quite similar across these measures.2 In contrast, others provide evidence that some of these
alternative measures follow distinct patterns.3 Earlier work looking specifically at consumption
based measures of poverty suggests that changes in these measures differ from income based
poverty trends, but some recent work concludes otherwise.4
In our study, we emphasize the advantages of consumption based measures of poverty.
Consumption reflects permanent income and thus captures the long-term prospects of a family
better than current income. Consumption is more likely to capture the effects of saving and
dissaving, the ownership of durable goods such as houses and cars, and access to credit.
Consumption is also more likely to reflect private and government transfers. The consumption
and income data available in the U.S. are both subject to error, but the consumption data provide
more information than income data to impute noncash housing benefits and the service flow
country, and the Census Bureau tells us we have lost the war.” (Congressional Record, 104th Cong., 1st sess., March
21, 1995).
2
Hoynes, Page, and Stevens (2006) report that “Although poverty can be measured in ways other than the official
definition, our work, and the work of others, shows that most of these different ways will alter the level of poverty
but not the trend.” Similarly, Lang (2007) states that “Although… there is considerable support for improving the
poverty measure, doing so has only a small effect on recent trends.” Also see U.S. Census (various years-b, 1995),
Triest (1998), Short et al. (1999), and Dalaker (2005).
3
For example, Joint Economic Committee (2004) shows that adding the EITC to money income results in a
noticeably greater decline in poverty during the 1990s. Jencks et al. (2004b) present similar findings for child
poverty.
4
For example, comparing consumption to official income thresholds, Cutler and Katz (1991) find that consumption
poverty rose more than income poverty during the 1970s. Slesnick (2001) concludes that consumption poverty fell
considerably more than income poverty from 1980 through 1995. Johnson (2004) also finds differences between
consumption and income based poverty trends, while Bavier (2008) concludes they are similar.
2

from vehicle and home ownership. Disaggregated consumption data permit the examination and
possible exclusion of components of consumption such as medical or work expenses.
Disaggregated consumption will also prove helpful for addressing concerns about underreporting; an approach that is less suitable with income data.
Our study contributes to the existing literature on poverty in several ways. First, we
construct consumption based measures of poverty that improve upon measures used in previous
studies. Using detailed housing characteristics, we calculate better measures of housing
consumption for those living in public or subsidized housing. We measure the flow value of
vehicle ownership using the reported purchase prices of over 350,000 vehicles and the predicted
market price (validated using published vehicle price data) for other vehicles. Using several data
sources, we impute the value of public and private health insurance coverage. Second, we
address concerns about increased under-reporting of consumption in survey data by constructing
a measure of core consumption that relies on the components of consumption that are reported
consistently well over time compared to the national income accounts. Third, we examine
consumption and income based measures for 1960 through 2005. Examining poverty trends in
recent years is particularly interesting given the extensive overhaul during the 1990s in tax and
transfer programs that target poor families. Moreover, there is evidence that trends in income
and consumption differ noticeably during this period (Meyer and Sullivan, 2008). Fourth, we
show that bias in the price index, an issue that has received considerably less attention in the
poverty literature, has a much larger effect on changes in poverty over the past three decades
than other poverty measurement issues that have received greater attention, such as the
equivalence scale and the resource sharing unit (e.g. the family or the household). Fifth, in
addition to the poverty rate, which is just the cumulative distribution function at a single point,
we also study other features of the resource distribution including deep poverty, near poverty,
poverty gaps, and relative poverty. Sixth, we contrast income and consumption poverty rates
and gaps for a number of family types defined by marriage, presence of children, and age.
Finally, we examine potential explanations for changes in poverty over time and investigate why
the trends for income and consumption poverty differ sharply for some family types.
We find sharp differences, particularly in recent years, between different income based
poverty measures, and between income and consumption based poverty rates and gaps. An
income poverty measure that incorporates taxes declines by about 2 percentage points more
3

during the 1960s, and by another 1.2 percentage points more during the 1990s, than a pre-tax
money income measure. Furthermore, consumption based poverty rates often indicate large
declines, even in recent years when income based poverty rates have risen. The patterns are very
different across family types, with consumption poverty falling much faster than income poverty
for the elderly, but more slowly for married couples with children. Income and consumption
measures of deep poverty and poverty gaps have generally moved sharply in opposite directions
in the last two decades with income deep poverty and poverty gaps rising, but consumption
based deep poverty and poverty gaps falling. The overstatement of inflation in official price
indices has a sizeable effect on changes in poverty. Between the early 1960s and 2005, an
income poverty measure that corrects for this bias declines by 14 percentage points more than a
comparable measure based on the CPI-U. We find that while relative poverty rose in the early
1980s, changes in relative poverty have been fairly small since 1990. Our results show that
demographic changes do a poor job of explaining the post 1980 poverty changes, except for
education changes in the case of consumption poverty. Changes in tax policy explain a
substantial part of the decline in income poverty particularly for families with children. We
suspect that measurement error plays an important role in explaining the large differences
between income and consumption measures that focus on the distribution below the poverty line
such as poverty gaps and deep poverty. Given the evidence on low asset holdings, particularly
for groups such as single parents, saving and dissaving are likely to explain only a small portion
of the differences between income and consumption measures of poverty.
In the next section we discuss the official poverty measure and some of its weaknesses.
In Section 3, we outline the conceptual advantages of consumption based measures of poverty.
We describe our income data and income based measures of poverty in Section 4, and we do the
same for the consumption data and consumption poverty measures in Section 5. Section 6
discusses the quality of income and consumption data. We address inflation adjustments to
poverty thresholds in Section 7 and other poverty measurement issues in Section 8. In Section 9
we present our results for changes in a number of different income and consumption based
poverty measures over the past three decades. We also examine near poverty, deep poverty,
poverty gaps, and relative poverty, and present poverty trends for various family types. We
consider a number of potential explanations for changes in poverty and differences across
measures in Section 10. We offer conclusions in Section 11.
4

2. The Official Poverty Measure and its Weaknesses
Official poverty in the U.S. is determined by comparing the pre-tax money income of a
family or an unrelated individual to a predetermined poverty threshold. Official poverty
estimates are based on data from the Annual Social and Economic (ASEC) Supplement
(formerly the Annual Demographic File (ADF)) to the Current Population Survey (CPS).5 The
original poverty thresholds, developed by Mollie Orshansky of the Social Security
Administration in 1964, were based on the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Economy Food
Plan budgets. These budgets provided an estimate of the minimum cost for a nutritional diet for
families of different sizes based on 1955 spending patterns. A poverty threshold for a family of
three or more was determined as three times the cost of the economy food plan, which varied by
family size and composition. This multiplier was used because 1955 survey data on
expenditures suggested that the average family of three or more people allocated about a third of
their after-tax income for food. The current thresholds vary by family size, the number of
children under 18, and whether the householder is 65 or older. These thresholds are adjusted for
inflation annually using the CPI-U. For a more detailed summary see Citro and Michael (1995)
or Blank (2007).
A number of studies have highlighted the shortcomings of the official poverty measure
and proposed alternative approaches for measuring poverty.6 One of the most commonly
criticized features of the official measure is that it defines resources as pre-tax money income,
failing to reflect appropriately the resources at a family’s disposal. Pre-tax money income does
not include taxes or noncash benefits such as the EITC, food stamps, housing or school lunch
subsidies, or public health insurance. It is precisely these tax credits and in-kind transfers that
have expanded in recent decades. Many observers have argued that these benefits should be
included as part of family income because they have an important effect on the resources
available for consumption.

5

A family in the CPS is defined as all individuals related by blood or marriage living in the same unit. See Section
4 for more details.
6
The National Academy of Sciences (NAS) panel, which was appointed to review the official measure, offers a
discussion of the shortcomings and recommended improvements. See Citro and Michael (1995).
5

Other problems with the official poverty measure include 1) a price adjustment that
overcompensates for inflation, 2) a definition of the family that is not based on who in the
household shares resources, and 3) an adjustment for family size and composition with
unattractive features.7 We discuss alternative measures of family resources in Sections 3 through
6, and then alternative approaches to these remaining issues in Sections 7 and 8.8

3.

The Conceptual Advantages of Consumption Measures of Poverty
Throughout this paper we emphasize the differences between income and consumption

based measures of poverty. In previous work, we presented evidence that consumption provides
a better measure of well-being than income for families with few resources (Meyer and Sullivan
2003, 2007). Conceptual arguments as to whether income or consumption is a better measure of
the material well-being of the poor almost always favor consumption.9 For example,
consumption captures permanent income (for further discussion see Cutler and Katz 1991;
Poterba 1991; Slesnick 1993). Income measures fail to capture disparities in consumption that
result from differences across families in the accumulation of assets or access to credit. Also,
consumption reflects the insurance value of government programs, better accommodates illegal
activity and price changes, and is more likely to reflect private and government transfers. In
addition to these reasons, available consumption data are better suited than available income data
for imputing some non-money resources, particularly those related to housing and vehicle
ownership. For example, a better value of housing subsidies can be computed using Consumer
Expenditure (CE) Survey data because the survey provides information on out of pocket rent and
the characteristics of the living unit including the total number of rooms, the number of
bathrooms and bedrooms, and appliances such as a washer, dryer, etc. These characteristics can
be used to impute a total rental value as we will explain in Section 5. In addition, for
homeowners the CE Survey provides self reported values of the rental equivalent of the home.

7

The unattractive features include an allowance for additional people that first rises and then falls (see Section 8.B)
Other alternative approaches suggest constructing measures of poverty that vary by geographic area or measures
for time periods other than a year, but we do not tackle these issues here.
9
Blundell and Preston (1998) is sometimes characterized as finding that income has advantages over consumption.
A more accurate summary is that some comparisons of consumption across cohorts or age will not give the correct
sign to the difference in utility, but income suffers from the same types of problems in the situations they consider.
6
8

That consumption can be divided into meaningful categories, such as food and housing,
provides several advantages over income. First, expenditures on categories such as food and
housing are of interest in their own right, and second, one can better account for relative price
changes. Even more importantly, subcategories of consumption such as nondurable
consumption have been used extensively in past work. In this paper, we will report results for
what we call core consumption, a measure that closely approximates essentials and only includes
items that are well measured over time. Furthermore, we can examine the effects of excluding
categories of consumption that may not directly increase well-being, such as work expenses and
out-of-pocket medical expenses.
Meyer and Sullivan (2003, 2007) also provide evidence that consumption is a better
predictor of well-being than income. For example, we examine other measures of material
hardship or adverse family outcomes for those with very low consumption or income. These
problems are more severe for those with low consumption than for those with low income,
indicating that consumption does a better job of capturing well-being for these families.

4.

Current Population Survey (CPS) Income Measures
The official poverty measure in the U.S. is based on data from the ASEC/ADF

Supplement to the Current Population Survey (CPS) for approximately 100,000 households
annually (60,000 households prior to 2002).10 For the previous calendar year, respondents report
the income amounts for a number of different sources that are included in the money income
measure used to determine official poverty statistics.11 In addition, the survey collects
information on the dollar value of food stamps received by the household, as well as whether
household members received other noncash benefits including housing subsidies and subsidies
for reduced or free school lunch. Starting with the 1980 survey, the ASEC/ADF also provides
imputed values for these and other noncash benefits including Medicaid and Medicare, the value
10

The ASEC is currently administered to the March sample of the CPS as well as a random subsample of the
respondents in the February and April CPS. Prior to 2002, the supplement was only included in the March survey.
11
These sources, as reported in the ASEC codebook, include: earnings; net income from self employment; Social
Security, pension, and retirement income; public transfer income including Supplemental Security Income, welfare
payments, veterans' payment or unemployment and workmen's compensation; interest and investment income; rental
income; and alimony or child support, regular contributions from persons outside the household, and other periodic
income.
7

of housing equity converted into an annuity, and the value of employer health benefits. The Data
Appendix provides more details on these imputed noncash benefits. While respondents do not
report income taxes, since 1980 imputed values for taxes and credits have been included in the
ASEC/ADF.12 From these income data, we construct a measure of money income that follows
the definition used by the Census to calculate official poverty statistics. In addition we construct
several different measures of disposable income that include imputed values of taxes and
noncash income as described below and in the Data Appendix.
Several studies have constructed alternative measures of poverty using these imputed
values of taxes and noncash benefits that the Census has provided since 1980. However, some of
these imputation methods have important limitations. For example, the Census imputes a
fungible value of Medicare and Medicaid that attributes a market value to these benefits only to
the extent that other income exceeds an allowance for food and housing (see Data Appendix).
Thus, these fungible values imply that public health insurance has no value for families whose
resources fall short of this allowance, which surely understates the value of public health
insurance for this group.13
Additional complications arise with the Census' valuation of subsidized and owner
occupied housing. Rental subsidies are imputed using data on housing characteristics and gross
rent in the 1985 American Housing Survey (AHS) (see Data Appendix). However, it is difficult
to match AHS data with the CPS because the latter does not include information on the
characteristics of the living unit. The Census imputes the number of bedrooms for the CPS
sample using information on family composition. Studies have shown that weighted estimates of
total housing subsidies using CPS data fall far short of the administrative numbers reported by
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (Steffick (1993) reports a ratio of
about 0.7 for 1990).
The Census' imputed value of annuitized home equity, which is included in some
alternative poverty measures to capture the value of owner occupied housing, is particularly
problematic not only because home equity is not observed in the CPS, but also because this
imputed value is highly sensitive to changes in interest rates. It is calculated as the product of
12

Prior to 1992, tax and noncash benefit data are available in separate data files. Much of these data are available at
http://www.census.gov/housing.
13
See Citro and Michael (1995), p. 223-237 for a discussion of the inclusion of health insurance and health
expenditures in a measure of poverty.
8

imputed net housing equity and a municipal bond rate that has changed sharply over time. Thus,
when the bond rate rises, poverty will fall even if disposable income or consumption does not
change.

5.

Consumption Measures from the Consumer Expenditure (CE) Survey
Our consumption data come from the Consumer Expenditure (CE) Survey, which is the

most comprehensive source of consumption data in the U.S. We use the Interview component of
the CE Survey for the years 1960-1961, 1972-1973, 1980-1981 and 1984-2005 (see Data
Appendix for details). Because information on health insurance coverage is not available from
1984 to 1987, we do not report results for these years for consumption measures that include
health insurance. The CE Survey is a rotating panel survey that includes about 5,000 families
each quarter between 1980 and 1998 and about 7,500 families thereafter. Each family in the
survey reports spending on a large number of expenditure categories for up to four consecutive
quarters. Expenditure data are reported at the level of the consumer unit, which is defined as
either a group of individuals who are related by blood or marriage, a single or financially
independent individual, or two or more persons who share resources.14 The information in some
of the earlier years is not as complete as that in later years, as explained in the Data Appendix.
As we report below, the survey changes have only a small effect on the poverty rates that we
calculate.
To convert reported expenditures into a measure of consumption, we make a number of
adjustments. First, expenditures on durable goods tend to be large and infrequent because the
entire cost of new durables is included in current expenditures. In the case of vehicle
expenditures, we are able to convert vehicle spending to a service flow equivalent. Second,
consumption does not include spending that is better interpreted as an investment such as
spending on education and health care, and outlays for retirement including pensions and social
security.15 However, given the importance of health coverage and changes over time in public
and private insurance, we report alternative consumption measures that include a value for public
14

Individuals are considered to be sharing resources if expenses are not independent for at least two of the three
major expense categories: housing, food, and other living expenses.
15
We also exclude spending on individuals or entities outside the family, such as charitable contributions and
spending on gifts to non-family members. This category is very small relative to total consumption.
9

and private health insurance. Third, to convert housing expenditures to housing consumption for
homeowners, we subtract housing outlays such as mortgage interest payments, property tax
payments, and spending on insurance, maintenance and repairs, and add the reported rental
equivalent of the home. Because respondents living in government or subsidized housing do not
report a rental equivalent, we use detailed housing characteristics in the CE Survey to impute a
rental value for these units. Each of these adjustments has several steps and involves important
methodological improvements. We consider these adjustments in turn.
Instead of including the full purchase price of a vehicle, we calculate a flow that reflects
the value that a consumer receives from owning a car during the period. This procedure provides
two important improvements upon previous work. First, we impute a current market value for
all vehicles without purchase prices based on the observed price paid for vehicles of the same
make, model, year, and age, and with comparable features such as air conditioning, power
steering, or a sunroof. Such a procedure accounts for amenities and quality improvements
through what purchasers are willing to pay. Second, we estimate depreciation rates by
comparing the reported purchase prices for similar vehicles of different ages. We validate the
predicted vehicle values for those observations where we do not have a purchase price by
comparing the predicted values to published values in National Automobile Dealers Association
(NADA) guides. We find a correlation of 0.88 between our predictions and the published values.
The Data Appendix provides more details on how vehicle service flows are calculated and the
validation procedure.
We impute a measure of the value of public and private health insurance using the
coverage information in the CE Survey and data on insurance costs.16 We exclude out of pocket
medical expenses because high out of pocket expenses are arguably more likely to reflect
substantial need or lack of good insurance rather than high well-being. The worker and firm cost
of employer provided insurance is obtained from a combination of sources including the
National Medical Care Expenditure Survey and the Mercer/Foster Higgins National Survey of
Employer Sponsored Health Plans. From these surveys we calculate a cost of employer provided
health insurance that varies by year and nine geographic regions. The cost of Medicaid and

16

Because measuring the value of public and private health insurance requires a number of strong assumptions, we
also usually report alternative resource measures that exclude health insurance and medical spending.
10

Medicare is taken from expenditures per person in a given state and year. For Medicaid we
calculate these expenditures separately for children, adults under 65, and adults 65 and over.
While estimating the cost of different types of coverage is conceptually clear, what
should be included in consumption is not straightforward. The value a family places on health
coverage may exceed its cost because of its insurance value. On the other hand, this in-kind
transfer may be valued at much less than cost given the one size fits all nature of insurance and
the lower value of purchases of most goods by the poor. The compromise that we consider here
is to count desired health expenditures. Assuming that desired health expenditures by those with
few resources can be characterized by Cobb-Douglas preferences with a coefficient of 0.33 on
health and 0.67 on other goods, only health expenditures up to one-third of total expenditures are
included. This compromise values health coverage at cost for those with substantial resources as
they likely spend less than one-third of consumption on health, but at much less than cost for
those with few other resources.
Housing consumption is measured as the reported rental equivalent of the home for home
owners, and as the reported out of pocket spending on rent for non-homeowners. However,
respondents living in government or subsidized housing do not report a rental equivalent, and the
CE Survey collects information on only the out of pocket portion of rent. To measure
appropriately consumption for these families, we impute a rental value using reported
information on their living unit including the number of rooms, bedrooms and bathrooms, and
the presence of appliances such as a microwave, disposal, refrigerator, washer, and dryer. Our
procedure accounts for the lower quality of public and subsidized housing using information on
the rental equivalent of such housing from the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics (PSID).
Specifically, for renters that are not in public or subsidized housing we estimate quantile
regressions for log rent using the housing characteristics mentioned above as well as a number of
geographic identifiers including state, region, urbanicity, and SMSA status, as well as
interactions of a nonlinear time trend with appliances (to account for changes over time in their
price and quality). We then use the estimated coefficients to predict the 40th percentile of rent
for the sample of families that do not report full rent because they reside in public or subsidized
housing. We use the 40th percentile because public housing tends to be of lower quality than
private housing in dimensions we do not directly observe. Evidence from the PSID indicates that
the average reported rental equivalent of public or subsidized housing is just under the predicted
11

40th percentile for these units using parameters estimated from those outside public or subsidized
housing.
We considered subtracting estimated monetary work expenses from consumption.
However, work related expenses that are reported in the CE Survey, such as child care and
domestic services, tend to be very small relative to total spending. We have also examined the
difference in transportation and clothing expenditures for those who work and those who do not
as an estimate of additional work expenses, but again this estimate is small relative to total
consumption.17

6.

Data Quality and Under-reporting in the CPS and CE Survey
Evidence on the tendency of surveys to capture more accurate information on income or

consumption is split. For most people, income is easier to report given administrative reporting
and a small number of sources of income. However, for analyses of families with few resources
this argument is less valid, as these families tend to have many income sources. Additionally,
while income may be easier to report, it is likely to be a more sensitive topic for survey
respondents than consumption. The CPS has slightly lower survey non-response than the CE
Survey, but much higher item non-response on income questions than the CE Survey has on
expenditure questions. Taken together, the CPS has appreciably higher nonresponse than the CE
Survey (Meyer and Sullivan 2007).

6.A.

Income Under-Reporting
Income in the CPS appears to be substantially under-reported, especially for categories of

income important for those with few resources. Furthermore, the extent of under-reporting
appears to have changed over time. Meyer and Sullivan (2003, 2007) and Meyer, Mok and
Sullivan (2008) report comparisons of weighted micro-data from the CPS to administrative
aggregates for government transfers and tax credits. These ratios are substantially below one and
have declined over time, falling to below 0.6 for Food Stamps and 0.5 for Temporary Assistance
for Needy Families (TANF) in recent years. Comparisons of survey micro-data to administrative
17

To account for how work affects consumption more generally, one may want to examine the consumption of
leisure (Aguiar and Hurst 2007, Meyer and Sullivan 2008).
12

micro-data for the same individuals also indicate severe under-reporting of government transfers
in other household surveys. Consistent with these results, income is often far below
consumption for those with few resources, even for those with little or no assets or debts (Meyer
and Sullivan 2003, 2007).

6.B.

Consumption Under-Reporting
There is also under-reporting of consumption, but because consumption often exceeds

income, we might be more concerned about over-reporting of consumption, of which there is
little evidence. Nevertheless, past work (Giesman 1987, Slesnick 1992, Garner et al. 2006,
Attanasio et al. 2006) has emphasized a discrepancy between CE aggregates and Personal
Consumption Expenditure (PCE) data from the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA).
Some of this evidence is easily misinterpreted and is less applicable to the current analyses for
several reasons. First, many published comparisons are based on the integrated data that
combine CE Diary and CE Interview data rather than the Interview data used exclusively here. It
is not clear whether the integrated CE Survey data should compare more favorably to the PCE.
For example, while we might expect food expenditures to be reported more accurately in the
Diary Survey, these data appear to have greater downward bias. Between 1998 and 2003,
average spending on food at home in the Interview Survey exceeded the average from the Diary
Survey by more than 20 percent (BLS 2005).18 Second, the poor consume a different bundle of
goods than the general public, so that aggregate analyses do not reflect the composition of
consumption for the poor. Third, the PCE numbers cover a different population, are defined
differently from the CE, and are the product of a great deal of estimation and imputation that is
subject to error.
PCE numbers differ from CE Survey data for reasons besides under-reporting. PCE
coverage is wider, including purchases by nonprofits, purchases by those abroad, on military
bases and in institutions, free financial services, and employer-paid insurance—all categories not
included in CE Survey expenditures. More importantly, the NIPA PCE values are constructed
18

The fact that food at home from the Interview Survey compares more favorably to PCE numbers than does food at
home from the Diary Survey does not necessarily imply that the former is reported more accurately. For example,
the Interview Survey numbers may include non-food items purchased at a grocery store. Battistin (2003) argues that
the higher reporting of food at home for the recall questions in the Interview component is due to over-reporting, but
as Browning et al. (2003) state, this is open to question.
13

through a complex process that relies on input-output tables to impute sales to final sector,
wholesale and retail markups, and taxes. Thus, the PCE values are not as reliable as the
administrative aggregates to which we compare government transfers, for example. An
indication of the error in the PCE calculations is the substantial revisions that are made to the
historical data from time to time (Slesnick 1992). The Bureau of Economic Analysis reported
that in 1992 more than half of the difference between PCE and CE Survey consumer spending
was due to coverage and definitional differences (summarized in GAO 1996).
Subject to the caveats above, we examine the ratio of CE Interview Survey values
weighted by population to corresponding categories of PCE data. We have followed the
approach of Garner et al. (2004) who report that they chose the categories in the PCE and CE
Survey data that are most comparable based on concepts and comprehensiveness. In Appendix
Table 1, we report CE/PCE ratios for the Interview data for ten categories of expenditures,
including the three largest: housing, food, and transportation. To improve comparability, we
combine rent with utilities since rent often includes some utilities and space rent (exclusive of
utilities) cannot be obtained in the CE Survey. We divide food consumption into food consumed
at home and food consumed away from home.
A few patterns are evident in Appendix Table 1. The numbers indicate fairly steady
ratios of CE to PCE expenditures on food at home and rent plus utilities.19 For food at home, on
average the CE/PCE ratio is over 0.85 and for rent plus utilities the ratio is nearly 1.00. The
numbers do indicate a noticeable decline over time in the ratio for food away, which leads to a
decline in overall food. Since food away is a much smaller share of consumption for the poor, a
share weighted ratio for total food expenditures for the poor would fall much less over time.
Since food plus housing account for 70 percent of consumption near the poverty line in 2004, we
expect that consumption is understated somewhat on average for the poor, but not nearly as
much as it is for other groups.
Appendix Table 1 also reveals the types of goods that are badly reported. Taking the
PCE data as truth, the numbers suggest that just over half of food away from home is reported in
the CE Interview Survey in recent years. The reporting ratios for most other reported
components of nondurable consumption are well under one-half. In the recent data, under forty
19

In a comprehensive study of survey data on food spending, Browning et al. (2003) conclude that, in general,
respondents are “remarkably good” at reporting food at home.
14

percent of clothing and tobacco consumption is captured by the CE Survey, under fifty percent of
alcoholic beverages is obtained, while over seventy-five percent of audio, video and computers is
included. This result is consistent with the general conclusion from Garner et al. (2006) that
nondurable goods and non-housing services are not well-captured in the CE data. The underreported items tend to be those that are discretionary and purchased at irregular intervals.
Reporting ownership of houses and vehicles is very different from reporting the small,
discretionary purchases that seem to be badly reported in the CE Survey, but validating the value
of owner occupied housing and owned vehicles requires methods besides those of Appendix
Table 1. The average value of these flows depends on the product of the ownership rate and the
value of the flow conditional on ownership. Estimates of homeownership rates in the CE Survey
match up very closely with those from the CPS (see Appendix Table 5). We know from past
work that respondents seem to report house values fairly accurately in household surveys (Kiel
and Zabel 1999; Bucks and Pence 2006). We have compared the reported rental equivalent of
homes to the reported house values to confirm that the rental equivalents are reasonable.20 For
automobiles, we have compared ownership rates to administrative data on motor vehicle
registrations. These comparisons indicate that the CE Survey captures about 90 percent of all
cars and trucks and this rate does not vary substantially over time. We have also verified that the
purchase price of vehicles in the CE Survey is reported fairly well. We find a high correlation
between the reported purchase prices of cars and blue book prices (see the Data Appendix,
Section D.3). Furthermore, Garner et al. (2006) note that there has not been deterioration in the
reporting of new car purchases. Thus, these flows seem less likely to be under-reported or
exhibit increased under-reporting over time than other spending components in the CE Survey.

6.C.

Core Consumption
Incorporating the lessons of the previous section, we construct a measure of core

consumption that includes spending components that are primarily non-discretionary and have
reporting ratios that are high and decline slowly over time. This core consumption measure
consists of food at home, rent plus utilities, transportation, gasoline, the value of owner-occupied
20

The rental equivalent and home value are highly correlated, at around 0.7 in a typical year. The ratio of the rental
equivalent to home value has been fairly stable, though it has declined in recent years, as one might expect with
higher home prices.
15

housing, rental assistance, and the value of owned vehicles. This measure arguably
approximates essential consumption spending. Food away from home is omitted, but that is
largely a discretionary expenditure. Other omitted categories include clothing and personal care
items that have both an essential and discretionary component. We could add health care to this
measure, but there is less agreement about how to measure the value of health insurance than
there is about measuring any other category of consumption. Overall, our core consumption
measure is 73 percent of total consumption, but is on average 80 percent of consumption for
those near the poverty line.21 The results in Appendix Table 1 indicate that the components of
core consumption are reported well. For food at home, rent plus utilities, transportation, and
gasoline and motor oil, the reporting rates are high and there is only a slow decline in these ratios
over time except for gasoline and motor oil. The average reporting ratio for the sum of these
four components is 0.944 with a range between 1.03 and 0.867 (see Core consumption excluding
flows in Appendix Table 1).

7.

Price Indices
Because the official poverty thresholds are adjusted over time using the CPI-U, bias in

this price index will lead to bias in poverty trends. Although this bias can be very substantial for
changes over long time periods, this criticism has received little attention in the poverty
literature.22 The BLS has implemented several methodological improvements in calculating the
CPI-U over the past 25 years. Although the BLS does not update the CPI-U retroactively, it does
provide a consistent research series (CPI-U-RS) that incorporates many of the changes.23 As we
will show, these two price indices yield very different patterns for poverty changes over longer
periods (also see Jencks et al. 2004). However, a consensus view among economists is that the
CPI-U-RS does not make sufficient adjustment for the biases in the CPI-U. Between 1972 and
2005 the CPI-U grew on average between 0.4 and 0.5 percentage points per year faster than the
CPI-U-RS, with essentially all of this difference occurring before 1998. A reasonable estimate
21

Non-medical core consumption is on average 80 percent of total non-medical consumption in the early 1980s, and
a higher share in recent years due to the decline in reporting of other components of consumption.
22
A recent exception is Broda and Weinstein (2007).
23
The CPI-U-RS does not incorporate all of the methodological improvements to the CPI-U. See Stewart and Reed
(1999) for more details.
16

of the bias in the CPI-U over this period is much larger–about 1.3 percentage points per year
between 1978 and 1995.
There are four types of biases in the CPI-U that have been emphasized: substitution bias,
outlet bias, quality bias, and new product bias. Substitution bias refers to the bias in the use of a
fixed market basket when people substitute away from high relative price items. Outlet bias
refers to the inadequate accounting for the movement of purchases toward low price discount or
big box stores. Quality bias refers to inadequate adjustments for the quality improvements in
products over time, while new product bias refers to the omission or long delay in the
incorporation of new products into the CPI. The Boskin Commission (Boskin et al. 1996), a
group of eminent economists appointed by the Senate Finance Committee, provides an
authoritative source on the extent of these biases. They concluded that the annual bias in the
CPI-U was 1.1 percentage points per year at the time of the report, but 1.3 percentage points
prior to 1996 (the extra 0.2 percentage points is due to an inadvertent bias added by a 1978
change that was later corrected). While there have been criticisms of the Boskin Commission
(for summaries see Berndt 2006; Gordon 2006; Johnson, Reed, and Stewart 2006), the
conclusions have held up fairly well. Some of the critics such as Hausman (2003) suggest that
the commission understated the bias. The Commission itself argued that the estimates were on
the “conservative” side and tended to understate the bias (Boskin et al. 1996 Section VI, Gordon
2006 p. 13).
The Boskin Commission and several other surveys have estimated CPI bias by
assembling direct bias estimates for parts of the index from a variety of sources. Costa (2001)
and Hamilton (2001) use an alternative approach that essentially determines how much CPI-U
adjusted income needs to be further adjusted so that spending patterns at adjusted income are
unchanged over time. Costa (2001) concludes that the CPI-U overstated inflation by 1.6
percentage points per year between 1972 and 1994. Hamilton (2001) uses a different data
source and concludes that the CPI-U overstated inflation by 3.0 percentage points per year
between 1972 and 1981 and by 1.0 percentage point per year between 1981 and 1991.
All of these sources indicate that the upward bias in the CPI-U exceeds the 0.4 - 0.5 percentage
points per year correction of the CPI-U-RS.

17

In the analyses that follow, we use the CPI-U-RS as our base price adjustment.24
However, given the estimated bias in the CPI-U of greater than one percentage point per year,
the CPI-U-RS will not fully correct the problem. Thus, we report results using an adjusted CPIU-RS that subtracts 0.8 percentage points from the growth in the CPI-U-RS index each year. We
base this adjustment on Gordon (2006) who argues that even with recent alterations to the CPI-U
methodology that make it and the CPI-U-RS essentially the same for recent years, a bias of 0.8
percentage points per year remains. Berndt (2006) reports that the range of estimates for the
remaining bias in 2000 indicated by the individual Boskin Committee members was 0.73 to 0.9
percentage points per year. Given the conservative nature of the earlier Boskin Commission
numbers and the higher numbers from other sources such as Costa and Hamilton, this index
seems reasonable.
An additional issue is whether the price adjustment for the poor should use the same
market basket as overall official price indices. McGranahan and Paulson (2005) have compared
a CPI-U based index using a market basket of the poor to the official index and found little
difference. However, one could go one step further and ask if the bias calculations in the
literature should be directly applied to the poor given that the market basket for the poor is
different from that of the overall population—food at home, rent, and utilities have particularly
large shares for the poor. The research on CPI bias for specific commodities provides mixed
evidence on how the CPI bias for the poor might compare to the overall bias. Food at home is
the main source of outlet bias that is estimated to be quite substantial in Hausman and Leibtag
(2005). On the other hand, the largest single component of expenditures by the poor, rent, has
been found to have bias in the opposite direction, i.e. true prices have gone up faster than
suggested by the CPI through the mid-1980s (Gordon and vanGoethem 2005). However,
because of BLS changes in the mid-1980s, there is negligible bias in the shelter CPI for the bulk
of our period. Furthermore, given that the rental weight in the CPI is only slightly lower than its
share in the consumption of the poor (because the cost of home ownership is calculated using a
rental equivalent), but the food at home weight is much lower, the bias in an index reweighted
for the poor is unlikely to be appreciably smaller that that in the CPI-U.

24

We use the CPI-U-RS index released by the BLS in 2006. We also compare our results to those using the PCE
deflator.
18

Broda and Romalis (2008) find that the much of the rise in income inequality between
1994 and 2005 was offset by a relative decline in prices faced by the poor. In particular, they
find that inflation for the lowest ten percent of households was 6 percentage points lower than
inflation for the highest ten percent. Applied to poverty measures, this correction would likely
amplify the types of reductions in poverty that we find. However, what is relevant for poverty
measures is the difference between the poor and the average household rather than the bottom
decile versus top decile difference that the authors report. These former differences appear to be
much smaller. In addition, it is unclear what the patterns were over earlier years. In particular,
Broda and Romalis’ findings on Chinese imports are unique to their period. For these reasons,
we have not incorporated an adjustment based on their results.

8.

The Unit of Analysis, Equivalence Scale, and Other Issues

8.A

Unit of Analysis
Although official poverty is a count of individuals, whether an individual is poor is

determined by income measured at the family level. The unit of analysis for the official measure
of poverty includes only individuals within a housing unit who are related by blood or marriage.
This measure excludes from family resources the resources of unrelated individuals, such as a
cohabiting partner. Citro and Michael (1995) and others argue that cohabitors should be
included in the family unit. Analytically, the unit should be based on those who share resources.
However, in the CPS ADF/ASEC we do not observe whether the cohabitor is sharing resources
with other family members. Other surveys offer a more appropriate unit of analysis for
measuring poverty. For example, the unit of observation in the CE Survey includes all those
related by blood and marriage as well as cohabitors that share responsibility for housing, food, or
other living expenses, but excludes cohabitors who do not contribute to these expenses.
Different units of analyses may affect trends if there are significant changes in cohabitation over
time, as suggested by Bumpass and Lu (2000). Haider and McGarry (2006) show that the share
of household income coming from household members outside the nuclear family increased
noticeably during the 1990s. In the CPS, we examine two different resource sharing units: the
family and the household. For the CE Survey, the only unit of analysis that we observe is the
consumer unit, but this unit is closest to the conceptual ideal.
19

8.B.

Equivalence Scales
Considerable debate has arisen over the best way to adjust poverty thresholds for

different family types. The scale implicit in the official poverty thresholds does not exhibit
diminishing marginal cost over the whole range of family sizes (Ruggles 1990), and the
thresholds imply that children are more costly than adults in some cases. A number of
alternative scales have been proposed and we will consider several of them.25 The NAS panel
(see footnote 6) recommends an equivalence scale that allows for differences in costs between
adults and children and exhibits diminishing marginal cost with each additional adult equivalent.
For much of the analyses we use an equivalence scale that follows the NAS panel
recommendations: (A + PK)F, where A is the number of adults in the family and K is the number
of children. The panel recommends that the child proportion of an adult, P, be equal to 0.7 and
that the economies of scale factor, F, fall in the range 0.65 to 0.75. In most cases we will use the
midpoint of this range for F, although we also examine how patterns vary with F and P.

8.C

Anchoring the Estimates for Comparison Purposes
To facilitate comparisons across resource measures and price indices we anchor each

measure by using the thresholds that equate poverty in the baseline year (1980). Specifically, for
each alternative poverty measure we find thresholds such that the poverty rate for that scaleadjusted measure is equal to that of the official poverty rate in 1980 (13.0 percent).26 Anchoring
our alternative measures to the official measure in 1980 allows us to examine the same point of
the distribution initially so that different measures do not diverge simply because of differential
changes at different points in the distribution.27 To obtain thresholds for other years, the
thresholds are adjusted for inflation using the different price indices.

25

Others have used expenditure data to construct equivalence scales that are determined by household specific
spending on all goods and services, not just food (Slesnick 1993, 2001).
26
In 1980, the 13.0 percentile of the distribution is actually quite similar across several of our different scale
adjusted measures of resources. For example, the ratio of the thresholds for after-tax money income to that of
money income is 0.97; for after-tax money income plus noncash benefits, 1.11; for after-tax money income plus
noncash benefits plus annuitized home equity, 1.27; and for consumption, 1.09 or 0.97 excluding health insurance.
27
Triest (1998) and Joint Economic Committee Democrats (2004) use a similar approach.
20

9.

Results
We focus first on alternative definitions of resources, and second on different inflation

adjustments. We then briefly discuss alternative equivalence scales and resource sharing units,
but these changes have much less of an effect on our poverty measures. We then discuss deep
poverty, near poverty, poverty gaps, relative poverty, and poverty by family type.

9.A

Different Resources
Figure 1 reports changes in poverty since 1972 for various income measures. These

measures are also presented in the first five columns of Table 1, which includes poverty rates for
the 1960s. Each measure is anchored in 1980 as described above so that the poverty rate is the
same as the official measure in 1980 (13.0%). In all of the series besides the official measure,
we use the CPI-U-RS price adjustment and the NAS equivalence scale. We will discuss the
effect of the price adjustment in the next section and the equivalence scale in section 9.C. There
are two main lessons to take from Figure 1 and columns 1 through 5 of Table 1. First, how
resources are measured has an important effect on income poverty measures.28 A comparison of
columns 2 and 3 or the corresponding series in Figure 1 shows the effects of accounting for taxes
and tax credits. In the early 1980s, after-tax income poverty increases relative to pre-tax income
poverty. However, in the 1960s and between 1986 and 1996, the reverse is true: after-tax money
income poverty falls quite a bit faster than pre-tax income poverty. Between 1963 and 1972, and
then again between 1986 and 1996, the decline in after-tax income poverty exceeds that of pretax poverty by at least two percentage points. After 1996, the relative movements of the two
measures are small.
Second, adding the value of noncash government benefits (food stamps, subsidies for
housing and school lunch, the fungible value of Medicare and Medicaid, and the value of
employer provided health benefits; column 4) has little additional impact on changes in poverty.
However, adding the annuitized value of home equity (column 5) offsets much of the effect of

28

Standard errors for changes in some of the key poverty measures and the differences between them are reported in
Appendix Table 2. Changes and differences between poverty measures between 1980 and 2005 are typically
significantly different from zero if they exceed 0.6 percentage points. If one groups years, much smaller changes are
significant.
21

the EITC since the early 1990s.29 Measures that include the annuitized value of home equity
may fluctuate for reasons that are not directly related to changes in well-being because this value
is very sensitive to changes in interest rates. For example, poverty based on this measure
remains unchanged between 1984 and 1986–a period of significantly declining interest rates–
while all other income based measures fall by approximately a percentage point.
There are important differences between trends in income and consumption measures of
poverty. We report changes in consumption based measures of poverty from 1972 to 2005 in
Figure 2. These and other consumption based measures are presented in columns 6-10 of Table
1, which also includes poverty rates for the 1960s.30 We also show changes in official income
poverty and an after-tax income poverty measure from Figure 1 for comparison. Again, we
anchor all the poverty series to equal the official measure in 1980. As with measures of after-tax
money income, consumption poverty falls by more than the pre-tax money income poverty
measure. For some periods, the change in consumption poverty is similar to that of after-tax
money income poverty. For example, between 1980 and 2000, consumption (column 6) and
after-tax money income (column 3) poverty both fall sharply, though the latter falls by about one
percentage point more. Recent research has presented patterns such as these as evidence that
consumption and income provide very comparable measures of well-being at the bottom (Bavier,
2008). However, the results in Figure 2 and Table 1 reveal important differences between the
changes in consumption and income based poverty. The decline in after-tax money income
based poverty is nearly three percentage points greater than the decline for consumption based
poverty between 1993 and 2000. And, between 2000 and 2005 these measures diverge with
income based poverty rising about one percentage point while consumption based poverty falls.31
Differences between the changes in after-tax money income poverty and consumption
poverty are also evident for earlier years. After-tax money income poverty falls 5.2 percentage

29

Dalaker (2005) suggests that the similarity in trends between a poverty measure based on pre-tax money income
and one based on after-tax money income plus noncash benefits and the annuitized value of home equity indicates
that poverty trends are similar for different measures of resources. However, if the return on home equity is
excluded from resources, one can see that taxes do have an important effect on changes in poverty, particularly for
certain periods, as shown in Figure 1.
30
Consumption poverty rates for 1984-1987 are not provided because information on health insurance coverage is
not available in the CE Survey for these years.
31
Given the standard errors of these estimates, differences of this magnitude between income and consumption
poverty changes are strongly statistically significant.
22

points more than consumption poverty during the 1960s (columns 3 and 7).32 These results
indicate that consumption measures do not always show greater or lesser improvement in
poverty than income measures. We will also see this mixed pattern of differences when we turn
to trends by family type below.
The changes in consumption poverty based on our measure of core consumption (column
8), which includes components that are reported consistently well over time compared to the
national income accounts, are similar to those for total consumption. Poverty based on core
consumption declines about 0.8 percentage points more than poverty based on total consumption
over the period between 1980 and 2005. One notable exception is the period between 1973 and
1980 when core consumption poverty falls while consumption poverty rises. In column 9 we see
that non-housing consumption poverty falls much less than measures that include housing. We
do not emphasize this measure for several reasons. First, housing is the largest component of
consumption for the poor, so excluding it could give a distorted picture of well-being for those
with few resources. Second, non-housing consumption over-weights the components of
consumption that are measured poorly and have seen declining reporting in recent years, i.e. it
does the opposite of core consumption. We should note that the discrepancy between total
consumption and non-housing consumption appears in the late 1980s and grows steadily,
implying that it is not due to recent house price increases. Estimates reported in column 10 of
Table 1 show that our trends for consumption poverty are not driven by our method of imputing
service flows for durables or housing consumption for those in public or subsidized housing,
which are the main differences between expenditures and consumption. For much of this period,
changes in expenditure based poverty mirror the changes for consumption based poverty except
between 1973 and 1980 when expenditure poverty rises while consumption poverty falls slightly.
However, as discussed in Section 10, who is consumption poor differs significantly from who is
expenditure poor. For example, the share of those 65 and older that are poor is twice as high
when poverty is measured using expenditures than when it is measured using consumption.

32

Cutler and Katz (1991) do not examine after-tax income poverty or a measure that incorporates noncash benefits,
but, similar to our results, they do find (Table 13) that both pre-tax income and consumption poverty fall during the
1960s (also see Slesnick (2001)). They report that consumption poverty rises between 1972-73 and 1980, while our
results indicate consumption poverty declined slightly during this time. This difference is mainly accounted for by
differences in how we construct our measures of consumption, but also because they use different thresholds.
23

9.B.

Different Price Adjustments
Changes in poverty differ noticeably depending on the price index used to adjust the

thresholds. Figure 3 displays changes in after-tax money income poverty and consumption
poverty that excludes health insurance using three different price deflators: the CPI-U, CPI-URS, and our adjusted CPI-U-RS.33 We report the consumption poverty measure that excludes
health insurance because it is available for a longer time period. These series can be seen in
Table 2. Between the early 1960s and 2005, moving from the CPI-U to the CPI-U-RS increases
the decline in income poverty by 5.3 percentage points, and moving from the CPI-U to the
adjusted CPI-U-RS increases the decline by a full 14.1 percentage points. As shown in Figure 3,
the effect of the move to the CPI-U-RS is most evident in the late 1970s. Between 1976 and
1980 income poverty increases by nearly a percentage point when thresholds are adjusted by the
CPI-U, while poverty falls by more than one percentage point when adjusted by the CPI-U-RS.34
This difference primarily results from how prices for owner-occupied housing were determined
prior to 1983 when the BLS shifted from using the purchase price of residential homes to a rental
equivalent value of the home. The effect of the adjusted CPI-U-RS is more uniform over time,
as might be expected.
Price deflators that better approximate the change in the cost of living have an even
greater effect on changes in consumption poverty. Using the measure excluding health
insurance, between 1972 and 2005, moving from the CPI-U to the CPI-U-RS leads to a 4.8
percentage point difference in the change in poverty, while the adjusted CPI-U-RS leads to a
11.4 percentage point difference relative to the rate based on the CPI-U. It is not surprising that
the deflators have a larger effect on the consumption measures, since consumption is less
dispersed than income. Thus, a given reduction in the thresholds will move a larger share of the
consumption distribution above the poverty line. In terms of percentage changes, between 1972
and 2005, CPI-U consumption poverty falls 2.8 percent, while adjusted CPI-U-RS consumption
poverty falls by 71 percent.

33

Results using the PCE deflator are similar to those using the CPI-U-RS, although poverty declines slightly more
between 1995 and 2005 when thresholds are adjusted using the PCE rather than the CPI-U-RS.
34
These results are similar to those reported in Burtless and Smeeding (2001).
24

9.C.

Different Equivalence Scales and Resource Sharing Units
The results in Figure 4 demonstrate how different equivalent scales and resource sharing

units affect changes in poverty. Changing from the equivalence scale implicit in the official
thresholds to one that is more generally accepted does not greatly alter the change in the poverty
rate. Using the same measure of resources (money income) and the same price index (CPI-U),
there is little difference in the change in poverty between official poverty and income poverty
calculated using the NAS equivalence scale for the years 1972 through 2005.35 These patterns
are not sensitive to small changes in F or P, nor do they change appreciably using a common 3parameter equivalence scale.36
The poverty rate falls somewhat more when the resource sharing unit is the household
rather than the family. Figure 4 reports money income poverty using the same price adjustment
(CPI-U-RS) for two different resource sharing units: the family and the household. Neither
resource sharing unit is comparable to the CE resource sharing unit which is directly based on
who shares resources. From 1972 to 2005, the poverty rate based on the household falls by 1.2
percentage points more than the similarly defined measure based on the family. Comparing the
differences in patterns in Figure 3 to the differences in Figure 4 emphasizes that changes in
poverty over the past three decades are much more sensitive to different price indices than they
are to different equivalent scales or different resource sharing units.

9.D

Deep Poverty, Near Poverty, and Poverty Gaps
To this point, our analyses of poverty have focused on the narrow, but ubiquitous head

count measures of poverty. In statistical terms, this measure summarizes the bottom tail of the
distribution using the cumulative distribution function at a single point. We now consider other
cutoff points as well as the poverty gap. We examine the share of individuals below thresholds
of 0.5 times the original thresholds, often called deep poverty, and thresholds of 1.5 times the
35

Citro and Michael (1995) show that their recommended equivalence scale does not have a significant effect on
changes in poverty between 1979 and 1992 for economies of scale parameters 0.65 and 0.75 (Table 5-11). In
contrast, Triest (1998) finds that poverty rates rise faster during the 1970s and early 1980s for measures adjusted by
the NAS scale than for a modified measure of official poverty. While our analyses of different equivalent scales are
consistent with results in Citro and Michael, efforts to replicate Triest have been unsuccessful.
36
We find that changes in poverty between 1972 and 2005 are remarkably similar for values of F between 0.65 and
0.75, for values of P between 0.7 and 1, or using the 3-parameter scales reported in Short et. al. (1999) and Betson
(1996). Poverty rates increase significantly more during this period if economies of scale are considered to be large
(i.e. F = 0.25).
25

original thresholds, often called near poverty. These results are reported in Table 3 for our main
income and consumption based measures of poverty. The deep poverty results are displayed in
Figure 5 as well. Sharply distinct differences are evident between the income and consumption
based measures of deep poverty, particularly in recent years. Between 1980 and 2005, deep
poverty based on after-tax income plus noncash benefits rises (see column 3 where it increases
by 0.4 percentage points–an increase of 13 percent).37 By contrast, the consumption based deep
poverty rate in column 5 falls by a 1.1 percentage points–a drop of sixty percent. At 150 percent
of our original thresholds (columns 8 through 14) we again see that after-tax income plus
noncash benefits and consumption based measures of poverty have decreased more in recent
years than has poverty based on pre-tax money income. However, changes for consumption
based measures of poverty are similar to those that are based on after-tax income plus noncash
benefits.38 It appears that much of the decline in consumption near poverty is due to health
insurance, as can be seen by comparing columns 12 and 14.
We also examine poverty gaps for the resource measures discussed above. The poverty
gap provides evidence on the depth of poverty and is often thought to be a better measure of
deprivation than head count measures (Dasgupta 1993, Deaton 1997). The total gap for a given
poverty measure is the sum of the difference between the poverty threshold and family resources
across all families in poverty. For each poverty measure we divide this gap by the number of
poor families to calculate average gaps. These average gaps are reported in Table 4 (in 2005
dollars). In the 1960s both after-tax money income and consumption based measures of the gap
drop sharply, by about 15 percent (see columns 3 and 8). However, between 1972 and 2005
income and consumption based gaps move in opposite directions (also see Figure 6). The
average gap based on after-tax money income rises by 16.8 percent between 1972 and 2005.
During this same period the consumption based gap falls by 10.8 percent. Including noncash
benefits in an income based measure dampens the rise in the gap somewhat, but the pattern still
diverges sharply from that based on consumption during the 1990s and 2000s (compare columns
4 and 6 or 5 and 7).
37

Unlike the results reported in Table 1, incorporating taxes in an income based poverty measure (not reported) does
not have a noticeable effect on changes in deep poverty. This is not surprising given that for those with income near
50 percent of the poverty line tax liabilities and credits are typically small.
38
Due to the less dispersed distribution for consumption, the level of consumption poverty is higher than that of
income poverty at this higher cutoff even though the original thresholds are very similar.
26

The difference in recent changes in the poverty gap has important implications for
interpreting recent changes in poverty. For example, income based gaps suggest that while
poverty falls between 1972 and 2005, those that remain in poverty are more likely to be severely
deprived. By contrast, the pattern for consumption based gaps suggests that as overall poverty
falls during this period the degree to which families are severely deprived also falls.

9.E

Relative Poverty
The emphasis in this paper is on absolute poverty measures that rely on an unchanging

absolute standard to gauge the change over time in material deprivation. Relative poverty
measures provide another way of examining the extent of poverty and are more akin to measures
of income inequality. Following the most common international standard, we examine the share
of the population living in families with resources below half of the median value (Smeeding
2006).
Table 5 presents relative poverty trends for several income and consumption measures.
In general, the level of consumption relative poverty is much lower than that of income relative
poverty due to the lower dispersion of consumption. Unlike absolute poverty, which falls
noticeably during the 1960s, relative poverty remained flat for both income and consumption
based measures. Relative poverty also changed very little in the 1970s. Since then the trends
are not pronounced (Table 5 and Figure 7): money income poverty has moved upward slightly,
while after-tax income has trended downward slightly. Consumption relative poverty has also
trended downward slightly since the mid 1980s, though the measure including health insurance
has been rising slowly since 2000. While the fall in consumption reporting may be less
important at the bottom, the poorly reported items are a higher share at the median, which might
lead to substantial bias at that point. Thus, core consumption relative poverty may be the most
appropriate relative measure and it has fallen since the mid-1980s. The pattern for core
consumption relative poverty (not reported) mirrors the patterns for consumption relative poverty
reported in column 5 of Table 5.

9.F

Demographics and Poverty
Some of the most striking differences in trends across measures of poverty are evident

within family types. We calculate income and consumption poverty rates for five mutually
27

exclusive and exhaustive groups defined by marriage, children, and age: single parent families,
married parent families, single individuals without children, married couples without children,
and households with a head 65 or older.39 We report poverty rates for these groups in Table 6.40
As emphasized earlier, income poverty falls more than consumption poverty during the
1960s. The results in Table 6 show that this is true within each family type except single parents,
where the decline is similar for income and consumption (in percentage terms). After the 1960s,
these measures diverge considerably for single parents. In the 1970s and 1990s, income poverty
falls more than consumption poverty, while the reverse is true in the 1980s, and the measures
move sharply in opposite directions in the 2000s. The difference between changes in income and
consumption poverty is also evident at lower points in the distribution. For example, at 50
percent of our baseline thresholds (not reported), after-tax income plus noncash benefit poverty
for single parents increases modestly after 1997 while consumption poverty appears to fall
slightly.
Quite strikingly, for married couples with children—the largest of our family types,
accounting for about 40 percent of the entire sample and between 25 and 40 percent of poor
individuals in recent years—a very different pattern is evident. For these families income
poverty falls more than consumption poverty. Between 1980 and 2005, income poverty falls by
4.1 percentage points, while consumption poverty only falls 1.3 percentage points. For single
individuals we again see a decline in consumption poverty since 1980, while income poverty
rises slightly. Married couples without children see a decline in income poverty of more than 60
percent during the 1960s as compared to a 33 percent decline for consumption poverty. In more
recent years, this group has seen little change in their (low) poverty rates measured with either
income or consumption.
Income and consumption poverty also diverge for those with a head 65 or older. In the
1960s and 1970s income poverty falls considerably more than consumption poverty. Between

39

Those households with a head 65 or older are included in this last category regardless of marriage or the presence
of children.
40
Standard errors for changes in some of the key poverty measures and differences between them can be seen in
Appendix Table 3. In Table 6 we report poverty rates based on after-tax income and consumption excluding health
insurance because these measures are available for the 1960s and 1970s. The patterns for measures based on aftertax income plus noncash benefits and consumption including health insurance reported in Appendix Table 3 are
qualitatively similar to the patterns presented in Table 6.
28

1980 and 2005, consumption poverty falls by 11.7 percentage points (61 percent), while income
poverty falls by 7.1 percentage points (45 percent).
The sharp contrast between changes in income and consumption based poverty gaps is
even more evident within family types (Table 7). In the 1960s, the income based gap falls much
more than the consumption based gap for families with a head 65 or older, while the reverse is
true for married parent families. Income and consumption gaps continue to diverge sharply
within group in more recent years. For single parent families, we see large increases in income
based gaps and large decreases in consumption based gaps between 1980 and 2005. For families
with a head 65 or older, we see an increase in the income based poverty gap of 43 percent
between 1980 and 2005, while the consumption based poverty gap falls by 19 percent.41 During
this period the income poverty gap for single individuals rises considerably (27.5 percent) while
the consumption poverty gap falls slightly (3.23 percent).
The small movements in overall income and consumption relative poverty over the last
three decades hide some striking changes within family types and differences between income
and consumption. In Table 8 we report relative poverty for our five family types. Between 1972
and 2005 relative poverty declined sharply for those living in single parent families or with a
head 65 or older, but remained flat or even rose slightly for those in married parent families.
Comparing income and consumption based measures within groups reveals some noticeably
different patterns. Between 1980 and 2005, for those in single parent families, consumption
relative poverty falls by twice as much as income relative poverty in percentage terms. For
single childless individuals, relative income poverty rises significantly between 1980 and 2005
while relative consumption poverty falls slightly. For those in families with a head 65 and over,
income relative poverty falls noticeably more than consumption relative poverty in the 1970s,
but the reverse is true between 1980 and 2005.
A comparison of the demographic characteristics of the income poor and the
consumption poor also reveals some important differences. Based on a number of observable
characteristics, the consumption poor appear to be worse off than the income poor. For example,
the consumption poor are less educated (Table 9), are less likely to own a home, are more likely
to live in a mobile home if they do own their home, are less likely to own a car, and have smaller
41

When noncash benefits are included in income (not reported), the rise in the gap is less pronounced for all groups,
but the distinct differences from the patterns for consumption based gaps remain.
29

living units that are less likely to be air conditioned or include durables such as a washer and
dryer (Appendix Table 4). For the 1980-2005 period, we also examine the demographic
characteristics of the income poor using the measure that includes noncash benefits (not
reported). The characteristics of this group are very similar to those of the after-tax income poor
reported in Table 9 with a few notable exceptions. The after-tax income plus noncash benefit
poor are less likely to own a home and to live in a single parent family or a family with a head 65
or older, and they are more likely to live in a married parent family. In some cases this implies
that those defined as poor using an income measure that includes noncash benefits look more
like the consumption poor (i.e. homeownership), but in other cases the reverse is true (i.e. the
fraction with a head 65 or older in the 1980s and 1990s).
The characteristics of the income and consumption poor—in particular, race,
homeownership, and family type—become more different over time. We also see some changes
in the characteristics of the poor over time that are evident regardless of how poverty is defined.
For example, the poor in the 2000s are more educated and more likely to be neither black nor
white than the poor in earlier years. Also, the poor in the 2000s are more likely to be single
individuals, a group that includes cohabiting adults. One should note that over a third of the
official income poor are homeowners, underscoring the need to account for the flow of housing
services in resource measures. The differences between the characteristics of the consumption
and income poor do not appear to be the result of differences between the surveys, as the
demographic characteristics of the full samples (Appendix Table 5) are very similar across
surveys.

10. Explanations for Poverty Trends and Differences between Income and Consumption
A.

Explaining Trends
We have concentrated so far on establishing the facts about changes in poverty over time.

In this section we focus on possible explanations for the changes over time and for the
differences between changes in income and consumption poverty measures. In explaining the
changes over time, we start with what we know based on past work. Hoynes et al. (2006)
provides a perceptive recent summary of the evidence on explanations for changes in official
poverty. The paper examines the role of four factors in explaining changes in non-elderly pretax money income poverty: macroeconomic conditions and the employment of women, family
30

structure changes, government tax and transfer programs, and immigration. The authors estimate
the effect of macroeconomic variables and the employment of women on poverty using region
by year regressions. They then use these coefficient estimates to predict the aggregate poverty
rate. They find that macroeconomic conditions and employment are predicted to decrease the
official poverty rate (for the nonelderly) by only 1.0 percentage point between 1980 and 2003.42
Even this small magnitude would be approximately halved if the estimated relationship between
macroeconomic changes after 1980 were used for the predictions rather than the much stronger
relationship of the 1970s. If the changing employment of women is incorporated, Hoynes et al.
predict that poverty will rise slightly over the period, rather than fall. Their results indicate that
demographic changes, such as the falling share of married couple families, predict a substantial
increase in poverty. Anti-poverty programs and immigration are found to play an unimportant
role in changes over time.
While Hoynes et al. focus on explaining changes in official poverty, we will examine
changes for alternative income measures that will allow us to consider the role of taxes and
noncash benefits over time (rather than the point in time analysis in Hoynes et al.). We also
examine the entire population, rather than the non-elderly. Most importantly, we analyze these
issues for consumption as well as income poverty.
We analyze the role of demographics including family type, employment, race, region
and education, on the changes in income and consumption poverty rates over time. We might
expect that the decline in overall employment, the increase in single parent families and single
individuals, and the changes in the population by region and race, might lead to higher poverty
over time. On the other hand, we might expect the increase in education over time, particularly
the decline in the share of those without a high school degree, would lead to lower poverty rates.
We calculate the predicted changes in poverty over time if poverty rates within demographic
groups remained fixed at the level in a base year, but only the shares of family types and other
demographics changed. These results are reported in Table 10, using the five mutually exclusive
and exhaustive family types discussed in Section 9.F. We perform these calculations using the
42

There is a large literature examining the relationship between macroeconomic conditions and income poverty. In
general, this literature finds that poverty and the macroeconomy are correlated, but that this relationship is quite
weak for some periods such as the 1980s. For more recent discussions see Blank (2000) and Gundersen and Ziliak
(2004). We do not reexamine the effects of macroeconomic conditions.
31

poverty rates in several alternative base years (1972, 1980 and 2005). We have divided the full
time period into three parts: the early 1960s-1972, 1972-1980 and 1980-2005. We examine the
effect of demographics on both consumption poverty (panel A) and income poverty (panel B).43
Table 10 indicates several patterns. Changes in family type typically predict increasing
poverty regardless of which rates are used as the base, although the predicted rise is smaller
using the 2005 rates. Thus, family type changes cannot explain declines in income or
consumption poverty. Changes in employment, race and region are predicted to have small
effects on poverty rates in all periods.
Education is predicted to have a large poverty reduction effect for consumption, but little
for income. Between 1980 and 2005, consumption poverty falls 3.9 percentage points, while
education changes predict a 2.8 percentage point fall when combined with family type and
employment using the 2005 poverty rates as the base (1.8 percentage points with 1980 base
poverty rates). On the other hand, income poverty falls 3.2 percentage points, but education
combined with family type and employment predicts a 0.2 percentage point fall using 2005 base
rates (0.9 percentage points with 1980 base rates). This difference reflects the fact that low
education is more closely associated with consumption poverty than income poverty, reflecting
the more permanent, long-term nature of consumption poverty. In general, demographic
changes do a poor job of explaining changes in poverty since the 1960s, except for education
changes in the case of consumption poverty.
As discussed in Section 9.A, taxes and tax-credits play a substantial role in changes in
improved measures of poverty (though they do not enter the official poverty measure). The
effect of taxes can be seen by comparing money income to after-tax money income in Figure 1
and Table 1. Subtracting taxes and adding tax credits to money income adds to the increase in
poverty in the early 1980s, but substantially accelerates the decline in poverty in the 1960s and
between 1986 and 1996, adding at least two percentage points to the decline in these latter two
periods.
It is clear what changes in tax provisions led to these after-tax poverty changes. In 1964
and 1965, marginal tax rates for the lowest tax bracket fell, while in 1970 the standard deduction
was sharply increased for those with incomes near the poverty line. In the early 1970s the
43

We also examined the effect of demographics on a measure of income poverty that includes noncash benefits for
the years 1980 to 2005. These results are very similar to those reported in Panel B of Table 10.
32

personal exemption was also increased, but the increases do not quite make up for inflation over
our period. As a result, after-tax income poverty declined more than pre-tax income poverty
during the 1960s. While the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 (ERTA) cut rates and indexed
tax brackets for the vast majority of people, the standard deduction and personal exemption (that
together determine the zero tax bracket amount) were not indexed until after 1984. The high
inflation of this period moved more and more low-income families into the range where their
income was taxable. Thus, poverty accounting for taxes increased relative to pre-tax money
income over this period. After 1986, the situation reversed with the Tax Reform Act of 1986.
There is a large decline in after-tax money income poverty relative to money income poverty
between 1986 and 1988, the first period during which the EITC was expanded (and the personal
exemption and standard deduction were increased). The effect of the EITC is even more
noticeable between 1990 and 1996, when after-tax money income poverty fell by 1.3 percentage
points more than the rate for money income. This growing gap coincides with the period of
greatest expansion of the EITC under the 1990 and 1993 budget acts. Since 1996, the end of the
EITC expansions, there has been little change in the difference between these two measures of
poverty.44 Thus, tax policy has had a substantial impact on poverty rates. Lack of indexing of
the zero bracket amount combined with inflation increased after-tax poverty in the early 1980s.
The rate cuts of the 1960s and the standard deduction increase of 1970, as well as the later EITC
expansions and increases in the personal exemption and standard deduction had the opposite
effect.
The pattern of changes in poverty by family type reinforces this conclusion (results not
reported). Single parents are by far the most likely group to receive the EITC, followed by
married parents. Bearing this out, the post-1986 difference between money income and post-tax
money income is most pronounced for single parents and to a lesser extent married parents. The
changes in the two measures over time are almost the same for single individuals and families
headed by someone 65 or older.
In interpreting changes in poverty due to tax and transfer programs, one must keep in
mind that changes in taxes and transfers may alter pre-tax and transfer incomes. A full analysis
44

Certainly this difference between money income and after-tax income is partly mechanical given the implicit
assumption of complete takeup in the imputation of tax credits in the CPS tax calculation and our TAXSIM based
calculations. However, the imputation does not overstate dollars received since the imputed amounts fall far short
of those actually received (Meyer, Mok and Sullivan 2008).
33

of the behavioral effects of these programs is beyond the scope of this paper. However, one
would expect that the mechanical effects of the tax changes on poverty indicated here understate
the effects of the tax changes (principally the EITC) on employment and earnings given the
evidence in the literature (for summaries see Hotz and Scholz 2003, Eissa and Hoynes 2006,
Meyer 2007). On the other hand, transfer programs likely reduce pre-transfer earnings,
suggesting that any direct poverty reducing effects of these programs overstate the effects
incorporating behavioral responses.
The effects of non-cash transfers (food stamps, housing and school lunch subsidies,
Medicaid, and Medicare) on changes in poverty rates over time can be seen by comparing aftertax money income to after-tax money income plus non-cash transfers, as reported in Figure 1 and
Table 1. For the full population, the role of non-cash transfers is not pronounced as the two
series align closely. However, non-cash transfers have a large effect for single parents and a
noticeable effect for aged households, but much smaller effects for the changes over time for
other groups (see Table 6 and Appendix Table 3). The role of noncash benefits is odd for single
parents in that accounting for them reduces the fall in income poverty, making it less similar to
the consumption poverty change over the full period. Over the 1990s when food stamp receipt
fell, accounting for non-cash transfers makes income closer to consumption. For the aged as
well, accounting for non-cash transfers reduces the fall in income poverty over time, making it
less similar to the pattern for consumption.
Income poverty rates that include the return on home equity as calculated by the Census
Bureau have a peculiar time pattern. Including home equity reduces the increase in poverty by
nearly a percentage point in 1981 as compared to poverty calculated excluding home equity
(column 4 versus column 5 in Table 1). Then, between 1981 and 1986, the measure including
home equity rises by two percentage points more than the measure excluding home equity.
These differences are due to the Census calculation of the value of the return on home equity as
the product of the Standard & Poor’s bond rate times home value. The bond rate sharply
increased in 1981 and then fell over time, causing poverty rate to move in the opposite direction
in both cases. The effect of this odd way of calculating the value of home ownership is
especially pronounced for those 65 and older in the early 1980s. Poverty for this group (not
reported) falls 2.9 percentage points in 1981 due to the largest one year increase in interest rates
(over our sample period) occurring in that year. Poverty for those 65 and older then rises by
34

more than a percentage point by 1986 as the bond rate falls, while poverty excluding home
equity falls by 2.5 percentage points. Because Census income measures including the return on
home equity are sensitive to interest rate fluctuations, changes in these measures may not
accurately reflect changes in well-being.

B.

Explaining Consumption Income Differences
The two most plausible explanations for the differences between the changes in income

and consumption poverty are measurement error and saving or dissaving. There is considerable
evidence that changes in measurement error are important for families with few resources. First,
transfer income, which is particularly relevant for those with few resources, is significantly
under-reported in surveys and the extent of under-reporting has grown over time. Meyer, Mok
and Sullivan (2008) find that nearly half of food stamp benefits and TANF dollars are not
reported in the CPS in recent years. Second, reported expenditures exceed reported income at
the bottom (Meyer and Sullivan 2007). For all families, the 5th percentile of the CE Survey
expenditures distribution is 44 percent higher than the 5th percentile of the CPS income
distribution. For single mothers, expenditures exceed income by 50 percent when comparing the
5th percentiles and by 25 percent at the 20th percentiles.45 Given that the extent of underreporting seems to be especially pronounced at the very bottom, we suspect that measurement
error is a likely candidate for the large differences in poverty measures that focus on the
distribution below the poverty line: the poverty gap and deep poverty. For these measures we
saw particularly sharp differences between income and consumption based measures, with the
two often moving in opposite directions.
A second explanation for differences between income and consumption is that consuming
out of past saving or borrowing against future income allows some groups to spend more than
their income, and this saving or borrowing has changed over time. To address this possibility,
we examine changes over time in various percentiles of the financial asset and non-mortgage,
non-vehicle debt distributions in the CE survey for the entire population as well as for the
income poor, the consumption poor, and for different family types. We also examine various
45

In Meyer and Sullivan (2006), we find that, after accounting for the under-reporting of Food Stamp and TANF
dollars, changes in income and consumption distributions between 1993 and 2000 are similar for single mothers.
We consider alternative ways of allocating under-reported dollars, but, without knowing explicitly who is not
reporting, the evidence is inconclusive.
35

percentiles of the one year change in financial assets for these same groups.46 A summary of
these numbers is reported in Appendix Table 4. The 85th percentile of the asset distribution for
the income poor is always under $1,500 and has only changed by a few hundred dollars over
time, which is not sufficient to support much consumption in excess of income.47 Looking at the
bottom of the distribution of the change in assets for the income poor (to focus on those who may
be dissaving), there is some evidence of dissaving for a small fraction of the income poor in the
1960s and 1970s, but the 10 percentile is zero in more recent years, providing little evidence of
overall dissaving. Moreover, the decline in the change in financial assets suggests less dissaving
over time, which is contrary to the pattern we would expect if dissaving were to explain
differences between income and consumption poverty trends. Similarly, the fraction of the
income poor with substantial debt is small and there is no evidence of increased borrowing over
time for this group. Even if under-reporting leads the levels and changes in assets to be truly two
or three times the reported amounts, the role of dissaving overall must be small.
While dissaving does not seem to be the dominant explanation for differences between
income and consumption poverty, for some family types a small but important part of the
difference between consumption and income is likely dissaving. Appendix Table 6 provides
asset and debt information for the income poor by family type. Financial assets are substantial at
the 85th and 90th percentiles for income poor families with a head 65 or older. After 1990, more
than ten percent of the aged income poor have financial assets over $30,000, and more than five
percent have assets over $120,000. For those aged income poor who are not consumption poor
(Appendix Table 7, panel A), which is most of the aged income poor in recent years, assets are
even higher—$40,000 at the 85th percentile after 1990. Dissaving is also suggested by the
change in asset distribution, which shows that at least five percent of the aged income poor, but
46

There is evidence that assets are under-reported in the CE Survey. For example, a comparison of the distribution
of financial assets for the PSID and CE Survey for 1994 and 1999 indicate that the median and 75th percentiles for
the distribution in the CE Survey are 30 to 50 percent lower than the respective percentiles in the PSID. However,
the fraction of families with positive financial assets is very similar across surveys.
47
To examine assets for the income poor (Appendix Tables 4, 6 and 7) we use data from the CE Survey because
asset information is not available in the CPS. For these tables we restrict the CE Survey sample to those designated
as complete income respondents, and exclude families whose head or spouse responds “don’t know” to questions on
wage and salary income or refuses to respond to these questions. Because the CE Survey did not impute missing
values for income prior to 2004, the level of income is lower (and consequently the level of poverty is higher) than
that from the CPS, even after restricting the sample to complete income respondents. However, changes in income
poverty based on CE Survey data are very similar to changes in income poverty based on CPS data for the years
1980-2005.
36

not consumption poor have drawn down their assets by more than $3000 over the year. In
contrast, after 1980 the aged who are both income poor and consumption poor (Appendix Table
7, panel B) have assets under a couple thousand dollars at the 90th percentile, and the change in
assets at the 5th percentile is zero (or very close to it). Married couple families, especially those
without children, also have substantial assets if they are income poor, but not consumption poor.
On the other hand, for income poor single parents (Appendix Table 6), the 95th percentile
of assets is below $1400 for all time periods and the 5th percentile of the change in assets is
essentially zero for the 1990s and 2000s. Even for single parent families that are income poor,
but not consumption poor (Appendix Table 7, panel A), assets are about one thousand dollars at
the 90th percentile and the change in assets at the 5th percentile is only a fall of a few hundred
dollars after 1990. Non-mortgage, non-vehicle debt for those who are income, but not
consumption poor is under a few thousand dollars at the 90th percentile for single parents and
even lower for the aged, but is much higher for the other family types. These patterns indicate
essentially no consumption out of wealth or borrowing by some groups (single parents) and
suggest dissaving for a small share in some other groups (the aged, and married couples without
children).
Several studies, summarized in Hurd (1990) have found that the elderly as a whole
dissaved even back in the 1970s. However, this literature does not show how the distribution of
dissaving rates or amounts for the elderly has changed over time. Nor does it specifically
examine the poor. There is also the possibility that the aged in recent years may be more able to
consume housing wealth by borrowing against their homes. Venti and Wise (2004) find that it is
uncommon for the aged to draw down housing equity to support consumption, although they find
that housing equity is consumed in the case of negative shocks, such as nursing home entry or
the death of a spouse. These studies do not provide evidence on whether those near the bottom
of the income distribution are more likely to draw down equity than in the past.
Another possible source of the differences between income and consumption is the
ownership of houses and cars that provide a flow of consumption services to their owners. If
ownership rates have changed over time, they could explain some of the differences between
income and consumption changes. We find substantial changes in house and car ownership for
single parents and families with a head 65 or older who are income poor. Between the 1980s and
the 2000s, home ownership by single parents rises by about four percentage points, while car
37

ownership rises by nearly 17 percentage points (see Appendix Table 6). Car ownership also rises
for the aged poor, but homeownership rises in the 1960s and then does not change noticeably. It
is unclear whether these changes are big enough to explain much of the income consumption
difference. Focusing on the difference between expenditure based poverty and consumption
based poverty provides evidence on the effects of excluding consumption flows from houses and
cars. In Table 1, we see that consumption and expenditure based poverty measures follow a
similar pattern. Changes between 1980 and 2005 are very comparable, although expenditure
poverty rises while consumption poverty falls between 1973 and 1980. By family type (not
shown), the main difference between consumption and expenditure poverty is that the latter is
about fifty percent higher than the former in a typical year for those with a head 65 and over,
making comparing changes in the two difficult. Although the percentage point fall in
expenditure poverty exceeds that for consumption poverty for this group, in percentage terms the
declines are comparable. Overall, it appears that changes in the flow of services from houses and
cars are not a large part of the difference between income and consumption poverty changes.
One possible explanation for why consumption poverty falls less than income poverty for
couples with children is that educational spending (which is excluded from consumption) might
be increasing for this group. To test this possibility, we examined poverty trends for a measure
of consumption that includes educational spending. Patterns for this measure do not differ from
the patterns of consumption poverty reported earlier, which is not surprising given that
educational spending is very small relative to total consumption, even for married parents.

11. Conclusions
This paper examines poverty in the United States from 1960 through 2005. While the
official poverty rate in 2005 is the same as in 1970, we show that improved measures of poverty
decline noticeably. We find that sensible changes from the CPI-U, the official price index, lead
to substantial declines in measured income poverty rates. Between the early 1960s and 2005, an
income poverty measure that corrects for bias in the price index declines by 14 percentage points
more than a comparable measure based on the CPI-U. We document sharp differences,
particularly in recent years, between different income based poverty measures, and between
income and consumption based poverty rates and gaps. An income poverty measure that
incorporates taxes declines by about 3.9 percentage points more between the early 1960s and
38

2005 than a pre-tax money income measure. Measuring income at the household level instead of
the family level leads to slightly greater declines in poverty during this period, but alternative
equivalence scales have a very small impact. Consumption based poverty rates often indicate
large declines, even in recent years when income based poverty rates have risen. The patterns
are very different across family types, with consumption poverty falling much faster than income
poverty for the elderly, but more slowly for married couples with children.
We also document patterns for other measures of deprivation. Relative poverty increased
in the early 1980s, but did not have a clear trend in other periods. In particular, relative poverty
changed little over the 1960s while absolute poverty fell sharply. Income and consumption
poverty gaps have generally moved sharply in opposite directions in the last two decades with
income gaps rising, but consumption gaps falling. Since both the poverty rate and the poverty
gap per poor person have fallen appreciably more in consumption data than in income data, the
overall picture of the change in poverty is much more favorable using consumption measures
than income measures.
Our results show that demographic changes do a poor job of explaining poverty changes
over the past 45 years, except for education changes in the case of consumption poverty.
Changes in tax policy explain a substantial part of the decline in income poverty particularly for
families with children.
The differences between income and consumption measures that we document renew the
question as to why these measures differ. We consider two primary explanations: measurement
error and saving/dissaving. Increased under-reporting of income is likely to play a critical role,
particularly for some groups. Given that the extent of income under-reporting seems to be
especially pronounced at the very bottom, measurement error is likely to play an important role
in explaining the large differences between income and consumption measures that focus on the
distribution below the poverty line such as poverty gaps and deep poverty. For these measures,
those based on consumption often move in the opposite direction from those based on income.
Given the evidence on low asset holdings among the income poor, particularly for groups such as
single parents, saving and dissaving are likely to explain only a small portion of the differences
between income and consumption measures of poverty. Further evidence on the importance of
measurement error, saving, and dissaving in explaining the differences would be especially
valuable.
39

The results from this paper have a number of important implications for poverty
measurement. Bias in the CPI-U means that official poverty, while described as an absolute
measure, is far from it. Although the CPI-U-RS incorporates the latest improvements the BLS
has made, it still overstates inflation. The bias is substantial for estimates of changes in poverty
over a long time period. Adjustments for these biases are critical for constructing a poverty
measure that reflects an unchanging living standard.
A disposable income based poverty measure better reflects the resources available for
consumption than the official poverty measure. However, there are important limitations to the
Census valuations of nonmonetary resources including health insurance, housing subsidies, and
owner occupied housing. Given these limitations and the fact that consumption better captures
well-being, rather than measuring the resources available for consumption, it may be preferable
to measure consumption directly. A consumption based poverty measure would more accurately
capture changes in well-being and the effects of anti-poverty government policies. Going
forward, consumption measures will reflect the loss of housing service flows if home ownership
falls or the decline in consumption that might be required to repay debts, both of which would be
missed by an income measure.
There are some practical limitations to an official, consumption based measure of
poverty. Small sample sizes in the CE Survey relative to the CPS make it difficult to compute
reliable poverty statistics at the state and local level. Also, many government transfer programs
determine eligibility by comparing the applicant’s income to a standard of need which is tied to
the poverty line. While consumption has advantages when determining standards for benefit
amounts for transfer programs such as Food Stamps and TANF, the ease of reporting income
facilitates its use in determining eligibility for these programs.

40

References
Aguiar, Mark, and Erik Hurst. 2007. “Measuring Trends in Leisure.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 122(3): 969-1006.
Attanasio, Orazio P., Erich Battistin, and Andrew Leicester. 2006. “From Micro to Macro, from
Poor to Rich: Consumption and Income in the UK and the US,” working paper,
University College London.
Bakija, Jon. 2008. “Documentation for a Comprehensive Historical U.S. Federal and State
Income Tax Calculator Program.” Williams College working paper, January.
Battistin, E. (2003). ‘Errors in survey reports of consumption expenditures’, Institute for Fiscal
Studies, Working Paper 0307.
Bavier, Richard. 2008. “Income and Expenditure Data in Poverty Measurement.” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management, 27(1): 44-62.
Berndt, Ernst R. 2006. “The Boskin Commission Report After a Decade: After-life or
Requiem?” International Productivity Monitor 12: 61-73.
Besharov, Douglas J. and Peter Germanis. 2004. “Reconsidering the Federal Poverty Measure”
Project Description, University of Maryland.
Betson, David. 1996. “Is Everything Relative? The Role of Equivalence Scales in Poverty
Measurement” Working Paper, University of Notre Dame.
Blank, Rebecca. 1997. It Takes a Nation: A New Agenda for Fighting Poverty, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Blank, Rebecca. 2000. “Fighting Poverty: Lessons from Recent U.S. History,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, vol. 14(2), 3-19.
Blank, Rebecca. 2007. “How to Improve Poverty Measurement in the United States,” National
Poverty Center Working Paper 2007-30.
Blundell, Richard and Ian Preston. 1998. “Consumption Inequality and Income Uncertainty”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 103, 603-640.
Boskin, Michael et al. 1996. “Toward a More Accurate Measure of the Cost of Living” Final
Report to the Senate Finance Committee.
Broda, Christian, and John Romalis. 2008. “Inequality and Prices: Does China Benefit the Poor
in America” Working Paper, University of Chicago.
41

Broda, Christian, and David E. Weinstein. 2007. “Prices, Poverty, and Inequality” Working
Paper, University of Chicago.
Browning, Martin, Thomas Crossley, and Guglielmo Weber, 2003. "Asking Consumption
Questions in General Purpose Surveys," Economic Journal, Royal Economic Society,
vol. 113(491), pages F540-F567, November.
Bucks, Brian and Karen Pence. 2006. “Do Homeowners Know Their House Values and
Mortgage Terms?” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Board of Governors.
Bumpass, Larry and Hsien-hen Lu. 2000. “Trends in cohabitation and implications for
children’s family contexts in the United States,” Population Studies, 54:1, 29-41.
Burtless, Gary, and Timothy Smeeding. 2001. “The Level, Trend, and Composition of Poverty.”
In Sheldon Danziger and Robert Haveman, eds., Understanding Poverty, Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 27–68.
Citro, Constance F. and Robert T. Michael. 1995. Measuring Poverty: A New Approach, eds.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Costa, Dora. 2001. “Estimating Real Income in the United States from 1988 to 1994:
Correcting CPI Bias Using Engel Curves,” Journal of Political Economy 109: 12881310.
Cutler, David M. and Lawrence F. Katz. 1991. “Macroeconomic Performance and the
Disadvantaged.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 1-74.
Dalaker, Joe. 2005. Alternative Poverty Estimates in the United States: 2003. U.S. Census
Bureau. Current Population Reports P60-227.
Dasgupta, Partha. 1993. An Inquiry into Well-Being and Destitution. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Deaton, Angus. 1997. The Analysis of Household Surveys. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.
Eissa, Nada and Hilary Hoynes (2006). “Behavioral Responses to Taxes: Lessons from the
EITC and Labor Supply,” in Tax Policy and the Economy, 20, ed. by James M. Poterba,
pp. 163-192.
Feenberg, Daniel and Elisabeth Coutts. 1993. "An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model", Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management, 12(1): 189-94. http://www.nber.org/~taxsim/.
Garner, Thesia I., George Janini, William Passero, Laura Paszkiewicz, and Mark Vendemia.
2006. “The Consumer Expenditure Survey: A Comparison with Personal Consumption
Expenditures,” working paper, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
42

General Accounting Office. 1996. “Alternative Poverty Measures,” GAO/GGD-96-183R.
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Gieseman, Raymond. 1987. “The Consumer Expenditure Survey: quality control by
comparative analysis,” Monthly Labor Review, 8-14.
Gordon, Robert J. 2006. “The Boskin Commission Report: A Retrospective One Decade Later,”
NBER Working Paper No. 12311.
Gordon, Robert J. and Todd vanGoethem. 2005. “A Century of Housing Shelter Prices: Is there
A Downward Bias in the CPI?” NBER Working Paper No. 11776.
Grogger, Jeffrey and Lynn A. Karoly. 2005. Welfare Reform: Effects of a Decade of Change.
Harvard University Press.
Gundersen, Craig and James Ziliak. 2004. “Poverty and Macroeconomic Performance across
Space, Race, and Family Structure,” Demography, 41:1, 61-86.
Haider, Steven J., and Kathleen M. McGarry. 2006. “Recent Trends in Resource Sharing
among the Poor,” Working and Poor: How Economic and Policy Changes Are Affecting
Low-Wage Workers (eds., Rebecca Blank, Sheldon Danziger, and Robert Schoeni),
Russell Sage Press.
Hamilton, Bruce W. 2001. “Using Engel’s Law to Estimate CPI Bias,” American Economic
Review 91: 619-630.
Hausman, Jerry. 2003. “Sources of Bias and Solutions to Bias in the Consumer Price Index,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 17: 23-44.
Hausman, Jerry and Ephraim Leibtag. 2005. “Consumer Benefits from Increased Competition
in Shopping Outlets: Measuring the Effect of Wal-Mart,” NBER Working paper No.
11809.
Hotz, V. Joseph, and John Karl Scholz (2003): “The Earned Income Tax Credit, ” in MeansTested Transfer Programs in the United States, edited by Robert A. Moffitt, University of
Chicago Press.
Hoynes, Hilary W., Marianne E. Page, and Ann Huff Stevens. 2006. “Poverty in America:
Trends and Explanations.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20: 47-68.
Hurd, Michael D. 1990. “Research on the Elderly: Economic Status, Retirement, and
Consumption and Saving.” Journal of Economic Literature 28: 565-637.
Jencks, Christopher, Susan E. Mayer, and Joseph Swingle. 2004a. “Can We Fix the Federal
Poverty Measure So it Provides Reliable Information About Changes in Children’s
Living Conditions?” Working Paper. Harvard University.
43

Jencks, Christopher, Susan E. Mayer, and Joseph Swingle. 2004b. “Who Has Benefitted from
Economic Growth in the United States Since 1969? The Case of Children.” in Edward
N. Wolff, ed. What Has Happened to the Quality of Live in the Advanced Industrial
Nations? Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Johnson, David S. 2004. “Measuring Consumption and Consumption Poverty: Possibilities and
Issues” Paper prepared for “Reconsidering the Federal Poverty Measure.”
Johnson, David S., Stephen B. Reed and Kenneth J. Stewart. 2006. “Price Measurement in the
United States: a Decade After the Boskin Report” Monthly Labor Review: 10-19.
Joint Economic Committee Democrats (JEC). 2004. “Reduction in Poverty Significantly
Greater in the 1990s than Official Estimates Suggest,” Economic Policy Brief, August.
Kiel, Katherine A. and Jeffrey E. Zabel. 1999. “The Accuracy of Owner-Provided House
Values: the 1978-1991 American Housing Survey” Real Estate Economics 27(2): 263298.
Lang, Kevin. 2007. Poverty and Discrimination. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
McGranahan, Leslie and Anna Paulson. 2005. “Constructing the Chicago Fed Income Based
Economic Index–Consumer Price Index: Inflation,” revised November 2006, Working
Paper No. 20, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Meyer, Bruce D. 2008. “The U.S. Earned Income Tax Credit, its Effects, and Possible Reforms”
forthcoming, Swedish Economic Policy Review.
Meyer, Bruce D., Wallace K. C. Mok and James X. Sullivan. 2008. “The Under-Reporting of
Transfers in Household Surveys: Its Nature and Consequences” working paper,
University of Chicago.
Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2008. “Changes in the Consumption, Income, and
Well-Being of Single Mother Headed Families,” American Economic Review, 98(5),
December, 2221-2241.
_____. 2007. “Further Results on Measuring the Well-Being of the Poor Using Income and
Consumption,” NBER Working Paper 13413.
. 2006. "Consumption, Income, and Material Well-Being After Welfare Reform,” NBER
Working Paper 11976.
. 2004. "The Effects of Welfare and Tax Reform: The Material Well-Being of Single
Mothers in the 1980s and 1990s," Journal of Public Economics, 88, July, 1387-1420.
44

. 2003. “Measuring the Well-Being of the Poor Using Income and Consumption.”
Journal of Human Resources, 38:S, 1180-1220.
Murray, 1984, Losing Ground: American Social Policy, 1950-1980, New York, Basic Books.
Poterba, James M. 1991. “Is the Gasoline Tax Regressive?” In Tax Policy and the Economy 5,
ed. David Bradford, 145-164. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ruggles, Patricia. 1990. Drawing the Line–Alternative Poverty Measures and Their
Implications for Public Policy. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute Press.
Sawhill, Isabel. 1988. “Poverty in the U.S.: Why Is It So Persistent?” Journal of Economic
Literature, 26, September, 1073-1119.
Scholz, John Karl, and Kara Levine. 2001. “The Evolution of Income Support Policy in Recent
Decades.” In Sheldon Danziger and Robert Haveman, eds., Understanding Poverty,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 193–228.
Short, Kathleen, Thesia Garner , David Johnson, and Patricia Doyle, "Experimental Poverty
Measures: 1990 to 1997," U. S. Census Bureau, Current Population Reports, Series P60205, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1999.
Slesnick, Daniel T. 1992. “Aggregate Consumption and Savings in the Postwar United States.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 74(4): 585-597.
Slesnick, Daniel T. 1993. “Gaining Ground: Poverty in the Postwar United States.” Journal of
Political Economy 101(1): 1-38.
Slesnick, Daniel T. 2001. Consumption and Social Welfare. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Smeeding, Timothy. 2006. “Government Programs and Social Outcomes: Comparisons of the
United States with Other Rich Nations.” In Public Policy and the Income Distribution
edited by Alan J. Auerbach, David card and John M. Quigley. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.
Steffick, Diane. 1993. “Housing Subsidies.” Unpublished manuscript. The Urban Institute,
Washington D.C.
Stewart, Kenneth J. and Stephen B. Reed. 1999. “Consumer Price Index Research Series Using
Current Methods, 1978-98” Monthly Labor Review, June, pp. 29-38.
Triest, Robert. 1998. “Has Poverty Gotten Worse?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 12: 1, pp.
97-114.
45

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). 2005. “Expenditures on Food from the Consumer
Expenditure Survey,” unpublished manuscript.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). 1997. “Consumer Expenditures and Income,” in BLS
Handbook of Methods, U.S. Department of Labor, U.S. Department of Labor.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2006. “The Effects of Government Taxes and Transfers on Income and
Poverty: 2004.” Housing and Household Economic Statistics Division. February 8.
U.S. Census Bureau, Administrative and Customer Services Division, Statistical Compendia
Branch Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2004-2005 edition.
U.S. Census Bureau. 1995. “Income, Poverty, and Valuation of Noncash Benefits: 1993.”
Current Population Report P-60-188, Washington D.C., Department of Commerce.
U.S. Census Bureau. various years-a. “Estimates of Poverty Including the Value of Noncash
Benefits.” Current Population Reports, Washington D.C., Department of Commerce.
U.S. Census Bureau. various years-b. “Measuring the Effects of Benefits and Taxes on Income
and Poverty.” Current Population Reports, Washington D.C., Department of Commerce.
Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise. 2004. “Aging and Housing Equity: Another Look” in
Perspectives on the Economics of Aging, edited by David A. Wise. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 127-175.

46

Data Appendix
A.

CE Survey and CPS ASEC/ADF Samples

Income data primarily come from the ASEC/ADF Supplement to the Current Population Survey
(CPS), which is the source for official measures of poverty in the U.S. We use data from the
1964-2006 surveys which provide data on income for the previous calendar year. Our samples
exclude individuals under the age of 15 who are not related to any other member in the
household, because these “secondary individuals” are not included in the official poverty count.
All expenditure and consumption data come from the Interview component of the Consumer
Expenditure (CE) Survey. We use data from the 1960-1961 and 1972-1973 surveys and all
quarterly waves from the first quarter of 1980 through the third quarter of 1981 and from 1984
through 2005 (some of the fourth quarter of 2005 data comes from surveys conducted in the first
quarter of 2006). We do not use the data from the fourth quarter of 1981 through the fourth
quarter of 1983 because the surveys for these quarters only include respondents from urban
areas.48 We report a single poverty rate for the 1960-1961 period because the data are only
representative of the full population when the samples from these two years are combined. The
CE Survey data include 13,728 observations from 1960-1961, 19,975 from 1972-1973, and
569,425 from 1980-2005. For this latter period we drop 116 observations due to missing
member file information, 198 observations due to missing information on the rental equivalent
value of owned homes, and 1,591 observations due to missing information on public or private
health insurance enrollment, yielding a final sample of 567,520 for the years from 1980-2005.
For analyses using income from the CE Survey (Appendix Tables 4, 6, and 7) we restrict the
sample to those designated as complete income respondents, and exclude families whose head or
spouse responds “don’t know” to questions on wage and salary income or refuses to respond to
these questions. This yields a sample of 13,728 observations from 1960-1961, 18,903 from
1972-1973, and 440,040 from 1980-2005. The 1980-2005 quarterly surveys collect expenditure
data for the three months prior to the interview month. To obtain annual measures we multiply
these quarterly measures of expenditures and consumption by four. In the 1960-1961 and 19721973 surveys only annual expenditures are available.

48

By excluding observations from the fourth quarter of 1981, and the first quarter of 1982 if the reference period
falls in 1981, our poverty statistics for 1981 will be biased due to seasonal spending patterns. To determine the
extent of this bias, we calculate an alternative poverty rate for 1981 that uses the urban families from the fourth
quarter of 1981. This sample while non-representative captures the bulk of the population since in the first three
quarters of 1981 about 88 percent of the sample was designated as “urban”. We calculate this alternative poverty
rate as the weighted average of the poverty rates of the fully representative sample from the first three quarters of
1981 and the non-representative sample from the fourth quarter. The poverty rate for the non-representative sample
is scaled up by the ratio of overall poverty to urban poverty in the first three quarters of 1981, and the weight for the
non-representative sample is scaled up by the ratio of the sum of the weights for the full sample to the sum for the
urban sample in the first three quarters of 1981. Note that this approach assumes that the poverty rate of urban
families relative to rural families does not change between the first three quarters and the final quarter of 1981.
Using this approach, the poverty rate for 1981 is 12.90 percent, which is 0.09 percentage points below the rate
calculated by simply excluding observations from the fourth quarter of 1981, suggesting a small downward bias in
the poverty rate we report for 1981. Based on this result, we suspect that the bias in other poverty measures for this
year is small.
47

B.

Measures of Consumption in the CE Survey

Expenditures: This summary measure includes all expenditures reported in the CE Interview
Survey except miscellaneous expenditures and cash contributions because some of these
expenditures are not collected in all interviews. Since 1980 a subset of miscellaneous
expenditures has been collected only in the fifth interview, and cash contributions are only
collected in the fifth interview for surveys conducted from the first quarter of 1980 through the
first quarter of 2001.
Consumption: Consumption includes all spending in our measure of total expenditures less
spending on out of pocket health care expenses, education, and payments to retirement accounts,
pension plans, and social security. In addition, housing and vehicle expenditures are converted
to service flows. For homeowners we subtract spending on mortgage interest, property taxes,
maintenance, repairs, insurance, and other expenses, and add the reported rental equivalent of the
home. For those in public or subsidized housing, we impute a rental value using the procedure
outlined in the text. For vehicle owners we subtract spending on recent purchases of new and
used vehicles as well vehicle finance charges. We then added the service flow value of all
vehicles owned by the family, as described in part D of this appendix.
Comparability over Time:
We make two minor adjustments to the measure of total expenditures provided in the CE Survey
to maintain a comparable definition of expenditures across our sample period. First, we add in
insurance payments and retirement contributions for the 1960-1961 and 1972-1973 surveys
because these categories were not treated as expenditures in these years. Second, the wording
for the question regarding spending on food at home in surveys conducted between 1982 and
1987 differed from other years. Several studies have noted that this wording change resulted in a
decrease in reported spending on food at home (Battistin 2003; Browning et al. 2003). To
correct for the effect of this change in the questionnaire, for the years 1984-1987 we multiply
spending on food at home by an adjustment factor which is equal to the ratio of average spending
on food at home from 1988 through 1990 to average spending on food at home from 1984
through 1987. These adjustment factors, which we estimate separately for different family types,
range from 1.12 to 1.30.
Additional adjustments are necessary to maintain a consistent definition of consumption across
our sample period. Because a rental equivalent is not reported in the 1960-1961 and 1980-1981
surveys, we impute a rental equivalent for these years. Using data from the 1984 survey, we
regress log reported rental equivalent on the log market value of the home, log total non-housing
expenditures, family size, and the sex and marital status of the family head. Estimates from
these regressions are used to impute a value of the rental equivalent for respondents in the 19801981 surveys. A similar approach is used to impute a rental equivalent value for the 1960-1961
surveys using data from the 1972-1973 surveys. In addition, the reported rental equivalent is top
coded, and the threshold value of this top code changes over time. In each year, we top code the
reported rental equivalent at the real value of the most restrictive of these top code thresholds
($1000 per month in 1988). Also, we do not observe whether a consumer unit resides in public
or subsidized housing prior to 1982, so a rental equivalent value for those in such housing is not
included in consumption prior to 1982. Estimates of the rental equivalent for those in public or
48

subsidized housing in the mid 1980s are small relative to total consumption, suggesting that this
exclusion is not likely to significantly bias our estimates for changes in poverty. Finally, the
availability of information on vehicles also changes during our sample period. See Section D
below for more details.
C.

Measures of Income in the CPS ASEC/ADF

ASEC/ADF respondents report annual measures of money income for the previous calendar
year. Respondents also report the dollar value of food stamps received by the household, as well
as whether household members received other noncash benefits including housing subsidies and
subsidies for reduced or free school lunch. Starting with the 1980 survey, the Census also
provides imputed values for these and other noncash benefits. For more details see U.S. Census
(various years-a,b), Appendices B and C.
Money Income: The Census definition of money income that is used to measure poverty.
After-Tax Money Income: adds to money income the value of tax credits such as the EITC, and
subtracts state and federal income taxes and payroll taxes, and includes capital gains and losses.
Federal income tax liabilities and credits and FICA taxes are calculated for all years using
TAXSIM (Feenberg and Coutts 1993). State taxes and credits are also calculated using
TAXSIM for the years 1977-2005. Prior to 1977 we calculate state taxes using IncTaxCalc
(Bakija, 2008). We confirm that in 1977 net state tax liabilities generated using IncTaxCalc
match very closely those generated using TAXSIM.
After-tax Money Income Plus Noncash Benefits: this adds to After-Tax Money Income the
cash value of food stamps, and imputed values for housing subsidies, school lunch programs,
Medicaid and Medicare, employer health benefits, and the net return on housing equity.
Face Value of Food Stamps: The value of food stamps for each family is determined by the
Census using reported information on the number of persons receiving food stamps in the
household and the reported total value of food stamps received.
Income Value of School Lunch Program: The Census imputes a value for lunch subsidies for
families that report having children who receive free or reduced price school lunch. The value is
determined using information on the dollar amount of subsidy per meal as reported by the
USDA. If a child participates in school lunch, it is assumed that the child receives that subsidy
type (reduced price or free) for the entire year.
Fungible Values of Medicaid and Medicare: The Census imputes a “fungible” value of
Medicaid or Medicare for families that include an individual who is reported to be covered by
Medicaid or Medicare. Fungible means that “Medicare and Medicaid benefits are counted as
income to the extent that they free up resources that could have been spent on medical care”
(U.S. Census various years-b). Thus, these programs have no income value if the family does
not have resources (the sum of money income, food stamps, and housing subsidies) that exceed
basic needs. If these resources do exceed basic needs, then the fungible value of medical
benefits is equal to the smaller of: a) the market value of these benefits and b) the value of
49

resources less basic needs. The market value of Medicaid is equal to mean government outlays
for families in a given state and risk class. The four risk classes are: 65 and over, blind and
disabled, 21-64 nondisabled, and less than 21 nondisabled. The market value of Medicare is
equal to mean government outlays for families in a given state and risk class. The two risk
classes are: 65 and over and blind and disabled.
Housing Subsidies: The Census imputes a value of housing subsidies for households that report
living in public housing or receiving a public rent subsidy. The value of the subsidy is calculated
as follows. Using data from the 1985 American Housing Survey (AHS), reported rent for
unsubsidized two-bedroom housing units is regressed on housing characteristics. Separate
regressions are estimated for each of four regions, and the coefficients from these models are
used to predict rent for those living in subsidized units in the AHS. The subsidy for those in
subsidized housing in the AHS sample is then calculated as the difference between out of pocket
rent and imputed total rent. Region-specific adjustment factors for smaller and larger units are
estimated using data on rent for units with different numbers of bedrooms in the 1985 AHS.
Thirty-six different subsidy values are calculated which vary by four regions, three income
brackets, and three different unit sizes. Because unit size is not observed in the ASEC/ADF, this
is imputed from family composition. Subsidy values for each year are based on estimates using
the 1985 data, but are updated to reflect changes in shelter costs using the CPI residential rent
index. Before 1985 housing subsidies in the ASEC/ADF were imputed using the 1979 or 1981
Annual Housing Survey.
Employer Contributions to Health Insurance: The Census imputes a value of health
insurance for persons who were covered by an employer health insurance plan. Using data from
the 1977 National Medical Care Expenditures Survey, the value of the employer contribution
was imputed as a function of observable characteristics including earnings, full-time/part-time,
industry, occupation, sector, public/private, residence, and personal characteristics of the worker
such as age, race, marital status, and education, and information on whether the employer paid
all, part, or none of the cost of health insurance as reported in the supplement.
Net Return on Home Equity (annuitized value): Using data from the 1985 or 1989 AHS, a
value of home equity is imputed for each ASEC/ADF household by statistically matching the
two surveys on observable characteristics including geographic location, income, household size,
number of living quarters, and the age, race, sex, and education of the household head. The
equity value of the home and property taxes for homeowners in the ASEC/ADF are determined
by using these values from a household with similar characteristics in the AHS. This equity is
converted to an annuity using a rate of return based on high grade municipal bonds from the
Standard & Poor’s series. The value of home equity is net of imputed property taxes.

50

D.

Estimating Vehicle Service Flows

Our measure of consumption replaces the purchase price of vehicles and vehicle
maintenance costs with the service flow value from owned vehicles. We improve upon previous
studies in how we calculate a flow that reflects the value that a consumer receives from owning a
car during the period. These studies have imputed flows based only on recent spending on
vehicles and descriptive characteristics of the family (Cutler and Katz 1991), recent spending on
vehicles, vehicle age, and descriptive characteristics of the family (Meyer and Sullivan 2003,
2004), or reported purchase prices and vehicle age (Slesnick 1993). Our approach provides two
important improvements upon previous work. First, in addition to vehicle age, our approach
uses detailed information for each vehicle (such as make, model, year, automatic transmission,
and other characteristics) to determine the market price. Second, we estimate depreciation rates
by comparing the reported purchase prices for similar vehicles of different ages. We use the
detailed expenditure data for owned vehicles from the 1980-2005 CE Surveys. A detailed
explanation of the procedure used to estimate these service flows along with the data are
available at www.nd.edu/~jsulliv4/vehicles.
D.1 Calculating the Market Price of a Vehicle
We determine a current market price for each of the 1.1 million vehicles in the data from
1980-2005 in one of three ways. First, for vehicles that were purchased within twelve months of
the interview and that have a reported purchase price (the estimation sample), we take the current
market price to be the reported purchase price. This estimation sample accounts for about 15
percent of all vehicles in the 1980-2005 surveys. Second, for vehicles that were purchased more
than twelve months prior to the interview and that have a reported purchase price (also about 15
percent of all vehicles), we specify the current market price as a function of the reported
purchase price and an estimated depreciation rate as explained below.
Finally, for the remaining 70 percent of vehicles, we impute a current market price
because the purchase price is not reported. Using the estimation sample, we regress the log real
purchase price on a cubic in vehicle age, vehicle characteristics, family characteristics, and
make-model-year fixed effects.49 The vehicle characteristics include indicators for whether the
vehicle has automatic transmission, power brakes, power steering, air conditioning, a diesel
engine, a sunroof, four-wheel drive, or is turbo charged. Family characteristics include log real
expenditures (excluding vehicles and health), family size, region, and the age and education of
the family head. Coefficient estimates from this regression are then used to calculate a predicted
log real purchase price for the ith vehicle ( xi β̂ ). The predicted current market value for each

49

76 percent of the vehicles without a reported purchase price can be matched to at least one vehicle in the
estimation sample with the same make, model, and year. Four-fifths of the remaining 24 percent do not have a
match because they are not a car, truck, or van so make and model are not observed. For those vehicles without a
reported purchase price that do not have the same make, model, and year as at least one vehicle in the estimation
sample, but do have the same make and year as a vehicle in the estimation sample (about 3 percent of all vehicles), a
separate regression is estimated that includes make-year fixed effects instead of make-model-year fixed effects.
51

vehicle without a reported purchase price is then equal to αˆ * exp( xi βˆ ) , where α̂ is the
coefficient on exp( x βˆ ) in a regression of yi on exp( x βˆ ) without a constant term.50
i

i

D.2 Estimating a Depreciation Rate and Service Flows
To estimate a depreciation rate for vehicles, we compare prices across vehicles of
different age, but with the same make, model, and year. In particular, from the estimation
sample we construct a subsample of vehicles that are in a make-model-year cell with at least two
vehicles that are not the same age. Using this sample, we regress the log real purchase price of
the vehicle on vehicle age and make-model-year fixed effects.51 From the coefficient on vehicle
age (β), we calculate the depreciation rate (δ): δ = 1 – EXP(β). The service flow is then the
product of this depreciation rate and the current market price. If the vehicle has a reported
purchase price but was not purchased within 12 months of the interview we calculate the service
flow as: (real reported purchase price)*δ(1- δ)t, where t is the number of years since the car was
purchased.
Although the 1972-1973 CE Survey data files include an inventory of vehicles owned, we
do not use these data to calculate service flows from vehicles for several reasons. First, we do
not observe the year the car was manufactured, only whether it was manufactured before or after
1967. Second, we do not observe the model for vehicles manufactured during or before 1967,
and for those manufactured after 1967 we only observe a broadly defined model group:
subcompact domestic, compact domestic, etc. Thus, rather than using the vehicle inventory data,
we impute service flows for owned automobiles using data on reported spending on new and
used automobile purchases during the survey year and the reported number of automobiles
owned during the year. Specifically, for a sample with positive spending on automobiles, we
regress annual spending for new and used automobiles on a quadratic in total (non-automobile)
spending and observable characteristics of the family including family income, family size, and
the age, sex, and education of the family head. Parameter estimates from these regressions are
used to predict spending on new and used car purchases for all families that own automobiles.
We calculate the service flow from automobiles as the product of predicted automobile spending,
the number of owned automobiles and a depreciate rate. This approach will understate total
automobile flows for some families because the number of automobiles is topcoded at 2. This
approach will overstate vehicle flows for families that dispose of an automobile during the
survey year if this automobile is included in the total count of automobiles owned. This
approach will also overstate vehicle flows for families that have owned their vehicles for an
extended time, because we are predicting the value based on recent automobile purchases. Note
that unlike our approach for 1980-2005, we calculate service flows only for automobiles, not for
other vehicles such as trucks, motorcycles, campers, etc., because we do not have reliable
information on the total number of each of these types of vehicles owned.

This adjustment is made because exp( xi βˆ ) will tend to underestimate yi.
The distribution of service flows does not differ noticeably when alternative specifications for depreciation are
estimated. For example, specifications that allow the depreciation rate to vary by age of the vehicle (by including a
cubic in vehicle age in the regression) yield similar results.
52

50
51

D.3 Validation
We validate our procedure for predicting the current market value of vehicles for those
observations where we do not have a purchase price by comparing the predicted values to
published values in National Automobile Dealers Association (NADA) guides. For a given year
of the CE Survey we take a random sample of 100 vehicles for which a purchase price was not
observed. We then find the average retail price of the vehicle reported in the NADA Official
Used Car Guide, using observable vehicle characteristics including make, model, year, number
of cylinders, and number of doors. In cases where a unique match is not found in the NADA
guide (for example, there might be multiple sub-models listed in the NADA guide), we use the
midpoint of the range of prices for the vehicles that match the description of the vehicle from the
CE Survey. For the sample of vehicles randomly drawn from the 2000 CE Survey, the
correlation between our imputed price and the 2000 NADA price was 0.88. Similarly, for a
sample of 100 cars with a reported purchase price, the correlation between the reported price and
the NADA price was 0.91.

53

Figure 1: Official and Alternative Income Poverty Rates, 1972-2005
0.16
0.15
0.14

Fraction Poor

0.13
Rates anchored
at the official
rate in 1980

0.12
0.11

Official Income Poverty (CPI-U)

0.1

Money Income (NAS Scale, CPI-U-RS)

0.09

After-Tax Money Income (NAS Scale, CPI-U-RS)
After-Tax Income + Noncash Benefits Excluding Home Equity (NAS Scale, CPI-U-RS)

0.08

04
20

02
20

00
20

98
19

96
19

94
19

92
19

90
19

88
19

86
19

84
19

82
19

80
19

78
19

76
19

74
19

19

72

0.07

Notes: The rates are anchored at the official rate in 1980. Data are from the CPS-ASEC/ADF. Official Income Poverty follows the U.S. Census definition of income
poverty using official thresholds. For measures other than the official one, the threshold in 1980 is equal to the value that yields a poverty rate equal to the official poverty
rate in 1980 (13.0 percent). The thresholds in 1980 are then adjusted overtime using the CPI-U-RS. Poverty status is determined at the family level and then person
weighted. After-Tax Money Income includes taxes and credits (calculated using TAXSIM). After-Tax Money Income + Noncash Benefits Excluding Home Equity also
includes food stamps and CPS-imputed measures of housing and school lunch subsidies, and the fungible value of Medicaid and Medicare. This last series is only
available starting with the 1980 CPS-ASEC/ADF. See Data Appendix for more details.

Figure 2: Consumption and Income Poverty Rates, 1972-2005
0.16
0.15
0.14

Fraction Poor

0.13
0.12
0.11
0.1

Official Income Poverty (CPI-U)
After-Tax Money Income (NAS Scale, CPI-U-RS)

0.09

Consumption (NAS Scale, CPI-U-RS)

0.08

Consumption Excluding Health Insurance (NAS Scale, CPI-U-RS)

04
20

02
20

00
20

98
19

96
19

94
19

92
19

90
19

88
19

86
19

84
19

82
19

80
19

78
19

76
19

74
19

19

72

0.07

Notes: The rates are anchored at the official rate in 1980. Poverty status is determined at the family level and then person weighted. Consumption data are from the CE
Survey and income data are from the CPS-ASEC/ADF. Official Income Poverty and After-Tax Money Income Poverty are as in Figure 1. CE Survey data are not available
for the years 1974-1979 and 1982-1983. Also, consumption data are not available for the years 1984-1987 for measures that include health insurance.

Figure 3: Consumption and Income Poverty Rates using Different Price Indices, 1972-2005
0.170
0.160
0.150
0.140

0.120
0.110
0.100
0.090
0.080

After-Tax Money Income (NAS Scale, CPI-U)

0.070

After-Tax Money Income (NAS Scale, CPI-U-RS)
After-Tax Money Income (NAS Scale, Adjusted CPI-U-RS)

0.060

Consumption Excluding Health Insurance (NAS Scale, CPI-U)

0.050

Consumption Excluding Health Insurance (NAS Scale, CPI-U-RS)

04
20

02
20

00
20

98
19

96
19

94
19

92
19

90
19

88
19

86
19

84
19

82
19

80
19

76
19

74
19

72
19

78

Consumption Excluding Health Insurance (NAS Scale, Adjusted CPI-U-RS)

0.040

19

Fraction Poor

0.130

Notes: The rates are anchored at the official rate in 1980. Consumption data are from the CE Survey and income data are from the CPS-ASEC/ADF. Poverty status is
determined at the family level and then person weighted. Adjusted CPI-U-RS subtracts 0.8 percentage points from the CPI-U-RS per year. See text for more details.

Figure 4: Official and Alternative Income Poverty Rates, Different Equivalence Scales and Resource Sharing Units, 1972-2005
0.16
0.15
0.14

Fraction Poor

0.13
0.12
0.11
Official Income Poverty (CPI-U)

0.1

Money Income (NAS Scale, CPI-U)

0.09

Money Income (NAS Scale, CPI-U-RS)
Household Money Income (NAS Scale, CPI-U-RS)

0.08

04
20

02
20

00
20

98
19

96
19

94
19

92
19

90
19

88
19

86
19

84
19

82
19

80
19

78
19

76
19

74
19

19

72

0.07

Notes: The rates are anchored at the official rate in 1980. Data are from the CPS-ASEC/ADF. Household level poverty is determined using the resources of all members
of the household, regardless of whether they are related. See notes to Figure 1.

Figure 5: Consumption and Income Deep Poverty Rates (Fraction below 50% of Threshold), 1980-2005
0.08

0.07

Official Income Poverty (CPI-U)
Money Income (NAS Scale, CPI-U-RS)
After-Tax Income + Noncash Benefits (NAS Scale, CPI-U-RS)
After-Tax Income + Noncash Benefits (NAS Scale, Adjusted CPI-U-RS)
Consumption (NAS Scale, CPI-U-RS)
Consumption (NAS Scale, Adjusted CPI-U-RS)

Fraction Poor

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

19
80
19
81
19
82
19
83
19
84
19
85
19
86
19
87
19
88
19
89
19
90
19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95
19
96
19
97
19
98
19
99
20
00
20
01
20
02
20
03
20
04
20
05

0.00

Notes: Poverty status is determined at the family level and then person weighted. Thresholds are 50 percent of the thresholds used in Figures 1-3. Consumption data are
from the CE Survey and income data are from the CPS-ASEC/ADF. After-Tax Income + Noncash Benefits includes taxes and credits (calculated using TAXSIM), food
stamps, and CPS-imputed measures of housing and school lunch subsidies, the fungible value of Medicaid and Medicare, the value of employer health benefits, and the
net return on home equity.

Figure 6: Percent Change in Average Poverty Gap Since 1980, Various Income and Consumption Measures, Poor Families, 1972-2005

0.200
0.150

Percent Change Since 1980

0.100
0.050
0.000
-0.050
-0.100
-0.150
Pre-Tax Money Income (NAS Scale, CPI-U-RS)

-0.200

After-Tax Income + Noncash Benefits (NAS Scale, CPI-U-RS)
After-Tax Income + Noncash Benefits (NAS Scale, Adjusted CPI-U-RS)

-0.250

Consumption Excluding Health Insurance (NAS Scale, CPI-U-RS)

04
20

02
20

00
20

98
19

96
19

94
19

92
19

90
19

88
19

86
19

84
19

82
19

80
19

19

76
19

74
19

72
19

78

Consumption Excluding Health Insurance (NAS Scale, Adjusted CPI-U-RS)

-0.300

Notes: The average gap (reported in Table 4) is calculated as the sum of the gap for each family in poverty divided by the total number of poor families. The gaps are
calculated using the same thresholds as in Figures 1-3. Consumption data are from the CE Survey and income data are from the CPS-ASEC/ADF.

Figure 7: Consumption and Income Relative Poverty (Fraction below 50% of Median), 1972-2005
0.23
0.22
0.21
0.2
0.19
Fraction Poor

0.18
0.17
0.16

Money Income (NAS Scale)
After-Tax Money Income (NAS Scale)
After-Tax Income + Noncash Benefits (NAS Scale)
Consumption (NAS Scale)
Consumption Excluding Health Insurance (NAS Scale)

0.15
0.14
0.13
0.12
0.11
0.1
0.09

04
20

02
20

00
20

98
19

96
19

94
19

92
19

90
19

88
19

86
19

84
19

82
19

80
19

78
19

76
19

74
19

19

72

0.08

Notes: Poverty status is determined at the family level and then person weighted. An individual is designated as poor if the measure of resouces falls below 50 percent of
the median of the individual weighted, scale-adjusted distribution for the respective resource measure. Consumption data are from the CE Survey and income data are
from the CPS-ASEC/ADF.

Table 1: Consumption and Income Poverty Rates, 1960-2005
Income Measures of Poverty

Scale
Year
1960-61/1963
1972
1973
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
Change:
1961-1972
1972-1980
1980-1990
1990-2000
2000-2005
1980-2005
1972-2005

Official
Income
Poverty
Official
(1)
0.195
0.119
0.111
0.130
0.140
0.150
0.152
0.144
0.140
0.136
0.134
0.130
0.128
0.135
0.142
0.148
0.151
0.145
0.138
0.137
0.133
0.127
0.119
0.113
0.117
0.121
0.125
0.127
0.126

Money
Income
NAS
(2)
0.236
0.140
0.131
0.130
0.137
0.147
0.151
0.143
0.138
0.133
0.131
0.127
0.124
0.128
0.134
0.140
0.143
0.135
0.126
0.126
0.120
0.114
0.107
0.101
0.105
0.108
0.113
0.116
0.114

After-Tax
Money
Income
NAS
(3)
0.258
0.142
0.135
0.130
0.142
0.153
0.158
0.151
0.144
0.140
0.130
0.125
0.122
0.126
0.131
0.136
0.138
0.125
0.113
0.111
0.105
0.099
0.093
0.088
0.090
0.094
0.096
0.098
0.097

-0.076
0.011
0.005
-0.022
0.013
-0.004
0.007

-0.096
-0.010
-0.002
-0.027
0.013
-0.016
-0.026

-0.116
-0.013
-0.003
-0.039
0.010
-0.032
-0.045

Consumption Measures of Poverty

After-Tax Income
+ Noncash
Benefits Excluding
Home Equity
NAS
(4)

After-Tax
Income +
Noncash
Benefits
NAS
(5)

0.130
0.143
0.154
0.160
0.152
0.147
0.140
0.129
0.127
0.120
0.124
0.128
0.133
0.133
0.121
0.110
0.110
0.106
0.100
0.093
0.091
0.093
0.096
0.099
0.101
0.100

0.130
0.134
0.152
0.159
0.150
0.149
0.151
0.138
0.132
0.130
0.133
0.136
0.139
0.141
0.126
0.117
0.117
0.114
0.108
0.100
0.096
0.098
0.102
0.107
0.108
0.102

-0.006
-0.033
0.009
-0.030

0.004
-0.037
0.006
-0.027

Consumption
Excluding
Health
Core
Non-housing
Consumption Insurance Consumption Consumption Expenditures
NAS
NAS
NAS
NAS
NAS
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
0.206
0.181
0.142
0.190
0.122
0.128
0.171
0.110
0.130
0.130
0.130
0.130
0.130
0.130
0.128
0.128
0.125
0.131

0.132
0.121
0.125
0.128
0.131
0.123
0.117
0.118
0.119
0.109
0.103
0.104
0.100
0.098
0.093
0.099
0.088
0.086

-0.005
-0.026
-0.014
-0.044

0.140
0.140
0.141
0.132
0.132
0.122
0.131
0.134
0.136
0.131
0.122
0.125
0.122
0.110
0.104
0.107
0.103
0.102
0.099
0.105
0.096
0.091

0.147
0.144
0.146
0.140
0.140
0.128
0.135
0.136
0.138
0.128
0.125
0.122
0.115
0.105
0.102
0.107
0.100
0.092
0.090
0.089
0.080
0.078

-0.064
-0.012
0.001
-0.028
-0.012
-0.039
-0.051

-0.060
0.005
-0.035
-0.022
-0.052
-0.112

0.145
0.133
0.138
0.142
0.151
0.141
0.135
0.147
0.145
0.133
0.128
0.134
0.127
0.130
0.127
0.137
0.131
0.123

0.008
-0.011
-0.004
-0.007

0.135
0.138
0.135
0.130
0.131
0.114
0.126
0.126
0.126
0.123
0.118
0.124
0.125
0.114
0.105
0.113
0.112
0.107
0.103
0.108
0.091
0.085
-0.059
0.008
-0.004
-0.014
-0.027
-0.045
-0.037

Notes: The rates are anchored at the official rate in 1980, meaning that the thresholds for each resource measure in 1980 are adjusted proportionately to yield a
poverty rate equal to the official poverty rate in 1980 (13.0 percent). The 1980 thresholds are then adjusted over time using the CPI-U-RS (except for Column 1).
Poverty status is determined at the family level and then person weighted. Consumption data are from the CE Survey and income data are from the CPSASEC/ADF. After-Tax Money Income includes taxes and credits (calculated using TAXSIM). After-tax Income + Noncash Benefits also includes food stamps and
CPS-imputed measures of housing and school lunch subsidies, the fungible value of Medicaid and Medicare, the value of employer health benefits, and the net return
on home equity. Consumption measures include the imputed value of health insurance unless noted otherwise. Core Consumption includes key components that
compare more favorably to NIPA data totals including food at home, housing, utilities, transportation, and gasoline and motor oil. Data from the 1960s are for 19601961 (CE Survey) or 1963 (CPS). CE Survey data are not available for the years 1962-1971, 1974-1979 and 1982-1983. Also,
consumption measures that include health insurance are not available for 1984-1987.

Table 2: Consumption and Income Poverty Rates using Different Price Indices, 1960-2005
Income Measures of Poverty
Consumption Measures of Poverty
Consumption
Consumption
Consumption
After-Tax After-Tax After-Tax
Excluding
Excluding
Excluding
Money
Money
Money
Health
Health
Health
Income
Income
Income
Consumption Insurance Consumption Insurance Consumption Insurance
Adjusted
Adjusted
Adjusted
CPI-U
CPI-U-RS CPI-U-RS
CPI-U
CPI-U
CPI-U-RS
CPI-U-RS
CPI-U-RS
CPI-U-RS
Price Index
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Year
1960-61/1963
0.214
0.258
0.323
0.158
0.206
0.287
1972
0.122
0.142
0.159
0.109
0.142
0.165
1973
0.114
0.135
0.148
0.103
0.128
0.145
1980
0.130
0.130
0.130
0.130
0.130
0.130
0.130
0.130
0.130
1981
0.145
0.142
0.140
0.132
0.133
0.130
0.128
0.127
0.127
1982
0.156
0.153
0.149
1983
0.158
0.158
0.152
1984
0.152
0.151
0.144
0.142
0.140
0.131
1985
0.146
0.144
0.136
0.142
0.140
0.129
1986
0.141
0.140
0.129
0.142
0.141
0.125
1987
0.132
0.130
0.120
0.135
0.132
0.114
1988
0.128
0.125
0.114
0.136
0.137
0.132
0.132
0.112
0.110
1989
0.126
0.122
0.108
0.127
0.129
0.121
0.122
0.098
0.101
1990
0.131
0.126
0.112
0.134
0.138
0.125
0.131
0.102
0.107
1991
0.136
0.131
0.115
0.138
0.145
0.128
0.134
0.102
0.106
1992
0.143
0.136
0.117
0.145
0.150
0.131
0.136
0.102
0.105
1993
0.146
0.138
0.118
0.136
0.145
0.123
0.131
0.091
0.097
1994
0.133
0.125
0.105
0.130
0.140
0.117
0.122
0.086
0.090
1995
0.122
0.113
0.094
0.133
0.141
0.118
0.125
0.085
0.087
1996
0.121
0.111
0.090
0.137
0.142
0.119
0.122
0.083
0.083
1997
0.115
0.105
0.085
0.124
0.130
0.109
0.110
0.074
0.076
1998
0.108
0.099
0.079
0.117
0.124
0.103
0.104
0.067
0.066
1999
0.101
0.093
0.071
0.121
0.126
0.104
0.107
0.065
0.066
2000
0.097
0.088
0.067
0.116
0.123
0.100
0.103
0.060
0.061
2001
0.099
0.090
0.070
0.114
0.121
0.098
0.102
0.058
0.059
2002
0.102
0.094
0.071
0.109
0.117
0.093
0.099
0.053
0.054
2003
0.105
0.096
0.074
0.115
0.125
0.099
0.105
0.055
0.057
2004
0.107
0.098
0.075
0.106
0.115
0.088
0.096
0.047
0.049
2005
0.106
0.097
0.074
0.102
0.106
0.086
0.091
0.046
0.048
Change:
1961-1972
-0.092
-0.116
-0.164
-0.050
-0.064
-0.122
1972-1980
0.008
-0.013
-0.029
0.021
-0.012
-0.035
1980-1990
0.002
-0.003
-0.018
0.004
0.009
-0.005
0.001
-0.028
-0.023
1990-2000
-0.034
-0.039
-0.045
-0.018
-0.015
-0.026
-0.028
-0.042
-0.045
2000-2005
0.009
0.010
0.007
-0.014
-0.017
-0.014
-0.012
-0.014
-0.014
1980-2005
-0.024
-0.032
-0.056
-0.028
-0.024
-0.044
-0.039
-0.084
-0.082
1972-2005
-0.015
-0.045
-0.085
-0.003
-0.051
-0.117
Notes: The rates are anchored at the official rate in 1980. Each series is adjusted using the NAS recommend equivalence scale. See notes
to Figure 3 and Table 1.

Table 3: Consumption and Income Deep Poverty Rates (Fraction below 50% of Threshold) and Near Poverty Rates (Fraction below 150% of Threshold), 1960-2005
50 % of Threshold
150 % of Threshold

Scale

Official
Income
Poverty
Official

Consumption
After-Tax
Excluding
Income +
Health
Noncash
Money
Benefits Consumption Consumption Insurance
Income
NAS
NAS
NAS
NAS
NAS
Adjusted
Adjusted
CPI-U-RS CPI-U-RS CPI-U-RS CPI-U-RS
CPI-U-RS
CPI-U-RS
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
0.086
0.034
0.041
0.018
0.037
0.013
0.043
0.032
0.032
0.018
0.018
0.017
0.047
0.035
0.034
0.016
0.015
0.016
0.054
0.039
0.038
0.057
0.041
0.040
0.054
0.039
0.036
0.015
0.050
0.037
0.035
0.020
0.051
0.038
0.034
0.017
0.051
0.035
0.032
0.013
0.050
0.036
0.032
0.014
0.010
0.012
0.046
0.033
0.030
0.013
0.010
0.013
0.048
0.033
0.028
0.014
0.010
0.013
0.052
0.035
0.030
0.010
0.007
0.010
0.056
0.039
0.033
0.012
0.009
0.012
0.058
0.039
0.033
0.010
0.008
0.011
0.055
0.033
0.028
0.008
0.005
0.007
0.048
0.032
0.027
0.009
0.006
0.009
0.049
0.031
0.025
0.009
0.005
0.009
0.049
0.033
0.027
0.008
0.005
0.008
0.047
0.031
0.027
0.009
0.005
0.009
0.043
0.030
0.025
0.010
0.005
0.010
0.040
0.029
0.024
0.008
0.005
0.008
0.044
0.033
0.028
0.008
0.005
0.008
0.045
0.034
0.028
0.008
0.005
0.007
0.049
0.037
0.030
0.009
0.005
0.009
0.050
0.038
0.031
0.008
0.004
0.008
0.051
0.036
0.029
0.007
0.004
0.007
After-Tax
Income +
Noncash
Benefits
NAS

Official
Income
Poverty
Official

Money
Income
NAS

After-Tax
Income +
Noncash
Benefits
NAS

Consumption
After-Tax
Excluding
Income +
Health
Noncash
Benefits Consumption Consumption Insurance
NAS
NAS
NAS
NAS
Adjusted
Adjusted
CPI-U-RS CPI-U-RS
CPI-U-RS
CPI-U-RS
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
0.487
0.358
0.333
0.292
0.348
0.348
0.331
0.290
0.365
0.361
0.349
0.299
0.303
0.285
0.340
0.280
0.325
0.276
0.334
0.248
0.326
0.244
0.326
0.290
0.321
0.237
0.315
0.272
0.315
0.239
0.316
0.271
0.328
0.239
0.310
0.263
0.336
0.240
0.321
0.266
0.348
0.236
0.302
0.247
0.329
0.216
0.302
0.243
0.331
0.204
0.306
0.243
0.332
0.199
0.305
0.234
0.324
0.190
0.289
0.214
0.304
0.174
0.280
0.205
0.304
0.162
0.283
0.204
0.307
0.154
0.273
0.193
0.297
0.151
0.266
0.186
0.290
0.153
0.256
0.176
0.281
0.152
0.270
0.180
0.299
0.149
0.257
0.168
0.282
0.143
0.249
0.155
0.273

CPI-U
CPI-U
CPI-U-RS CPI-U-RS
Price Index
(1)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Year
1960-61/1963 0.078
0.339
0.422
1972
0.038
0.221
0.260
1973
0.034
0.207
0.244
1980
0.044
0.232
0.238
0.292
1981
0.049
0.247
0.247
0.294
1982
0.056
0.255
0.257
0.307
1983
0.059
0.256
0.261
0.315
1984
0.055
0.243
0.245
0.300
1985
0.052
0.239
0.241
0.299
1986
0.053
0.229
0.231
0.296
1987
0.052
0.224
0.223
0.270
1988
0.052
0.222
0.221
0.269
1989
0.049
0.220
0.216
0.265
1990
0.052
0.227
0.223
0.271
1991
0.056
0.238
0.231
0.274
1992
0.061
0.245
0.238
0.278
1993
0.062
0.250
0.241
0.279
1994
0.059
0.243
0.232
0.260
1995
0.053
0.235
0.223
0.250
1996
0.054
0.234
0.220
0.248
1997
0.054
0.225
0.211
0.240
1998
0.051
0.215
0.200
0.225
1999
0.047
0.210
0.193
0.216
2000
0.045
0.202
0.187
0.208
2001
0.048
0.208
0.192
0.205
2002
0.049
0.214
0.198
0.209
2003
0.053
0.217
0.201
0.207
2004
0.054
0.216
0.202
0.206
2005
0.054
0.215
0.199
0.200
Change:
1961-1972
-0.040
-0.044
-0.017
-0.118
-0.163
-0.129
1972-1980
0.006
0.001
0.000
0.011
-0.021
-0.027
1980-1990
0.008
0.006
0.001
-0.003
-0.004
-0.008
-0.004
-0.005
-0.016
-0.021
-0.053
-0.032
-0.078
-0.003
1990-2000
-0.007
-0.008
-0.003
-0.004
-0.006
-0.005
-0.005
-0.025
-0.036
-0.063
-0.085
-0.043
-0.077
-0.031
2000-2005
0.009
0.010
0.006
0.004
-0.001
-0.001
-0.001
0.013
0.013
-0.007
-0.011
-0.024
-0.038
-0.024
1980-2005
0.010
0.008
0.004
-0.003
-0.011
-0.014
-0.010
-0.016
-0.039
-0.092
-0.149
-0.100
-0.193
-0.058
1972-2005
0.016
0.009
-0.010
-0.061
-0.085
Notes: Poverty status is determined at the family level and then person weighted. Thresholds are 50 percent and 150 percent of the thresholds used in Tables 1 and 2. Consumption data are from the
CE Survey and income data are from the CPS-ASEC/ADF.

Table 4: Average Poverty Gap, Various Income and Consumption Measures, Poor Families, 1960-2005
After-Tax After-Tax
Consumption
Official
After-Tax Income + Income +
Excluding
Income
Money
Money
Noncash Noncash
Health
Poverty
Income
Income
Benefits Benefits Consumption Consumption Insurance
Official
NAS
NAS
NAS
NAS
NAS
NAS
NAS
Scale
Adjusted
Adjusted
CPI-U
CPI-U-RS CPI-U-RS CPI-U-RS CPI-U-RS CPI-U-RS
CPI-U-RS
CPI-U-RS
Price Index
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Year
1960-61/1963 13,757
6,383
5,920
4,697
1972
10,777
5,227
5,022
3,986
1973
10,515
5,100
4,916
3,941
1980
10,628
5,265
5,024
6,125
5,043
3,901
3,212
3,866
1981
11,200
5,469
5,120
6,414
5,293
3,710
3,047
3,699
1982
11,998
5,803
5,474
6,666
5,499
1983
11,836
5,776
5,437
6,617
5,423
1984
11,541
5,665
5,356
6,526
5,359
3,779
1985
11,271
5,631
5,290
6,460
5,301
3,895
1986
11,283
5,665
5,293
6,214
5,102
3,827
1987
11,373
5,686
5,379
6,206
5,117
3,681
1988
11,160
5,559
5,306
6,250
5,148
3,967
3,219
3,781
1989
11,093
5,519
5,256
6,184
5,089
3,839
3,185
3,723
1990
11,012
5,576
5,296
6,017
4,953
3,849
3,104
3,754
1991
11,306
5,686
5,359
6,132
5,076
3,604
2,862
3,487
1992
11,577
5,839
5,522
6,338
5,208
3,491
2,739
3,548
1993
11,738
5,848
5,578
6,404
5,255
3,366
2,709
3,442
1994
11,658
5,876
5,563
6,238
5,116
3,362
2,585
3,477
1995
10,990
5,775
5,467
6,145
5,047
3,422
2,669
3,494
1996
10,769
5,711
5,437
6,049
5,000
3,539
2,773
3,562
1997
11,033
5,852
5,622
6,242
5,219
3,565
2,737
3,582
1998
10,918
5,941
5,663
6,296
5,317
3,403
2,695
3,428
1999
10,515
5,754
5,457
6,159
5,257
3,620
2,922
3,587
2000
2001

10,157
10,345

5,647
5,854

5,401
5,639

6,130
6,376

5,284
5,584

3,552
3,442

2,936
2,728

3,545
3,409

2002

10,367

5,894

5,616

6,412

5,562

3,439

2,722

3,427

2003
10,742
6,071
5,893
6,527
5,680
3,432
2,742
3,494
2004
10,859
6,149
5,883
6,589
5,638
3,420
2,830
3,356
2005
10,617
6,100
5,867
6,581
5,609
3,474
2,763
3,555
% Change
1961-1972
-21.66% -18.11% -15.17%
-15.14%
1972-1980
-1.38%
0.73%
0.04%
-3.01%
1980-1990
3.61%
5.90%
5.40%
-1.78%
-1.79%
-1.31%
-3.35%
-2.88%
1990-2000
-7.76%
1.28%
2.00%
1.89%
6.70%
-7.73%
-5.41%
-5.57%
2000-2005
4.53%
8.02%
8.62%
7.36%
6.13%
-2.19%
-5.90%
0.27%
1980-2005
-0.10%
15.86%
16.78%
7.44%
11.21%
-10.94%
-13.98%
-8.04%
1972-2005
-1.48%
16.70%
16.82%
-10.81%
Notes: The amounts are in 2005 dollars. The average gap is calculated as the sum of the gap for each family in
poverty divided by the total number of poor families. Consumption data are from the CE Survey and income data
are from the CPS-ASEC/ADF. See notes for Figure 6.

Table 5: Consumption and Income Relative Poverty (Fraction below 50% of Median), 1960-2005
Income Measures
Consumption Measures
After-Tax
Consumption
After-Tax
Income +
Excluding
Money
Money
Noncash
Health
Income
Income
Benefits
Consumption
Insurance
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Year
1960-1961/1963
0.191
0.164
0.107
1972
0.184
0.158
0.104
1973
0.181
0.152
0.104
1980
0.199
0.159
0.134
0.100
0.109
1981
0.203
0.163
0.144
0.087
0.098
1982
0.209
0.173
0.157
1983
0.216
0.181
0.164
1984
0.213
0.182
0.164
0.123
1985
0.212
0.178
0.165
0.129
1986
0.213
0.180
0.167
0.125
1987
0.216
0.186
0.174
0.121
1988
0.215
0.181
0.171
0.115
0.119
1989
0.216
0.182
0.170
0.109
0.115
1990
0.214
0.181
0.169
0.113
0.115
1991
0.219
0.183
0.173
0.118
0.112
1992
0.223
0.186
0.174
0.118
0.112
1993
0.223
0.186
0.175
0.118
0.113
1994
0.221
0.178
0.170
0.115
0.108
1995
0.218
0.171
0.162
0.110
0.106
1996
0.219
0.172
0.165
0.114
0.111
1997
0.220
0.172
0.165
0.110
0.106
1998
0.220
0.171
0.165
0.110
0.103
1999
0.219
0.171
0.162
0.114
0.107
2000
0.213
0.169
0.160
0.111
0.103
2001
0.219
0.168
0.159
0.116
0.107
2002
0.220
0.169
0.161
0.117
0.108
2003
0.224
0.175
0.167
0.118
0.107
2004
0.221
0.174
0.167
0.117
0.105
2005
0.219
0.173
0.167
0.116
0.102
Change:
1961-1972
-0.007
-0.006
-0.003
1972-1980
0.015
0.001
0.005
1980-1990
0.015
0.022
0.036
0.012
0.006
1990-2000
-0.001
-0.012
-0.009
-0.001
-0.011
2000-2005
0.007
0.004
0.007
0.004
-0.001
1980-2005
0.020
0.014
0.034
0.015
-0.006
1972-2005
0.035
0.015
-0.002
Notes: An individual is designated as poor if family resources fall below 50 percent of the median
of the individual weighted, NAS scale-adjusted distribution for the respective resource measure.
Consumption data are from the CE Survey and income data are from the CPS-ASEC/ADF.

Table 6: Consumption and Income Poverty by Family Type, 1960-2005
Single Parent Families
Married Parent Families

After-Tax
Income
(1)
0.602
0.484
0.471
0.421
0.435
0.479
0.478
0.455
0.450
0.462
0.434
0.426
0.408
0.415
0.429
0.428
0.423
0.387
0.341
0.335
0.323
0.289
0.272
0.242
0.249
0.246
0.266
0.260
0.267

Consumption
Excluding
Health
Insurance
(2)
0.466
0.380
0.378
0.369
0.353

After-Tax
Income
(3)
0.223
0.097
0.089
0.093
0.107
0.122
0.129
0.123
0.113
0.101
0.091
0.083
0.084
0.090
0.091
0.093
0.096
0.083
0.072
0.069
0.063
0.059
0.053
0.052
0.050
0.053
0.052
0.052
0.052

Consumption
Excluding
Health
Insurance
(4)
0.192
0.124
0.102
0.100
0.104

Single Individuals

After-Tax
Income
(5)
0.304
0.188
0.172
0.143
0.163
0.163
0.174
0.160
0.156
0.157
0.141
0.141
0.135
0.136
0.144
0.150
0.155
0.149
0.142
0.135
0.138
0.134
0.132
0.126
0.132
0.142
0.144
0.148
0.150

Consumption
Excluding
Health
Insurance
(6)
0.147
0.119
0.110
0.136
0.130

Married without Children

After-Tax
Income
(7)
0.135
0.052
0.050
0.039
0.049
0.055
0.056
0.055
0.053
0.046
0.041
0.041
0.040
0.040
0.039
0.042
0.046
0.042
0.041
0.041
0.035
0.036
0.038
0.038
0.042
0.040
0.041
0.046
0.040

Consumption
Excluding
Health
Insurance
(8)
0.087
0.059
0.040
0.041
0.041

Head 65 and Over

After-Tax
Income
(9)
0.429
0.244
0.223
0.157
0.152
0.143
0.141
0.127
0.124
0.125
0.123
0.112
0.107
0.108
0.107
0.116
0.112
0.100
0.086
0.093
0.089
0.086
0.081
0.082
0.081
0.090
0.086
0.090
0.086

Consumption
Excluding
Health
Insurance
(10)
0.343
0.231
0.225
0.191
0.180

Year
1960-61/1963
1972
1973
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
0.356
0.132
0.138
0.040
0.148
1985
0.332
0.123
0.140
0.050
0.173
1986
0.380
0.124
0.124
0.047
0.146
1987
0.371
0.114
0.111
0.041
0.133
1988
0.380
0.116
0.094
0.035
0.137
1989
0.339
0.113
0.080
0.036
0.125
1990
0.329
0.121
0.115
0.039
0.131
1991
0.348
0.130
0.115
0.040
0.117
1992
0.334
0.129
0.114
0.037
0.115
1993
0.329
0.123
0.107
0.038
0.116
1994
0.300
0.112
0.101
0.047
0.101
1995
0.299
0.125
0.100
0.031
0.101
1996
0.315
0.115
0.096
0.037
0.092
1997
0.278
0.102
0.094
0.034
0.082
1998
0.254
0.104
0.095
0.033
0.070
1999
0.245
0.105
0.105
0.033
0.083
2000
0.233
0.100
0.100
0.034
0.084
2001
0.258
0.091
0.103
0.031
0.074
2002
0.238
0.089
0.106
0.030
0.075
2003
0.249
0.099
0.102
0.039
0.078
2004
0.222
0.095
0.092
0.040
0.068
2005
0.192
0.087
0.097
0.033
0.075
Change:
1961-1972
-0.118
-0.086
-0.126
-0.068
-0.117
-0.028
-0.083
-0.029
-0.185
-0.113
1972-1980
-0.063
-0.011
-0.004
-0.024
-0.045
0.017
-0.013
-0.017
-0.088
-0.039
1980-1990
-0.006
-0.039
-0.003
0.021
-0.007
-0.020
0.001
-0.002
-0.049
-0.060
1990-2000
-0.173
-0.096
-0.038
-0.020
-0.010
-0.016
-0.002
-0.005
-0.027
-0.047
2000-2005
0.025
-0.041
-0.001
-0.013
0.024
-0.002
0.002
-0.001
0.004
-0.010
1980-2005
-0.154
-0.177
-0.041
-0.013
0.007
-0.038
0.001
-0.008
-0.071
-0.117
1972-2005
-0.217
-0.188
-0.045
-0.037
-0.038
-0.022
-0.012
-0.026
-0.159
-0.156
Notes: Poverty status is determined at the family level and then person weighted. For each measure, thresholds are the same as those used in Figures 1-3. Thus,
thresholds are anchored in 1980 for the full sample, rather than for each demographic group. Consumption data are from the CE Survey and income data are from the
CPS-ASEC/ADF. Each series is adjusted using the NAS recommend equivalence scale. See notes to Figures 1-3 for additional details.

Table 7: Average Poverty Gap by Family Type, Poor Families, 1960-2005
Single Parent Families
Married Parent Families

After-Tax
Income
(1)
9,097
6,834
6,799
6,720
6,998
7,202
7,265
7,174
7,080
7,161
7,322
7,424
7,380
7,378
7,358
7,657
7,489
7,365
7,289
7,228
7,660
7,517
7,337
7,427
7,921
7,859
8,108
8,071
8,055

Consumption
Excluding
Health
Insurance
(2)
5,645
5,323
5,444
5,093
5,141

After-Tax
Income
(3)
7,850
7,259
7,081
7,459
6,958
7,393
7,145
7,099
7,108
6,911
7,352
7,406
6,829
6,873
7,410
7,234
7,425
7,373
6,835
7,033
7,500
7,641
7,297
7,358
7,805
7,682
8,002
7,828
7,873

Consumption
Excluding
Health
Insurance
(4)
6,343
5,174
5,083
4,968
4,636

Single Individuals

After-Tax
Income
(5)
4,394
4,061
3,855
3,919
4,083
4,152
4,193
4,144
3,983
4,143
4,172
4,089
4,127
4,088
4,065
4,242
4,352
4,376
4,513
4,363
4,513
4,656
4,610
4,511
4,730
4,751
4,906
4,882
4,997

Consumption
Excluding
Health
Insurance
(6)
2,499
2,614
2,637
3,258
2,738

Married without Children

After-Tax
Income
(7)
5,414
5,555
5,354
5,496
5,869
5,836
6,063
5,552
5,738
5,861
5,738
5,341
5,445
5,877
5,397
5,551
5,793
5,634
5,773
5,972
5,779
6,039
6,143
6,486
6,102
6,490
6,543
6,442
6,380

Consumption
Excluding Health
Insurance
(8)
3,877
3,589
3,261
3,080
3,404

Head 65 and Over

After-Tax
Income
(9)
4,182
3,199
3,113
2,695
2,688
3,088
3,000
2,736
2,876
2,807
2,805
2,759
2,828
2,874
2,896
3,103
3,132
3,501
3,329
3,371
3,567
3,788
3,325
3,433
3,389
3,455
3,820
4,141
3,851

Consumption
Excluding
Health
Insurance
(10)
3,417
3,079
3,150
2,956
2,880

Year
1960-61/1963
1972
1973
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
4,791
5,011
3,012
3,278
2,543
1985
4,834
5,583
3,087
3,274
2,696
1986
4,816
4,877
2,964
3,489
2,766
1987
4,643
4,612
2,740
2,731
2,856
1988
5,251
4,587
2,607
2,395
2,712
1989
4,701
4,567
2,904
3,122
2,589
1990
4,692
4,806
3,002
3,172
2,500
1991
4,429
4,608
2,555
2,977
2,264
1992
4,589
4,553
2,605
2,616
2,395
1993
4,518
4,467
2,511
2,437
2,323
1994
4,357
4,372
2,646
3,180
2,328
1995
4,203
4,557
2,884
2,433
2,144
1996
4,276
4,305
2,903
3,450
2,221
1997
4,282
4,598
2,972
3,209
2,134
1998
4,103
4,270
2,747
2,518
2,554
1999
4,278
4,346
3,080
3,051
2,565
2000
3,992
4,715
3,024
2,825
2,386
2001
3,903
4,639
2,912
2,835
2,027
2002
3,720
4,397
3,028
2,905
2,536
2003
3,981
4,419
3,125
3,076
2,338
2004
3,653
4,457
2,984
2,695
2,400
2005
4,106
4,638
3,153
2,961
2,399
% Change
1961-1972
-24.88%
-5.70%
-7.52%
-18.43%
-7.59%
4.60%
2.61%
-7.41%
-23.50%
-9.90%
1972-1980
-1.66%
-4.33%
2.75%
-3.98%
-3.48%
24.65%
-1.06%
-14.19%
-15.75%
-4.00%
1980-1990
9.78%
-7.87%
-7.86%
-3.26%
4.31%
-7.86%
6.93%
2.97%
6.64%
-15.42%
1990-2000
0.66%
-14.91%
7.06%
-1.89%
10.35%
0.73%
10.37%
-10.91%
19.43%
-4.55%
2000-2005
8.46%
2.85%
7.00%
-1.64%
10.77%
4.26%
-1.65%
4.81%
12.18%
0.55%
1980-2005
19.86%
-19.37%
5.56%
-6.65%
27.51%
-3.23%
16.07%
-3.85%
42.88%
-18.81%
1972-2005
17.88%
-22.86%
8.45%
-10.36%
23.07%
20.62%
14.85%
-17.50%
20.37%
-22.06%
Notes: The amounts are in 2005 dollars. Consumption data are from the CE Survey and income data are from the CPS-ASEC/ADF. Each series is adjusted using the NAS
recommend equivalence scale. See notes to Figure 6.

Table 8: Consumption and Income Relative Poverty (Fraction below 50% of Median) by Family Type, 1960-2005
Single Parent Families
Married Parent Families
Single Individuals
Married without Children

After-Tax
Income
(1)
0.490
0.518
0.504
0.471
0.469
0.507
0.511
0.506
0.505
0.527
0.520
0.507
0.500
0.499
0.511
0.509
0.492
0.470
0.437
0.432
0.439
0.419
0.409
0.394
0.384
0.376
0.396
0.390
0.397

Consumption
Excluding
Health
Insurance
(2)
0.267
0.292
0.331
0.320
0.289

After-Tax
Income
(3)
0.128
0.110
0.104
0.119
0.127
0.142
0.153
0.152
0.145
0.142
0.145
0.141
0.145
0.145
0.145
0.143
0.144
0.133
0.126
0.128
0.124
0.123
0.123
0.122
0.117
0.120
0.120
0.115
0.114

Consumption
Excluding
Health
Insurance
(4)
0.097
0.087
0.081
0.081
0.076

After-Tax
Income
(5)
0.229
0.201
0.189
0.169
0.178
0.179
0.196
0.190
0.185
0.193
0.197
0.191
0.185
0.185
0.187
0.193
0.201
0.204
0.200
0.198
0.206
0.209
0.210
0.200
0.211
0.215
0.226
0.229
0.230

Consumption
Excluding
Health
Insurance
(6)
0.069
0.094
0.091
0.121
0.101

After-Tax
Income
(7)
0.086
0.057
0.056
0.049
0.057
0.065
0.065
0.069
0.069
0.062
0.064
0.063
0.063
0.062
0.060
0.062
0.067
0.067
0.063
0.065
0.064
0.062
0.075
0.071
0.077
0.071
0.075
0.079
0.074

Consumption
Excluding
Health
Insurance
(8)
0.042
0.043
0.029
0.033
0.029

Head 65 and Over

After-Tax
Income
(9)
0.280
0.270
0.251
0.210
0.185
0.173
0.173
0.171
0.175
0.184
0.203
0.200
0.197
0.184
0.180
0.188
0.177
0.171
0.164
0.171
0.175
0.185
0.183
0.201
0.196
0.201
0.205
0.203
0.199

Consumption
Excluding
Health
Insurance
(10)
0.188
0.177
0.189
0.159
0.139

Year
1960-61/1963
1972
1973
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
0.322
0.116
0.123
0.034
0.121
1985
0.314
0.116
0.124
0.044
0.151
1986
0.347
0.109
0.110
0.040
0.131
1987
0.348
0.104
0.104
0.034
0.123
1988
0.361
0.103
0.086
0.025
0.122
1989
0.325
0.106
0.076
0.033
0.119
1990
0.294
0.104
0.104
0.033
0.114
1991
0.305
0.106
0.094
0.031
0.094
1992
0.287
0.106
0.094
0.027
0.089
1993
0.294
0.107
0.089
0.027
0.099
1994
0.269
0.097
0.091
0.042
0.088
1995
0.260
0.105
0.088
0.025
0.088
1996
0.293
0.102
0.087
0.036
0.081
1997
0.265
0.099
0.091
0.033
0.076
1998
0.250
0.103
0.094
0.033
0.069
1999
0.244
0.105
0.105
0.033
0.083
2000
0.234
0.101
0.100
0.034
0.085
2001
0.272
0.096
0.106
0.034
0.078
2002
0.258
0.098
0.113
0.036
0.083
2003
0.252
0.101
0.104
0.040
0.081
2004
0.237
0.106
0.099
0.042
0.075
2005
0.218
0.098
0.108
0.039
0.084
Change:
1961-1972
0.028
0.024
-0.018
-0.010
-0.028
0.025
-0.029
0.000
-0.010
-0.011
1972-1980
-0.047
0.028
0.008
-0.006
-0.032
0.027
-0.008
-0.010
-0.060
-0.019
1980-1990
0.028
-0.026
0.026
0.023
0.016
-0.017
0.013
0.001
-0.025
-0.045
1990-2000
-0.104
-0.060
-0.023
-0.003
0.015
-0.003
0.010
0.000
0.017
-0.029
2000-2005
0.003
-0.016
-0.009
-0.003
0.030
0.008
0.002
0.005
-0.002
-0.001
1980-2005
-0.074
-0.101
-0.005
0.017
0.061
-0.013
0.025
0.006
-0.011
-0.075
1972-2005
-0.121
-0.073
0.003
0.011
0.029
0.014
0.016
-0.004
-0.071
-0.093
Notes: An individual is designated as poor if family resources fall below 50 percent of the median of the individual weighted, NAS scale-adjusted distribution for the
respective resource measure. Consumption data are from the CE Survey and income data are from the CPS-ASEC/ADF.

Table 9: Demographic Characteristics of the Consumption and Income Poor, 1960-2005
1960-1961/1963
1972-1973
1980-1989
1990-1999
2000-2005
Consumption
Consumption
Consumption
Consumption
Consumption
Official AfterExcluding
Official AfterExcluding
Official AfterExcluding
Official AfterExcluding
Official AfterExcluding
Resources Used to
Income
Tax
Health
Income
Tax
Health
Income
Tax
Health
Income
Tax
Health
Income
Tax
Health
Define Poverty
Poverty Income Insurance
Poverty Income Insurance
Poverty Income Insurance
Poverty Income Insurance
Poverty Income Insurance
Survey
CE
CE
CE
CE
CE
CPS
CPS
CPS
CPS
CPS
CPS
CPS
CPS
CPS
CPS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
Family Type
Single Mother Families
0.151
0.122
0.117
0.303
0.266
0.205
0.350
0.339
0.282
0.377
0.378
0.313
0.342
0.337
0.300
Married Parent Families 0.515
0.548
0.611
0.343
0.377
0.488
0.314
0.335
0.403
0.281
0.273
0.409
0.253
0.220
0.389
Single Individuals
0.077
0.066
0.032
0.116
0.096
0.052
0.152
0.136
0.100
0.177
0.171
0.107
0.227
0.239
0.147
Married without Children 0.061
0.076
0.058
0.053
0.062
0.062
0.051
0.062
0.056
0.047
0.060
0.053
0.060
0.079
0.062
Head 65 and Over
0.195
0.190
0.181
0.185
0.200
0.194
0.134
0.129
0.159
0.119
0.118
0.117
0.119
0.126
0.102
Age
0-17
0.440
0.423
0.463
0.421
0.409
0.427
0.396
0.397
0.385
0.397
0.396
0.403
0.356
0.337
0.371
18-64
0.408
0.429
0.387
0.430
0.433
0.419
0.494
0.500
0.499
0.504
0.511
0.510
0.543
0.561
0.554
65+
0.152
0.149
0.150
0.150
0.157
0.154
0.110
0.102
0.116
0.099
0.093
0.087
0.101
0.102
0.076
Education of Head
Less than HS
0.765
0.741
0.832
0.673
0.673
0.752
0.528
0.528
0.604
0.450
0.461
0.494
0.380
0.385
0.435
HS
0.164
0.183
0.125
0.208
0.208
0.187
0.298
0.299
0.249
0.326
0.321
0.317
0.336
0.331
0.309
Some College
0.043
0.046
0.030
0.082
0.082
0.042
0.127
0.125
0.111
0.168
0.161
0.151
0.205
0.199
0.204
College +
0.027
0.030
0.012
0.036
0.038
0.019
0.048
0.048
0.036
0.056
0.057
0.038
0.080
0.085
0.052
Race
White, Non Hispanic
0.687
0.725
0.722
0.564
0.579
0.704
0.532
0.533
0.488
0.471
0.465
0.439
0.453
0.457
0.397
Black, Non Hispanic
0.299
0.263
0.259
0.317
0.298
0.296
0.282
0.279
0.308
0.266
0.273
0.285
0.238
0.246
0.250
Other
0.014
0.013
0.019
0.119
0.123
0.000
0.186
0.187
0.205
0.263
0.262
0.276
0.309
0.298
0.353
Region
Northeast
0.165
0.169
0.115
0.217
0.217
0.157
0.175
0.171
0.177
0.176
0.176
0.154
0.170
0.169
0.129
Midwest
0.214
0.237
0.257
0.175
0.176
0.212
0.232
0.231
0.245
0.201
0.200
0.213
0.194
0.193
0.198
South
0.492
0.467
0.535
0.442
0.444
0.505
0.404
0.412
0.414
0.390
0.396
0.414
0.402
0.410
0.460
West
0.129
0.126
0.093
0.165
0.162
0.126
0.189
0.185
0.165
0.233
0.228
0.219
0.234
0.228
0.213
Homeowner
0.382
0.370
0.369
0.383
0.342
0.337
0.340
0.312
0.382
0.390
0.308
Single family home
0.339
0.269
0.224
0.224
Mobile home or trailer
0.017
0.054
0.068
0.059
Own an automobile
0.595
0.575
0.619
0.649
0.675
N ('000s)
8.9
12.9
2.7
30.6
37.1
2.5
227.3
229.6
17.7
202.6
173.0
20.9
145.2
110.9
14.8
Total Financial Assets
Median
0
0
0
0
85th Percentile
2,284
803
607
446
N (asset sample)
2,525
2,713
3,659
2,597
Debt
Median
0
0
0
85th Percentile
1,517
1,106
331
N (debt sample)
8,755
10,334
7,351
Notes: Consumption data are from the CE Survey and income data are from the CPS-ASEC/ADF. Poverty status is determined at the family level and then person weighted. For columns labeled
"Official Income Poverty" poverty status is determined using the official thresholds. The other income and consumption poverty definitions are calculated using the NAS scale and the CPI-U-RS.
Column 9 only includes data from the CE Survey from 1980-1981 and 1984-1989. Debt includes all non-mortgage, non-vehicle debt. Financial asset statistics come from samples of families in their
fifth CE Survey interview, while debt statistics come from families in either their second or fifth interview.

Table 10: The Effect of Changes in Demographic Characteristics on Changes in Poverty, 1960-2005
1960-61/
Change
Change
Change
1963
1963-1972 1972-1980 1980-2005
1972
1980
1990
2000
2005
A. Consumption Poverty (Excluding health insurance)
Actual Poverty
0.206
0.142
0.130
0.131
0.103
0.091
-0.064
-0.012
-0.039
Predicted poverty holding within group poverty at 1972 rate
Changes in family type
0.139
0.142
0.150
0.156
0.158
0.159
0.003
0.007
0.009
Changes in family type and employment
0.140
0.142
0.148
0.152
0.153
0.155
0.002
0.005
0.008
Changes in family type and race
Changes in family type and region
0.145
0.142
0.154
0.155
0.157
0.159
-0.003
0.012
0.005
Changes in family type, education, and employment
0.161
0.142
0.126
0.113
0.097
0.096
-0.019
-0.016
-0.029
Predicted poverty holding within group poverty at 1980 rate
Changes in family type
0.117
0.121
0.130
0.138
0.141
0.142
0.004
0.009
0.012
Changes in family type and employment
0.126
0.124
0.130
0.135
0.135
0.139
-0.002
0.006
0.009
Changes in family type and race
0.130
0.140
0.152
0.161
0.031
Changes in family type and region
0.119
0.119
0.130
0.134
0.136
0.136
0.000
0.011
0.006
Changes in family type, education, and employment
0.163
0.141
0.130
0.122
0.110
0.112
-0.022
-0.011
-0.018
Predicted poverty holding within group poverty at 2005 rate
Changes in family type
0.084
0.084
0.086
0.089
0.090
0.091
0.000
0.002
0.004
Changes in family type and employment
0.110
0.092
0.088
0.088
0.088
0.091
-0.018
-0.004
0.002
Changes in family type and race
0.075
0.080
0.086
0.091
0.016
Changes in family type and region
0.088
0.086
0.090
0.090
0.090
0.091
-0.003
0.004
0.001
Changes in family type, education, and employment
0.183
0.141
0.118
0.103
0.090
0.091
-0.042
-0.023
-0.028
B. Income Poverty (After-tax money income)
Actual Poverty
0.258
0.142
0.130
0.126
0.088
0.097
-0.116
-0.013
-0.032
Predicted poverty holding within group poverty at 1972 rate
Changes in family type
0.132
0.142
0.157
0.166
0.169
0.173
0.010
0.014
0.016
Changes in family type and employment
0.139
0.142
0.158
0.165
0.169
0.180
0.004
0.016
0.022
Changes in family type and race
0.123
0.142
0.159
0.174
0.183
0.190
0.019
0.017
0.031
Changes in family type and region
0.132
0.142
0.159
0.169
0.174
0.178
0.010
0.017
0.018
Changes in family type, education, and employment
0.154
0.142
0.146
0.141
0.134
0.140
-0.011
0.003
-0.006
Predicted poverty holding within group poverty at 1980 rate
Changes in family type
0.112
0.120
0.130
0.136
0.139
0.141
0.008
0.010
0.011
Changes in family type and employment
0.117
0.118
0.130
0.133
0.137
0.148
0.001
0.012
0.018
Changes in family type and race
0.102
0.118
0.130
0.141
0.149
0.156
0.015
0.012
0.026
Changes in family type and region
0.110
0.118
0.130
0.136
0.139
0.142
0.008
0.012
0.012
Changes in family type, education, and employment
0.144
0.131
0.130
0.122
0.115
0.120
-0.013
-0.001
-0.009
Predicted poverty holding within group poverty at 2005 rate
Changes in family type
0.070
0.077
0.086
0.092
0.095
0.097
0.007
0.009
0.011
Changes in family type and employment
0.068
0.072
0.083
0.086
0.088
0.097
0.004
0.011
0.015
Changes in family type and race
0.056
0.067
0.078
0.087
0.093
0.097
0.011
0.011
0.019
Changes in family type and region
0.068
0.075
0.085
0.092
0.095
0.097
0.007
0.010
0.012
Changes in family type, education, and employment
0.103
0.096
0.100
0.096
0.091
0.097
-0.007
0.003
-0.002
Notes: Predicted poverty is the weighted average of the poverty rates for each group in the base year using as weights the distribution across groups in the year listed in
the column headings.

Appendix Table 1: Comparison of CE Expenditure Measures to National Aggregates, 1972-2004
1972
1973
1980
1984
1987
1992
1994
1997
2002
2004
a
Food at home
CE
87.5
98.1
199.2
211.9
236.4
324.9
338.7
376.2
436.8
477.4
PCE
100.7
112.1
213.7
260.6
290.7
366.8
392.8
431.3
540.1
603.4
Ratio
0.869
0.875
0.932
0.813
0.813
0.886
0.862
0.872
0.809
0.791
b
Food away from home
CE
24.3
26.9
75.8
104.0
120.1
136.4
150.8
164.9
191.8
217.8
PCE
35.7
40.2
90.2
123.6
154.9
212.3
234.5
262.7
339.4
388.2
Ratio
0.680
0.668
0.841
0.842
0.775
0.643
0.643
0.628
0.565
0.561
Total food
CE
111.8
124.9
275.0
315.9
356.4
461.4
489.5
541.1
628.6
695.2
PCE
136.4
152.3
303.9
384.2
445.6
579.1
627.3
694.0
879.5
991.6
Ratio
0.819
0.820
0.905
0.822
0.800
0.797
0.780
0.780
0.715
0.701
c
Rent plus utilities
CE
66.7
73.6
132.0
202.3
235.1
306.7
334.2
380.7
438.5
485.1
PCE
58.6
64.8
144.2
209.9
250.0
315.0
347.0
387.7
469.6
504.5
Ratio
1.139
1.135
0.916
0.964
0.940
0.974
0.963
0.982
0.934
0.961
Gasoline and motor oil
CE
27.4
31.1
98.6
95.4
83.6
97.5
100.8
115.9
138.5
185.7
PCE
24.4
28.1
86.7
94.6
85.4
112.4
116.2
134.4
164.5
231.4
Ratio
1.125
1.107
1.137
1.008
0.979
0.867
0.867
0.862
0.842
0.803
Alcoholic beverages
CE
2.2
2.3
12.4
14.6
13.6
13.1
13.9
15.3
19.8
19.7
PCE
14.8
15.9
29.7
37.1
41.4
48.9
52.9
61.2
75.5
85.0
Ratio
0.149
0.147
0.417
0.393
0.329
0.267
0.263
0.250
0.262
0.232
Transportation d
CE
38.0
39.3
72.3
106.0
128.0
177.4
203.3
240.5
268.1
279.9
PCE
29.6
31.6
65.3
93.2
120.8
157.6
190.7
245.7
288.4
308.2
Ratio
1.283
1.245
1.107
1.138
1.059
1.125
1.066
0.979
0.930
0.908
Tobacco
CE
9.0
9.3
14.4
20.5
21.6
27.3
26.3
27.6
35.7
33.3
PCE
12.2
13.2
20.9
29.2
34.5
48.0
47.3
53.8
89.2
87.5
Ratio
0.734
0.708
0.689
0.701
0.626
0.568
0.556
0.512
0.400
0.380
Clothing
CE
37.4
41.2
55.7
81.5
92.1
105.6
110.7
117.2
119.3
112.1
PCE
56.3
62.4
107.2
142.4
174.2
221.6
237.8
257.8
303.1
324.6
Ratio
0.663
0.660
0.520
0.572
0.529
0.477
0.465
0.455
0.394
0.345
Audio, video, and computers
CE
8.1
8.4
15.1
26.5
32.8
49.6
62.6
74.4
90.1
102.7
PCE
10.1
11.3
20.6
32.0
46.2
57.0
73.7
92.3
120.0
133.3
Ratio
0.797
0.743
0.733
0.829
0.709
0.869
0.849
0.806
0.750
0.771
e
Core consumption (excluding flows)
CE core
219.7
242.1
502.1
615.6
683.1
906.5
977.0
1113.3 1281.8 1428.1
PCE core
213.3
236.6
509.9
658.3
746.9
951.8
1046.7 1199.1 1462.6 1647.5
Ratio
1.030
1.023
0.985
0.935
0.915
0.952
0.933
0.928
0.876
0.867
Non-core consumption
CE non-core
72.8
79.8
158.4
220.6
247.5
282.4
301.7
325.0
366.6
382.9
PCE non-core
119.0
131.7
248.0
332.3
405.0
530.8
572.5
635.5
807.2
885.3
Ratio
0.612
0.606
0.639
0.664
0.611
0.532
0.527
0.511
0.454
0.433
Total
CE total expendituresf
584.9
653.5 1,260.2 1,821.0 2,094.0 2,663.1 2,923.6 3,306.5 4,090.7 4,486.1
PCE
770.6
852.4 1,757.1 2,503.3 3,100.2 4,235.3 4,743.3 5,547.4 7,350.7 8,195.9
Ratio (CE/PCE)
0.759
0.767
0.717
0.727
0.675
0.629
0.616
0.596
0.557
0.547
Notes: All survey data come from the CE Interview Survey. The expenditure components reported here are those that align most
closely with PCE categories.
a Food at home is food purchased for off-premise consumption minus alcoholic beverages purchased for off-premise consumption.
CE Survey numbers in 1984 and 1987 are not adjusted for the change in survey question during this period (see Data Appendix).
b Food away from home is purchased meals and beverages minus other alcoholic beverages.
c Rent plus utilities is rent on tenant-occupied nonfarm dwellings plus utilities excluding telephone.
d Transportation includes spending on public transportation, vehicle maintenance and repairs, insurance, rentals and leases.
e Core consumption is the sum of the categories: food at home, rent plus utilities, gasoline and motor oil, and transportation.
f Total expenditures excludes miscellaneous expenditures and cash contributions which are not asked in all interviews.

Appendix Table 2: Poverty Rates and Changes in Poverty with Standard Errors, 1980-2005
Consumption
After-Tax
After-Tax
Resources
Excluding
Income +
Income +
Pre-tax
Used to
Health
Noncash
Noncash
Money
Define
Insurance
Expenditures
Benefits
Consumption
Benefits
Income
Poverty
Adjusted
CPI-U-RS CPI-U-RS CPI-U-RS
CPI-U-RS
CPI-U-RS
CPI-U-RS
Price Index
CPS
CPS
CPS
CE
CE
CE
Survey
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Year
1980
0.1300
0.1300
0.1300
0.1300
0.1300
0.1300
1990
2000
2005

0.1282
(0.0013)
0.1013
(0.0013)
0.1140
(0.0011)

0.1332
(0.0013)
0.0963
(0.0013)
0.1024
(0.0010)

0.1152
(0.0013)
0.0716
(0.0011)
0.0759
(0.0009)

0.1253
(0.0049)
0.0996
(0.0033)
0.0858
(0.0029)

0.1311
(0.0050)
0.1029
(0.0034)
0.0907
(0.0029)

0.1259
(0.0050)
0.1119
(0.0034)
0.0846
(0.0025)

Consumption
Adjusted
CPI-U-RS
CE
(7)

Consumption
Excluding
Health
Insurance
Adjusted
CPI-U-RS
CE
(8)

Expenditures
Adjusted
CPI-U-RS
CE
(9)

0.1300

0.1300

0.1300

0.1020
(0.0046)
0.0601
(0.0026)
0.0459
(0.0021)

0.1066
(0.0047)
0.0613
(0.0026)
0.0477
(0.0022)

0.1043
(0.0046)
0.0727
(0.0028)
0.0469
(0.0018)

(4) - (1)
(10)

(4) - (2)
(11)

(5) - (2)
(12)

(6) - (2)
(13)

(7) - (3)
(14)

-0.0029
(0.0050)
-0.0017
(0.0035)
-0.0282
(0.0031)

-0.0079
(0.0050)
0.0033
(0.0035)
-0.0166
(0.0031)

-0.0021
(0.0052)
0.0066
(0.0036)
-0.0117
(0.0031)

-0.0073
(0.0052)
0.0156
(0.0036)
-0.0178
(0.0027)

-0.0132
(0.0048)
-0.0116
(0.0028)
-0.0300
(0.0023)

Change
1980 -0.0018
0.0032
-0.0148
-0.0047
0.0011
-0.0041
-0.0280
-0.0234
-0.0257
-0.0029
-0.0079
-0.0021
-0.0073
-0.0132
1990
(0.0013)
(0.0013)
(0.0013)
(0.0049)
(0.0050)
(0.0050)
(0.0046)
(0.0047)
(0.0046)
(0.0050) (0.0050) (0.0052) (0.0052) (0.0048)
1990 -0.0269
-0.0369
-0.0436
-0.0257
-0.0282
-0.0140
-0.0419
-0.0453
-0.0315
0.0012
0.0112
0.0087
0.0229
0.0017
2000
(0.0018)
(0.0018)
(0.0017)
(0.0059)
(0.0061)
(0.0060)
(0.0053)
(0.0054)
(0.0053)
(0.0062) (0.0062) (0.0063) (0.0063) (0.0056)
2000 0.0127
0.0062
0.0043
-0.0138
-0.0122
-0.0273
-0.0142
-0.0136
-0.0258
-0.0265
-0.0199
-0.0184
-0.0335
-0.0185
2005
(0.0017)
(0.0016)
(0.0014)
(0.0044)
(0.0045)
(0.0042)
(0.0034)
(0.0034)
(0.0033)
(0.0047) (0.0047) (0.0047) (0.0045) (0.0036)
1980 -0.0160
-0.0276
-0.0541
-0.0442
-0.0393
-0.0454
-0.0841
-0.0823
-0.0831
-0.0282
-0.0166
-0.0117
-0.0178
-0.0300
2005
(0.0011)
(0.0010)
(0.0009)
(0.0029)
(0.0029)
(0.0025)
(0.0021)
(0.0022)
(0.0018)
(0.0031) (0.0031) (0.0031) (0.0027) (0.0023)
Notes: Poverty status is determined at the family level and then person weighted. Standard errors for estimates from the CE Survey are bootstrapped and corrected for family correlation over time.

Appendix Table 3: Poverty Rates and Changes in Poverty with Standard Errors by Family Type, 1980-2005
Single Parent Families
Married Parent Families
Single Individuals
After-Tax
After-Tax
After-Tax
Resources
Income +
Income +
Income +
Used to
Noncash
Noncash
Noncash
Define
Benefits Consumption
Benefits Consumption
Benefits Consumption
Poverty
CPS
CE
(2) - (1)
CPS
CE
(5) - (4)
CPS
CE
(8) - (7)
Price Index
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Survey
Year
1980
0.3925
0.3751
-0.0175
0.1044
0.1074
0.0030
0.1517
0.1485
-0.0032
(0.0065)
(0.0243)
(0.0251)
(0.0021)
(0.0081)
(0.0084)
(0.0028)
(0.0096)
(0.0100)
1990
0.3981
0.3348
-0.0633
0.1085
0.1194
0.0109
0.1538
0.1160
-0.0378
(0.0065)
(0.0211)
(0.0221)
(0.0024)
(0.0085)
(0.0088)
(0.0027)
(0.0092)
(0.0096)
2000
0.2622
0.2318
-0.0304
0.0653
0.1035
0.0381
0.1373
0.1001
-0.0373
(0.0062)
(0.0120)
(0.0135)
(0.0022)
(0.0055)
(0.0059)
(0.0027)
(0.0051)
(0.0058)
2005
0.2786
0.1878
-0.0908
0.0606
0.0858
0.0252
0.1575
0.0946
-0.0629
(0.0046)
(0.0110)
(0.0119)
(0.0016)
(0.0047)
(0.0049)
(0.0023)
(0.0054)
(0.0059)
Change
1980 0.0056
-0.0403
-0.0458
0.0041
0.0121
0.0079
0.0021
-0.0325
-0.0346
1990
(0.0092)
(0.0322)
(0.0335)
(0.0032)
(0.0117)
(0.0122)
(0.0039)
(0.0133)
(0.0138)
1990 -0.1358
-0.1030
0.0329
-0.0432
-0.0160
0.0272
-0.0165
-0.0160
0.0005
2000
(0.0090)
(0.0243)
(0.0259)
(0.0033)
(0.0101)
(0.0107)
(0.0038)
(0.0105)
(0.0112)
2000 0.0164
-0.0439
-0.0603
-0.0047
-0.0176
-0.0130
0.0202
-0.0055
-0.0257
2005
(0.0077)
(0.0163)
(0.0180)
(0.0027)
(0.0072)
(0.0077)
(0.0036)
(0.0075)
(0.0083)
1980 -0.1139
-0.1872
-0.0733
-0.0437
-0.0215
0.0222
0.0058
-0.0539
-0.0597
2005
(0.0080)
(0.0266)
(0.0278)
(0.0026)
(0.0093)
(0.0097)
(0.0037)
(0.0110)
(0.0116)
Notes: See notes to Appendix Table 2.

Married without Children
After-Tax
Income +
Noncash
Benefits Consumption
CPS
CE
(11) - (10)
(10)
(11)
(12)

Head 65 and Over
After-Tax
Income +
Noncash
Benefits Consumption
CPS
CE
(14) - (13)
(13)
(14)
(15)

0.0404
(0.0017)
0.0439
(0.0019)
0.0390
(0.0019)
0.0408
(0.0017)

0.0446
(0.0057)
0.0385
(0.0060)
0.0324
(0.0039)
0.0344
(0.0039)

0.0042
(0.0059)
-0.0054
(0.0063)
-0.0066
(0.0044)
-0.0064
(0.0043)

0.1245
(0.0029)
0.0901
(0.0025)
0.0716
(0.0025)
0.0756
(0.0023)

0.1463
(0.0101)
0.0887
(0.0094)
0.0539
(0.0058)
0.0466
(0.0050)

0.0218
(0.0104)
-0.0014
(0.0097)
-0.0177
(0.0063)
-0.0290
(0.0055)

0.0035
(0.0025)
-0.0049
(0.0027)
0.0018
(0.0026)
0.0004
(0.0024)

-0.0061
(0.0083)
-0.0061
(0.0072)
0.0020
(0.0055)
-0.0101
(0.0069)

-0.0096
(0.0086)
-0.0012
(0.0077)
0.0002
(0.0061)
-0.0106
(0.0073)

-0.0344
(0.0038)
-0.0185
(0.0035)
0.0040
(0.0034)
-0.0488
(0.0036)

-0.0576
(0.0138)
-0.0348
(0.0110)
-0.0073
(0.0076)
-0.0997
(0.0112)

-0.0232
(0.0143)
-0.0164
(0.0116)
-0.0113
(0.0083)
-0.0509
(0.0118)

Appendix Table 4: Demographic Characteristics of All Individuals and by Poverty Status, CE Survey, 1972-2005
All Individuals
Consumption Poor
19601961
(1)
0.894
.
0.627
.
.
0.822
245
1,955
2,200
4.291
2.076
0.215
.

19721973
(2)
0.846
.
0.653
0.607
0.019
0.860
651
2,680
3,331
4.160
1.839
0.200
5.669

Head Employed
Number of Earners
Homeowner
Single family home
Mobile home or trailer
Own a car
Service flows from vehicles
Service flows from owned
Total service flows
Family size
# of children
# over 64
# of rooms
# of Bedrooms
# of Bathrooms
Appliances
Stove
Microwave
Refrigerator
Freezer
Disposal
Dishwasher
Window Air Conditioning
.
0.278
Central Air Conditioning
.
0.150
Washer
Dryer
Television
Computer
Stereo
VCR
Race
White, Non Hispanic
Black, Non Hispanic
Other
Expenditures > Income
0.435
0.368
N
13,728 18,903
Total Financial Assets
Median
.
2,467
75th Percentile
.
15,224
85th Percentile
.
33,161
90th Percentile
.
53,381
95th Percentile
.
103,514
Change in Total Financial Assets
5th Percentile
-8,297 -8,754
10th Percentile
-3,540 -4,044
15th Percentile
-1,751 -1,998
Percent Change in Total Financial Assets
5th Percentile
.
-0.99
10th Percentile
.
-0.67
15th Percentile
.
-0.39
N (asset sample)
13,728 18,903
Debt
Median
.
.
75th Percentile
.
.
85th Percentile
.
.
90th Percentile
.
.
95th Percentile
.
.
N (debt sample)
.
.

19801989
(3)
0.780
1.694
0.672
0.581
0.043
0.891
963
3,193
4,156
3.485
1.278
0.239
5.911
2.806
1.488

19901999
(4)
0.761
1.635
0.663
0.570
0.044
0.894
1,080
3,661
4,741
3.374
1.232
0.245
5.952
2.839
1.479

20002005
(5)
0.738
1.613
0.697
0.604
0.039
0.900
1,272
4,454
5,727
3.314
1.156
0.255
6.107
2.918
1.615

0.995
0.533
0.991
0.393
0.347
0.473
0.242
0.324
0.792
0.692
0.706
0.122
0.447
0.473

0.992
0.846
0.995
0.358
0.401
0.534
0.226
0.438
0.810
0.750
0.973
0.309
0.672
0.810

0.992
0.942
0.995
0.354
0.459
0.616
0.212
0.575
0.841
0.807
0.986
0.666
0.763
0.907

0.777
0.738
0.690
0.118
0.117
0.119
0.105
0.145
0.191
0.445
0.429
0.359
129,249 173,869 136,922

19601961
(6)
0.763
.
0.382
.
.
0.595
76
614
691
5.408
3.146
0.322
.

.
.

19721973
(7)
0.638
.
0.368
0.339
0.018
0.572
151
469
620
5.040
2.787
0.306
4.964

0.130
0.028

Income poor

19801989
(8)
0.560
1.273
0.330
0.260
0.054
0.609
156
598
754
4.372
2.087
0.264
5.043
2.511
1.337

19901999
(9)
0.572
1.277
0.297
0.216
0.064
0.653
180
584
764
4.338
2.105
0.208
4.949
2.487
1.150

20002005
(10)
0.590
1.413
0.301
0.217
0.062
0.679
219
655
874
4.286
1.939
0.205
4.910
2.528
1.220

0.979
0.196
0.983
0.300
0.093
0.113
0.213
0.106
0.584
0.336
0.607
0.024
0.274
0.221

0.971
0.594
0.984
0.240
0.153
0.146
0.269
0.196
0.574
0.401
0.920
0.084
0.455
0.557

0.958
0.821
0.982
0.217
0.189
0.213
0.309
0.339
0.611
0.492
0.950
0.304
0.601
0.740

.
.

0.434
0.268
0.297
0.428
16,015

0.387
0.242
0.370
0.362
10,462

0.459
2,728

0.314
2,422

0.485
0.310
0.205
0.413
14,586

19601961
(11)
0.701
.
0.409
.
.
0.545
80
805
885
5.205
3.016
0.353
.

19721973
(12)
0.607
.
0.393
0.360
0.023
0.602
225
1,086
1,311
5.086
2.838
0.264
5.077

Income Poor but Not Consumption Poor

19801989
(13)
0.532
1.130
0.399
0.330
0.043
0.645
333
1,383
1,716
3.894
1.795
0.240
5.255
2.571
1.419

19901999
(14)
0.520
1.062
0.361
0.282
0.055
0.671
385
1,447
1,832
3.841
1.815
0.204
5.160
2.567
1.235

20002005
(15)
0.507
0.994
0.385
0.297
0.046
0.687
463
1,878
2,342
3.605
1.617
0.232
5.156
2.608
1.336

19601961
(16)
0.719
.
0.715
.
.
0.718
201
2,246
2,447
3.567
1.584
0.397
.

0.156
0.053

0.976
0.253
0.982
0.298
0.158
0.194
0.216
0.156
0.597
0.394
0.623
0.043
0.307
0.265

0.970
0.639
0.985
0.257
0.226
0.237
0.243
0.258
0.603
0.463
0.923
0.140
0.508
0.592

0.959
0.845
0.983
0.236
0.271
0.314
0.272
0.382
0.635
0.538
0.957
0.392
0.639
0.770

0.681
0.299
0.020
0.672
2,180

0.695
0.305
0.000
0.734
1,365

0.539
0.277
0.184
0.823
17,638

0.485
0.256
0.259
0.853
20,555

0.457
0.243
0.299
0.868
13,442

0.952
464

.
.

19721973
(17)
0.634
.
0.499
0.456
0.021
0.736
418
2,335
2,753
4.103
1.940
0.271
5.328

19801989
(18)
0.605
1.230
0.543
0.454
0.047
0.797
575
2,337
2,912
3.334
1.307
0.284
5.541
2.651
1.488

19901999
(19)
0.560
1.112
0.479
0.390
0.053
0.783
620
2,354
2,974
3.293
1.337
0.252
5.386
2.631
1.320

20002005
(20)
0.518
0.989
0.497
0.397
0.046
0.769
687
2,848
3,534
3.177
1.278
0.284
5.389
2.675
1.438

0.983
0.370
0.983
0.332
0.236
0.305
0.255
0.223
0.674
0.537
0.685
0.071
0.352
0.356

0.982
0.736
0.991
0.291
0.302
0.342
0.251
0.330
0.676
0.576
0.944
0.198
0.566
0.683

0.979
0.889
0.989
0.275
0.342
0.417
0.252
0.440
0.702
0.630
0.971
0.484
0.682
0.824

0.968
584

0.672
0.180
0.148
0.976
9,758

0.592
0.193
0.214
0.977
12,488

0.535
0.212
0.253
0.972
8,831

0.252
0.094

2,290
14,367
33,660
55,427
117,237

2,046
13,720
36,336
68,181
142,862

1,793
12,928
41,278
85,277
226,582

.
.
.
.
.

0
666
2,362
5,459
17,508

0
200
860
1,748
5,586

0
205
718
1,433
3,588

0
138
543
1,134
2,583

.
.
.
.
.

0
285
1,415
3,806
10,514

0
383
1,359
2,983
11,972

0
280
1,228
3,128
14,098

0
310
1,178
2,546
11,030

.
.
.
.
.

8
1,541
5,047
9,290
22,836

152
1,643
5,421
12,487
30,451

68
1,398
5,320
13,993
43,934

33
1,100
3,448
9,297
52,731

-7,930
-2,888
-1,038

-6,650
-2,097
-620

-10,610
-3,000
-826

-2,107
-774
-274

-2,022
-761
-247

-793
-34
0

-341
0
0

-200
0
0

-5,531
-1,798
-691

-3,616
-913
-381

-1,699
-170
0

-724
0
0

-849
0
0

-19,631
-12,846
-8,297

-7,279
-3,806
-1,237

-5,437
-1,529
-340

-2,606
-409
0

-2,206
-340
0

-0.50
-0.25
-0.13
21,466

-0.39
-0.20
-0.09
33,240

-0.33
-0.19
-0.09
23,150

.
.
.
2,728

-1.00
-0.98
-0.50
2,422

-0.43
-0.06
0.00
2,572

-0.31
0.00
0.00
3,303

-0.20
0.00
0.00
2,167

.
.
.
2,180

-1.00
-1.00
-0.71
1,365

-0.62
-0.17
0.00
2,772

-0.33
0.00
0.00
3,818

-0.23
0.00
0.00
2,520

.
.
.
464

-1.00
-1.00
-0.88
584

-0.74
-0.33
-0.14
1,377

-0.51
-0.19
0.00
2,172

-0.33
-0.13
0.00
1,511

476
3,122
5,628
8,155
13,296
65,253

391
3,584
6,726
9,681
15,548
87,996

0
3,000
6,715
10,537
18,594
69,533

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

0
481
1,627
2,657
4,587
7,236

0
280
1,398
2,796
5,660
7,956

0
0
531
1,588
5,000
5,219

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

0
603
1,778
3,187
6,080
8,594

0
380
1,630
3,180
7,143
10,077

0
113
1,412
3,175
8,308
6,664

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

0
1,099
2,957
4,725
9,186
4,724

0
1,064
2,751
4,784
9,702
6,105

0
652
2,686
5,443
11,840
4,357

Notes: The sample includes all families in the CE Survey that are designated as complete income reporters. All estimates are person weighted. Debt includes all non-mortgage, non-vehicle debt. Financial asset statistics come
from samples of families in their fifth CE Survey interview, while debt statistics come from families in either their second or fifth interview. Income poverty is determined using after-tax money income.

Appendix Table 5: Demographic Characteristics of all Individuals, 1960-2005
1960-1961/1963
1972-1973
1980-1989
Survey
CE
CE
CE
CPS
CPS
CPS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Family Type
Single Mother Families
0.052 0.052
0.077 0.073
0.106 0.104
Married Parent Families 0.634 0.656
0.562 0.582
0.449 0.462
Single Individuals
0.056 0.045
0.074 0.061
0.123 0.114
Married without Children 0.144 0.138
0.168 0.169
0.184 0.181
Head 65 and Over
0.114 0.109
0.119 0.115
0.138 0.140
Age
0-17
0.371 0.383
0.326 0.336
0.267 0.273
18-64
0.538 0.521
0.575 0.566
0.617 0.610
65+
0.091 0.095
0.099 0.098
0.116 0.117
Education of Head
Less than HS
0.508 0.530
0.384 0.404
0.260 0.271
HS
0.285 0.261
0.316 0.316
0.337 0.316
Some College
0.095 0.096
0.149 0.130
0.195 0.206
College +
0.112 0.113
0.151 0.150
0.208 0.208
Race
White, Non Hispanic
0.883 0.884
0.822 0.889
0.778 0.779
Black, Non Hispanic
0.108 0.103
0.112 0.111
0.119 0.118
Other
0.009 0.013
0.067 0.000
0.103 0.103
Region
Northeast
0.249 0.248
0.288 0.241
0.210 0.222
Midwest
0.279 0.287
0.221 0.277
0.249 0.252
South
0.307 0.307
0.315 0.306
0.340 0.317
West
0.165 0.158
0.176 0.176
0.201 0.209
Homeowner
0.627
0.656
0.683 0.683
Single family home
0.609
0.592
Mobile home or trailer
0.018
0.041
Own an automobile
0.822
0.862
0.892
N ('000s)
54.5
13.7
269
20.0
1,600 157.4
Total Financial Assets
Median
2,261
2,062
85th Percentile
32,126
32,621
N (asset sample)
19,975
20,520
Debt
Median
329
85th Percentile
5,179
N (debt sample)
78,935

1990-1999
CE
CPS
(7)
(8)

2000-2005
CE
CPS
(9)
(10)

0.123
0.418
0.142
0.176
0.142

0.127
0.429
0.126
0.176
0.142

0.124
0.399
0.160
0.180
0.137

0.128
0.412
0.146
0.180
0.134

0.265
0.615
0.120

0.272
0.607
0.121

0.254
0.625
0.120

0.260
0.621
0.119

0.194
0.325
0.246
0.235

0.206
0.313
0.244
0.236

0.161
0.303
0.268
0.268

0.162
0.282
0.295
0.262

0.729
0.125
0.147

0.739
0.123
0.139

0.681
0.122
0.197

0.691
0.125
0.184

0.196
0.235
0.348
0.221
0.679

0.203
0.236
0.335
0.226
0.673
0.578
0.045
0.889
221.5

0.187
0.225
0.358
0.230
0.710

0.180
0.224
0.366
0.230
0.704
0.611
0.037
0.896
188.6

1,427

1,191.9

1,757
33,474
31,783

1,485
36,924
24,112

145
6,025
111,121

0
5,647
94,985

Notes: Consumption data are from the CE Survey and income data are from the CPS-ASEC/ADF. See notes to Table 9.

Appendix Table 6: Assets and Debts of the Income Poor by Family Type, CE Survey, 1972-2005
Single Parent Families
Married Parent Families
Single Head without Children
Married without Children
Head 65 and Over
1960- 1972- 1980- 1990- 20001960- 1972- 1980- 1990- 20001960- 1972- 1980- 1990- 20001960- 1972- 1980- 1990- 20001960- 1972- 1980- 1990- 20001961 1973 1989 1999 2005
1961 1973 1989 1999 2005
1961 1973 1989 1999 2005
1961 1973 1989
1999
2005
1961 1973 1989
1999
2005
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
Homeowner
0.211 0.198 0.215 0.194 0.257
0.358 0.419 0.461 0.412 0.452
0.491 0.291 0.218 0.209 0.214
0.564 0.409 0.634 0.649 0.605
0.603 0.691 0.704 0.729 0.693
Own a car
0.151 0.332 0.433 0.504 0.601
0.726 0.784 0.853 0.840 0.842
0.299 0.471 0.542 0.601 0.578
0.677 0.740 0.851 0.881 0.824
0.343 0.515 0.649 0.722 0.689
Total Financial Assets
Median
.
0
0
0
0
.
0
0
0
0
.
0
111
133
109
.
81
58
144
10
.
0
0
24
0
75th Percentile
.
0
0
0
3
.
381
519
333
400
.
324 1,148 1,152 1,227
.
2,022 2,696 2,823 1,241
.
2,831 1,117 1,955 1,200
85th Percentile
.
16
100
60
103
.
1,213 1,730 1,376 1,272
.
607 2,549 2,576 2,900
.
4,679 12,516 15,223 6,479
.
8,897 6,796 12,130 7,024
90th Percentile
.
266
397
254
227
.
3,235 3,043 3,639 2,702
.
1,618 4,758 4,852 4,763
.
9,758 24,624 56,378 16,000
.
13,547 16,430 35,539 31,752
95th Percentile
.
1,375 1,019 878
680
.
9,301 11,972 15,059 14,062
.
3,045 13,680 14,072 10,258
.
20,220 60,315 129,874 62,703
.
27,023 48,440 122,514 127,553
Change in Total Financial Assets
5th Percentile
-824 -761 -358
0
-10
-3,899 -5,844 -1,699 -1,231 -1,061 -10,612 -4,974 -1,903 -2,426 -1,200 -11,549 -4,044 -4,354 -11,727 -11,340 -7,633 -5,662 -1,967 -1,239 -5,000
10th Percentile
-55
-190
0
0
0
-1,070 -1,213 -456
0
-33
-7,743 -1,618 -822 -724 -300
-6,361 -2,022 -1,520 -1,239 -1,600
-3,955 -1,903 -170
0
-28
15th Percentile
0
0
0
0
0
-277 -571
0
0
0
-4,468 -1,142 -329 -261
0
-4,117 -922
0
0
0
-2,212 -381
0
0
0
Percent Change in Total Financial Assets
5th Percentile
.
-1.00 -0.29 0.00 -0.13
.
-1.00 -0.67 -0.33 -0.33
.
-0.95 -0.71 -0.71 -0.33
.
-1.00 -0.94 -0.28
-0.47
.
-1.00 -0.33 -0.12
-0.20
10th Percentile
.
-0.98 0.00 0.00 0.00
.
-1.00 -0.22 0.00 -0.02
.
-0.93 -0.33 -0.33 -0.17
.
-0.83 -0.21 -0.09
-0.23
.
-0.50 -0.03
0.00
-0.01
15th Percentile
.
-0.24 0.00 0.00 0.00
.
-1.00 0.00
0.00
0.00
.
-0.90 -0.22 -0.16 -0.01
.
-0.53 0.00
0.00
-0.01
.
-0.17 0.00
0.00
0.00
N (asset sample)
194
354
698 1,054 612
720
436
539
670
397
206
69
936 1,308 929
247
197
197
248
170
813
309
402
538
412
Debt
Median
.
.
0
0
0
.
.
0
0
0
.
.
0
0
0
.
.
0
0
0
.
.
0
0
0
75th Percentile
.
.
360
27
0
.
.
1,368 1,173 386
.
.
194
509
308
.
.
865
867
1,270
.
.
152
0
0
85th Percentile
.
.
1,466 859
543
.
.
2,990 3,180 2,122
.
.
1,256 1,596 1,918
.
.
2,230 2,500 4,479
.
.
714
699
648
90th Percentile
.
.
2,336 1,910 2,000
.
.
4,661 5,898 4,682
.
.
3,172 3,258 4,855
.
.
4,377 4,092 8,264
.
.
1,263 1,330 1,390
95th Percentile
.
.
4,607 4,365 5,305
.
.
8,451 10,033 9,800
.
.
6,796 8,443 11,974
.
.
11,085 8,650 17,097
.
.
2,422 4,280 3,309
N (debt sample)
.
.
1,875 2,615 1,481
.
.
1,504 1,672 951
.
.
2,837 3,316 2,392
.
.
607
696
461
.
.
1,771 1,778 1,379
Notes: The sample includes all families in the CE Survey that are income poor (defined using after-tax money income) and are designated as complete income reporters. All estimates are person weighted. Debt includes all
non-mortgage, non-vehicle debt. Financial asset statistics come from samples of families in their fifth CE Survey interview, while debt statistics come from families in either their second or fifth interview.

Appendix Table 7: Assets, Debts, and Other Characteristics of the Income Poor by Consumption Poverty Status and by Family Type, 1972-2005
Single Parent Families
Married Parent Families
Single Head without Children
1960- 1972- 1980- 1990- 20001960- 1972- 1980- 1990- 20001960- 1972- 1980- 1990- 20001961
1973
1989
1999
2005
1961
1973
1989
1999
2005
1961
1973
1989
1999
2005
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
Panel A: Income Poor but not Consumption Poor
Share of Income Poor 0.082 0.325 0.389 0.484 0.566
0.163 0.413 0.538 0.540 0.568
0.301 0.638 0.574 0.635 0.642
Homeowner
0.246 0.285 0.349 0.261 0.331
0.641 0.527 0.588 0.554 0.602
0.688 0.355 0.292 0.280 0.286
Own a car
0.302 0.438 0.666 0.652 0.698
0.878 0.879 0.933 0.906 0.909
0.488 0.553 0.686 0.707 0.682
Expenditures > Income 1.000 0.981 0.985 0.968 0.967
1.000 0.988 0.991 0.996 0.986
0.950 0.944 0.983 0.989 0.977
N
16
115
1,473 2,556 1,721
117
180
1,652 1,901 1,106
62
44
3,370 4,250 3,088
Total Financial Assets
Median
.
0
0
0
0
.
57
340
154
53
.
0
318
263
160
75th Percentile
.
76
224
119
103
.
1,618 1,889 2,455 1,405
.
283
1,740 1,433 1,385
85th Percentile
.
404
731
391
331
.
5,116 5,421 9,368 6,917
.
607
4,587 3,325 3,258
90th Percentile
.
1,375 1,643 1,054
620
.
7,566 9,365 15,428 14,175
.
1,383 9,880 8,688 6,167
95th Percentile
.
3,806 5,522 4,070 2,053
.
12,306 20,388 25,270 55,162
.
3,640 28,991 21,078 16,000
Change in Total Financial Assets
5th Percentile
-1,571 -3,094 -3,172 -234
-454
-19,413 -11,829 -7,152 -5,088 -2,376
-19,548 -5,709 -5,097 -3,717 -2,041
10th Percentile
-1,571 -841
-865
0
0
-12,168 -5,844 -1,520 -364
-1,061
-16,476 -2,103 -1,520 -1,088 -371
15th Percentile
-1,571 -381
-33
0
0
-7,190 -1,618 -510
0
-100
-10,509 -1,519 -476
-480
0
Percent Change in Total Financial Assets
5th Percentile
.
-1.00
-0.76
-0.25
-0.28
.
-1.00
-0.71
-0.62
-0.34
.
-1.00
-0.71
-0.77
-0.33
10th Percentile
.
-1.00
-0.24
0.00
0.00
.
-1.00
-0.46
-0.27
-0.16
.
-0.95
-0.33
-0.38
-0.14
15th Percentile
.
-0.66
-0.04
0.00
0.00
.
-1.00
-0.21
0.00
-0.04
.
-0.90
-0.24
-0.21
-0.01
N (asset sample)
16
115
255
454
299
117
180
264
349
201
62
44
510
816
587
Debt
75th Percentile
.
.
971
579
200
.
.
2,432 2,427 1,655
.
.
623
1,031
800
85th Percentile
.
.
2,244 2,264 1,303
.
.
4,725 5,429 4,990
.
.
2,468 2,462 3,450
90th Percentile
.
.
3,678 3,591 3,183
.
.
6,748 8,113 8,000
.
.
4,470 5,576 8,264
95th Percentile
.
.
6,718 7,248 7,371
.
.
12,342 13,356 14,869
.
.
9,268 11,125 15,469
N (debt sample)
.
.
741
1,246
829
.
.
802
897
533
.
.
1,634 2,099 1,534
Panel B: Income Poor and Consumption Poor
Homeowner
0.208 0.166 0.150 0.146 0.179
0.316 0.361 0.330 0.279 0.279
0.411 0.190 0.106 0.084 0.090
Own a car
0.139 0.292 0.318 0.395 0.499
0.704 0.733 0.770 0.779 0.765
0.223 0.341 0.327 0.413 0.399
Expenditures > Income 0.626 0.595 0.660 0.675 0.748
0.670 0.663 0.702 0.744 0.697
0.540 0.641 0.751 0.764 0.723
N
178
239
2,315 2,728 1,322
603
256
1,417 1,617
840
144
25
2,502 2,446 1,721
Total Financial Assets
75th Percentile
.
0
0
0
0
.
84
0
3
10
.
348
510
586
737
85th Percentile
.
0
8
0
5
.
404
242
124
199
.
1,545 1,274 1,634 2,228
90th Percentile
.
19
57
33
53
.
1,047
537
269
400
.
1,941 2,059 2,606 3,402
95th Percentile
.
761
397
243
191
.
4,044 1,807
798
765
.
3,045 3,755 4,858 6,198
Change in Total Financial Assets
5th Percentile
-498
-228
-17
0
0
-1,383 -1,998 -519
-20
-2
-6,849 -304
-1,384 -1,158 -882
10th Percentile
-6
-57
0
0
0
-553
-607
0
0
0
-4,021 -202
-397
-359
-258
15th Percentile
0
0
0
0
0
-55
-266
0
0
0
-2,766
-38
-170
-36
0
Percent Change in Total Financial Assets
5th Percentile
.
-1.00
-0.18
0.00
0.00
.
-1.00
-0.43
-0.02
-0.13
.
-0.93
-0.73
-0.54
-0.40
10th Percentile
.
-0.96
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
-1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
-0.08
-0.35
-0.23
-0.20
15th Percentile
.
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
-1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
-0.01
-0.18
-0.05
0.00
N (asset sample)
178
239
443
600
313
603
256
275
321
196
144
25
426
492
342
Debt
75th Percentile
.
.
114
0
0
.
.
519
203
0
.
.
0
0
0
85th Percentile
.
.
1,025
213
0
.
.
1,699 1,356
310
.
.
209
425
318
90th Percentile
.
.
1,813
718
532
.
.
2,314 2,936 1,289
.
.
848
991
1,804
95th Percentile
.
.
3,735 2,392 2,864
.
.
4,460 6,226 2,865
.
.
3,010 2,576 4,081
N (debt sample)
.
.
1,134 1,369
652
.
.
702
775
418
.
.
1,203 1,217
858

19601961
(16)

Married without Children
1972- 1980- 19901973
1989
1999
(17)
(18)
(19)

20002005
(20)

19601961
(21)

Head 65 and Over
1972- 1980- 19901973
1989
1999
(22)
(23)
(24)

20002005
(25)

0.308
0.823
0.926
0.961
76

0.563
0.478
0.833
0.961
111

0.796
0.687
0.886
0.983
733

0.237
0.907
0.504
0.854
193

0.434
0.770
0.717
0.909
134

0.639
0.821
0.746
0.932
2,324

0.802
0.777
0.747
0.949
2,183

.
.
.
.
.

426
5,257
20,172
27,023
112,357

438
8,723
25,950
53,200
138,012

.
.
.
.
.

0.737
0.725
0.921
0.979
939

0.791
0.717
0.920
0.973
1,133

647
865
743
106
3,175 5,915 7,434 3,099
11,081 24,016 42,966 9,700
16,378 52,247 78,845 21,693
45,208 67,683 172,299 315,065

-33,511 -4,044
-19,631 -2,495
-11,549 -1,237

-8,204 -12,390 -15,288
-1,643 -2,392 -3,000
-40
-682
-1,103

.
.
.
76

-1.00
-0.83
-0.53
111

-0.94
-0.14
-0.03
130

-0.33
-0.15
-0.05
188

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

0.457
0.574
0.599
171

0.326
0.628
0.610
86

0.407
0.680
0.703
335

0.418
0.749
0.801
300

.
.
.
.

685
1,213
2,131
3,806

26
575
1,019
19,029

-3,319
-1,051
-553

-3,425
-922
-381

.
.
.
171
.
.
.
.
.

-0.62
-0.26
-0.19
127

-16,607 -19,791 -3,172
-12,846 -7,612 -2,682
-9,098 -3,806 -1,586

0.731
0.814
0.810
0.952
2,648

559
340
7,818 6,198
43,934 37,666
89,711 100,585
146,766 277,978
-3,816 -13,512
-262
-543
0
0

.
.
.
193

-1.00
-0.50
-0.38
134

-0.88
-0.22
-0.08
218

-0.33
-0.05
0.00
365

-0.21
-0.10
0.00
297

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

173
795
1,520
2,612
1,109

51
805
1,433
3,909
1,314

0
869
1,950
4,412
1,101

0.346
0.630
0.700
188

0.532
0.305
0.508
620

0.643
0.390
0.424
175

0.533
0.509
0.576
1,311

0.554
0.540
0.682
976

0.455
0.525
0.654
540

0
254
725
957

55
318
326
600

.
.
.
.

1,142
6,470
9,515
17,127

170
1,100
2,209
6,055

120
1,014
1,955
5,985

6
331
500
1,200

-1,788
-164
0

-36
0
0

0
0
0

-4,287
-1,815
-979

-1,903
-809
-171

-86
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

-1.00
-0.86
-0.48
86

-1.00
-0.79
0.00
67

-0.04
0.00
0.00
60

0.00
0.00
0.00
43

.
.
.
620

-1.00
-0.22
-0.04
175

-0.02
0.00
0.00
184

0.00
0.00
0.00
173

0.00
0.00
0.00
115

.
.
.
.
.

380
1,427
1,901
3,142
169

0
732
2,852
4,092
147

0
413
1,270
5,517
101

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

114
673
986
1,666
662

0
405
869
4,852
464

0
124
826
1,659
278

1,155 1,158 2,122
3,653 2,693 6,000
6,344 5,580 10,000
12,977 11,438 18,462
438
549
360

Notes: The samples are restricted to families in the CE Survey that are income poor (defined using after-tax money income) and are designated as complete income reporters. All estimates are person weighted. Debt includes all non-mortgage, nonvehicle debt. Financial asset statistics come from samples of families in their fifth CE Survey interview, while debt statistics come from families in either their second or fifth interview.

