                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              SHOW ME THE MONEY:
                    DOES SHARED CAPITALISM SHARE THE WEALTH?

                                           Robert Buchele
                                           Douglas Kruse
                                           Loren Rodgers
                                            Adria Scharf

                                        Working Paper 14830
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14830


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2009




Earlier drafts of this paper were presented at the Russell Sage/NBER conference in New York City,
October 6-7, 2006 and at the Labor and Employment Relations conference, Boston, Massachusetts,
January 5-8, 2006. We have benefited from comments on these drafts by Mark Aldrich, Joseph Blasi,
Eric Kaarsemaker, Jeffrey Keefe and Christopher Mackin. This research is supported by a grant from
the Russell Sage Foundation and the Rockefeller Foundation. Additional funding for the General Social
Survey questions was provided by the Beyster Institute of the University of California at San Diego,
the ESOP Association, the Employee Ownership Foundation, Hewitt Associates, the National Center
for Employee Ownership, the Profit Sharing Council of America, and American Capital. The National
Opinion Research Center at the University of Chicago provided valuable assistance with the U.S. General
Social Survey that provides a national sample comparison group in our analysis. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Robert Buchele, Douglas Kruse, Loren Rodgers, and Adria Scharf. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Show Me the Money: Does Shared Capitalism Share the Wealth?
Robert Buchele, Douglas Kruse, Loren Rodgers, and Adria Scharf
NBER Working Paper No. 14830
April 2009
JEL No. D31,J33,J54

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper examines the effect of a variety of employee ownership programs on employees' holdings
of their employers' stock, their earnings and their wealth. Two major datasets are employed: the NBER
Shared Capitalism Research Project employee survey dataset and the 2002 and 2006 national General
Social Surveys (GSS). The GSS national survey shows that 29% of permanent, full-time employees
with at least one year on the job own their employers' stock, compared to the unsurprisingly higher
87% of employees in the NBER "shared capitalist" firms. The employees in the national sample hold
an average of $10,600 of employer stock, compared to $52,800 in the NBER sample. Employee owners
in NBER companies with broad-based ownership structures fare better: those in majority-owned ESOPs
hold on average $86,000 in company stock and those in broad-based stock option plans hold options
worth an average of $283,000. We find no evidence – either between datasets or between employee-owners
and non-owners within datasets – of substitution of company stock ownership for pay or benefits.
Moreover, our analysis suggests that company stock ownership substantially raises total employee
wealth, though it appears to have little effect on the overall distribution of wealth. These results suggest
that employee ownership tends to raise both ownership stakes and economic resources of American
workers across the economic spectrum.


Robert Buchele                                       Loren Rodgers
Department of Economics                              National Center for Employee Ownership
Smith College                                        1736 Franklin Street
10 Prospect St., #103                                8th Floor
Northampton, MA 01063                                Oakland CA 94612
rbuchele@email.smith.edu                             lrodgers@nceo.org

Douglas Kruse                                        Adria Scharf
School of Management and Labor Relations             Ownership Associates
Rutgers University                                   122 Mt. Auburn Street
94 Rockafeller Road                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
Piscataway, NJ 08854                                 scharf@rpec.org
and NBER
dkruse@rci.rutgers.edu
         Cheerleaders for the “ownership society” tout the growing share of U.S. households

owning stock – up from 31.7 percent in 1989 to 51.9 percent in 2001.1 What is less often

advertised is that stock ownership remains highly concentrated. The bottom 90 percent of

households owns only 23 percent of all stock and just 12 percent of all directly held stock (which

confers direct control or voting rights on stockholders).2 Only 27 percent of households in the

bottom 90 percent of the wealth distribution own (directly or indirectly) more than $10,000 of

stock (calculated from Wolff, 2004: Table 13a). If ownership is measured by households’

ownership stake in the corporate sector of the U.S. economy, a large majority of American

households have little or no meaningful claim to membership in the ownership society.

         This concentration of stock ownership implies a corresponding concentration of income

from capital, which contributes to growing income inequality since dividends and capital gains

have been a growing share of market-based income in the past 30 years, and capital income

disproportionately goes to high-income households (Mishel et al, 2007: 79, 81). Employee stock

ownership may help reduce this growing inequality by contributing to broad-based wealth

building and income growth across the economic spectrum.

         This paper addresses four sets of questions surrounding employee stock ownership as a

wealth-sharing tool, going beyond previous studies in the scope of the inquiry and the use of the

new data sources. First, how much on average do employee owners own in “shared capitalist”

firms (those with broad-based employee ownership, profit sharing, gainsharing, and/or stock


1
  This figure includes both directly held stock and indirect holdings in mutual funds and retirement accounts. See
Wolff (2004: Table 12b). An important reason why the incidence of stock ownership has risen in recent decades is the
replacement of defined benefit with defined contribution pension plans. Nevertheless, 34 percent of households have
no (defined benefit or defined contribution) pension plan (Wolff, 2005: Table 5), and “more than one-fifth of all
households nearing retirement (those between the ages of 56 and 64) had no retirement savings other than Social
Security” (Weller and Wolff, 2005: 2).
2
  These statistics are from Wolff (2004: Table 13a) and Kennickell (2003: Table 10), respectively. All statistics in this
section are for 2001.


                                                           1
options), and more generally? Second, how is company stock distributed among employee-

owners, which ownership structures distribute wealth most equitably, and how does the

distribution of employee stock ownership wealth compare to the distribution of wealth among

U.S. households? Third, to what extent does employer stock substitute for other forms of

compensation (higher pay and benefits) and for other forms of wealth? And fourth, what effect

might universal employee ownership of employer stock have on the overall distribution of stock

ownership and pension wealth in the U.S?



History and Review of Employee Ownership

        Employee Stock Ownership Plans (ESOPs) were first promoted as a matter of public

policy by a provision in the Employee Retirement and Security Act of 1974 (ERISA), authored by

Senator Russell Long, allowing for tax deductible contributions of company stock to a workers’

trust. Long was influenced by Louis Kelso, a San Francisco investment banker and lawyer who

set up the first ESOP at a California newspaper in 1956 and published The Capitalist Manifesto

(with Mortimer Adler) in 1958. Kelso advocated employee ownership as a means of

counteracting (in his view) a declining share of labor income inevitably resulting from labor-

saving technical change (Kelso and Adler, 1958: Ch. 4). Long advocated employee ownership on

other grounds as well – including promoting labor peace, securing workers’ allegiance to the

capitalist system and improving workers’ motivation and productivity. But Long and Kelso’s

chief interest in ESOPs was as a vehicle for building workers’ wealth and increasing their share of

capital and income from capital.3 And a chief interest of this paper is to determine the extent to

which companies with shared capitalism plans do this.


3
  Paraphrasing Mill, Kelso and Adler (1958:85) wrote that “no man’s ownership of (capital) should be so extensive as
to exclude others from an economically significant participation in the production of wealth.”

                                                         2
       The stock of companies with ESOPs can be publicly traded or privately held and can be

minority-owned or 100% owned by the employees. But in any case, ownership must be broad-

based. With few exceptions, ESOPs are required by law to cover all employees age 21 and over

who work more than 1,000 hours per year and have at least a year of service with the company.

       Several recent studies have estimated the size of employees’ ownership stakes in employee

stock ownership plans. A census of Washington State ESOPs (Kardas, Scharf and Keogh 1998)

found median pension assets per participant of $31,600 (vs. $5,400 for a matching sample of non-

ESOP control companies). A 2005 study of Ohio companies found median ESOP account

balances of $30,000 (cited in Rosen, 2005:4), and two surveys of Massachusetts ESOPs found

average assets to range from $39,900 per participant (Scharf and Mackin 2000) to $56,200 per

participant (Mackin 2005). Finally, a survey of 16 S-corporation ESOPs found median employee

account balances of $75,000 to $100,000 (Rosen, 2005).

       In addition to ESOPs, there are a number of other popular employee ownership

mechanisms: employee stock purchase plans (ESPPs), company stock in 401k plans, and broad-

based stock option plans. Each of these plans – like ESOPs – has implications for retirement

savings and employee risk.

       ESPPs emerged gradually in the late 1800s and early 1900s as various industrialists sought

ways to encourage workers to buy company stock in order to secure loyalty and create a common

bond between labor and management. These plans spread rapidly in the context of welfare

capitalism before the crash of 1929. They grew again in popularity after WWII, encouraged by a

variety of tax incentives created by changes in the federal Internal Revenue Code.

       Today, ESPPs constitute one of the “quiet” mechanisms of employee ownership in many

major American corporations. In recent times, companies have typically allowed workers to buy



                                                3
stock through a payroll deduction at 85% of the market price. Many workers have come to see

ESPPs as a supplement to their retirement savings, however long-term employees can accumulate

substantial ESPP investments that dominate their retirement savings and raise serious issues of

diversification.

       Another form of employee ownership is the 401k retirement plan. While the U.S. Congress

worked intentionally to expand employee ownership through ESOPs, other models of employee

ownership emerged with little governmental guidance. In the late seventies, the Internal Revenue

Code was amended to allow for company contributions to tax-sheltered individual retirement

trusts. The idea was that both company and worker contributions to these plans would be invested

in stocks, bonds, and other assets, and this accumulated wealth would provide a supplement to the

worker’s main retirement fund – a defined benefit pension plan. These 401k defined contribution

plans (called that because only the initial employer contribution, and not the final benefit, was

defined) were originally intended for top management. But many companies have replaced their

workers’ defined benefit pension plans with defined contribution plans, shifting the risk associated

with retirement income planning from employers to employees. (The risk issue is addressed in the

companion paper using these data by Blasi, Kruse, and Markowitz, 2008).

       Increasingly, workers came to see these plans as useful supplements to their retirement.

As the plans grew in number and popularity in the late eighties and early nineties, companies

began matching employee contributions in company stock, and 401k plans emerged as vehicles

for employee ownership. Companies next added company stock as an investment choice whereby

workers could direct their own contributions to be used to buy company stock. Many companies

found that employee ownership often grew rapidly under such plans. However, 401k plans as

vehicles for employee ownership have come under criticism in recent years because (unlike



                                                  4
ESOPs) they finance employee ownership with worker savings and raise concerns about

diversification when retirement plans are excessively invested in company stock. Most observers

agree however that matching contributions of company stock to 401k retirement plans – within

reason – has a useful role to play in expanding employee ownership.

       The most recent development in the world of employee ownership is the “broad-based”

stock option plan. These gained currency in the 1980s when high-tech firms began offering them

to workers involved in developing computer and information systems hardware and software, and

often more broadly to all employees in these firms (see Blasi, Kruse and Bernstein, 2003). Unlike

ESPPs and employee purchases of company stock in 401k plans, employee stock options require

no investment of employees’ savings. Employees are awarded options to buy company stock

(after a vesting period), typically at the price it is trading on the day the options are awarded, for a

ten year period. If employees exercise their options and hold the stock, broad-based stock options

become a way to finance ongoing employee ownership. If employees exercise their stock options

and immediately sell the stock (which is much more usually the case) they can pocket the profit on

the stock price’s increase. In this case, the stock options serve as a form of cash profit sharing,

based on company performance as measured by its stock price.

       Broad-based stock option plans have become more common in a variety of manufacturing

and service businesses. Stock options for employees, like ESOPs, involve lower risk for workers

because they do not require the investment of workers’ savings. However, when stock options are

used in lieu of higher base pay or conventional retirement plans – as was sometimes the case in the

tech sector start-ups of the 1980s and early 1990s – they are, in effect, risking employees’ savings.

Mature high-tech companies today, however, typically use broad-based stock options in

combination with market level base pay and benefits.



                                                   5
        Today, employee stock ownership is well established in the U.S. economy. Blasi, Kruse

and Bernstein (2003: Appendix C) calculate that in 2002 there were 24.1 million participants in

11,561 pension plans that held company stock.4 About 8.2 million (34%) of these participants

were in employee stock ownership plans (including ESOPs and similar plans called KSOPs),5 and

these held 59 percent of all company stock in employee pension plans. ESOPs are “by far the

most common form of employee ownership in the U.S.” (Rosen, 2005: 5). Another 13.6 million

employees held company stock in 401(k) plans and 1.4 million in ESPPs. In addition 10.6 million

employees held stock options in the companies they work for.

        Employee-owners bear two distinct types of risk: First, employees who have their own

“skin in the game,” having purchased company stock with their own funds, bear the risk of

potential investment loss. This risk is minimized in ESOPs because the company stock allocated

to workers’ ESOP accounts is almost always contributed by the employer with no out-of-pocket

cost to the employee.6 At the other extreme, company stock acquired through employee stock

purchase plans is financed primarily by employee savings.

        Second, employees who have concentrations of assets invested in a single company bear

risk associated with inadequate diversification. This problem is exacerbated by a firm-specific

risk for employee-owners whose jobs (and incomes), as well as a substantial portion of their

savings, depend on the fortunes of the company they work for. This is an inevitable feature of any

form of employee ownership, but it is likely to be greatest for ESOP employees who accumulate

4
  As Kruse (2002) points out, these figures double count companies and employees who have more than one plan. His
calculations (for 1998) suggest a lower-bound estimate of around 20 million employees (or 18 percent of all private
sector workers) holding stock in their companies through various defined contribution pension plans (ESOPs, KSOPs
and 401(k)s that hold employer stock) and profit sharing and employee stock purchase plans in 2002.
5
  A KSOP is a combination ESOP and 401(k) plan in which employees’ 401(k) contributions are matched by
employer contributions of company stock to their ESOP accounts.
6
  In one company the initial purchase of company stock at the founding of the KSOP was financed by a rollover from
employees’ existing 401(k) accounts. Employees of this company are an exception to the ‘no skin in the game’
depiction of ESOP participants. Subsequent stock allocations to the KSOP have been provided by the employer.


                                                        6
company shares in retirement accounts with limited opportunities for diversification. The risk,

however, appears generally to be manageable: portfolio theory suggests that a moderate amount

of employee ownership can be part of a prudent portfolio depending on how other assets are

diversified (Blasi, Kruse, and Markowitz, 2008).

         The inadequate diversification issue has come up most frequently with respect to ESOPs

because of their retirement-plan structure. Although ESOPs are legally organized as retirement

plans, scholars caution that they should not be thought of as a substitute for a diversified

retirement plan (e.g., see Kruse 2002), and indeed, all but one of the 14 companies (including nine

ESOPs) in the NBER study also have regular diversified 401(k) retirement plans. Among the

subset of nine ESOPs, surveyed employees at three companies had less than half of their pension

assets in the employer’s stock, while employees at three other companies had between half and

three-quarters, and employees at another three companies had over three-quarters of pension

assets invested in their employer’s stock. Clearly, many of these plans should be more diversified,

but we need to bear in mind that employee-owners inevitably face greater ownership risk. To the

extent that employee ownership increases wealth as well as risk, the question becomes whether

this wealth-risk tradeoff leaves employee-owners better off or not. 7



Profile of the SCRP Companies and the GSS National Sample

         The NBER Shared Capitalism Research Project includes fourteen companies with one or

more forms of shared ownership.8 These companies come from a variety of industries – including


7
  We thank Jeff Keefe for this point and for pointing out that the U.S. system of employment-based health insurance,
life insurance, savings plans, etc. exposes American workers in general to high levels of firm specific risk. Employee-
ownership further increases this risk. The better these benefits (including ownership) are, the greater the firm specific
risks are. But this does not mean that employees would be better off without them.
8
   An overview of the data is contained in Kruse, Blasi, and Park (2008). Other papers using these data include Blasi,
Kruse, and Markowitz (2008), Blasi et al. (2008), Freeman, Kruse, and Blasi (2008), Harden, Kruse, and Blasi (2008),
and Kruse, Freeman, and Blasi (2008).

                                                           7
manufacturing (8), professional services (3), high tech (2) and finance (1) and vary in size from a

few hundred to almost 50,000 employees. Four have publicly traded stock, and ten are privately

held. Many of these companies are very successful, high wage employers and industry leaders.

Others (5 of these 14 companies) are in relatively low wage industries and pay below (U.S.)

average wages. This study reflects their experiences too, and is relevant to their (lower to middle

income) employees.

         Employee surveys, conducted between 2001 and 2005, yielded over 41,000 valid surveys,

of which over 26,000 were of permanent, full-time employees. These companies were not

randomly selected to participate in this study. Their participation hinged on their willingness to

allow their employees to be surveyed, and in some cases their involvement grew out of prior

professional contacts with project researchers. They are a unique group of companies – certainly

more exemplary than representative – with stronger than average wealth-sharing practices and

managers who were willing to devote time and organizational resources to participate in this

study.

         We also draw on the 2002 and 2006 General Social Surveys to provide a nationally

representative baseline. The GSS is administered to a national random sample of adults by the

National Opinion Research Center of the University of Chicago. The combined surveys include

over 5,000 respondents. Excluding non-employees, part-time employees and employees with less

than a year on the job reduces the sample to 1,384. Twenty-nine percent of this subsample reports

owning their employer’s stock.

         The 14 NBER companies have a variety of different stock sharing programs in place.       As

Table 1 indicates, these include nine ESOP-type plans (eight ESOPs and one KSOP), three 401(k)

plans that invest in the employer’s stock as well as other assets, five employee stock purchase



                                                  8
plans (ESPPs), and six stock option plans (SOPs). Nine of these companies (identified with bold

company numbers in Table 1) are majority employee-owned ESOP-type plans (including one

KSOP and one set up as a 401(k)).9 In some of the following tables, we report results for this

subset of majority-owned ESOP companies.

        All of the privately held ESOP companies in the NBER study are majority owned; most

are 100% employee owned. Overall participation rates of eligible employees (the percent of

employees participating in at least one plan) are high, especially in the ESOPs.10 The average

value of company stock holdings (for employees with any stock) varies widely across companies –

from just under $8,000 to over $239,000.



Ownership Stakes

        In this section we examine the extent of participation in employee stock ownership, the

size of employees’ ownership stakes, the importance of ownership relative to base pay, and the

value of company stock in relation to employee’s total wealth. These measures are reported for all

14 companies in the NBER study, a subsample of the nine ESOP companies in the NBER study,

and for the combined 2002 and 2006 General Social Surveys. The measures are also broken down

by position: management vs. non-management.

        Table 2 presents various measures of employee stock ownership in the NBER shared

capitalism companies and the GSS national samples.11 Panel A confirms a very high participation

rate, for managers and non-managers alike, in the NBER companies, with nearly 87% of surveyed


9
  One of the companies included in this group holds its company stock in a 401(k) rather than an ESOP. One became
majority owned shortly after its employee survey was conducted.
10
   As noted in Table 1, overall about 15% of the employees surveyed responded that they did not know if they held
any employer stock. Here these employees are counted as non-participants (rather than dropped from the sample),
significantly reducing reported participation rates for some companies. In the remaining tables they are excluded from
the calculation of participation rates and company stock values.
11
   All stock ownership and pay estimates presented here and below are reported in 2006 dollars.

                                                          9
employees in these firms reporting that they own employer stock – far higher than the 29%

incidence of employee ownership in the national sample of private-sector employees.12

        The two most important sources of company stock ownership in the NBER study are (1)

ESOPs (including KSOPs and 401(k) plans that hold company stock), in which stock accumulates

in employees’ retirement accounts and (2) stock option plans, where employees are free to (and

usually do) sell their shares immediately upon exercising their options. Consequently, we expect

company stock ownership to be higher for employees in the subset of nine ESOP companies than

for employees of all of the companies in the NBER study, and indeed this is the case (see Panel B

of Table 2). Company stock holdings per employee (including those with no stock) are about

$52,800 in the NBER full dataset, and $76,000 for the nine NBER ESOPs. Based on the General

Social Surveys, employees nationwide own on average $10,600 worth of their employers’ stock.

        We see in Panel C that the average stake of employee-owners (i.e., employees who own

some company stock) is $61,000 for all NBER companies and $85,900 for the NBER ESOPs.

The average ownership stake of employee-owners in the GSS national sample is $48,000. For the

NBER shared capitalist firms, non-managers (“Others”) own roughly one-third as much company

stock as managers, and the median holdings of the employee-owners is only about a quarter of the




12
  The GSS asked respondents: “Do you own any shares of stock in the company where you now work, either directly
or through some type of retirement or stock plan?” Those who answered affirmatively were asked for “a general
estimate of how much cash you would get if all this stock were sold today.” They were not asked how they acquired
their company stock, but it is likely that the majority of the GSS employee-owners did so through an employer
sponsored program (rather than simply through open market purchases). Freeman (2007:2) indicates that the great
majority of private sector employees who own shares in their company do so via either ESOPs or 401(k) plans.
          The incidence of company stock ownership among GSS respondents may itself seem surprisingly high. Note
that this estimate is based on a sample of permanent, full-time, private sector employees, who are 18 or over and have
been in their current job for at least one year, and excludes respondents who didn’t know if they owned company
stock – all conditions favoring a high participation rate.



                                                         10
mean.13 Although skewed toward the top, the distribution of employee-owned stock is

considerably less skewed than is the distribution of wealth in general.

        Company stock contributions to ESOP accounts are governed by ERISA and generally

vary in proportion to participants’ taxable earnings (with a cap of $170,000 in 2001). But the

longer an employee has been in the plan, the more stock he or she can potentially accrue, so

differences in ownership stakes among employees can be due to differences in length of service as

well as differences in pay levels. In the case of the NBER ESOPs, controlling for job tenure

reduces the manager vs. non-manager gap in average company stock holdings in Panel C by just

9%, because in fact, there is little difference between managers and others in average job tenure.14

But it reduces the mean-median gap for all employees by 50%.15 ESOP account balances

increase, on average, by about $8,400 per year of service. As a result, a large part of the variation

in account balances among ESOP participants at any point in time is not due to unequal stock

allocations to ESOP accounts, but simply to differences in time-in-plan.

        Panel D shows the value of employer stock holdings relative to base pay. In all cases

employee-owners own stock worth two-thirds or more of their annual base pay, with a higher ratio

for managers than for others in the NBER companies but a higher ratio for others than for

managers in the GSS. This reversal – with stock being more important (relative to pay) for non-

management employees than for managers – is due more to their relatively low pay than to large

company stock holdings.

13
   The ratio of mean to the median employer stock holdings is a rough measure of the degree to which the distribution
of company stock ownership is skewed to the right, with a relatively small number of employee-owners holding much
more stock than the bulk of more typical owners. For perspective, Wolff (2004: Table1) reports a 13:1 ratio of mean
to median household financial net worth in 2001 ($298,500 vs. $23,200).
14
   Tenure-adjusted stock values for non-managerial employees are obtained by regressing stock value on job tenure
for these employees and using this regression equation to find the expected stock value for non-managerial employees
who have the mean job tenure of managerial employees.
15
   Tenure-adjusted stock values are obtained by adjusting each employee’s stock value by the expected difference in
value for someone with that employee’s job tenure vs. the mean job tenure for the sample.


                                                         11
        Finally, Panel E reports employees’ estimates of the value of their company stock relative to

their total wealth. While company stock represents somewhat over half of pension assets, on

average, for the full sample of NBER employees (not shown in tables), it represents only about 20

percent, on average, of their total wealth. In the GSS as well, employee-owners hold just under 20%

of their wealth in company stock.

        Table 3 (Panel A) reports the value of stock options held by employees in the NBER and the

2006 GSS datasets. Just 22% of employees in the NBER companies and 17% of employees in the

GSS hold stock options, but among the five broad-based stock option companies in the NBER study,

93% hold options to purchase their employers’ stock. The average value of these options is

$262,000 per employee (panel B) or $283,000 per option holder (Panel C).16

        Focusing on the broad-based stock-options companies, we see that on average management

holds options worth about 2.5 times more than other employees’ options ($583,400 vs. $213,300).

On average, employees in these companies hold options worth almost two years pay (Panel D), and

in the case of managers almost three years pay. On average, over half of their wealth is held in these

stock-options (Panel E).



Do Employee-Owners Pay with Lower Wages?

        Skeptics of employee ownership suggest that (for equivalent workers and working

conditions) whatever value ownership confers on employees must be offset by correspondingly

lower wages, since the market insures that total (risk-adjusted) compensation must be the same

everywhere. And there are reasons, besides competitive theory, to suppose that employees

receiving company stock might pay for it with lower wages. Unionized workers in airlines and

16
  The values reported here are the net gain the employee would realize if his/her stock options were exercised and the
stock sold.


                                                         12
trucking – industries under pressure of deregulation in the late 1970s and ‘80s – made large wage

concessions in return for ownership shares to save their companies and their jobs (Blasi, 1988:94;

Russell, 1985:200). Some high-tech startups, such as Amazon, acknowledged a compensation

strategy of luring talent on the cheap with stock options and below-market pay.17

         The preponderance of empirical evidence, however, goes the other way. In a pre/post

study of ESOPs adopted by public companies between 1980 and 2004, Kim and Ouimet (2008)

find significant increases in employee compensation following the adoption of ESOPs,

particularly for ESOPs owning more than 5% of a company where the long-term increase in

compensation is 4.5%. A study of 490 firms with broad-based stock options found that these

companies paid their employees 8% more than all other public companies when most of them

introduced their stock-option plans in the mid 1980s, and continued to pay 8% more a decade later

(Sesil et al., 2007). Blasi, Conte and Kruse (1996) found that compensation per employee was 23

percent higher in publicly traded companies with more than 5 percent of their stock held in broad-

based employee stock ownership plans than it was in other firms. Kardas, Scharf, and Keogh

(1998) found mean and median wages of ESOP companies in Washington State to be higher than

a matched set of control companies. And Kruse and Blasi (2001), matching 1,176 pairs of ESOP

and non-ESOP companies, found that the ESOP companies were over four times more likely to

have traditional defined benefit plans and over five times more likely to have 401(k) plans – in

addition to their ESOPs.

         What do our data say on this issue? Employees in the NBER companies receive higher

pay than employees in the GSS, but this simple comparison does not account for the select nature

17
  Statistical evidence for wage substitution is harder to come by than anecdotal evidence. One tangentially related
study of Italian producer co-ops by Pencavel, Pistaferri and Schivardi (2006) finds that “a worker in a co-op earned
15-16% less than a worker in a capitalist enterprise,” controlling for age, gender, region, establishment size, industry
and occupation.


                                                           13
of the NBER firms. For a more finely tuned examination of the relationship between employee

ownership and pay levels, we compare wages (and perceptions about them) of employee-owners

and non-owners within datasets. First we consider employees’ views about their base pay relative

to the base pay of similarly qualified employees in similar jobs at other companies. Responses to

this question are reported in Table 4. Differences in the pattern of responses between owners and

non-owners in the NBER data are consistent with the substitution hypothesis, and they are

statistically significant. However, they are very small. In particular, the percentage of employee-

owners who felt that they were paid below market was only one percentage point more than the

percentage of non-owners who felt that they were paid below market (39.5% vs. 38.5%).

Responses of GSS employee-owners and non-owners do not differ significantly (due in part to the

much smaller sample size) and are not consistent with substitution. In fact a substantially higher

percentage of employee-owners felt that they were paid above market (29.2% vs. 21.4%).

        Next we consider the relationship between employees’ pay and their ownership stakes

(more specifically, the annual increase in their ownership stake). The key independent variable in

this analysis is the ratio of the value of the employee’s accrued company stock per year of service

(indicating the annual growth of his/her ownership stake) to his or her annual base pay. A

negative relationship between this variable and pay suggests that the more important ownership

growth is relative to pay, the lower pay will be – in other words, ownership substitutes for pay. A

positive relationship is inconsistent with the substitution hypothesis.18

        In Table 5A seven different measures of pay are regressed on this independent variable

(i.e., the annual increase in stock ownership relative to annual pay), controlling for an extensive

list of personal and job-related determinants of pay. The first two dependent variables in Panel A


18
  We use the average annual increase in ownership stake since the level of stock ownership depends heavily on years
of service, which obscures the relationship between pay and ownership.

                                                        14
are the log of base pay and of total pay. The next four are employees’ assessments of their pay

(fixed and total) relative to the pay of employees in similar jobs at other companies in their region.

The last dependent variable indicates respondents’ assessment of how hard would it be to find

another job with pay and benefits comparable to what they now have. In 12 of the 14 regressions,

the coefficient of the key ownership share variable is positive; in six of these it is statistically

significant (at better than a 5% level of significance), and in every case where the relationship is

statistically significant, it is positive. These results suggest that if there is any relationship

between company stock ownership and pay, it is a complementary one.

         Panel B of Table 5 presents similar regressions based on the GSS data. Here the five

dependent variables are log earnings, perceptions of pay relative to market, assessments of pay and

fringe benefits, and the difficulty of finding another job with comparable pay and benefits. In four

of these five regressions the signs of the key coefficient are positive and in all of the statistically

significant estimates the coefficients are positive.

         The main finding here is that there is no evidence that employee ownership substitutes for

wages or benefits. On the contrary, it appears on average to be an add-on, with employees’

ownership stake growing without sacrificing pay.19



Does Employee Ownership Build Wealth?

         Here we turn to the question of whether employee ownership actually adds to wealth or

just changes the composition of wealth, substituting company stock for other forms of wealth

(e.g., assets in a 401(k) account or an IRA). Do employees, for example, buy company stock


19
  These relationships were also estimated for samples restricted to non-managers and for the five NBER companies
with the lowest pay, all with similar results. In no case was there statistically significant evidence of substitution of
ownership for pay or benefits.


                                                            15
through an employee stock purchase plan instead of buying other stock or in addition to other

stock? In this case, employee ownership would just be a substitute for other forms of wealth,

rather than an addition to them.

         Of course, we cannot know what the wealth levels of employee-owners would have been

in the absence of employee ownership, but we can see whether employee ownership is associated

with higher levels of overall wealth or not. If it is, that is prima facie evidence that employee

ownership does not fully substitute for other forms of wealth and thus increases total wealth.20

         Table 6 presents some evidence on this question. Two regressions are reported for the

NBER full data set and two for the nine NBER ESOP companies. In each regression the

dependent variable is the employee’s wealth. Because wealth is a categorical variable in this

dataset, interval regressions are used to assess the relationship of employee ownership to overall

wealth.21 The key independent variable in the first regression on each dataset is the value of

company stock held in all plans. In the second regression this variable is replaced by the value of

company stock in each plan. All regressions also include a set of controls for other potential

determinants of wealth which might be correlated with the level of company stock holdings (see

table notes).

         The first and most general result is the coefficient of 0.942 on company stock in all plans

in the first regression, which implies that each additional dollar of employer stock is associated

with 94.2 cents of higher wealth. That is, there appears to be very little reduction in other wealth

associated with increasing employee ownership (only about 6 cents less other wealth as employee

20
   Moreover, as Joseph Blasi has pointed out to us, even if employee ownership is substituting for other wealth dollar
for dollar, that does not mean there is no net gain for the employee. It still allows for a higher level of consumption at
the same level of wealth. This is especially relevant for stock options, where options are usually exercised and the
stock immediately sold. The proceeds can be reinvested (increasing wealth) or spent (increasing consumption), but in
either case there is a welfare gain.
21
   The NBER surveys asked employees to put their wealth into one of between 9 and 16 categories (depending on the
survey). The regressions were run using Stata’s intreg command, with dollar values adjusted for inflation to represent
2006 values.

                                                           16
ownership increases by one dollar). For nine NBER ESOPs the corresponding coefficient is

0.801, which indicates that wealth rises 80.1 cents as employee ownership increases by one dollar,

so other wealth is decreasing by only 20 cents. While we cannot know what the wealth of

employees would have been in the absence of employee ownership, these results cast doubt on a

simple story of dollar-for-dollar substitution.

         The regressions that include all plan types indicate the effect on total wealth of increases in

the value of company stock in each of the various methods of stock ownership – ESOPs, 401(k)’s,

Employee Stock Purchase Plans (ESPPs), exercised stock options, and open market purchases. In

these regressions, all of the coefficients are positive and statistically significant, indicating that

employee ownership is associated with higher wealth. The ESOP coefficient in the full dataset is

not significantly different from one, indicating no substitution of ESOP stock with other wealth,

while the coefficient of 0.880 in the ESOP-only regression indicates only minimal substitution for

other wealth. The coefficients on open market purchases and stock purchased through ESPPs are

much larger than one, which probably indicates that increases in (other) wealth lead to increased

investment in the employer’s stock.22 Exercised stock options have a coefficient of 0.646,

suggesting that an extra dollar of stock from stock options is associated with 64.6 cents of greater

wealth, and the remainder of the extra dollar (35.4 cents) may be substituting for other wealth as

employees save less as this form of wealth increases. A similar story may apply to the 401(k)

coefficient in the ESOP-only regression. While these estimates are necessarily rough, they are

generally inconsistent with the idea that employee ownership is substituting for other wealth, and



22
  The large ESPP coefficient might also be partly due to the fact that company stock in ESPPs is typically bought at a
20% discount, so every $1 of stock purchased automatically raises wealth by $1.25. Also employees are most likely
to buy company stock when its price is rising, and if the price does rise the value of their wealth will rise more than
their dollar investment.


                                                          17
more consistent with the idea that increasing employee stock ownership by a dollar tends to raise

employee wealth by almost a dollar.

        Another way to examine the wealth impact of employee ownership across the economic

spectrum is to compare the distribution of wealth classes with and without employee ownership.

Figures 1 to 3 provide such a comparison for the GSS sample, full NBER sample, and NBER

ESOP sample. Within each of these samples, the distribution of employees by wealth class was

predicted using multinomial logits, and the probabilities of membership in each class were then

predicted with the value of employer stock set to zero.23 If employee ownership makes no

difference in the levels or distribution of wealth (that is, if it fully substitutes for other wealth) then

these predicted and actual distributions will be identical.

        As seen in Figure 1, the predicted and actual distributions by wealth class in the GSS

sample are fairly similar but employee ownership seems to shift the distribution to the right,

slightly decreasing the likelihood of being in the two lowest wealth classes (<$20,000) and slightly

increasing the likelihood of being in the $150,000-250,000 and >$500,000 wealth classes. Figure

2 shows a larger difference for employee ownership among the NBER shared capitalism

employees, where it appears to decrease membership in the six lowest wealth classes (<$150,000)

and increase membership in the classes above that, particularly in the >$500,000 class. Figure 3

finds the same pattern among employees in ESOP companies, but with more dramatic differences.

Combined membership in the four lowest wealth categories (<$75,000) is 47% without employee

ownership, and 34% with employee ownership. These figures are consistent with the idea that

employee ownership is enhancing wealth, not substituting for other forms of wealth.


23
  The predictors used in the multinomial logits were gender, age, married, BA degree, graduate degree, black,
Hispanic, household size, number of children, tenure, natural logarithm of annual earnings, and dollar value of
employer stock held. The predicted likelihoods were averaged within each wealth class for an estimate of the percent
of employees who would be in each wealth class.

                                                         18
The Distribution of Employee Stock Ownership and the Distribution of Wealth

         Finally, we assess the distribution of company stock ownership and of all wealth (net

worth). Table 7A shows the distribution of employer stock across employees (for the NBER

companies and GSS employees) and compares it with Edward Wolff’s estimates of the

distribution of all stock across households. In both the NBER full sample and the ESOP

subsample the top 10% of employees hold about 64% of employer stock and the next 50% hold

almost all the rest. In the GSS the top 10 percent hold an estimated 73% of the company stock

(which is likely to be a lower bound estimate24), and the next 50% hold the remaining 27%. By

way of a rough comparison, Wolff (2004) finds that the top 10 percent of households hold 77% of

all stock.25 It is not surprising to find a more equal distribution of company stock among

employees of the “shared capitalism” companies in the NBER study (with over a third of company

stock held by those between the 40th and 90th percentile). Many fewer GSS respondents are

employee-owners and even fewer of them are likely to be employed in companies with a broad-

based employee ownership plan.



24
   A problem with estimating the distribution of company stock ownership in the GSS sample is that 30% of the
respondents who reported that they owned company stock did not report the value of that stock (usually because they
didn’t know, rather than refused to say). Omitting these respondents from the calculation lends an upward bias to the
distribution, resulting in an estimate that 91% of the company stock is held by the top 10%. We have no way of
knowing the actual stock holdings of those who did not respond to the question. The GSS estimates in Table 7 are
based on imputing stock values for employees who said they owned company stock but didn’t report how much. This
imputation was done by regressing stock value on pay, sex, age, education, tenure and position (management vs.
other) for the portion of the sample of employees who report stock value and using the resulting equation to estimate
stock values for those who didn’t report. This procedure relies on the assumption that employee-owners who are
statistically alike in their personal characteristics will have similar company stock holdings. Since it is likely that
employee-owners who do not know the value of their company stock do not hold as much of it as their statistically
similar counterparts who do know, we take 73.3% as a rough ‘lower bound’ estimate of the share of company stock
held by the top 10% of GSS employees.
25
   Comparisons in panel A of this table are confounded by inconsistencies in the unit of observation between the
NBER/GSS data (company stock value per employee) and Wolff’s data (stock value per household). This observation
does not apply to panel B, where the unit of observation is the household in the NBER/GSS data, as well as Wolff’s
data.


                                                          19
         Turning to Panel B of Table 7, we find that for both the NBER full sample and ESOPs and

the GSS, the top 10 percent of households hold around 55-58% of all wealth and the next 50%

hold 37-41%.26 The similarity of the numbers provides little evidence that employee ownership

has a significant impact on the wealth distribution. Comparisons among these samples may,

however, be affected by demographic differences (e.g., age, marital status, and household size)

that are related to wealth levels. This was checked in two ways. First, the NBER wealth

distribution was imputed based on predictors of wealth in the GSS sample, to see what the

distribution would look like if the NBER employees had the same wealth levels of

demographically-similar people in the general population. 27 The result (not reported in the table)

was that 55.9% of the wealth among NBER employees was predicted to be held by the top 10

percent, and 38.9% by the next 50 percent, indicating that the actual NBER wealth distribution is

similar to, but slightly less equal than, the NBER distribution predicted from the GSS.

         A second and more straightforward way to examine the influence of employee ownership

on wealth distribution is to calculate the distribution for employees both with and without

employer stock (assuming that employer stock is not substituting for other forms of wealth, as is

26
   Because the NBER and GSS wealth data are based on categorical variables rather than exact dollar values, the
figures in Table 7B are approximations. The calculation of the wealth distribution is based on assigning mean dollar
values to each category using data from the 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). When the 90th and 40th
percentiles fell within a wealth category, the distribution of wealth within that category in the SCF was used in order
to estimate the total wealth of those above and below those percentiles. E.g., if those in the $500,000-1,000,000
wealth category covered the 85th to 95th percentiles of the NBER distribution, the median of the $500,000-1,000,000
category was identified in the SCF distribution, and the mean wealth was calculated above that median and multiplied
by the number of NBER employees in the 90th to 95th percentiles for an estimate of total wealth among employees in
that part of the distribution. That figure was then added to an estimate of total wealth for those in the 95th to 100th
percentiles, using mean SCF wealth for each category multiplied by the number of employees in that category, to
determine the total held by the top 10 percent. This procedure assumes that wealth is distributed similarly within each
category for the NBER, GSS, and SCF samples. While only an approximation, it is unlikely to lead to any systematic
bias.
27
   The imputations were done using multinomial logits with the GSS data to predict membership in the wealth
categories, then using these estimates to make predictions in the NBER sample of the likelihood of being in each
wealth category. The predicted likelihoods were averaged within each wealth category for an estimate of the percent
of employees who would be in each wealth category. The wealth distribution was then estimated using the procedure
described in the previous footnote. The predictors used in the multinomial logits were gender, age, married, BA
degree, graduate degree, black, Hispanic, household size, number of children, tenure, and natural logarithm of annual
earnings.

                                                          20
strongly suggested by the earlier results). Panel C of Table 7 shows that when employee

ownership is subtracted from estimated wealth holdings, the share of wealth held by the top 10

percent is 57.0% among NBER employees, just slightly higher than the 56.3% figure that includes

employer stock (panel B). Both the middle and lower groups see slightly increased shares of

wealth from adding employee ownership. A similar pattern appears in the GSS data, where the

presence of employer stock slightly decreases the share of wealth among the top 10 percent from

55.9% (panel C) to 55.4% (panel B). The difference is larger in the ESOP sample, where 61.0%

of the wealth excluding employer stock is held by the top 10 percent, and adding employer stock

decreases that share to 58.5%, with increases in the shares of both the middle and bottom wealth

holders. This indicates that ESOPs may play a stronger role than other forms of employee

ownership in broadening ownership of wealth.

       Examination of employee ownership by wealth class can also shed light on how employee

ownership affects the wealth distribution. Table 8 shows that average employee ownership, as a

percent of wealth, is very similar across the wealth categories for the NBER sample, with only a

slightly higher figure (19.5%) for the richest class compared to the poorest class (16.3%). There is

a similar pattern for ESOPs, with fairly uniform percentages across the wealth classes although a

higher percentage in the richest class. This indicates that while employee ownership may increase

wealth, it appears unlikely to have much effect on the distribution of wealth across workers since

everyone’s wealth is going up by a similar percentage (assuming a similar rate of substitution of

employee ownership for other wealth across the categories). The NBER-SCF comparison in

Table 8 clearly shows that employee ownership increases stock ownership as a percentage of

wealth across all of the wealth categories. This reinforces the finding at the top of Table 7 that




                                                 21
stock ownership is greater amid middle and lower employees in the NBER companies than in the

national samples.

       The data in Tables 6 to 8 and Figure 1 point toward a wealth-enhancing effect of employee

ownership but suggest that the shape of the wealth distribution (reflecting the relative amounts

held by those at the top, middle, and bottom) may not be greatly affected by employee ownership.

This is not surprising when one considers that employee ownership plans often distribute company

stock in proportion to salary, and salary is also distributed unequally. Some simple calculations

illustrate this point. If each person in the NBER dataset were simply given an amount of company

stock equal to 10% of their yearly pay, we estimate that the percent of wealth held by the top 10

percent would fall from 56.3% (Table 7) to 55.7%. If a similar total were distributed in equal

dollar amounts ($5989) to each employee, that figure would fall only to 55.5%. The fact that

employee ownership is only a small portion of most workers’ wealth, and is often distributed in

proportion to pay which is itself unequal, indicates that employee ownership, as currently

practiced, is unlikely to significantly impact the existing distribution of wealth.

       Finally, Table 9 compares the mean and median pension wealth of employees in the NBER

(full sample and ESOPs) with Wolff’s estimates of mean and median household pension wealth.

Here again we run into the problem of inconsistent units of observation, and the comparison likely

favors Wolff’s measure because households may have more than one member with a pension plan

and therefore more pension assets.

       We expect pension values to be higher for the NBER ESOP companies than for all NBER

companies because ESOPs operate as retirement plans, with stock accumulating in them until the

employee retires (or otherwise leaves the company). The mean pension wealth for the ESOPs is

just a little higher than the mean in Wolff’s Survey of Consumer Finances data, but the median is



                                                  22
almost three times higher ($32,000 vs. $11,000), suggesting that companies with broad-based

employee ownership do benefit mid-level or median employees in their effect on the distribution

of pension assets. Turning to the “pre-retirement,” 47-64 age group, however, we find no practical

difference between the median pension assets of employees of these ESOPs vs. Wolff’s

households.



Conclusion

       The NBER Shared Capitalism Research Project employee surveys indicate that shared

ownership builds wealth for employees. The average value of company stock held by employee

owners in the nine majority-owned ESOP companies is almost $86,000, and the average value of

stock options held by option holders in the five broad-based stock option companies is almost

$283,000. Median holdings are considerably lower ($22,800 and $93,400, respectively), and non-

managers’ holdings are only about one-third those of managers, on average. Nonetheless,

comparison of the NBER and GSS datasets shows that if all employees worked for companies

with broad-based employee-ownership plans like the NBER firms, a lot more employees would

own a lot more company stock.

       There is no evidence that employees’ ownership gains are offset by lower wages or

benefits. While increases in company stock ownership appear to be partially offset by decreases in

other wealth, there is a substantial net gain in total wealth resulting from increases in employee

ownership – with a one dollar increase in ownership associated with almost a one dollar increase

in total wealth. We find some evidence here that the general pattern of capital ownership and

income going almost exclusively to the top is partly reversed by employee ownership, with

expanded stock ownership among those at the middle and bottom of the wealth distribution.



                                                 23
       While employee-ownership inevitably increases employees’ firm specific risks in

proportion to the value of company stock owned, the risk-reward tradeoff appears to be

manageable (Blasi, Kruse, and Markowitz, 2008). Since employee ownership does not cause a

substantial decrease in ownership of other assets, this increased risk applies only to assets that

employees would not have if they worked at a non employee-ownership company. In addition,

employee ownership is only a small portion of wealth for most employee owners, consistent with

the bounds suggested by portfolio theory (assuming other assets are properly diversified). These

results indicate that broad-based employee ownership may be raising wealth for many workers

without unduly increasing worker risk.




                                                  24
                                          Bibliography

Blasi, Joseph. 1988. Employee Ownership: Revolution or Ripoff? Ballinger.

Blasi, Joseph, Michael Conte and Douglas Kruse. 1996. “Employee Stock Ownership and
   Corporate Performance Among Public Companies,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review. v.
   50, n. 1, October.

Blasi, Joseph, Douglas Kruse, and Aaron Bernstein. 2003. In the Company of Owners: The Truth
   About Stock Options (And Why Every Employee Should Have Them). New York: Basic Books.

Blasi, Joseph, Richard Freeman, Chris Mackin, and Douglas Kruse. 2008. “Creating a Bigger
   Pie? The Effects of Employee Ownership, Profit Sharing, and Stock Options on Workplace
   Performance,” NBER Working Paper 14230, August.

Blasi, Joseph, Douglas Kruse, and Harry Markowitz. 2008. “Risk and Lack of Diversification
   Under Employee Ownership and Shared Capitalism,” NBER Working Paper 14229, August.

Freeman, Richard, Douglas Kruse and Joseph Blasi. 2008. “Worker Responses to Shirking under
   Shared Capitalism,” NBER Working Paper 14227, August.

Freeman, Steven F. 2007. “Effects of ESOP Adoption and Employee Ownership: Thirty Years of
   Research and Experience,” Organizational Dynamics Working Paper #07-01, University of
   Pennsylvania.

Harden, Erika, Douglas Kruse, and Joseph Blasi. 2008. “Who Has a Better Idea? Innovation,
   Shared Capitalism, and HR Policies,” NBER Working Paper 14234, August.

Kardas, Peter, Adria Scharf and Jim Keogh. 1998. “Wealth and Income Consequences of ESOPs
   and Employee Ownership: A Comparative Study from Washington State," Journal of
   Employee Ownership Law and Finance. v. 10, n. 4, Fall.

Kelso, Louis O. and Mortimer Adler. 1958. The Capitalist Manifesto. Random House.

Kennickell, Arthur B. 2003. “A Rolling Tide: Changes in the Distribution of wealth in the U.S.,
   1989-2001.” Working Paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Kim, E. Han, and Paige Ouimet. 2008. “Employee Capitalism or Corporate Socialism? Broad-based
   Employee Stock Ownership,” Draft, Ross School of Business, University of Michigan, October.

Kruse, Douglas. 2002. “Research Evidence on Prevalence and Effects of Employee Ownership,”
   Journal of Employee Ownership Law and Finance. v. 14, n. 4. Fall

Kruse, Douglas and Joseph Blasi. 2001. A Population Study of the Performance of ESOP and
   Non-ESOP Privately-held Companies. New Brunswick, N.J. School of Management and labor
   Relations, Rutgers University. May.


                                               25
Kruse, Douglas, Joseph Blasi, and Rhokeun Park. 2008. “Shared Capitalism in the U.S.
   Economy: Prevalence, Characteristics, and Employee Views of Financial Participation in
   Enterprises,” NBER Working Paper 14225, August.

Kruse, Douglas, Richard Freeman, and Joseph Blasi. 2008. “Do Workers Gain by Sharing?
   Employee Outcomes Under Employee Ownership, Profit Sharing, and Broad-based Stock
   Options,” NBER Working Paper 14233, August.

Mackin, Christopher. 2005. “2005 Census of Massachusetts Companies with Employee Stock
  Ownership Plans (ESOPs).” Boston: Commonwealth Corporation.

Mishel, Lawrence, Jared Bernstein, and Sylvia Allegretto. 2007. The State of Working America
   2006/2007. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Pencavel, John, Luigi Pistaferri and Fabiano Schivardi. 2006. “Wages, Employment and Capital in
   Capitalist and Worker-Owned Firms” Industrial and Labor Relations Review. V. 60, n. 1.
   October

Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-1998.”
   The Quarterly journal of Economics. v. 118, n. 1, February.

Rodrick, Scott S. 2005. An Introduction to ESOPs. Seventh edition. Oakland: The National
   Center for Employee Ownership.

Rosen, Corey. 2005. “Retirement security and Wealth Accumulation in S ESOP Companies.”
   Oakland: The National Center for Employee Ownership.

Russell, Raymond. 1985. Sharing Ownership in the Workplace. State University of New York
   Press.

Scharf, Adria and Christopher Mackin. 2000. “Census of Massachusetts Companies with
   Employee Stock ownership Plans (ESOPs),” Boston: Commonwealth Corporation.
Sesil, James, Maya Kroumova, Douglas Kruse, and Joseph Blasi. 2007. “Broad-based Employee
   Stock Options in the United States: Company Performance and Characteristics,” Management
   Revue, Vol. 18, No. 2, pp. 5-22.

Weller, Christian and Edward N. Wolff. 2005. “Retirement Income: The Crucial Role of Social
  Security.” Washington, D. C.: Economics Policy Institute.

Wolff, Edward N. 2004. “Changes in Household Wealth in the 1980s and 1990s in the U.S.”
  The Levy Institute of Bard College, Working Paper No. 407.

Wolff, Edward N. 2005. “Is the Equalizing Effect of Retirement Wealth Wearing Off?” The
  Levy Institute of Bard College, Working Paper No. 420.




                                              26
                               Table 1: NBER Company Plans and Disposition of Company Stock

                                     Stock is Publicly         Percent of Stock  Participation Rate                 Value per
Company1            Plans         Traded/Privately Held       Held by Employees (% holding co. stock)4            Employee-Owner4,5

   1          ESOP                       Private                       100%                 88.5%                     $239,139
   2          ESOP                       Private                       100                 81.9                          23,827
   3          ESPP, SOP                  Public                        n.a.                97.1                        138,430
   4          ESOP                       Private                        77                 64.1                          26,155
                                                                          2
   5          ESOP                       Private                       33                  39.1                           7,877
   6          401(k), ESPP, SOP          Private                       100                 88.5                          36,623
   7          ESOP, ESPP, SOP            Public                          53                88.1                          15,865
   8          KSOP                       Private                       100                 77.5                        166,713
   9          ESOP                       Private                       100                 69.3                          38,411
  10          ESOP                       Private                        75                 52.0                         40,407
  11          401(k), ESPP, SOP          Public                        n.a.                82.0                         39,547
  12          ESOP                       Private                       100                 87.1                         99,000
  13          ESPP, SOP                  Public                        n.a.                60.3                        175,687
  14          401(K), SOP                Public                        n.a.                67.7                         27,952
 ___________________
 Notes: ESOP – Employee Stock Ownership Plan
        KSOP – A 401(k) plan with matching contributions of company stock to a companion ESOP.
        401(k) – A 401(k) plan that holds company stock, as well as other assets.
        (Note: All but one of these companies has a regular 401(k) plan.)
        ESPP – Employee Stock Purchase Plan
        SOP – Company grants stock options (broad based in all but one case)
        1. Bold numbers indicate a subset of 9 ESOPs (or near-ESOPs) that are broken out in some subsequent analyses.
        2. 33% at the time of the survey, soon after increased to 67%.
        3. 15% including unexercised stock options.
        4. Includes only U.S. based, full-time employees (35 or more hours per week), age 18 and over, with at least one year of service.
           Employees who didn’t know if they owned their employer’s stock (about 15% of this subsample) are assumed not to. In the case of
           stock option plans, employees who have ever received stock options are counted, even if they do not currently hold company stock.
        5. Average value of employer stock for employees owning company stock.

                                                                  27
                           Table 2: Employee Stock Ownership by Employee Position

                                               NBER Full                NBER ESOP                GSS National
                                                Dataset                  Companies1             Sample 2002&06
A. Percent Owning Employer Stock

        All employees                             86.8%                     88.6%                      29.3%
            Managers                              96.5                      97.1                       33.9
            Others                                85.6                      87.4                       28.5
        (Sample size)                           (24,918)                   (3,889)                    (1370)

B. Value per Employee2

        All Employees                           $ 52,759                  $76,041                    $10,590
            Managers                            126,948                   202,078                     17,814
            Others                                41,745                    55,756                      9,576
        (Sample size)                           (24,202)                   (4,314)                     (1245)

C. Value per Employee-Owner3

        All Employees                           $61,059                   $85,926                    $47,961
            Managers                            131,654                   208,190                     63,281
            Others                               49,030                    63,874                     45,109
        All Employees (median)                   15,484                    22,767                     15,000
            Managers (median)                    46,452                    70,560                     28,016
            Others (median)                      13,340                    20,645                     11,206
        (Sample size)                           (20,912)                   (3,423)                     (276)

D. Value of Employer Stock as a Percentage of Annual Base Pay (NBER) or Earnings (GSS) 3

        All Employees                              65.4%                    118.5%                     75.8%
            Managers                               95.5                     179.8                      62.0
            Others                                 60.0                     107.3                      78.3
        (Sample size)                           (18,796)                   (2,527)                    (269)

E. Value of Employer Stock as a Percentage of Total Wealth3

        All Employees                              19.5%                     28.0%                    18.2%4
            Managers                               21.9                      34.1                     13.5
            Others                                 19.0                      26.7                     19.0
        (Sample size)                           (18,789)                   (2,419)                    (113)
_________________
Notes: All measures are based on a sample of US-based, full-time (35 or more hours per week) employees of for-
       profit companies, who are age 18 and over and have at least one year of service. Employees who reported
       that they didn’t know if they owned their employer’s stock are dropped from these calculations.

       1.   This is a subset of nine majority owned, privately held ESOP companies identified in Table 1.
       2.   Includes employees who own no employer stock.
       3.   Includes only employees who own employer stock.
       4.   Based on 2006 GSS only.




                                                           28
                                Table 3: Stock Options by Employee Position

                                            NBER Full             NBER Broad-based            GSS National
                                             Dataset              Stock Option Cos.1         Sample 2002&06
A. Percent Holding Stock Options

        All employees                          22.1%                     93.2%                     17.1%
            Managers                           44.1                      97.1                      18.4
            Others                             19.4                      92.4                      16.9
        (Sample size)                        (27,952)                  (5,896)                    (1359)

B. Value per Employee2

        All Employees                          $55,592                 $262,931
            Managers                           183,935                  566,146
            Others                              38,730                  196,498
        (Sample size)                         (27,711)                   (5,711)

C. Value per Stock Option Holder3

        All Employees                        $259,740                  $282,841
            Managers                          428,614                   583,424
            Others                            205,995                   213,264
        All Employees (median)                 80,042                     93,383
            Managers (median)                 112,805                   213,446
            Others (median)                    80,042                     80,042
        (Sample size)                         (5,931)                    (5,309)

D. Value of Stock Options as a Percentage of Annual Base Pay 3

        All Employees                           175.6%                   189.6%
            Managers                            219.7                    287.7
            Others                              161.9                    167.2
        (Sample size)                         (5,769)                   (5,185)

E. Value of Stock Options as a Percentage of Total Wealth3

        All Employees                            54.5%                    58.9%
            Managers                             45.2                     57.5
            Others                               57.4                     59.3
        (Sample size)                          (5,617)                  (5,102)
_________________
Notes: All measures are based on a sample of US-based, full-time (35 or more hours per week) employees of for-
       profit companies, who are age 18 and over and have at least one year of service. Employees who reported
       that they didn’t know if they hold stock options are dropped from these calculations

       1. This is a subset of five SOP companies (excluding company 14 which is not broad-based) identified in
          Table 1.
       2. Total value of vested and unvested options. Includes employees who hold no stock options.
       3. Total value of vested and unvested options. Includes only employees who hold stock options.




                                                         29
        Table 4: Perceptions of Base Pay Relative to Market for Employee-owners and Non-owners


                                    NBER Full Dataset                     GSS 2006 National Sample

                                 Employee-           Non-                    Employee-            Non-
                                   owners           owners                    owners             owners

         1 Below market             14.2%             17.8%                      15.5%             18.5%
         2                          25.3              20.7                       14.3              11.0
         3 At market                42.5              41.8                       41.1              49.1
         4                          15.1              15.0                       15.5              10.6
         5 Above market              2.9               4.7                       13.7              10.8

                                    χ2 = 72.9 (p=.000)                           χ2 = 6.90 (p=.141)

       Sample size                  19,093            2,836                      168               464
_____________________

Notes: All subsamples are restricted to US-based employees of for-profit, private sector companies, who are 18
       or over, usually work at least 35 hours per week and have at least one year of service with their employer.
       Respondents were asked “Do you believe your fixed annual wages last year were higher or lower than
        those of employees with similar experience and job descriptions in other companies in your region?”




                                                          30
                          Table 5: Does Employer Stock Substitute for Pay?


A. NBER Dataset                                        Ratio of Annual Ownership Stake to Base Pay

         Dependent Variable                               Full Dataset             Nine ESOPs

    1. Log base pay                                           .006                     .000
                                                            (.012)                   (.042)

    2. Log total pay                                          .114**                   .068
                                                            (.013)                   (.043)

    3. Base pay relative to market                            .073*                    .016
      (5 point scale: 1. below, … 5. above)                 (.040)                   (.175)

    4. Base pay percent of market                             .765                  – .294
      (percent below/above market)                          (.585)                   (3.05)

    5. Total pay relative to market                           .218**                   .431**
      (5 point scale: 1. below, … 5. above)                 (.041)                   (.159)

    6. Total pay percent of market                          3.313**                  7.155**
      (percent below/above market)                          (.690)                  (2.925)

    7. Difficulty replacing pay & benefits                 – .002                      .088
      (3 point scale: 1. easy, … 3. not at all easy)        (.024)                   (.090)

B. GSS National Sample 2002&06                         Ratio of Annual Ownership Stake to Earnings

    1. Log earnings                                                        .238
                                                                         (.109)

    2. Base pay relative to market                                        .682
      (5 point scale: 1. below, … 5. above)                              (1.017)

    3. Paid what you deserve                                             -.107
      (5 point scale: 1. much less, … 5. much more)                      (.173)

    4. Fringe benefits are good                                           .798*
      (4 point scale: 1. not true, … 4. Very true)                       (.378)

   5. Difficulty replacing pay and benefits                              1.657*
     (3 point scale: 1. easy, … 3. not at all easy)                      (.694)
________________________________

Notes: Each entry involves a separate regression. The key independent variable is the ratio of the
      value of employer stock (divided by years of tenure) to annual earnings. All regressions include
      controls for sex, age, education, job tenure, hours worked, management, hourly, union
      membership and company fixed effects. Equations A. 3, 5 and 7 and B. 2, 3 4, and 5 are
      ordered probits; others are OLS. Samples are restricted as indicated in Table 4. Standard errors
      are in parentheses. * and ** indicate p<.05 and p<.01 in a one-sided test of significance.



                                                     31
                   Table 6: Does Employer Stock Displace Other Wealth?


                                                            Dependent Variable: Wealth

Independent Variables                              NBER Full Dataset           Nine NBER ESOPs

Value of employer stock from

    All plans                                         0.942**                    0.801**
                                                      (.023)                    (.034)

    ESOP                                                        1.007**                    0.880**
                                                                (.098)                      (.045)

    401(k)                                                      1.280**                    0.661**
                                                                (.100)                     (.051)

    ESPP                                                        3.590**                    3.062**
                                                                (.106)                     (0.725)

    Open market purchases                                       2.179**
                                                                (.148)

    Exercised stock options                                     0.646**
                                                                (.020)
____________________________

Notes: All regressions run as interval regressions due to categorical coding of wealth. Controls include
      earnings, sex, age, marital status, family size, number of children, education, job tenure, hours worked,
      management, paid hourly, union membership and company fixed effects. Samples are restricted as
      indicated in Table 4. Standard errors in parentheses. ** indicates p<.01 in a one-sided test of
      significance.




                                                 32
                         Table 7. Distribution of Stock Ownership and Wealth


                          NBER               NBER                GSS Employees
 Wealth                 Employees           Employees            National Sample           Wolff 2001
 Class                 Full Sample           ESOPs                2002 & 2006             (Households)

                                     A. Share of Employer Stock                           Share of All
                                                                                             Stock

Top 10%                  64.0%                64.0%                 73.3%a                      76.9%b

Next 50%                 34.9                 34.5                  26.7                        22.4

Bottom 40%                 1.1                 1.6                    0.0                        0.7


                                  B. Share of All Wealth (Net Worth)

Top 10%                  56.3%                58.5%                   55.4%                     71.5%c

Next 50%                 39.5                 37.4                    40.8                      28.2

Bottom 40%                 4.2                 4.0                     3.7                       0.3


                          C. Share of All Wealth Excluding Employer Stock

Top 10%                   57.0%                61.0%                  55.9%

Next 50%                   39.2                 36.0                   40.5

Bottom 40%                  3.8                  3.0                    3.6

_____________________________
Note: NBER and GSS samples are restricted as indicated in Table 4. NBER sample employees who reported that
      they did not know if they owned employer stock are excluded.
     a. Imputes the value of employer’s stock for employee-owners who didn’t report it (see footnote 23).
      b. Wolff (2004), Table 13a.
      c. Wolff (2004), Table 2.




                                                       33
               Table 8. Employee Ownership Distribution by Wealth Class

                                        Percent of employee’s wealth in:
Wealth class                    Employee ownership              All stocks
                              NBER full     NBER
                              sample        ESOPs             SCF            NBER
<$5000                             16.3%         26.8%        1.4%           19.6%
$5000-20,000                       16.7%         18.7%        8.9%           23.0%
$20,000-40,000                     16.4%         19.1%       13.7%           23.3%
$40,000-75,000                     17.7%         22.4%       12.9%           26.2%
$75,000-100,000                    18.0%         24.8%       13.6%           28.2%
$100,000-150,000                   17.2%         24.7%       14.4%           29.0%
$150,000-250,000                   17.8%         26.6%       16.9%           31.9%
$250,000-500,000                   17.3%         27.9%       19.4%           34.3%
$500,000 or more                   19.5%         35.3%       26.8%           39.4%




                                                  34
                      Table 9. Pension Wealth: NBER Employees and All Households

                    All NBER companies               NBER ESOPs                   Wolff 2001 Estimates of
                    Assets in All Pensionsa      Assets in All Pensionsa         Household Pension Wealthb

                      Mean         Median         Mean            Median        Mean              Median


Age 18 & over
                     $67,035       $34,006      $102,589          $31,738      $94,800            $10,900
Percent in
                             31.2%                         71.5%
employer stock

Sample size                  22,558                         3,076




Ages 47-64
                    $100,802       $49,875      $165,469          $54,409     $170,800            $50,000
Percent in
                             33.9%                         73.7%
employer stock

Sample size                    7,709                        925

_____________________________
Notes: Sample is restricted as indicated in Table 7.
       a. There are nine companies with majority owned ESOPs. Assets include employer and other stock in ESOPs
           and 401(k) plans. Dollar values have been adjusted to 2001 levels for comparison with Wolff’s figures.
       b. Value of employees’ Defined Benefit and Defined Contribution pension plans. Wolff (2005), Table 11.




                                                       35
36
37
