                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE CAUSES AND EFFECTS OF INTERNATIONAL MIGRATIONS:
                   EVIDENCE FROM OECD COUNTRIES 1980-2005

                                           Francesc Ortega
                                            Giovanni Peri

                                        Working Paper 14833
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14833


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2009




We are thankful to Greg Wright and Tommaso Colussi for excellent research assistance. Peri gratefully
acknowledges generous funding from the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. This paper
was commissioned as background research study for the United Nation Human Development Report,
2009. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Francesc Ortega and Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Causes and Effects of International Migrations: Evidence from OECD Countries 1980-2005
Francesc Ortega and Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 14833
April 2009
JEL No. E25,F22,J61

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper contains three important contributions to the literature on international migrations. First,
it compiles a new dataset on migration flows (and stocks) and on immigration laws for 14 OECD destination
countries and 74 sending countries for each year over the period 1980-2005. Second, it extends the
empirical model of migration choice across multiple destinations, developed by Grogger and Hanson
(2008), by allowing for unobserved individual heterogeneity between migrants and non-migrants.
We use the model to derive a pseudo-gravity empirical specification of the economic and legal determinants
of international migration. Our estimates clearly show that bilateral migration flows are increasing
in the income per capita gap between origin and destination. We also find that bilateral flows decrease
when destination countries adopt stricter immigration laws. Third, we estimate the impact of immigration
flows on employment, investment and productivity in the receiving OECD countries using as instruments
the "push" factors in the gravity equation. Specifically, we use the characteristics of the sending countries
that affect migration and their changes over time, interacted with bilateral migration costs. We find
that immigration increases employment, with no evidence of crowding-out of natives, and that investment
responds rapidly and vigorously. The inflow of immigrants does not seem to reduce capital intensity
nor total factor productivity in the short-run or in the long run. These results imply that immigration
increases the total GDP of the receiving country in the short-run one-for-one, without affecting average
wages and average income per person.


Francesc Ortega
Department of Economics and Business
University Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas 25-27
Barcelona, 08005, Spain
francesc.ortega@upf.edu

Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu
1      Introduction

The present paper advances the literature on the economic determinants and eﬀects of international migrations.
We make three main contributions. First, we gather and organize annual data on bilateral immigration flows
from 74 countries of origin into 14 OECD countries from 1980 to 2005 and on immigration laws in those OECD
countries in order to analyze the economic and legal determinants of migration flows. We first update the data
used in Mayda (forthcoming) from the OECD international migration statistics. These data were discontinued
in 1994. For the period 1995-2005 it has been substituted with a new database on immigration flows and stocks
in OECD countries.1 We merge these two datasets on flows covering the period 1980-2005 with data on the
stock of immigrants residing in the 14 OECD destination countries from the same 74 countries for the period
1990-2000. This also allows us to impute the "net" migration flows to the OECD countries—that is, immigration
net of re-migration out of the country. For the same 14 OECD countries we also collect, organize, and classify
information on immigration laws, distinguishing between laws regulating entry, stay, asylum, and a few specific
multilateral treaties with implications for international labor mobility. The richness of our data allows us to
control for a very large set of fixed eﬀects when analyzing the determinants of bilateral flows. Furthermore,
it allows us to identify the eﬀects of economic variables and immigration laws using variation by destination
country over time only.
     The second contribution is that we use an empirical “generalized gravity equation”, derived from a model
in which potential migrants maximize utility by choosing where to migrate. We use such a model to estimate
the eﬀects of variation in geographic, economic and policy variables in the destination countries on immigration
flows. Our empirical model adapts and generalizes the one proposed in Grogger and Hanson (2007, 2008). In
contrast to them, however, we do not focus (as they do, following Borjas, 1987) on the selection of immigrants
according to skills but rather on the total size (scale) of bilateral migration flows. On the other hand, we
allow for a more general empirical specification that is consistent with several diﬀerent discrete choice models
(simple logit as well as nested logit) and requires only data on bilateral stocks (or flows) of migrants in order
to be implemented. Importantly, we allow for unobserved individual heterogeneity between migrants and non-
migrants. Also, since we have data on bilateral flows over time we can control for unobserved, time-varying,
sending-country characteristics and focus mainly on income per person, employment, and immigration policies
in the destination countries as determinants of migrations.
     Third, and most importantly, we can identify the aggregate eﬀects of these immigrant flows on the economy
of the receiving country, specifically on total employment, total hours worked, physical capital accumulation
and total factor productivity. While the recent literature on the impact of immigrants on labor markets (Borjas
and Katz 2007, Ottaviano and Peri 2008) acknowledges that the country is the appropriate unit with which
    1 Publicly   available at http://stats.oecd.org/wbos/Index.aspx?datasetcode=MIG.



                                                                 2
to analyze such eﬀects (due to the high degree of mobility of workers and capital within a country) there are
extremely few cross-country (or panel) studies of those eﬀects. The reason is that in order to do this one needs to
overcome two problems. First, we need to gather consistent, yearly data on hours worked, employment, capital
stock for each of the 14 OECD countries of destination, over the period 1980-2005. Second, we need to isolate
the impact of immigration on those variables when we know that productivity, investment and employment
growth are also determinants of immigration flows (through their eﬀects on income and wages). We address the
first issue by employing data from diﬀerent OECD datasets, while to solve the second issue we use our bilateral
migration equation estimated below. Restricting the explanatory variables of the bilateral migration flows to
factors specific to the country of origin and to bilateral costs only, we obtain a predicted flow of migrants to
OECD countries that can be used as an instrument, since it isolates the push-driven flows. Those flows vary
across country of destination due to the diﬀerent bilateral costs (due to geography and networks) of migrating
from one country to another, which are independent of any destination country variable. For instance, a boom
in emigrants from Poland due to the opening of its border is more likely to generate large migration to Germany
than to Canada (for geographical and historical reasons), while a boom of emigrants from the Philippines is
more likely to generate large immigration to Japan (proximity) and the US (previous networks) than to France.
Using such push-driven flows we track their eﬀects on the employment, capital and productivity of the receiving
countries.
   The paper has three main findings. First, confirming previous literature (e.g. Mayda, forthcoming), our
regressions consistently show that diﬀerences in the level of income per person between the destination and
origin country have a positive and significant eﬀect on bilateral migration flows. An increase in the gap by 1000
PPP$ (in 2000 prices) increases bilateral migration flows by about 10% of their initial value. Also, we find that
stricter entry laws significantly discourage immigration. Each reform which introduced tighter rules of entry
for immigrants decreased immigration flows by about 6% on average. Second, we find that time-varying push
factors specific to countries of origin and interacted with bilateral fixed costs of migration, predict a significant
share (between 30 and 40%) of the variation in migration to the OECD receiving countries. Such variation of
immigration flows for a receiving country over time can legitimately be consider as "exogenous" to the economic
and demographic conditions of the receiving country. Third, consistent with an increase in the labor supply
in the neoclassical growth model with endogenous capital adjustment, we find that the “exogenous” inflow
of immigrants increases one for one employment, hours worked and capital stocks in the receiving country,
implying no crowding-out of natives and a speedy and full adjustment of capital. Hence, even in the short run
(one year), the capital-labor ratio at the national level fully recovers from an immigration shock. We note that
in most instances, immigration flows are only a fraction of a percentage point of the labor force of the receiving
country. Moreover, the largest part of these flows is easily predictable, implying that full capital adjustment is



                                                         3
a very reasonable finding even in the short run. Also, immigration does not seem to have any significant eﬀect
on total factor productivity. These eﬀects, taken together, imply no significant eﬀect of immigration on average
wages and on the return to capital in the receiving countries. Instead, immigration shocks lead to an increase
in total employment and a proportional response of GDP.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows: section 2 reviews the existing literature on the determinants and
eﬀects of international migrations and puts the contribution of this paper into perspective. Section 3 describes
and presents the data, especially those on migration flows and immigration laws. Section 4 justifies the empirical
model used to analyze the determinants of bilateral migrations and estimates the eﬀect of income diﬀerences
(between sending and receiving country) and immigration laws (in destination countries) on bilateral flows.
Section 5 presents the estimates of the eﬀect of immigration on employment, physical capital accumulation and
productivity of the receiving country. Using an instrumental variable approach which isolates only the push-
driven part of immigrant flows, exogenous to the economic conditions of destination countries, we can provide
a causal interpretation of the estimated eﬀect. Section 6 discusses the main implications of our findings and
provides some concluding remarks.



2        Literature Review

This paper contributes to two strands of the literature on international migration that, so far, have developed
separately. One analyzes the determinants of international migrations (mostly by international economists) and
the other analyzes the impact of immigration on the receiving countries (mostly by labor economists and limited
to labor market eﬀects). On the first front we improve on the existing literature regarding the determinants
of bilateral migrations by applying a simple model of optimal choice similar to Grogger and Hanson (2008) as
the basis of our estimating equation. A large part of the literature on migration flows had previously either
estimated a gravity or "pseudo-gravity" equation between many origins and one destination (e.g. Clark et
al 2008, Karemera et al 2000, Pedersen et al 2004) with no foundation in the individual choices of migrants.
Other papers have derived predictions on the selection of migrants from a Roy model and estimated some of its
implications (Borjas 1987, Dahl 2002). Recently, Grogger and Hanson (2008) have analyzed the scale, selection
and sorting across destinations of migrants with diﬀerent education levels using a model based on optimal
discrete choice. Their contribution is part-way between the theory of optimal choice and an empirical, pseudo-
gravity equation. In particular, their specification for the "scale" of migration uses as the dependent variable
the diﬀerence between the logs of the odds of migrating to a specific country and the odds of not migrating at
all.
       Gravity regressions have become very popular in analyzing trade flows (Anderson and Van Wincoop 2003,
Chaney 2008 and Helpman, Melitz and Rubinstein, forthcoming) primarily because they can be derived from

                                                            4
an equilibrium model with optimizing firms. Building on Grogger and Hanson (2008), we employ an extension
of their model that allows for unobserved individual heterogeneity between migrants and non-migrants in order
to derive an empirical specification that is fully consistent with a generalized gravity model. Unlike them we
do not distinguish between education groups. The model delivers an equation in which the log of bilateral
migration (stocks or flows) is a function of sending and receiving country eﬀects, expected income diﬀerentials
and migration costs. Moreover, this pseudo-gravity equation can be seen as the result of a simple multinomial
logit model in which the migrant makes a comparison between migrating to any other country or staying at home,
assuming bilateral and destination-specific migration costs. The empirical specification can also be derived from
a more general nested logit model in which migrants first decide whether to migrate and then decide among
the potential destinations. Importantly, the nested logit model allows for unobserved individual heterogeneity
between migrants and non-migrants or, equivalently, for idiosyncratic shocks that may be correlated across
destinations.
    We test the predictions of the model with aggregate panel data on stocks and flows of migrants. Our
empirical specification allows us to focus on the determinants of migration in the destination countries (while fully
controlling for any factor depending on country of origin and year). Another contribution of this paper (with the
exception of Mayda, forthcoming) is the careful analysis of the eﬀects of immigration laws on immigration flows.2
In this respect, we present new data on several hundred immigration reforms in the 14 OECD countries analyzed.
Following some mechanical rules and by reading carefully the content of these laws we classify them based on
whether they tighten the requirements to enter or stay in the country, separating laws that concern asylum
seekers from laws dealing with other types of immigrants. The eﬀects of these laws on subsequent immigration
flows turn out to be quite significant, especially in the case of entry laws, and precisely estimated. Our dataset
on immigration laws over the 1980-2005 period, documented in the "Immigration Reform Appendix", may
become an important point of reference toward building a systematic classification of immigration laws across
OECD countries. In particular, we hope our data stimulates the literature on the determinants of immigration
policy that so far has remained mainly theoretical (Benhabib 1996, Ortega 2005) for lack of data measuring the
“tightness" of immigration policies.3
    The second part of this paper analyzes the impact of migration on the employment, investment and produc-
tivity of the receiving country using a panel of 14 countries over time. Most of the existing papers tracking the
impact of immigration focus only on labor market implications and on one or only a few receiving countries (e.g.
Aydemir and Borjas 2007, Borjas 2003, Ottaviano and Peri 2008, Manacorda et al. 2006). Angrist and Kugler
(2005) use a panel of European countries and analyze the labor market eﬀects of immigration. Related to this
  2 See also Bertocchi and Strozzi (2008) for a historical analysis of the eﬀects of institutions on migration flows for a reduced
number of countries.
   3 A notable exception is Bertocchi and Strozzi (2010) that looks at the economic and demographic determinants of citizenship

laws.



                                                                5
paper, Peri (2008) and Ortega (2008) analyze the eﬀects of immigration on employment, capital accumulation
and productivity, respectively, across US states and Spanish regions. The literature on the aggregate eﬀects
of migration using cross-country panel analysis is extremely scant. In particular, there are no estimates, so
far, of the eﬀect of immigration on total employment, capital accumulation or productivity based on country
level data. Two major reasons that such analysis has not been performed are that consistent data on migration
across countries and over time are hard to find and, since immigration is endogenous to income levels and to
their changes, the lack of plausible instruments has limited the ability to draw any inference on the eﬀect of
immigration on national income. This paper addresses both issues, providing estimates of the eﬀects of immi-
gration on aggregate employment, the capital stock, productivity and, consequently, income per capita at the
country level. Hence, though the paper builds on a rigorous model which can explain migration flows, the main
contribution is to estimate the aggregate impact of these flows on the receiving economies.



3     Data

This section describes the data that are novel to this paper, namely those on yearly migration flows into 14
OECD countries over the period 1980-2005 and those on immigration laws and reforms in the same countries
over the same period.


3.1     Migration Flows

The data on yearly migration flows come from the International Migration Dataset (IMD) provided by the
OECD. Data for the period 1980-1995 relative to 14 OECD destination countries and for close to 80 countries
of origin were collected and organized by Mayda (forthcoming)4 . We merged these data with the new data
relative to the period 1995-2005 for 25 OECD receiving countries and more than one hundred sending countries,
available at OECD (2007). In order to obtain a balanced and consistent panel we select 14 OECD destination
countries5 and 74 countries of origin (listed in table A1 of the Appendix). The data on migration flows collected
in the IMD are based on national statistics, gathered and homogenized by the OECD statistical oﬃce6 . The
national data are based on population registers or residence permits. In both cases these are considered to be
accurate measures of the entry of legal foreign nationals. We consider the data relative to the total inflow of
foreign persons, independently of the reason (immigration, temporary or asylum). While the OECD makes an
eﬀort (especially since 1995) to maintain a consistent definition of immigrants across countries, there are some
   4 We refer to Mayda (forthcoming) for specific descriptions of the data relative to the 1980-1995 period. The source (OECD

International Migration Data) and the definitions, however, are the same as those provided by the OECD for the statistics relative
to the 1995-2005 period. Hence, we simply merged the two series.
   5 Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, UK

and USA.
   6 More details on the immigration data and their construction is provided in Appendix A.




                                                                6
diﬀerences between destination country definitions. An important one is that some countries define immigrants
on the basis of the place of birth, and others on the basis of nationality. While this inconsistency can make a pure
cross-country comparison inaccurate, our analysis focuses on changes within destination countries over time.
Therefore it should be exempt from large mis-measurement due to the classification problem. The total inflow
of foreign persons each year for each country of destination, as measured by these OECD sources, constitutes
what we call total (gross) immigration. We also construct a measure of total net immigration for each receiving
country. In this measure we try to correct for the outflow of foreign persons, due to re-migration or return
             7
migration.       Those flows, however, are harder to measure as people are not required to communicate to the
registry of population their intention to leave the country. Hence we infer the net immigration flows using the
gross immigration data and the data on immigrant stocks (by country of origin) from Docquier (2007) for 29
OECD countries in years around 1990 and around 2000. Therefore, for each of our 14 countries of destination
we know the yearly inflow and the stock circa years 1990 and 2000. For each receiving country we impute a
yearly out-migration rate of the stock of immigrants that, using the stock in 1990 and the measured yearly
flows between 1990 and 2000, would produce the measured stock in 20008 . We apply this constant, destination-
specific, re-migration rate to all years and obtain the stock of immigrants each year (between 1980 and 2005)
and the net immigration rates each year. Panel A1 in the Appendix reports the gross and net immigration rates
(i.e. immigration flows as a percentage of the population at the beginning of the year) for our 14 destination
countries over the 25 years considered. For most countries gross and net immigration rates are similar and
move together over time. We note that our net immigration rates are probably much less precise than our
measures of gross immigration. Recall that we assumed constant re-migration rates for all years, while gross
immigration flows and re-migration rates are likely to be correlated9 . Second, any diﬀerence between stocks
and flows could also be due to undocumented immigration, their somewhat diﬀerent classification systems, or
other discrepancies, rather than to re-migration only. Third, for some countries the implied re-migration rate
is extremely high and not very plausible10 . Hence, while we will use the net immigration flows to check some
regression results (see Table 3 and 5) the preferred specifications which analyze the impact of immigration on
the receiving economy will be based on gross inflows of immigrants.
    A preliminary look at Panel 1 reveals two facts. First, immigration rates have displayed an increasing trend
in many countries but for some countries, such as the US and Germany, they peaked in the middle of the period
(corresponding to the regularization of the late 1980s for the US and to immigration from the East in the early
1990s in Germany). Therefore it is hard to establish a common trend of immigration flows over time. Second,
    7 This phenomenon can be significant—depending on the country, we estimate that every year between 0.5 and 10% of the existing

stock of migrants will migrate out.
    8 This procedure is like finding the unknown "depreciation rate" when we have a measure of a stock variable in 1990 and 2000

and a measure of yearly flows between them.
    9 Coen-Pirani (2008) analyzes migration flows across US states. He finds that gross inflow and outflow rates are strongly,

positively correlated.
  1 0 Appendix A reports the calibrated re-migration rates for each country of destination.




                                                                7
there is a lot of idiosyncratic fluctuation in immigration rates across countries. Hence, in principle, the variation
within country over time is large enough (and independent across countries) to allow us to identify the eﬀects of
immigration on employment, capital accumulation and TFP. Table A2 in the Appendix reports the summary
statistics and the data sources for the other economic and demographic variables in the empirical analysis. Note
that the average GDP per person was more than double in the receiving countries relative to the countries of
origin in each year; furthermore, the employment rate was also consistently higher and income inequality (Gini
coeﬃcient) consistently lower in the countries of destination. Countries of destination also typically had a lower
share of young persons in their population, reflecting the fact that most international migration is by young
workers from countries where they are abundant to countries where young workers are scarce.11


3.2    Immigration Laws

An important contribution of this paper is the updating of a database on immigration laws for the 14 OECD
countries in our sample and the codification of a method to identify an immigration reform as increasing (+1)
or decreasing (-1) the tightness of immigration laws. The starting point for the database is the laws collected
by Mayda and Patel (2004) and the Fondazione Rodolfo DeBenedetti (FRDB) Social Reforms database (2007).
Mayda and Patel (2004) documented the main characteristics of the migration policies of several OECD countries
(between 1980 and 2000) and the year of changes in their legislations. The FRDB Social Reforms Database
collects information about social reforms in the EU15 Countries (except Luxembourg) over the period 1987-2005.
   We merged and updated these two datasets obtaining the complete set of immigration reforms in the period
1980-2005 relative to all the 14 OECD countries considered, for a total of more than 240 laws. The list of
immigration laws by country and year and a brief description of what each of them accomplished can be
found in the "Immigration Reform Appendix" to the paper12 . We then constructed three separate indices of
"tightness" for every reform mentioned in the database. The first index includes only those measures tightening
or loosening the "entry" of non-asylum immigrants. The second is a more comprehensive index that includes
measures tightening or relaxing provisions concerning the entry and/or the stay of non-asylum immigrants.
The third is an index that includes changes in immigration policy concerning the entry and/or the stay of
asylum seekers only.     In general, we consider as "loosening" entry laws (implying a change in the tightness
variable of -1) those reforms that (i) lower requirements, fees or documents for entry and to obtain residence
or work permits or (ii) introduce the possibility or increase the number of temporary permits. We consider
as a loosening in stay laws those legal changes that (iii) reduce the number of years to obtain a permanent
residence permit and those that (iv) foster the social integration of immigrants. On the other hand, a reform
  1 1 The other variables used in the bilateral regressions are Log Distance, Border, Common Language and Colony dummies and

are taken from Glick and Rose (2001).
  1 2 Available at the website: http://www.econ.ucdavis.edu/faculty/gperi/Papers/immigration_reform_appendix.pdf




                                                             8
is considered as tightening entry laws (+1 in the variable capturing tightness of entry) if (i) it introduces or
decreases quotas for entry, and (ii) increases requirements, fees or documents for entry and to obtain residence
or work permits. It is considered as tightening the stay-laws if (iii) it raises the number of years to obtain
a permanent residence permit/citizenship or (iv) it introduces residence constraints. We also apply the same
definitions for the tightening of entry and stay to asylum seekers in order to produce tightness variables for this
group. In spite of these rules there are several reforms that do not explicitly fit any of the categories above. In
those cases we classified them as "loosening" or "tightening", or no change, by scrutinizing the content of each
              13
regulation.
    Panel A2 in the Appendix plots the variables for immigration policy tightening with respect to entry for
immigrants (solid lines) and asylum seekers (dashed lines) for each of the 14 countries of destination. The initial
value of each variable in each country is 0. Hence the variables only capture the variation in laws over time
within a country. In the regressions which include the bilateral migration flows we always include a country of
destination eﬀect which captures initial cross-country diﬀerences in tightness of immigration laws. A preliminary
inspection of the variables reveals that countries such as Australia, Germany, Luxembourg, Sweden and Canada
significantly loosened their entry laws beginning around 1990, (with less of a change for their asylum laws).
Denmark and Japan tightened their entry laws. The US loosened its immigration policy regarding entry during
the eighties and nineties and tightened policy beginning around 2000. The remaining countries did not change
the tightness of their immigration policies regarding entry very much. As it is hard to detect any clear correlation
between the change in laws over time and the change in immigration flows, we move to more formal regression
analyses of the determinants of bilateral migration flows, basing the estimating equation on a simple theory of
the discrete choices of migrants.



4     Determinants of Immigration

This section presents a model of migration choice across multiple locations and derives an estimating equation
from the model. Our estimating equation is consistent both with a simple logit model (McFadden, 1974) as
well as with a nested logit model (McFadden, 1978). Our migration model extends Grogger and Hanson (2007,
2008) by allowing for unobserved individual heterogeneity between migrants and non-migrants. Potentially, this
is an important omission. It is plausible that migrants systematically diﬀer from non-migrants along important
dimensions that are hard to measure, such as ability, risk aversion, or the psychological costs of living far from
home. An additional attractive feature of our empirical specification is that it is reminiscent of a generalized
gravity equation in which the logarithm of bilateral migration flows is a function of origin and destination
  1 3 Three research assistants read the laws and provided us with a brief summary of each law. These summaries were read by the

two authors and discussed until converging on the sign of the policy change.




                                                               9
country fixed eﬀects and bilateral migration costs.


4.1     Migration model

Following Grogger and Hanson (2007, 2008), we study the problem of a potential migrant that makes a utility-
maximizing migration decision among multiple destinations. Agent i, in country of origin o ∈ O, decides whether
to stay in o or to migrate to any of d ∈ D = {1, ..., D} potential destination countries.
    The utility from a given destination d depends on the potential migrant’s expected permanent value of labor
income in that country and on the costs associated with migrating to d. Specifically, individual i’s utility (net
of costs) associated with migrating from country of origin o to country d is given by:


                                        Uodi = δ od − vodi = f (W d ) − g(Cod ) − vodi ,                                          (1)


    where δ od is a country-pair-specific term shared by all individuals migrating from the same origin to the
same destination, and viod is individual-specific. In particular, the term W d is the permanent expected earnings
of individual i in country d and Cod is the cost of migration, which may include destination-specific terms and
bilateral costs that vary by country pair.
    We assume separability between costs and benefits of migration. We also assume that the average expected
labor income in the country of destination W d can be decomposed into the product of the probability of
employment in that country (pd ) times the average wage when employed (Wd ). We explicitly allow migration
costs to depend on specific destination country factors θd (such as immigration laws), and on specific bilateral
country factors Xod (such as geographical or cultural distance). We normalize the average expected utility from
not migrating (remaining in o) f1 (po Wo ) to zero. Obviously, migration costs are zero for individuals that choose
to stay in the country of origin.
    We also assume that f and g are increasing functions. If these functions are approximately linear, we can
interpret them as monetary costs that reduce expected income. If f and g are better approximated by logarithmic
functions then migration costs can be viewed as time costs, which can be subtracted from log real wages.
Grogger and Hanson (2008) argue that their estimation results are inconsistent with utility maximization under
logarithmic f and g, implying that the logarithmic model is mis-specified and produces omitted variable bias14 .
To keep our estimates comparable to theirs we proceed by assuming that functions f and g are approximately
linear. Hence, we can write (1) as:


                                          Uodi = f1 (pd Wd ) − g1 θd − g2 βXod − ν odi ,                                          (2)
  1 4 Our empirical specification is much richer, in terms of fixed eﬀects, than the one used by Grogger and Hanson (2008). Hence,

we do not expect such a large bias from the log utility model. This is confirmed by the fact that our linear and logarithmic estimates
(see Table 1) are not too diﬀerent.



                                                                 10
   where f1 and gi are positive constants.
   The idiosyncratic term ν odi captures any other individual, unobservable characteristics that are important to
migration decisions. There is substantial evidence suggesting that migrants and non-migrants are systematically
diﬀerent in important dimensions. For example, it is plausible to expect migrants to have higher ability, lower
risk aversion, or lower psychological costs from being in a foreign country than non-migrants from the same
country of origin. A convenient way to capture these diﬀerences is by adapting the nested logit discrete-choice
model first proposed in McFadden (1978) to our problem. Specifically, we follow the rendition by Cardell (1991),
which frames the nested logit model in the language of the random coeﬃcients model.15 Let


                                           ν odi   = (1 − σ)εiod , for d = o                                      (3)

                                           ν odi   = ζ i + (1 − σ)εiod , for d ∈ D,                               (4)


   where εiod is iid following a (Weibul) extreme value distribution, and ζ i is an individual-specific term that
aﬀects migrants only, and its distribution depends on σ ∈ [0, 1). As shown by Cardell (1991), ν odi has an
extreme value distribution as well. Two points are worth noting. First, we note that term ζ i is individual-
specific but constant across all possible destinations. Thus, it can be interpreted as diﬀerences in preferences for
migration. Second, this model nests the standard logit model used in Grogger and Hanson (2007, 2008) when
we set σ = 0.16
   Utility maximization under our distributional assumptions delivers a neat way to identify the utility (net
of costs) associated with migration decisions from data on the proportion of individuals that migrate to each
destination, or choose to stay in the country of origin. Namely,


                                   ln sod − ln soo − σ ln sdD = f1 W d − g1 θd − g2 βXod ,                        (5)

                               PD
   where sod = nod /(noo +        d=1nod ) is the share of people born in o who migrate to d (nod ) in the total popu-
                                                                                                             P
lation born in o, soo   is the share of those who stay in o (noo ) among those born in o, and sdD = nod / D    d=1 nod

is the proportion of people born in o migrating to destination d over the total number of people born in o who
          PD
migrate ( d=1 nod ).17
   Keeping in mind our normalization, assigning a utility of zero to staying in the home country, we note that
coeﬃcient f1 measures the eﬀect of an increase in the expected earnings gap between the origin-destination
 1 5 See also Berry (1994).
 1 6 In this case, the distribution of ζ i collapses and ν odi = εiod .
 1 7 If we did not normalize the utility from staying in the origin to zero we would have


                                   ln sod − ln soo − σ ln sdD = f1 (W d − W o ) − g1 θd − g2 βXod .                (6)




                                                                 11
pair on the left-hand side variable. We also point out that the standard logit model leads to a very similar
expression: simply substitute σ = 0 in equation (5). Intuitively, the term σ corrects for the fact that there is
some information in the total share of migrants that helps identify the average value of the diﬀerence in utilities
(due to costs or expected benefits) between migrants (to somewhere) and non-migrants. After this correction,
the diﬀerence in log odds equals the diﬀerence between the average utility net of cost associated to destination
d and the utility from staying in o, which we normalized to zero.
   Substituting the definition of the shares and solving for ln nod the logarithm of migrants from o to d, equation
(5) can be rearranged into

                                                                                     D
                                                                                     X
                                   1 ¡                        ¢   1            σ
                    ln nod   =        f1 W d − g1 θd − g2 βXod +     ln noo −     ln   nod                              (7)
                                  1−σ                            1−σ          1−σ
                                                                                            d=1
                                  .


   Noting that the last two terms on the right-hand side are constant across all destinations d, we can write


                                        ln nod = Do + φw W d − γ 1 θd − γ 2 βXod ,                                      (8)


                                                                                                   f1              g1
   where Do is a constant that collects all terms that do not vary by destination d, φw =         1−σ , γ 1   =   1−σ   and
        g2
γ2 =   1−σ .   Equation (8) is the basis of our estimating equation, which obviously encompasses both the logit
and the nested logit models. In the former case, fixed eﬀect Do captures the size of the group of stayers (noo ).
                                                                                                  PD
In the case of the nested logit, the fixed eﬀect also includes the size of the group of migrants ( d=1 nod ), which
provides a correction for the average unobserved heterogeneity between migrants and non-migrants. At any
rate, term Do allows for identification of coeﬃcient φw , which measures the eﬀect of an increase in the gap
between the expected earnings in the home country and in destination d.
   Assume that we observe, with some measurement error, the share of people born in country o and residing
in destination country d for a set of countries of origin O, destinations D, and for diﬀerent years t. The log of
the migration flow from o to destination d is given by


                                 ln nodt = Dot + Dd + φw W dt + φ1 Ydt + φ2 βXod + eodt .                               (9)


   Term eodt in (9) is the zero-mean measurement error. Coeﬃcient φw equals f1 /(1 − σ). Term Dot is a set
of country-of-origin by time eﬀects and Dd are destination-country dummies. Note that we are allowing for
time-invariant, destination-specific migration costs (through dummies) as well as time-varying ones (Ydt ), which
will proxy for changes in the tightness of immigration laws or in variables that may aﬀect these laws (population,
income inequality and the share of young people in the destination country).


                                                           12
   As emphasized above, the set of dummies Dot absorbs any eﬀect specific to the country of origin by year.
Justified by our theoretical model, this term serves the purpose of controlling for, among other factors, specific
features common to all migrants, for the average migration opportunities/costs in each country of origin in each
year. Potential migrants in country o and year t compare average expected utility across destinations and choose
the one that maximizes their expected utility. However, besides the average wage there are many other features
of the country of origin aﬀecting the cost and opportunity of migrating over time (such as the sudden fall of
the Iron curtain in Europe, the loosening of emigration controls in China, and so on) and that specification
accounts for them.
   Finally, let us note that the theoretically grounded empirical specification (9) can be interpreted as deter-
mining a relationship between stocks of migrants from each country o to each country d in each year t, or the
analogous flows. Given our interest in the economic eﬀects of immigration flows in the second part of the paper,
we shall focus on explaining immigration flows, and estimate the model using stocks as a robustness check.
Having data both on flows and stocks is a strength of our analysis. Data availability constrained previous
studies to the analysis of data on stocks only (e.g. Grogger and Hanson, 2008).


4.2    Economic and Geographic determinants of bilateral migration stocks

The basic empirical specification that we estimate on the data and its variations are all consistent with (9). In
particular, Table 1 shows the coeﬃcients for several diﬀerent variations of the following basic specification:


        ln(M igrant Stock)odt    = φw W dt−1 + Dd + Dot + φd ln(Distance)od + φb (Land Border)od +

                                     +φc (Colonial)od + φl (Language)od + eodt                                  (10)


   Specification (10) captures variables specific to the country-of-origin by year with the set of dummies Dot .
The fixed migration costs specific to country of destination d are absorbed by the dummies Dd and we explicitly
control for distance, colonial ties, common land border and common language as variables aﬀecting the pair-
specific bilateral migration costs Xod . The term W dt captures explicitly the eﬀect of the linear diﬀerence in
income between destination and origin country, measured as PPP gross domestic product per person in USD,
2000. The theory implies a positive and significant coeﬃcient φw . At the same time, if we assume that costs of
migration increase with distance, a negative value for φd is expected, while if sharing a border, having colonial-era
connections and speaking a common language decrease the costs of migration, φb , φc and φl should be positive.
The measures of (M igrant Stock)odt used in Table 1 are obtained from the bilateral stocks of immigrants circa
year 1990 (from Docquier 2007 data) updated backward and forward using the bilateral, yearly migration flows
data (described in section 3.1). In doing so we allow for receiving-country-specific re-migration rates calibrated



                                                         13
so that the stock of immigrants for each country of destination match the stock measured around year 2000,
also from the Docquier (2008) data. Specification (1) in Table 1 reports the estimates of the coeﬃcients for
the basic regression (10). In all regressions, unless otherwise specified, we lag the explanatory variables one
period, allowing them to aﬀect the stock of immigrants in the following year. Our method of estimation is least
squares, always including the destination countries and the country-of-origin by year fixed eﬀects. We add one
to each observation relative to stock and flows of immigrants so that when taking logs we do not discard the
0 observations18 . Finally we weight observations by the population of the destination country to correct for
heteroskedasticity of the measurement errors and we cluster the standard errors by country of destination to
account for the "within-destination country" correlation of the errors.
   The estimated coeﬃcients on the income diﬀerences (first row of Table 1) are always significant (most of the
time at the 5% confidence level) and positive. The magnitude of the coeﬃcient in the basic specification (1)
implies that the increase in the average income diﬀerences between destination and origin countries experienced
over the period 1980-2000 (equal to +7,000 US $ in PPP, calculated from Table 1A ) would generate an
increase of 42% (=0.06*7, since the income per capita is measured in thousands) in the stock of migrants to the
destination countries. This is equal to two thirds of the observed increase in the stock of immigrants from those
74 countries in the 14 OECD countries, which grew by 60%. Hence, both statistically and economically the
absolute real income diﬀerences between sending and receiving countries, and their changes over the considered
period, can explain a very large fraction of the growth in the stock of immigrants.
   As for the eﬀect of geographic variables on migration costs, the variable "colonial relations" and the natural
logarithm of distance have very significant eﬀects with the expected signs. Having had colonial connections
more than doubles the average stock of immigrants from origin to destination, and that stock decreases by 80%
any time the bilateral distance increases by 50%. On the other hand, sharing a land border and speaking a
common language do not significant aﬀect bilateral migration flows. This is hardly surprising as most of the
large migratory flows to the OECD (except for Mexico-US) take place between countries that do not share a
land border or a common language. These two results are also found by Mayda (forthcoming) who does not
find any significant eﬀects for common border and common language dummies. Specification (2) checks whether
including the logarithm of the destination country wage ln(W dt ) instead of its level results in similar eﬀects.19
The sign and significance of the income diﬀerence variable is as in specification (1), though the magnitude of
the coeﬃcient is smaller. In fact, a change by 1 (100%) in the log diﬀerence would only produce an increase
of 29% in the stock of immigrants. Notice, also, that in terms of log-diﬀerence (percentage diﬀerence) the gap
between origin and destination countries has barely changed between 1980 and 2000. This may imply that the
logarithmic specification is not the optimal approach; still, we are reassured that the sign and significance of
 1 8 Except    for Specification (6) of Table 1 where we explicitly omit zeros.
 1 9 Recall   that Wot or its log are absorbed into the country of origin by year fixed eﬀects.



                                                                   14
the income eﬀect does not depend on the specific functional form chosen.
   Specification (3) decomposes the eﬀect of the expected (logarithmic) income diﬀerence (between destination
and origin) into the eﬀect of diﬀerences in (the logarithm of) GDP per worker and diﬀerences in (the logarithm
of) the employment rate (probability of employment)20 . Both variables turn out to be significant, confirming
that the expected destination-country income, on which potential migrants base their decisions, depends on
potential wages and on the probability of being employed.
   Specification (4) adds three destination-country variables that can plausibly aﬀect the willingness of the
country to accept immigrants and hence its immigration policies (and immigration costs). The first is total
population, the second is a measure of income distribution (Gini Coeﬃcient) and the third is the share of
young (aged 15 to 24) individuals in the population. A country whose population is growing may find it
easier to absorb new immigrants with little consequence for its citizens. Similarly, in periods when the income
distribution is more equal, the opposition to immigration may be milder. There is weak evidence of a positive
eﬀect of population on immigration flows and of a negative eﬀect of inequality: the point estimates have the
expected sign but the coeﬃcients are not significant at standard levels of confidence. Also, the share of young
workers does not seem to be significant at all, possibly because young workers may fear the competition from
immigrants (who are typically younger than the average native) or, alternatively, they may be more flexible and
mobile in adjusting their occupation in response to immigrants, and hence suﬀer less from the competition.
   In specification (5) we consider whether including longer lags of the income variable changes its impact on
immigration. As it may take more than one year before income diﬀerences put in motion a migration response,
including a longer lag may strengthen the eﬀect. The coeﬃcient on log income, lagged two years, is only
marginally diﬀerent from that of the one year lag. If one includes both lags (not reported) or two lags and
the contemporaneous value (also not reported) only the two-year lagged income diﬀerence is significant (with
a coeﬃcient of 0.06). This implies that it takes at least one year and possibly up to two years for income
diﬀerentials to stimulate migrations.
   Specification (6) drops all the 0 observations. Note that we are using stocks as the dependent variable and
there are not many zeros (only 10% of the observations), and therefore the estimates do not change much.
Finally, we show in specifications (7) and (8) the results omitting the UK, whose immigration flows before 1990
look suspiciously small (see Panel 1A), and the US, whose large undocumented immigration from Mexico is not
included in our data. Neither omission aﬀects the results. We also run other checks changing the weighting of
the observations and the clustering of the residuals or using only the observations after 1990. All estimates of the
income and geography variables are quite stable and similar to those in the basic specification. A particularly
interesting robustness check (that will be systematically incorporated in Table 2) is the introduction of a full
 2 0 We
      decompose the eﬀects of GDP per worker and employment rates in the logarithmic specification because the logarithm of
GDP per person is the sum of those two logarithmic components.



                                                            15
set of origin-destination pair dummies. Such a specification adds 1022 fixed eﬀects and removes the geographic
controls (absorbed in the dummies). The estimated eﬀect of wage diﬀerentials on migration flows is equal to
0.054 with a standard error of 0.02 . Hence, still significant and very similar to the estimate obtained in the
basic specification of Table 1.


4.3     Eﬀect of Immigration laws on bilateral migration flows

In evaluating the eﬀects of immigration reforms, it is easier to look at the eﬀect on subsequent immigration
flows. After all, the immigrant stocks are the long-run accumulation of yearly flows, so the determinants of the
first should also determine the second. Hence we simply adopt the specification in (9) and use as the dependent
variable the logarithm of the flow of immigrants from country o to country d in year t, adding immigration laws
as an explanatory variable. Column (1) of Table 2, Panel A reports the relevant estimates for the following
specification:




ln(M igrant F low)odt         = φw W dt−1 + φR (T ightness)dt−1 + Dot +

                                   +φd ln(Distance)od + φb (Land Border)od + φc (Colonial)od + φl (Language)od + (11)
                                                                                                                 eodt


   Our data on (M igrant F low)odt are from the OECD International Migration Database, from 74 countries
of origin into 14 OECD countries. The variable "Immigration policy tightness" is the measure of tightness
of immigration (and asylum) laws described in section 3.221 . The other columns of Table 2 Panel A perform
variations and robustness checks on this basic specification. In Panel B of Table 2 we estimate a similar
specification but now include a full set of (73x14) country-pair fixed eﬀects, Dod , rather than the four bilateral
variables (Distance, Land Border, Colonial, Language) in order to capture any specific time-invariant bilateral
costs of migration.
   Moving from left to right in Table 2 we modify our basic specification (1) by including income on logarithm,
rather than in levels, (specification 2), then using a broader measure of tightness (specification 3), or longer lags
of the explanatory variables (specification 4). Specification (5) includes extra destination country controls, (6)
omits observations with 0 flows and (7) omits the UK data, whose immigration flows recorded before 1990 appear
suspiciously small. In all these specifications we include four variables that capture aspects of the immigration
laws. The first variable is our constructed measure of "Tightness of entry laws", the second is our measure of
"Tightness of asylum laws". Both are described in section 3.2 and their values for each country and year are
shown in Panel 2A. We also include dummies for the two most important multilateral treaties aﬀecting several
 2 1 Notice   that all the explanatory variables (that vary over time) are included with one lag.




                                                                   16
of the considered countries22 .
    The "Maastricht" treaty was ratified by most EU countries in 1992. Among other things, it introduced free
labor mobility for workers of the member states and it led to the introduction of the Euro, which may have
reduced migration costs within the European Union. The corresponding dummy takes a value of one for those
countries and years in which the agreement is in place and 0 otherwise. The "Schengen" agreement, adopted in
diﬀerent years by 22 European countries, regulates and coordinates immigration and border policies among the
signatory countries. While it eases intra-EU movement for citizens of the signatory countries, the agreement
also implies more restrictive border controls to enter the "Schengen" area. The corresponding dummy takes
a value of one for countries and years in which the agreement is in place. Three main results emerge from
Table 2. First, income diﬀerences between origin and destination country (whether in logs or in levels) have a
positive and significant eﬀect on immigration flows to OECD countries in almost every specification. Second, the
"Tightness of entry" has a significant negative eﬀect on immigration flows in most specifications. Each reform
that introduced less restrictive measures increased, on average, immigration flows by 5 to 9%. For instance,
this implies that a country like Canada, whose immigration policy loosened by 6 points between 1985 and 2005
(see Panel 2A), should exhibit an increase in immigration rates of 25 to 54%. The yearly immigration rates, in
Canada, went from 0.5% of population in the early eighties to 0.7-0.8% in the early 2000’s. That is, the entire
increase in immigration flows can be attributed to the change in the laws. Third, among the other laws the
most significant eﬀect is associated with the Maastricht treaty which increased, on average, the immigration of
signatories between 50 and 60%. Tightness of asylum laws had a negative (but rarely significant) impact on
immigration and Schengen had no eﬀect at all. Interestingly, column (3) in both Panel A and B reveals that
combining immigration entry- and stay- laws decreases the precision of the estimated coeﬃcient, suggesting that
mainly entry laws had an eﬀect on the actual inflow of immigrants. At the same time the eﬀect of entry laws
is less significant when we include population, income distribution and the share of young among the receiving
country variables (specification 5, both in Panel A and B). This may imply that some of those variables aﬀect
immigration laws, and indirectly immigration, so that including them reduces the eﬀect of the laws. Finally,
omitting the cells with 0 immigration flows (specification 6) reduces drastically the eﬀect of wage diﬀerentials,
while the eﬀect of entry laws is still significant. Since almost 70% of the cells are zeros, because we are looking
at bilateral flows (rather than stocks), it is remarkable that the immigration laws variable maintains its sign
and significance. Omitting the UK (column 7) does not change the results much. The estimated eﬀects on the
geographic variables (not reported in Table 2 and available only for Panel A) are qualitatively and quantitatively
close to the estimates reported in Table 1. In particular, sharing a land border (point estimate -1.6 and standard
error 1.3) and sharing a common language (point estimate 0.4, standard error 0.5) have no significant impact
  2 2 Wehave run a few other specifications such as a Tobit regression with censoring at 0, to account for the clustering of observations
at 0, and obtained a coeﬃcient of 0.25 on W dt−1 and of -0.14 on T ightness confirming the results in Table 2.



                                                                   17
on migration flows, while having had colonial ties (point estimate 3.88 and standard error 0.46) and the log of
distance (point estimate -2.2 standard error 0.46) are both very significant in their impact on migration flows23 .
    Let us emphasize that the estimates in Table 2 Panel B include 1022 country-pair fixed eﬀects and 1825
country-of-origin by year fixed eﬀects. Hence any variation is identified by the change over time in a specific
bilateral migratory flow, after controlling for any country-of-origin by year specific factor. We are not aware
of any previous analysis that could run such a demanding specification on bilateral migration panel data. All
in all, our analysis finds statistically and quantitatively significant eﬀects of income diﬀerentials on bilateral
immigration stocks and flows. These eﬀects are very robust to sample choice, specification and inclusion of
controls. We also find strong evidence that the receiving country laws, particularly those relative to the entry
of immigrants, significantly aﬀected the size of yearly inflows. The inclusion of income diﬀerences in levels or
in logs does not produce very diﬀerent eﬀects.



5     Impact of Immigration on OECD countries

5.1        A Production Function Framework

In order to evaluate the impact of immigration on the receiving economy’s income, average wages, and return
to capital, we use an aggregate production function framework, akin to the one used in growth accounting (see
for instance Chapter 10 of Barro and Sala-i-Martin 2004). Suppose that total GDP in each destination country
and year, Ydt , is produced using a labor input represented by total hours worked, Ldt (that can be decomposed
into Employmentdt times Hours per workerdt ), services of physical capital represented by Kdt and total factor
productivity Adt . According to the popular Cobb-Douglas production function:


                                                                    α 1−α
                                                         Ydt = Adt Kdt Ldt                                                 (12)

    where α is the capital income share and can be approximated for the destination countries in our sample by
0.3324 . In such a framework if we intend to analyze how immigration flows aﬀects income or wages (marginal
productivity of labor), we need to identify first how immigrations aﬀects the supply of each input and of total
factor productivity. Then we can combine the eﬀects of immigration using the implications of the model.
Specifically, the percentage changes in total real GDP, Ydt , real GDP per hour, ydt , and the average real wage,
wdt , are given, respectively, by:


                                            ∆Ydt   ∆Adt    ∆Kdt           ∆Ldt
                                                 =      +α      + (1 − α)                                                  (13)
                                            Ydt     Adt     Kdt           Ldt
 2 3 The    reported point estimates and standard errors are from the basic specification of column 1, Panel A, Table 2.
 2 4 See   Jones (2008) page 24 and Gollin (2002) to justify this assumption.



                                                                  18
                                         ∆ydt   ∆wdt   ∆Adt      ∆Kdt ∆Ldt
                                              =      =      + α(      −     )                                    (14)
                                          ydt   wdt     Adt       Kdt   Ldt

   If we can identify the percentage changes in Adt , Kdt , and Ldt in response to exogenous immigration flows
to the country we will be able to evaluate the impact of immigration on total income, labor productivity and
average wages.
   Clearly, immigration flows directly aﬀect labor input Ldt by adding potential workers. However, the increase
in employment may be less than one-for-one if immigrants displace native workers (out of the country or out of
the labor market). In addition, there may also be composition eﬀects if immigrants’ employment rates or hours
worked are lower than those of natives.
   Regarding the capital input, standard models with endogenous capital accumulation imply that immigration-
induced increases in the labor force will generate investment opportunities and greater capital accumulation,
up to the point that the marginal product of capital returns to its pre-shock value. However, the short-run
response of the capital stock to an international immigration flow can be less than complete and it has yet to
be quantified empirically.
   Concerning TFP, on the one hand immigrants may promote specialization/complementarities (Ottaviano and
Peri 2008) which increase the set of productive skills (Peri and Sparber, forthcoming) and increase competition
in the labor markets, generating eﬃciency gains that increase TFP. Or there can be positive scale eﬀects on
productivity if immigrants bring new ideas or reinforce agglomeration economies (of the kind measured by
Ciccone and Hall, 1996). On the other hand, it is also possible that immigration induces adoption of less
“productive”, unskilled-intensive technologies (as in Lewis 2005) that lead to reductions in measured TFP.
Ultimately, it is an empirical question whether an immigration shock increases, decreases or does not aﬀect
TFP.
                      ∆Fdt
   We denote by       P opdt   the immigration rate, namely the change in the foreign-born population Fdt (immigration
flows to country d in year t) relative to the total population of country d at the beginning of year t (P opdt ). We
then estimate the following set of regressions:


                                                ∆Xdt            ∆Fdt
                                                     = Dt + γ x        + est                                     (15)
                                                 Xdt            P opdt

   Where X will be alternatively total hours worked (Ldt ),25 , services of physical capital (Kdt ) and total factor
                                                                             ∆Fdt
productivity (Adt ). As a check we also analyze directly the eﬀect of        P opdt   on aggregate GDP, GDP per hour,
and capital per worker. The term Dt captures year fixed eﬀects that absorb common movements in productivity
and inputs across countries in each year. In order to assert that the estimated coeﬃcients γcx identify the causal
 2 5 Also   decomposed between employment Employmentdt and Hours per workerdt .




                                                             19
eﬀect of immigration on domestic variables we will instrument total immigration flows to a country with the sum
of bilateral flows to that country predicted using our empirical model in (11), but excluding variables relative to
the destination country26 . Essentially we predict those flows using only the components that vary by country
of origin and time, and the fixed bilateral migration costs.


5.2        Measurement of Employment, Capital Intensity and Productivity

The data on income and factors of production are mostly from OECD datasets. Specifically, GDP data is from
the OECD Productivity dataset, and employment and hours worked are from the OECD-STAN dataset. The
data cover the whole period 1980-2005 for the 14 countries in our sample.27
   The capital services data are also from the OECD Productivity dataset, but we make use of the data on
aggregate investment in the Penn World Tables (version 6.2) to extend its coverage. Let us provide a bit more
detail on the capital data that we use. The conceptually preferred measure of capital for our purposes is the
services of the capital stock that contribute to current production. Capital services are computed as follows.
For each type of capital (six or seven, depending on the country), we accumulate past investments making two
adjustments. First, we take into account that older units of capital provide fewer services than newer ones
(eﬃciency weighting). Secondly, we take into account the productive life of each type of capital (retirement
pattern). Finally, we aggregate across all types of capital using the relative productivity of each type to obtain
the stock of productive capital. The capital services data reported by the OECD is the rate of change of the
stock of productive capital and it is interpreted as the flow of capital services that went into production during
that period.
   The original data on capital services is available annually from 1985 onward and only covers 12 out of the 14
countries in our main sample.28 In order to expand the data to cover the whole country-year panel we use data
on gross fixed capital formation. Specifically, we proceed in three steps. First, we use the long series on real
investment provided by the PWT to compute the stock of capital for the 14 countries in our sample between
1980 and 2005. More specifically, we initialize the capital stock in 1970 following the procedure based on the
perpetual inventory method used in Young (1995). Next, we iteratively build the entire series of capital values
for the period 1980-2005. The main diﬀerence between this capital stock and the stock of productive capital
derived from capital services data is that here we are imposing the same growth rate across all types of capital.
   Second, we build a predictor for productive capital using the data on capital stocks that we just created. In
particular, we estimate a regression model where the dependent variable is the change in the log of productive
capital and the main explanatory variable is the change in the log of the capital stock. We estimate this
 2 6 Essentially
                                                
               we omit the term W dt−1 − W ot−1 and the term from the basic specification.
 2 7 The data on Hours for Luxembourg start in 1983. We use employment growth to fill in the missing values.
 2 8 Norway and Luxembourg are missing.




                                                             20
relationship for the sample period for which we have data on both variables, namely, 1985-2005. The slope
coeﬃcient is 1.31, estimated very precisely. A coeﬃcient larger than one makes sense. In good times, firms may
increase the rate of replacement of old capital goods for new ones. This automatically leads to the provision of
greater capital services, even keeping constant the total capital stock. This is because of the age-flow profile of
capital goods used in the calculation of capital services: a new truck is assumed to produce more services than
an old one. Finally, we use our predictor to extend the data on capital services to cover the whole sample. For
the twelve countries for which we have data on capital services (that is, the growth rate of productive capital),
we use our predictor to extend the data back to 1980. For the two countries for which we lack data on capital
services we use the prediction rule for the entire period, 1980-2005.
   Equipped with a full panel for real GDP and labor and capital inputs, we compute total factor productivity
as a Solow residual, imposing a labor share of 0.66 and using total hours worked and capital services as the
inputs into production.29
   Let us now have a descriptive look at our panel data for income, labor, capital services, and TFP. Table A3
reports annualized growth rates of these variables for three sub-periods: the 1980s, the 1990s, and 2000-2005.
Three features stand out. First, there is a noticeable slowdown in economic growth between 1980 and 2005 for
our sample of OECD countries. In the three sub-periods real GDP grew annually by 2.72%, 2.62%, and 1.98%,
respectively. The slowdown is also noticeable in terms of lower employment growth (from 0.68% to 0.34%),
lower capital growth (from 3.43% to 3.11%), and lower TFP growth (from 1.14% to 0.73%). Note also the large
cross-sectional dispersion.
   Secondly, average employment growth was substantially higher than average growth in total hours worked
between 1980 and 2005. That is, hours per worker on average fell during the period. Finally, capital intensity
on average increased substantially over the period. The average annual growth in capital services (in real terms)
was roughly three times as large as the annual growth rate in employment.


5.3    The Eﬀects of Immigration: OLS

Table 3 presents the estimates, using least squares methods, of the coeﬃcients γ x from equation 15. The
dependent variables are, in order, inputs to production (first to fourth row), total factor productivity (fifth
row), total GDP (sixth row), capital per worker, and output per hour worked (rows seven and eight). Notice
that not all the estimated coeﬃcients are independent of each other due to the relationship between inputs
and output provided by the production function. Hence, for instance, in the basic specifications in which
no other control variables are included and the selected observations are common between regressions, by
   2 9 The OECD Productivity dataset features an analogous measure of TFP for some countries covering part of our period of

interest. Our own measure is very strongly correlated with theirs. We run a regression of growth rates of the two measures amd
find that the estimated coeﬃcient is 0.92 and the standard error is 0.018.




                                                             21
virtue of (14) the estimated coeﬃcient on ∆y/y in the last row of the table should be equal to the diﬀerence
between the coeﬃcient on ∆Y /Y and the coeﬃcient on ∆L/L30 . Since we regress the percentage change of the
dependent variable on the inflow of immigrants as a percentage of the initial population, the interpretation of
the coeﬃcients (as elasticities) is straightforward. Diﬀerent columns of Table 1 correspond to diﬀerent samples
and specifications. Specification (1) is the basic one and it estimates 15 on 25 yearly changes (1980-2005) for
14 OECD countries. The method of estimation is OLS with year fixed eﬀects (since the variables are already
in changes we do not include country-level eﬀects31 ). The standard errors in parentheses are heteroskedasticity
robust and clustered by country. Specification (2) omits the US, which is one of the most studied cases, to show
that the rest of the sample does not behave too diﬀerently from the US. Column 3 includes only the continental
European countries, excluding the Anglo-Saxon group (US, UK, Canada and Australia) often considered as
more "immigration friendly". Specification (4) includes only the more recent years (1990-2005) , for which the
most accurate migration data from the OECD are available and specification (5) includes in each regression
the lagged level of the dependent variable to control for potential "convergence" behavior of each variable to a
balanced growth path or a steady state. Finally, specification (6) uses as explanatory variable the immigration
flows net of imputed re-migration of the stock of immigrants. While there is significant potential for endogeneity
in these OLS specifications, let us comment on some robust and clear correlations that emerge from Table 3.
First, the coeﬃcient on total labor inputs ∆L/L and on total capital ∆K/K are in most cases similar to each
other and close to one. Except for specification (6) we can never reject that the eﬀect on total labor input is
equal to one and in specifications 1 to 4 we cannot reject that the eﬀect on total capital services is equal to
one. This implies that the correlations do not show any evidence of crowding-out of native jobs: one newly
arrived immigrant worker increases employment by exactly one. Also, the estimates imply that the increase in
labor inputs occurs because of an increase in employment (one-to-one) and no changes in average hours worked
per person. The estimates on the capital stock imply that investment adjusts to the larger potential worker
pool (at constant wages) and capital increases within one year, eﬀectively leaving unchanged the capital-labor
intensity in production. Row seven shows that capital labor ratios are not significantly aﬀected by immigration
in all six specifications. Finally, the estimates in row 5 imply that there is no significant eﬀect of immigration
on TFP, ∆A/A. These eﬀects, combined together, imply that the inflows of immigrants are associated with
larger employment, larger total GDP, and unchanged wages, capital intensity and GDP per hour. These
correlations also hold when we consider European countries only (specification 3), when we restrict ourselves to
the more recent period 1990-2005 (in specification 4) or when we include lagged levels of the dependent variable
(specification 5). The results obtained using the net immigration flows, on the other hand (specification 6),
 3 0 Thereader can easily check that these relations hold.
 3 1 We have also run the panel regression with country fixed eﬀects, obtaining similar qualitative estimates, with larger point
estimates and standard errors, however.




                                                              22
show much larger coeﬃcients and standard errors on labor inputs and capital inputs (with similar eﬀects on
productivity). This suggests that the imputed re-migration flows are probably a rather noisy measure of actual
outflows of immigrants and by subtracting these imprecisely estimated outflows we are reducing the value of
flows and increasing the noise to signal ratio. Still, even this specification does not show any evidence of a
change in the capital-labor ratio or GDP per person associated with immigration. What seems implausible in
specification 6, however, is the very large (more than 1 to 1) response of labor inputs to immigrants, which
may indicate measurement error or endogeneity problems. For this reason we prefer the gross flows, which are
directly measured in the data, and which we use in the instrumental variable analysis below. Combining the
estimated γ x with the formula ?? would imply that immigration has no significant correlation with average
wages (or returns to capital) and that immigration increases employment and GDP in the receiving economy
one for one, even in the short run.


5.4    Immigration Eﬀects: Instruments and 2SLS approach

The most significant limitation of the estimates presented in Table 3 is that immigration flows are endogenous.
In fact, we have shown in section 4 that immigration flows respond vigorously to changes in wage diﬀerences
between origin and destination. Employment, capital and TFP are the determinants of those wages, hence we
cannot consider immigration as exogenous to them. The framework of section 4, however, provides an analysis
of the determinants of the international migration flows and lends us a solution to the problem of endogeneity.
In particular, consider the bilateral regression model used in Table 2, Panel B:


                  ln(M igrant F low)odt = φw W dt−1 + φR (T ightness)dt−1 + Dot + Dod + eodt                 (16)


   The terms Dot capture any economic, demographic and cost determinant of migration out of country o which
varies over time t. That set of dummies captures all the so called "push-factors" of immigration that do not
depend on specific destination countries but only on conditions in the countries of origin. The terms Dod , on
the other hand, capture the fixed bilateral costs of migrating from o to d. They mostly reflect geographic factors
and the existence of historical networks which provide information and ease the adjustment of immigrants to the
destination country. Therefore, only the terms φw W dt−1 and φR (T ightness)dt−1 are specific to the country of
destination and in particular to its economic conditions. The wage diﬀerential is the primary included economic
determinant of immigration, while the tightness of immigration laws can be considered as a determinant of the
cost of immigration which is still related to current economic conditions, although to a lesser degree. Hence
we can use (16), removing φw W dt−1 and φR (T ightness)dt−1 , to predict the log of annual bilateral flows from
all countries of origin to their destinations. The remaining factors in the regression, Dot and Dod are, by



                                                       23
construction, independent of time-varying economic (and legal) factors in the country of destination . Using
these predicted values we calculate the imputed immigration rate for each of the 14 destination countries in
each year (adding the predicted immigration rates from each country of origin).32 These imputed immigration
rates are what we use as instruments for the actual immigration rates. To the extent that immigration laws
(lagged one period) may also be considered as exogenous to the current economic condition of a country, we can
                                                                           b (T ightness)dt−1 in predicting
also construct predicted immigration flows by including the estimated term φR

the bilateral flows in regression 16. Table 4 shows the statistics for the first stage regressions using the predicted
immigration flows from 16 without wage diﬀerentials or immigration laws (first row of Table 4), and those
relative to predicted flows omitting only wage diﬀerentials (second row of Table 4). We test the significance of
the instrument on the whole sample (specification 1) or omitting the US (specification 2), using only European
countries of destination (specification 3) or only on the more recent period (specification 4). In each case
the coeﬃcient on the instrument is positive and very significant, and the partial R-square of the instrument
is between 0.32 and 0.42. Each regression includes time fixed eﬀects. The F-statistic of significance of the
instrument is usually above 300.         Thus, the instrument is quite powerful and captures only the variation in
immigration rates due to the interactions between country-of-origin specific factors and bilateral migration costs
(due to geography and historical bilateral networks). For instance, the large increase in Polish emigrants in
                                                                                                   b ot ) for
the period 1990-1995 due to the end of the communist regime produced a large Poland-specific term (D
those years in the migration equation. The fact that Poland has smaller bilateral costs of migration to Germany
                                                                          b od for Germany and the UK)
and the UK than to (say) Japan (which is captured by the higher estimated D
implies that the predicted migration rates from Poland to Germany and the UK, using our model, are larger
then the predicted migration rates to Japan, and particularly so during the years of large Polish migration.
Recall that while they are additive in equation 16, the terms Dot and Dod predict the logarithms of immigrant
flows. Hence, when we calculate their levels (divided by population to obtain immigration rates) the two eﬀects
are multiplicative, so for a given sending country shock, Dot , the eﬀect would be magnified by a large Dod . The
constructed immigration rate represents the exogenous (push-driven) variation in the immigration rates of the
receiving country and will be used as an instrument.
    Table 5 shows the 2SLS estimates of the eﬀect of immigration on inputs, productivity and per capita
income. The specifications and the dependent variables are as in Table 3. Again, the estimates obtained using
net immigration flows (specification 5) seem too large, but all the other specifications (using gross flows) are
consistent with the results obtained using OLS in Table 3. In particular, the eﬀect of immigration on total labor
supply ∆L/L is always very close to one (between 0.96 and 1.02) and precisely estimated (standard error around
  3 2 One further source of error in proxying the actual immigration rates with those predicted from the regression is that in the
bilateral regression we only have 74 countries of origin (the most important ones) and add the predicted flows from those. The
immigration rates, instead, measure the total immigration flows from those countries plus any other country in the world.




                                                               24
0.09). Similarly, the coeﬃcient on the capital adjustment (∆K/K) is always larger than one (and in most cases
not significantly diﬀerent from it) suggesting full adjustment of the capital stock within one year, so that the
change in the capital labor ratio (∆k/k) is always equal to 0. Similarly, there seems to be no significant eﬀect of
immigrants on productivity changes (∆A/A).The estimates of these eﬀects are robust to the choice of countries
in the sample (specification 2 omits the US, and specification 3 omits Europe) and to the choice of the period
(specification 4 considers only 1990-2005). All in all, the results of Table 5 confirm the correlations obtained
with the OLS estimates of Table 3. Immigrant flows caused (and predicted) by country-of-origin and geographic
factors increase the employment and labor supply in the receiving country one-to-one. Such an increase in the
pool of workers induces investments and capital accumulation that, even within one year, adjusts the capital-
labor ratio (and therefore the wages and return to capital) to the pre-immigration levels. The economy expands
and there is no significant eﬀect on the total productivity of factors but only to the overall size of GDP, which
grows in percentage roughly by the same amount as the immigration rates. Hence, for instance, the average
yearly inflow of immigrants in the US, recorded between 1995 and 2005 at around 0.3-0.4% of the population,
increased US GDP by around 0.3-0.4% each year, with no appreciable eﬀect on average wages and income per
person.
   The reader may find it puzzling that the capital stock adjusts fast enough to eliminate any eﬀect of immigra-
tion on wages, even within one year. Let us emphasize that immigration flows, even those that are push-driven,
have been quite predictable and, as a percentage of the population, never too large (mostly around 0.5% of
the population). Therefore, with yearly investments on the order of 20-30% of GDP there is ample room to
adjust investment by a relatively modest amount in order to accommodate new immigrant workers. Moreover
international capital movements may also follow migration and help the adjustment. As a further check that
our short-run estimates are not driven by some short-frequency noise in the data we have re-calculated the
responses of employment, capital, TFP and income to immigration over 5-year changes (rather than yearly
changes). Table 6 reports the estimated coeﬃcients from four diﬀerent specifications. Notice, importantly,
that the coeﬃcients on labor adjustment ( ∆L/L) and capital adjustment (∆K/K) are still close to one and
not significantly diﬀerent from one another (the capital response still seems to be a bit larger than one). The
eﬀects on productivity (∆A/A), on the capital-labor ratio and output per hour worked, are all insignificant.
The adjustment within one year seems fairly similar to the adjustment over 5 years and compatible with the
adjustment in the neoclassical model with endogenous capital: more workers encourage investment and do not
aﬀect productivity so that capital per worker and wages remain stable while the size of the workforce and of
the economy grows.




                                                        25
6     Discussion and Conclusions

The impacts of immigration on Western-country economies and labor markets have frequently been analyzed
by considering a single receiving country combined with individual or regional data. Similarly, the determinants
of international migrations have mostly been analyzed using only a single receiving country. These studies
are quite useful, however they have brought to light some issues that are diﬃcult to address in the context
of one receiving country, or by focusing exclusively on labor-market eﬀects. For instance, the degree and the
speed of adjustment of capital to immigration is a key determinant of the short-run eﬀect of immigration on
wages (see Borjas and Katz 2007, Ottaviano and Peri 2008). However, if capital is mobile within a country we
cannot estimate its response to immigrants with data from one country only (unless we have a very long time
series). Furthermore, the literature recognizes that we would need some "purely push-driven" migration flows
to identify the causal eﬀect of immigrants on economic outcomes in the destination country (e.g. Card 2001).
Those shocks, however, are hard to identify in the context of one receiving country only. This paper suggests a
couple of new approaches to address these issues and provides a new framework to estimate the determinants
of migration flows, to isolate the push-driven determinants, and to use them to identify the causal eﬀects of
immigration at the country-level. We also organize an extensive dataset of migration flows and immigration
laws for OECD countries (1980-2005).
    We make three main contributions. First, following Grogger and Hanson (2008) we use a bilateral migration
regression model that can be derived from a simple or nested logit model of the migration choices of potential
migrants. Migrants decide where to reside based on utility comparison between locations. Such a model can
explain the logarithm of the stock (and flow) of migrants from country o (origin) to country d (destination) as
a function of the wage diﬀerential between d and o, of bilateral migration costs and country-of-origin specific
eﬀects. Therefore, conveniently, we are microfounding a pseudo-gravity equation for international migrations.
We estimate that an increase in the wage diﬀerential between origin and destination of 1000 US $ (in 2000
PPP prices) increases the flow of migrants by 10-11% of their initial value. We also show that the immigration
reforms that made entry laws more restrictive were eﬀective in reducing migration flows by 6%, on average, for
each reform.
    Second, we use our model to separate between push factors, bilateral costs and pull factors, and construct a
prediction of migration flows that is "exogenous" to the economic conditions in the country of destination (pull
factors). Finally, using the predicted flows as an instrument we estimate the eﬀect of immigration on employ-
ment, capital accumulation, and total factor productivity. We find that, already within one year, employment
responds to new immigrants one for one, and capital adjusts in order to maintain the capital labor ratio. We do
not find any significant eﬀect of immigrants on total factor productivity. These results, taken together, imply
that immigration has no negative impact on average wages, or on income per worker in the short run (one year)


                                                       26
or in the long run (five years). The inflow of immigrants only increases the overall size of the economy without
altering the distribution of income between workers and capital owners. This is due to the fact that capital
owners respond eﬃciently to a larger labor pool by investing more. We hope that this paper will stimulate the
analysis of the eﬀects of international migrations, encouraging improvements and extensions in the collection
and organization of data on migration flows and immigration laws.




                                                      27
References

Anderson, James E., and Eric van Wincoop. (2003) “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border Puzzle.”
American Economic Review, 93(1): 170—92.

Angrist Joshua and Adriana Kugler (2005) “Protective or Counter-Productive? Labor Market Institutions and
the Eﬀect of Immigration on EU Natives,” Economic Journal, 113(488): 302-331.

Aydemir and Borjas (2007) "A Comparative Analysis of the Labor Market Impact of International Migration:
Canada, Mexico, and the United States" National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #12327, June
2006.

Barro, Robert and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (2004) "Economic Growth" MIT Press, Cambridge Massachusetts

Benhabib, Jesse, (1996) "On the political economy of immigration" European Economic Review.

Berry, Steven T. (1994) "Estimating Discrete Choice models of Product Diﬀerentiation" RAND Journal of
Economics, 25 (2).

Bertocchi Graziella and Chiara Strozzi. "International Migration and the Role of Institutions", 2008, Public
Choice, Vol. 137, No. 1, pp. 81-102.

Bertocchi Graziella and Chiara Strozzi. "The Evolution of Citizenship: Economic and Institutional Determi-
nants", Journal of Law and Economics, forthcoming, 2010.

Borjas, George (1987) "Self Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants" American Economic Review 77(4),
531-553.

Borjas, George. (2003). The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact of Immigra-
tion on the Labor Market. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, no. 4: 1335-1374.

Borjas, George, and Lawrence Katz. (2007). The Evolution of the Mexican-Born Workforce in the United States,
in Borjas, George, editor “Mexican Immigration to the United States” National Bureau of Economic Research
Conference Report, Cambridge Ma.

Card, David. (2001). Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of Higher
Immigration. Journal of Labor Economics 19, no 1: 22-64.

Cardell, N.S (1991). "Variance Components Structures for the Extreme Value and Logistic Distributions."
Mimeo, Washington State University.




                                                    28
Chaney, Thomas (2008) "Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margin of International Trade" Amer-
ican Economic Review 2008, 98:4, 1707—172.

Ciccone, Antonio and Robert Hall (1996) "Productivity and the Density of Economic Activity" American
Economic Review, 86 (1), 54-70.

Clark X., Hatton T.J. and J. Williamson (2007) "Explaining U.S. Immigration 1971-1998" Review of Economics
and Statistics 89(2), 359-373.

Coen-Pirani, Daniele (2008) "Understanding Gross Workers Flows Across United States" Manuscript, Canegie
Mellon University.

Docquier,        Frederic        (2007)   "International     Migration      Datasets"      available       at
http://www.ires.ucl.ac.be/CSSSP/home_pa_pers/docquier/oxlight.htm.

Dahl Gordon (2002) "Mobility and the Return to Education: Testing a Roy Model with Multiple Markets"
Econometrica 10(6): 2367-2420.

Deininger Klaus and Lyn Squire (1996) "A New data set Measuring Income Inequality" The World Bank
Economic Review, Vol. 10, N. 3 pp. 565-591.

Fondazione Rodolfo DeBenedetti (2007) "Social reform database" http://www.frdb.org/documentazione/scheda.php

Glick, Reuven and Andrew Rose (2002) ’Does a Currency Union Aﬀect Trade? The Time-Series Evidence"
European Economic Review 46(6) 1125-1151.

Grogger Jeﬀrey and Gordon Hanson (2007) "Income Maximization and the Sorting of Emigrants across Desti-
nations" Manuscript UC San Diego, 2007

Grogger Jeﬀrey and Gordon Hanson (2008) "Income Maximization and the Sorting of Emigrants across Desti-
nations" National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #13821, Cambridge, Ma.

Gollin Douglas (2002) "Getting Income Shares Right" Journal of Political Economy, vol. 100. pp. 458-474.

Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J. Melitz, and Yona Rubinstein (Forthcoming) “Estimating Trade Flows: Trading
Partners and Trading Volumes.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Jones, Charles I.(2008) "Macroeconomics" W.W. Norton, New York.

Karemera D., Oguledo V.I. and Davis B. (2000) " A Gravity Model Analysis of International Migration to
North America" Applied Economics (32) 1745-1755.




                                                     29
Lewis, Ethan. (2005) "Immigration, Skill Mix, and the Choice of Technique" Federal Reserve Bank of Philadel-
phia Working Paper no. 05-08 Philadelphia, PA.

Manacorda Marco, Alan Manning and John Wadsworth. (2006). The Impact of Immigration on the Structure
of Male Wages: Theory and Evidence from Britain IZA Discussion paper 2352. Bonn, Germany.

Mayda, Anna Maria (Forthcoming): "International Migrations: A Panel Data Analysis of the Determinants of
Bilateral Flows" Journal of Population Economics.

Mayda Anna Maria and Krishna Patel (2004) "OECD Countries Migration Policy Changes" available at
http://www9.georgetown.edu/faculty/amm223/papers.htm

McFadden, Daniel (1974) “Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior" in P. Zarembka Eds.
Frontiers in Econometrics, New York Acedemic press.

McFadden, Daniel (1978) “Modelling The Choice of Residential Location" in A.Karlgvist et al. Eds Spatial
Interaction Theories and Models; Amsterdam North Holland.

Ortega, Francesc (2005) "Immigration Quotas and Skill Upgrading" Journal of Public Economics, 89 1841-1863.

Ortega, Francesc (2008) "The Short-Run Eﬀects of a Large Immigration Wave: Spain 1998-2008". Manuscript,
Universitat Pompeu Fabra.

Ottaviano Gianmarco I.P. and Giovanni Peri (2008) "Immigration and National Wages: Clarifying the Theory
and the Empirics” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #14188, July 2008.

Pedersen, P. J., Pytlikova, M., and Smith, N. (2006) Migration into OECD countries 1990- 2000. In Parson and
Smeeding, editors, Immigration and the Transformation of Europe. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Peri, Giovanni (2008) “Immigration Accounting: U.S. States 1960-2006” CReAM Working paper # 04/08.

Peri Giovanni and Chad Sparber (forthcoming) "“Task Specialization, Immigration and Wages” American
Economic Journal: Empirical Economics.

Young, Alwyn, (1995) “The Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities of the East Asian Growth
Experience,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110: 641-680.




                                                      30
A      Data on Migration Flows and Stocks

The International Migration Data (2007) published by the OECD originate from contributions of the national
correspondents (National Statistical Agencies) organized in a network called "The Continuous Reporting Sys-
tem on Migration" (SOPEMI). Since the criteria for classifying immigrants and for registering the population
may vary significantly across countries the data are not necessarily homogeneous. Also, for each receiving
country the IMD (2007) records only the immigrants from the 15 countries of origin with the largest number
of immigrants. The OECD statistical annex to the data emphasizes the diﬃculty of measuring the undocu-
mented/illegal immigrants with this method. Only through censuses or after a regularization program are some
of the undocumented immigrants measured.
    The total inflows and outflows of the foreign population are derived from population registers and residence
and work permits. Due to the fact that removal from the registers due to departure is much less common than
the inclusion due to arrival these data are much better at measuring inflows than outflows of immigrants. The
countries of origin that we are able to record consistently and that therefore constitute our universe in the
bilateral regression analyses are listed in Table A2 of the Appendix.
    In the construction of the net immigration flows and immigration stocks for each year and each origin-
destination pair we compute the estimated rate of re-migration of the foreign population in each country. These
re-migration rates, which measure the percentage of the existing stock of immigrants in a country that leave
the country, are calculated to match the stocks of immigrants (in 1990 and 2000) with the flows between those
years in each country. The imputed re-migration rates, specific to the country of destination, were: 0.005 for
Australia, 0.09 for Belgium, 0.035 for Canada, 0.06 for Denmark, 0.015 for France, 0.05 for Germany, 0.05 for
Japan, 0.08 for Luxembourg, 0.02 for Netherlands, 0.12 for Norway, 0.04 for Sweden, 0.04 for Switzerland, 0.02
for the UK and 0.005 for the US.




                                                       31
Tables and Figures: Main Text

                                                                           Table 1
                                                Destination country determinants of bilateral migration stocks:
                                                               1980-2005 in 14 OECD countries
      Specification:               (1)              (2)                  (3)                (4)             (5)                     (6)                (7)            (8)
                                 Basic:         Income in          Decomposition        Including     Income is lagged         Omitting zero         Omitting       Omitting
                               Income in        logarithms           log(wage)-        country of        2 periods             migration cells         UK             US
                                 levels                           log(employment       destination
                                                                        rate)            controls
   Income per capita,            0.06**            0.29**                                 0.04*             0.06**                 0.076**             0.06**        0.06**
       destination               (0.01)            (0.10)                                 (0.02)            (0.01)                  (0.01)             (0.01)        (0.01)
  Income per worker,                                                   0.17**
       destination                                                     (0.08)
Employment/population,                                                 2.53**
       destination                                                     (0.93)
    Ln(population),                                                                         2.39
       destination                                                                         (1.66)
          Gini,                                                                             -0.01
       destination                                                                         (0.02)
     (Percentage of                                                                        0.002
 population between 15                                                                     (0.02)
  and 24), destination
      Land Border                 -1.29             -1.29                -1.29             -1.39              -1.33                  -0.12             -1.66*          -1.29
                                 (0.73)            (0.73)               (0.76)            (0.73)             (0.73)                 (0.52)             (0.75)         (0.73)
     Same Language                 0.08             0.08                 0.08              0.16               0.08                   0.09               0.13           0.08
                                 (0.40)            (0.41)               (0.40)            (0.42)             (0.42)                 (0.20)             (0.40)         (0.41)
      Colonial Ties              2.66**             2.65*                2.65*            2.66**             2.63**                 2.66**             2.04**         2.65**
                                 (0.42)            (0.42)               (0.42)            (0.42)             (0.33)                 (0.33)             (0.78)         (0.42)
      Log(distance)               -2.02           -2.02**              -2.04**           -2.02**            -2.03**                -1.43**            -2.14**        -2.02**
                                 (0.32)            (0.32)               (0.32)            (0.32)             (0.32)                 (0.14)             (0.31)         (0.32)
      Observations               21,805            21,805               21,805            21,148             19,776                 19,343             19,091         21,805

Note: The dependent variable in each regression is ln(Immigrant Stockop+1)t. Each regression includes 14 destination country effects and 1825(=73X25) year by country of origin
effects. The explanatory variables are all entered with one lag, unless otherwise specified. Income per person is measured in PPP US $ at 2000 prices. The observations are
weighted by the destination country population to account for heteroskedasticity of the errors across destination countries and the standard errors are clustered by destination
countries to account for correlation within those. **,* imply significance at the 5, 10% level.


                                                                                      32
                                                                             Table 2
                                               Bilateral migration flows, income per capita and immigration laws
                                                          1980-2005 in 14 OECD destination countries
        Specification:                     (1)                    (2)                    (3)                 (4)    (5)               (6)                             (7)
                                          Basic               Log income             Combining          Laws lagged 2
                                                                                                             Adding other      Omitting 0                         Omitting the
                                                                                   entry and stay         periods
                                                                                                              destination       migration                            UK
                                                                                        laws                    country             cells
                                                                                                                controls
                                  Panel A: Including bilateral geographic characteristics to control for migration costs
     Income per capita,              0.11**                0.75**             0.12**            0.10**           0.11**             0.03*                             0.12**
         Destination                 (0.03)                 (0.27)             (0.03)           (0.04)           (0.04)            (0.01)                             (0.02)
          Tightness                 -0.07**                -0.09**             -0.04*          -0.07**            -0.06           -0.06**                            -0.065*
 of immigration entry laws           (0.02)                 (0.02)             (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.04)            (0.02)                            (0.025)
          Tightness                   -0.19                 -0.19              -0.21*            -0.25            -0.12              0.12                              -0.01
       of asylum laws                (0.11)                 (0.11)             (0.10)           (0.18)           (0.07)            (0.07)                            (0.207)
         Maastricht                  0.58**                0.50**             0.63**            0.51**           0.70**              0.31                             0.79**
                                     (0.14)                 (0.18)             (0.14)           (0.15)           (0.12)            (0.28)                             (0.12)
          Schengen                    0.38                   0.27                0.37            0.37              0.37            -0.66*                              0.02
                                     (0.34)                 (0.34)             (0.34)           (0.37)           (0.38)            (0.32)                             (0.25)
                   Panel B: Including the full set of origin-destination country pair dummies to control for pair-specific migration costs
     Income per capita               0.12**                0.77**             0.13**            0.11**            0.11**             0.02                             0.13**
         Destination                 (0.03)                 (0.27)             (0.03)           (0.04)           (0.04)            (0.01)                             (0.03)
          Tightness                 -0.055*                -0.08**              -0.03          -0.06**            -0.04           -0.044*                              -0.05
 of immigration entry laws           (0.03)                 (0.03)             (0.03)           (0.03)           (0.03)           (0.024)                             (0.04)
          Tightness                  -0.20*                 -0.20             -0.23**            -0.26           -0.15*              0.13                              -0.04
       of asylum laws                (0.10)                 (0.12)             (0.10)           (0.18)           (0.08)            (0.07)                             (0.09)
         Maastricht                  0.68**                0.59**             0.72**            0.60**           0.78**              0.37                             0.81**
                                     (0.14)                 (0.18)             (0.14)           (0.16)           (0.13)            (0.28)                             (0.11)
          Schengen                    0.25                   0.12                0.25            0.24              0.27            -0.45*                              0.01
                                     (0.35)                 (0.35)             (0.36)           (0.38)           (0.40)            (0.23)                             (0.26)
        Observations                21,805                 21,805             21,805            21,148           19,776             5,371                             19,332

Note: Dependent variable ln(Immigrant Flowop+1)t . All regressions include 14 receiving country fixed effects and 1825(=73X25) year-by-sending-country fixed effects.
Regressions of Panel A include border, common language, colonial ties dummies and log distance as bilateral controls while regressions of Panel B include a full set of 1022
(=73X14) country-pair fixed effects. Observations are weighted by the population of the receiving country. Robust standard errors clustered by country of destination are reported
in parentheses. **,* imply significance at the 5, 10% level.

                                                                                       33
                                                        Table 3
            Impact of yearly gross immigrant flows on production factors, productivity and factors per worker:
                                             yearly changes, OLS Estimates
                            (1)              (2)               (3)             (4)               (5)             (6)
                        basic OLS       Omitting US      Europe only       1990-2005         including       Using Net
                                                                                           lagged levels    Immigration
      ΔL/L                0.95**           1.03**           1.06**           0.95**           1.09**           3.25**
                          (0.12)           (0.08)            (0.08)          (0.17)            (0.29)          (0.32)
  ΔEmployment/            0.99**           1.05**           1.09**           1.06**           1.30**           2.87**
   Employment             (0.12)           (0.08)            (0.14)          (0.23)            (0.28)          (0.35)
ΔHours per worker          -0.03            -0.01            -0.03            -0.11            -0.03            0.36
/Hours per worker         (0.08)           (0.08)            (0.07)          (0.13)            (0.07)          (0.24)
      ΔK/K                0.75**           0.84**           1.12**           1.04**           0.51**           1.77**
                          (0.27)           (0.24)            (0.20)          (0.30)            (0.19)          (0.39)
      ΔA/A                 -0.06            -0.07            -0.06            -0.23            -0.01            -0.27
                          (0.31)           (0.32)            (0.32)          (0.25)            (0.32)          (0.78)
      ΔY/Y                0.82**           0.87**           1.00**           0.73**            0.82*           2.48**
                          (0.41)           (0.39)            (0.40)          (0.41)            (0.45)          (0.81)
      Δk/k                 -0.24            -0.20             0.02            -0.02            -0.08            -0.11
                          (0.20)           (0.21)            (0.16)          (0.18)            (0.38)          (0.54)
      Δy/y                 -0.13            -0.15            -0.05            -0.21            -0.06            -0.51
                          (0.37)           (0.38)            (0.35)          (0.29)            (0.36)          (0.88)
   Observations             350              325              225              210              336              350



Note: Each cell shows the coefficient from a different regression with the dependent variable described in the first cell of the row and the explanatory
variable equal to the total flow of immigrants as a share of the initial population of the receiving country. The method of estimation is Least Squares. Each
regression includes year fixed effects. The standard errors in parentheses are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by country. Specification (1) uses all
the country-year observations, specification (2) omits the US data, specification (3) includes only the nine continental European countries in our sample;
specification (4) uses only observations from the 1990-2005 period, specification (5) includes the lagged value of the level of the dependent variable as
explanatory variable and specification (6) uses the “net” immigration flows, namely those obtained after subtracting the estimated re-migration from the
existing stock of immigrants. **,* imply significance at the 5, 10% level.


                                                                            34
                                                               Table 4
                               First stage of the 2SLS: dependent variable is the gross immigration flow




     Instrument:                                               (1)                      (2)                        (3)                       (4)
                                                             Basic                 Omitting US                Europe Only                1990-2005
  Predicted flows              Coefficient                   0.67**                  0.67**                      0.67**                    0.62**
 from gravity push                                           (0.03)                   (0.03)                     (0.04)                    (0.03)
                                  F-test                    495.1**                   496**                     319.2**                    539.14
                                (p-value)                   (0.000)                  (0.000)                    (0.000)                   (0.000)
                            Partial R-Square                  0.43                     0.44                       0.42                      0.41

   Predicted flows             Coefficient                  0.24**                     0.24**                    0.24**                     0.23**
 from gravity push                                           (0.01)                     (0.01)                    (0.01)                    (0.01)
  and immigration                  F-test                    301.2                      301.5                     276.2                      301.2
        laws                                                (0.000)                    (0.000)                   (0.000)                    (0.00)
                            Partial R-Square                  0.32                       0.32                      0.35                       0.43

    Observations                                               350                       325                       225                        210




Note: The dependent variable in all first stage regressions is the immigration rate measured as gross immigration flows relative to initial population. The
explanatory variable (instrument) in the first row is the predicted immigration rate using the empirical equation (14) without wage differential or
immigration tightness measures. In row 2 we use the predicted immigration flows from (14) omitting wage differentials only. All regressions include year
fixed effects. Specification (1) includes all countries and all years 1980-2005, specification (2) omits the US, specification (3) includes only the nine
Continental European Countries (not the UK) and specification (4) considers only observations relative to the period 1990-2005. In parentheses below the
coefficient estimates we report heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by country. Below the F-statistics we report the probability of rejecting
the inclusion of the instruments in the first stage. **,* imply significance at the 5, 10% level.



                                                                            35
                                                              Table 5
                           Impact of yearly gross immigrant flows on production factors and productivity:
                                       2SLS estimates, instruments: gravity push factors only

                                             (1)                   (2)                    (3)                  (4)                     (5)
                                         basic 2SLS            Omitting US            Europe only           1990-2005              Using Net
                                                                                                                                  Immigration
                 ΔL/L                       1.02**                   0.99                   1.00               0.96**               4.00**
                                            (0.12)                 (0.08)                 (0.08)               (0.08)               (0.29)
           ΔEmployment/                     1.22**                 1.21**                 1.22**               1.22**               4.81**
          Employment                        (0.09)                 (0.10)                 (0.13)               (0.12)               (0.37)
        ΔHours per worker                   -0.20*                  -0.20                -0.25**              -0.26**                -0.80
        /Hours per worker                   (0.10)                 (0.11)                 (0.08)               (0.10)               (0.45)
             ΔK/K                           1.36**                 1.37**                 1.49**               1.38**               5.37**
                                            (0.17)                 (0.18)                 (0.20)               (0.19)               (0.52)
                 ΔA/A                        -0.13                  -0.11                  -0.06                -0.37                -0.51
                                            (0.17)                 (0.16)                 (0.14)               (0.14)               (0.67)
                 ΔY/Y                       0.99**                 0.99**                 1.09**               0.94**               3.91**
                                            (0.50)                 (0.17)                 (0.20)               (0.17)               (0.62)
                 Δk/k                        0.14                    0.16                   0.23                 0.15                 0.56
                                            (0.13)                 (0.14)                 (0.14)               (0.14)               (0.51)
                 Δy/y                        -0.02                   0.03                   0.08                -0.04                -0.10
                                            (0.20)                 (0.19)                 (0.15)               (0.17)               (0.80)
            Observations                      350                    325                    225                  210                  350


Note: Each cell shows the coefficient from a different regression with the dependent variable described in the first cell of the row and the explanatory
variable equal to the total flow of immigrants as a share of the initial population of the receiving country. The method of estimation is 2SLS using the
predicted flow of immigrants from the gravity push factors as instruments. Each regression uses yearly differences by country and includes year fixed
effects. The standard errors in parentheses are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by country. Specification (1) uses all the country-year observations,
specification (2) omits the US data, specification (3) includes only the nine continental European countries in our sample; specification (4) uses only
observations from the 1990-2005 period, specification (5) uses the “net” immigration flows, namely those obtained after subtracting the estimated re-
migration from the existing stock of immigrants. **,* imply significance at the 5, 10% level.



                                                                            36
                                                                 Table 6
                                                            5-year differences
                                          2SLS estimates, instruments: gravity push factors only


                                                           (1)                    (2)                    (3)                  (4)
                                                       basic 2SLS            Omitting US           Europe only           1990-2005
                              ΔL/L                       0.99**                0.97**                 0.97**               0.97**
                                                         (0.09)                (0.08)                 (0.10)               (0.08)
                        ΔEmployment/                     1.18**                1.16**                 1.21**               1.18**
                       Employment                        (0.09)                (0.09)                 (0.10)               (0.10)
                     ΔHours per worker                    -0.19                 -0.19                -0.23**              -0.22**
                     /Hours per worker                   (0.08)                (0.09)                 (0.06)               (0.10)
                          ΔK/K                           1.24**                1.25**                 1.33**               1.22**
                                                         (0.13)                (0.17)                 (0.18)               (0.17)
                              ΔA/A                        -0.09                 -0.08                  -0.03                -0.08
                                                         (0.13)                (0.12)                 (0.11)               (0.12)
                              ΔY/Y                       0.96**                0.97**                 1.05**               0.97**
                                                         (0.14)                (0.16)                 (0.18)               (0.15)
                              Δk/k                        0.06                   0.08                   0.16                 0.04
                                                         (0.13)                (0.13)                 (0.13)               (0.14)
                              Δy/y                        -0.02                  0.01                   0.09                -0.04
                                                         (0.24)                (0.14)                 (0.12)               (0.14)
                         Observations                       70                     65                    45                   56



Note: Each cell shows the coefficient from a different regression with the dependent variable described in the first cell of the row and the explanatory
variable equal to the total flow of immigrants as a share of the initial population of the receiving country. The method of estimation is 2SLS using the
predicted flow of immigrants from the gravity push factors as instruments. Each regression uses changes over five years between 1980 and 2005 and
includes period fixed effects. The standard errors in parentheses are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered by country. **,* imply significance at the 5,
10% level.



                                                                           37
Tables and Figures: Appendix
                                                              Table A1:
                            List of the countries of origin of migrants for the bilateral migration data
                                                         Countries of Origin
              Algeria                           Ghana                                Nigeria
              Australia                         Greece                               Norway
              Austria                           Guatemala                            Pakistan
              Bangladesh                        Guyana                               Peru
              Belgium                           Haiti                                Philippines
              Bosnia-Herzegovina                Honduras                             Poland
              Brazil                            Hong Kong                            Portugal
              Bulgaria                          Hungary                              Romania
              Cambodia                          Iceland                              Russian Federation
              Canada                            India                                Slovenia
              Chile                             Iran                                 Somalia
              China                             Iraq                                 South Africa
              Colombia                          Ireland                              South Korea
              Croatia                           Italy                                Spain
              Cuba                              Jamaica                              Sri Lanka
              Cyprus                            Japan                                Suriname
              Denmark                           Kenya                                Sweden
              Dominican Republic                Laos                                 Thailand
              Ecuador                           Lebanon                              Tunisia
              El Salvador                       Malaysia                             Turkey
              Ethiopia                          Mexico                               UK
              Fiji                              Morocco                              USA
              Finland                           Netherlands                          Vietnam
              France                            New Zealand                          Zaire
              Germany                           Nicaragua




                                                                 38
                                                          Table A2:
                      Average values of the variables included in the regressions for bilateral flows;
               Separated between countries of origin and countries of destination, in 1980, 1990, 2000, 2004.


 variable                       1980                           1990                           2000                           2004
 GDP per person                 7,944                          9,442                          11,198                         12,018
 Origin
 GDP per person                 17,979                         21,916                         28,565                         29,022
 Destination
 Employment        rate         42%                            44%                            46%                            47%
 Origin
 Employment        rate         47%                            49%                            50%                            49%
 Destination
 Gini                           0.38                           0.39                           0.40                           0.40
 Origin
 Gini                           0.31                           0.33                           0.33                           0.33
 Destination
 Share of population            9.2%                           8.6%                           8.82%                          8.81%
 between 14 and 24
 years, Origin
 Share of population            7.1%                           6.1%                           5.25%                          5.99%
 between 14 and 24
 years, Destination
 Observations                   77                             77                             77                             77
 Origin
 Observations                   14                             14                             14                             14
 Destination
Note:
Per Capita GDP, Employment Rate and Population (available 1980-2004): Penn World Table 6.2. PPP-converted, chain-weighted GDP per worker.
Share of population 15 to 24 (available 1980-2004): United Nations population statistics.
Inequality (Gini Coefficient), (available 1980-2004): Deininger and Squire (1996), only “high quality” observations. The data are available to
differing degrees across countries, but we linearly interpolated and extrapolated values for all years as long as there was at least one value given for the
country in some year. Sometimes there was only a single value for a country, so we assumed this value for all years. Also, sometimes there were not
enough values to generate a reasonable extrapolation, so we assigned the values nearest (in time) to the missing values.


                                                                            39
                                            Table A3
                    Annualized growth rates of inputs, productivity and output



  Variable                     Observations       Mean        Std. Dev.       Min          Max
                                              1980-1990
  Real GDP                           14            2.72          0.79          1.99        4.83
  Total Hours worked                 14            0.68          0.84         -0.50        1.78
  Employment                         14            1.07          0.63          0.18        1.88
  Capital Services                   14            3.43          1.04          2.25        5.59
  Total Factor Productivity          14            1.14          0.71         -0.25        2.50
                                              1990-2000
  Real GDP                           14            2.62          1.02          1.06        4.91
  Total Hours worked                 14            0.58          0.96         -0.92        2.77
  Employment                         14            0.92          0.97         -0.67        3.40
  Capital Services                   14            3.75          1.05          2.06        6.12
  Total Factor Productivity          14            1.01          0.65         -0.56        2.38
                                              2000-2005
  Real GDP                           14            1.98          0.86          0.60        3.65
  Total Hours worked                 14            0.34          0.84         -0.93        1.96
  Employment                         14            0.73          0.97         -0.41        3.08
  Capital Services                   14            3.11          1.26          1.37        6.02
  Total Factor Productivity          14            0.73          0.54          0.17        1.79



Note: The data were constructed by the authors using the OECD-STAN dataset and the PWT 6.2 data as
sources. The exact definition of the variables and of the procedure to construct them is in the main text,
section 5.2.




                                                 40
                                                                            Panel A1: Immigration flows relative to population, Gross and Net for 14 OECD Countries
                                                        Australia                                                                                                                           Belgium                                                                                                                Canada                                                                                                        Denmark
 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                                                                                                                               0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                      1980   1985    1990             1995       2000     2005                                                                        1980    1985    1990              1995      2000      2005                                                             1980    1985    1990             1995    2000    2005                                                              1980   1985   1990          1995   2000   2005
                                                             year                                                                                                                              year                                                                                                                  year                                                                                                            year
                                                                   Gross                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Gross                                                                                                        Gross
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Gross
                                                                   Net                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Net                                                                                                          Net
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Net



                                                           France                                                                                                                      Germany                                                                                                                     Japan                                                                                                       Luxembourg



                                                                                                 0 .1 .2.3 .4 .5.6 .7 .8 .9 11.11.21.31.41.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1 1.21.41.61.8 2 2.22.42.62.8 3
 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                                      1980   1985    1990            1995       2000     2005                                                  1980                          1985    1990              1995     2000       2005                                          1980                       1985    1990            1995     2000    2005                                                     1980             1985   1990          1995   2000   2005
                                                            year                                                                                                                              year                                                                                                                  year                                                                                                             year

                                                                   Gross                                                                                                                            Gross                                                                                                              Gross                                                                                                            Gross
                                                                   Net                                                                                                                              Net                                                                                                                Net                                                                                                              Net



                                                     Netherlands                                                                                                                            Norway                                                                                                             Sweden                                                                                                          Switzerland




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2
     0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                                                     0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                                      1980   1985    1990            1995       2000     2005                                                                         1980   1985     1990             1995      2000      2005                                                              1980    1985    1990            1995     2000    2005                                               1980                  1985   1990          1995   2000   2005
                                                            year                                                                                                                              year                                                                                                                   year                                                                                                            year

                                                                   Gross                                                                                                                             Gross                                                                                                                 Gross                                                                                                        Gross
                                                                   Net                                                                                                                               Net                                                                                                                   Net                                                                                                          Net




                                                    United Kingdom
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                                                                                                     United States
                                                                                                                          0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                      1980   1985   1990            1995       2000     2005
                                                            year                                                                                             1980            1985    1990             1995     2000      2005
                                                                                                                                                                                             year
                                                               Gross                                                                                                                            Gross
                                                               Net                                                                                                                              Net




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             41
                                                                                                 Panel A2: Tightness of immigration reforms over time. 14 OECD countries 1980-2005


                                                              Australia                                                                                                                                                                                             Belgium
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Canada                                                                                                                                                               Denmark
   -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6




                                                                                                                                                                                                 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
                                       1980    1985     1990              1995            2000          2005                                                                                                                       1980          1985           1990              1995            2000             2005                                                                                                        1980          1985          1990              1995          2000      2005                                                                                                 1980      1985      1990               1995          2000          2005
                                                                 year                                                                                                                                                                                                     year                                                                                                                                                                                      year                                                                                                                                                                  year
                                                                     entry laws                                                                                                                                                                                           entry laws                                                                                                                                                                                 entry laws                                                                                                                                                           entry laws
                                                                     asylum laws                                                                                                                                                                                          asylum laws                                                                                                                                                                                asylum laws                                                                                                                                                          asylum laws



                                                              France                                                                                                                                                                                           Germany                                                                                                                                                                                        Japan                                                                                                                                                          Luxembourg




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
     -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6




                                                                                                                                                 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
                                       1980   1985     1990              1995         2000          2005                                                                            1980                                                    1985          1990              1995           2000             2005                                                                            1980                                         1985          1990                1995       2000          2005                                                                        1980                              1985      1990            1995        2000          2005
                                                                year                                                                                                                                                                                               year                                                                                                                                                                                           year                                                                                                                                                             year

                                                                 entry laws                                                                                                                                                                                        entry laws                                                                                                                                                                                     entry laws                                                                                                                                                        entry laws
                                                                 asylum laws                                                                                                                                                                                       asylum laws                                                                                                                                                                                    asylum laws                                                                                                                                                       asylum laws



                                                         Netherlands                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sweden                                                                                                                                                               Switzerland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Norway




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
     -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
                                                                                                                                                                       -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6




                                       1980   1985     1990              1995         2000          2005                                                                                                 1980                               1985         1990              1995          2000            2005                                           1980                                                                          1985          1990            1995            2000          2005                                        1980                                                               1985      1990             1995        2000          2005
                                                                year                                                                                                                                                                                              year                                                                                                                                                                                     year                                                                                                                                                                    year

                                                                 entry laws                                                                                                                                                                                       entry laws                                                                                                                                                                                entry laws                                                                                                                                                             entry laws
                                                                 asylum laws                                                                                                                                                                                      asylum laws                                                                                                                                                                               asylum laws                                                                                                                                                            asylum laws



                                                      United Kingdom                                                                                                                                                                                    United States
                                                                                                               -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
-6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6




                                   1980       1985    1990             1995        2000          2005                                            1980                                                                                     1985          1990             1995            2000            2005
                                                              year                                                                                                                                                                                              year

                                                              entry laws                                                                                                                                                                                         entry laws
                                                              asylum laws                                                                                                                                                                                        asylum laws




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         42
