NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENERGY, THE ENVIRONMENT, AND TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE
David Popp
Richard G. Newell
Adam B. Jaffe
Working Paper 14832
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14832

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2009

This paper was prepared for the forthcoming Handbook of Economics of Technical Change. In preparing
this review, the authors draw heavily on earlier joint work with Robert Stavins, William Pizer, and
Kenneth Gillingham. We thank them for those contributions and for all that we have learned from
them. Thanks to Jung Eun Kim and Kelly Bogart for their assistance preparing this manuscript. Finally,
we thank Bronwyn Hall, Reyer Gerlagh, and Nick Johnstone for helpful comments on an earlier version
of this chapter. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by David Popp, Richard G. Newell, and Adam B. Jaffe. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Energy, the Environment, and Technological Change
David Popp, Richard G. Newell, and Adam B. Jaffe
NBER Working Paper No. 14832
April 2009
JEL No. O30,Q53,Q54,Q55
ABSTRACT
Within the field of environmental economics, the role of technological change has received much attention.
The long-term nature of many environmental problems, such as climate change, makes understanding
the evolution of technology an important part of projecting future impacts. Moreover, in many cases
environmental problems cannot be addressed, or can only be addressed at great cost, using existing
technologies. Providing incentives to develop new environmentally-friendly technologies then becomes
a focus of environmental policy. This chapter reviews the literature on technological change and the
environment. Our goals are to introduce technological change economists to how the lessons of the
economics of technological change have been applied in the field of environmental economics, and
suggest ways in which scholars of technological change could contribute to the field of environmental
economics.

David Popp
Associate Professor of Public Administration
Syracuse University
The Maxwell School
426 Eggers
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
and NBER
dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu
Richard G. Newell
Nicholas School of the Environment
Duke University
Box 90227
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
richard.newell@duke.edu

Adam B. Jaffe
MS 120
Brandeis University
Waltham, MA 02454
and NBER
ajaffe@brandeis.edu

Table of Contents
1. Introduction ......................................................................................................................... 1
2. Key concepts ....................................................................................................................... 2
2.1. Fundamentals of Environmental Economics ............................................................... 2
2.2. The Economics of Technological Change ................................................................... 3
2.3 Implications for Environmental and Technology Policy .............................................. 4
3. Microeconomics: Innovation .............................................................................................. 6
3.1 Induced Innovation ....................................................................................................... 7
3.1.1. Empirical evidence on induced innovation in pollution abatement and energy
conservation ........................................................................................................................ 7
3.1.2. Innovation and the Choice of Policy Instrument .................................................... 10
3.1.3. What Can Technological Change Economists Contribute? .................................... 16
3.2. The Impacts of Technological Change ...................................................................... 17
3.2.1 Empirical Evidence .................................................................................................. 18
3.2.2. Estimates of Technological Impact Using Learning-by-Doing .............................. 19
3.2.3. Government R&D ................................................................................................... 21
3.2.4. What Can Technological Change Economists Contribute? .................................... 22
4. Microeconomics: Diffusion .............................................................................................. 23
4.1 Diffusion within Countries ......................................................................................... 23
4.1.1. Theoretical Analyses ............................................................................................... 24
4.1.2. Empirical Studies .................................................................................................... 26
4.1.2.1 Environmental Policy and Adoption ..................................................................... 26
4.1.2.2. Are there Adoption Market Failures? .................................................................. 30
4.1.3 What Can Technological Change Economists Contribute? ..................................... 33
4.2 Diffusion Across Countries......................................................................................... 33
4.2.1. What Can Technological Change Economists Contribute? .................................... 38
5. Technological Change in Aggregate Energy-Environment Models ................................. 39
5.1 Exogenous Technological Change .............................................................................. 40
5.2 Endogenous Technological Change ............................................................................ 40
5.2.1 Direct Price-Induced Technological Change ........................................................... 42
5.2.2 R&D-induced technological change ........................................................................ 42
5.2.2.1 Theoretical Models of R&D-Induced Technological Change .............................. 43
5.2.2.2 Numerical Models of R&D-Induced Technological Change ............................... 45
5.2.3 Learning-Induced Technological Change ................................................................ 47
5.3 What Can Technological Change Economists Contribute? ........................................ 48
6. Conclusions ....................................................................................................................... 49
References ............................................................................................................................. 52

1. Introduction
Within the field of environmental economics, the role of technological change has
received much attention (Jaffe, Newell, and Stavins 2003). The long term nature of many
environmental problems, such as climate change, makes understanding the evolution of
technology an important part of projecting future policy impacts. Environmental technologies
include technologies that reduce pollution at the end of the pipe, such as scrubbers for use on
industrial smokestacks or catalytic converters for automobiles. They also include changes to the
production process, such as improved energy efficiency, that lead to reduced environmental
impacts. Because the benefits of environmental technologies tend to accrue to society at large,
rather than the adopter of such technologies, market forces alone provide little incentive for
developing environmental technologies. Instead, environmental regulation or public funding of
research and development (R&D) often provides the first impetus for developing new
environmental technologies. These induced effects of environmental policy on technology may
have substantial implications for the normative analysis of policy decisions. Indeed, in many
cases, environmental problems cannot be addressed, or can only be addressed at great cost, using
existing technologies. As a result, understanding the interactions between environmental policy
and technology may have quantitatively important consequences in the context of cost-benefit or
cost-effectiveness analyses of such policies.
Understanding the environmental impact of overall technological change is also
important to assess the long-term sustainability of economic growth. The environmental impact
of economic activity is profoundly affected by the rate and direction of technological change.
Costs tend to fall, quality tends to improve, and a wider variety of technologies tend to become
available as time passes. New technologies may create or facilitate increased pollution, or may
mitigate or replace existing polluting activities. Further, because many environmental problems
and policy responses are evaluated over time horizons of decades or centuries, the cumulative
impact of technological changes is likely to be large. Indeed, uncertainty about the future rate
and direction of technological change is often an important sensitivity in forecasts of the severity
of environmental problems.
This is best illustrated by the example of climate change, in which different assumptions
about the potential for future technological change lead to greatly different assessments about
both the potential for reducing carbon emissions and the optimal rate at which such reductions
should occur. For instance, in its latest report on climate change, the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) reports estimates of the costs of stabilizing global carbon concentrations
from a variety of climate models. To stabilize concentrations at a level of 550 parts per million
(ppm), the estimated costs, in terms of lost GDP in the year 2050, range from a four percent loss
to a slight increase in GDP, relative to baseline growth (IPCC 2007). Projections of future
technological change are an important driver of these differences, and affect not only the cost of
reducing emissions, but also predictions of what emissions levels will occur in the absence of
climate policy initiatives.
This chapter reviews the literature on technological change and the environment. This is
a large task, inevitably requiring unfortunate but necessary omissions. In particular, we confine
ourselves to the relationship between technology and problems of environmental pollution,
leaving aside a large literature on technological change in agriculture and natural resources more
broadly. Because of the significant environmental implications of fossil fuel combustion, we
include in our review some of the relevant literature on technological change and energy use,

2

with a focus on the environmental impacts of energy use. Our goals in this chapter are to both
introduce technological change economists to how lessons from the study of technological
change have been applied in the field of environmental economics, and to suggest ways in which
scholars of technological change might contribute to the field of environmental economics.
2. Key concepts1
2.1. Fundamentals of Environmental Economics
Economic analysis of environmental policy is based on the idea that the potentially
harmful consequences of economic activities on the environment constitute an “externality,” an
economically significant effect of an activity, the consequences of which are borne (at least in
part) by a party or parties other than the party that controls the externality-producing activity. A
factory that pollutes the air, water, or land imposes a cost on society. The firm that owns the
factory has an economic incentive to use only as much labor or steel as it can productively
employ, because those inputs are costly to the firm. The cost to society of having some of its
labor and steel used up in a given factory is internalized by the firm, because it has to pay for
those inputs. But the firm does not have an economic incentive to minimize the external costs of
pollution.
Environmental policies attempt to equalize this imbalance by raising the incentive for a
firm to minimize these externalities. Policy choices accomplish this in one of two general
ways—either by financially internalizing the environmental costs so polluters make their own
decisions regarding their consumption of environmental inputs, or by imposing a limit on the
level of environmental pollution.
The cost of environmental policies could be in the form of decreased output of desired
products (for example, a scrubber on an electric power plant reduces its electricity production
from a given quantity of fuel), increased use of other variable inputs (for example, eliminating
certain gases from the waste stream in a smokestack may require more fuel to be burned and
require additional labor to maintain pollution control equipment), purchase of specialized
pollution control equipment (for example, catalytic converters on automobiles), or substitution of
inferior or more expensive products or production methods to avoid pollution-causing products
or methods (for example, less effective pesticides used when DDT was banned).
In the short run, setting an efficient environmental policy requires a comparison of the
marginal cost of reducing pollution with the marginal benefit of a cleaner environment. All else
being equal, emissions of pollutants that are very harmful should be greatly restricted, because
the pollutants otherwise produce large marginal costs to society. But, all else being equal,
emissions of pollutants that are very costly to eliminate should be tolerated, because the marginal
cost of reducing them is high.
When technology enters the equation, the terms of the tradeoff between the marginal cost
of pollution control and its marginal social benefit is altered. In particular, technology
innovations—such as new pollution control equipment, cleaner production methods, or new
substitutes for environmentally harmful products—typically reduce the marginal cost of
1

This section draws considerably from Jaffe, Newell, and Stavins (2005).

3

achieving a given unit of pollution reduction. These innovations may also change the shape or
the slope of these marginal costs. In most cases, technological change enables a specified level
of environmental cleanup to be achieved at lower total cost to society. New innovations also
make it possible for a lower total level of pollution to be attained more efficiently than would be
expected if the cost of cleanup were higher.
The ability of technology to lower environmental cleanup costs has influenced much
research in environmental economics. Initially, these questions focused on the ability of
environmental policy to shape the direction of technological change. In the absence of
environmental policy, firms have little incentive to install cleaner technologies or develop better
environmental technologies for future use.2 This can lead early, pre-policy predictions of the net
benefits of environmental regulation to be lower than evaluations after the fact, as newly
developed technologies lower the costs of complying with regulation (Harrington et al. 2000).
More recently, environmental economists have paid increasing attention to estimating the rate at
which technology improves, as well as the role of technology policy itself to supplement the
effects of environmental policy.
2.2. The Economics of Technological Change
As environmental economic research on technological change has grown, the importance
of considering market failures for knowledge, as well as traditional environmental externalities,
has been emphasized. In particular, calls for increased government support for environmentallyfriendly R&D are motivated by the need to overcome such market failures. As these should be
familiar to technological change scholars, we only briefly mention these here, with an emphasis
on the importance of these lessons for environmental models.
The generation of knowledge through the innovative process contrasts sharply with the
negative externalities from pollution. Because of the public goods nature of knowledge, a firm
that invests in or implements a new technology typically creates benefits for others while
incurring all the costs. The firm therefore lacks the incentive to increase those benefits by
investing in technology. Pollution creates a negative externality, and so the invisible hand allows
too much of it. Technology creates positive externalities, and so the invisible hand produces too
little of it. As such, even if policies to correct the environmental externalities are in place, the
level of environmental R&D will still be suboptimal. Because they ignore the positive spillovers
created by R&D, firms will underinvest in research activity.
Uncertainty is also an issue for innovation. While all investment is characterized by
uncertainty, the uncertainty associated with the returns to investment in innovation is often
particularly large. Not only is the variance of the distribution of expected returns much larger
than for other investments, but much or even most of the value may be associated with very low2

The assumption here, and through much of the literature on environmental innovation, is that any resulting
environmental benefits are a pure public good. Exceptions occur when the benefits are impure public goods, in
which some, but not all, of the benefits of the good go to the user of technology. An example is energy efficiency
improvements, for which there is an incentive even absent direct environmental policy, due to the positive price of
energy. However, as reducing energy consumption also benefits the environment through lower production, energy
prices themselves will not encourage efficient usage and development of energy efficiency technologies unless the
associated environmental externalities have been fully priced.

4

probability but very high value outcomes (Scherer et al. 2000). Uncertainty may prove
particulary problematic for environmental policy, as the technologies needed to comply with
propsed regulations may evolve in unexpected ways once policy is in place, making it difficult
for regulators to anticipate the true costs of compliance.
More recently, economists have come to understand additional market failures that may
operate in the adoption and diffusion of new technology. For a number of reasons, the cost or
value of a new technology to one user may depend on how many other users have adopted the
technology. In general, users will be better off the more other people use the same technology.
This benefit associated with the overall scale of technology adoption has sometimes been
referred to as “dynamic increasing returns,” which may be generated by learning-by-using,
learning-by-doing, or network externalities. Thus, just like the creation of the technology itself,
information about the performance of a technology has an important public goods component.
Finally, adoption of new technologies may be hindered by principal-agent problems, as
when a builder or landlord chooses the level of investment in energy efficiency in a building, but
the energy bills are paid by a later purchaser or a tenant. If the purchaser has incomplete
information about the magnitude of the resulting energy savings, the builder or landlord may not
be able to recover the cost of such investments, and hence might not undertake them. These
market failures with respect to adoption of new technology are part of the explanation for the
apparent “paradox” of underinvestment in energy-saving technologies that appear cost-effective
but are not widely utilized (Jaffe and Stavins 1994; Newell, Jaffe, and Stavins 2004; Gillingham,
Newell, and Palmer 2009).
2.3 Implications for Environmental and Technology Policy
The combination of environmental externalities and knowledge market failures provide
two hurdles for policy makers to address when providing incentives for environmental
innovation, and suggests two possible avenues through which policy can encourage the
development of environmentally-friendly technologies: correcting the environmental externality
and/or correcting knowledge market failures. At a minimum, effective long-run environmental
policies require both. Because knowledge market failures apply generally across technologies,
policies addressing knowledge market failures may be general, addressing the problem in the
economy as a whole, such as patent protection, R&D tax credits, and funding for generic basic
research. Such policies focus on the overall rate of innovation – how much innovative activity
takes place. In contrast, policies aimed specifically at the environment focus on the direction of
innovation. While this includes policies regulating externalities, such as a carbon tax or cap-andtrade system, it also includes environmental and energy policies using more general R&D policy
mechanisms with a specific focus on the environment. Technology policies specific to energy
include targeted government subsidies for adoption of alternative energy, and funding for
targeted basic and applied research.
Studies evaluating the effectiveness of these various policy options find that
environmental and technology policies work best in tandem. While technology policy can help
facilitate the creation of new environmentally-friendly technologies, it provides little incentive to
adopt these technologies. Fischer (2008) develops a theoretical model showing that government
support for emissions control R&D is only effective if there is at least moderate environmental

5

policy in place to encourage adoption of the resulting technologies. Using a computable general
equilibrium model to study the potential effects of energy R&D for climate change mitigation,
Schneider and Goulder (1997) show that policies to address knowledge spillovers are more
effective if they address all knowledge spillovers, rather than focusing exclusively on R&D
pertaining to alternative energy. Not surprisingly, technology subsidies alone have a smaller
environmental impact than policies that directly address the environmental externality.
Popp (2006a) considers the long-run welfare gains from both an optimally-designed
carbon tax (one equating the marginal benefits of carbon reductions with the marginal costs of
such reductions) and optimally designed R&D subsidies. Popp finds that combining both
policies yields the largest welfare gain. However, a policy using only the carbon tax achieves
95% of the welfare gains of the combined policy, while a policy using only the optimal R&D
subsidy attains just 11% of the welfare gains of the combined policy in his model. In contrast to
Schneider and Goulder, R&D policy has less effect in this study, as the subsidies only apply to
the energy sector.
Given the importance of emissions policies to encourage R&D, two recent papers ask
whether initial emissions policies should be made stronger, in order to achieve lower costs
through an initial burst of induced innovation. Using a growth model, Hart (2008) shows that, in
general, it is not optimal to raise an emissions tax above the level necessary to account for the
environmental externality. One exception is if the shadow price of the emissions stock is rising
and the initial level of emissions-saving knowledge is low. In this case, the spillovers from
emissions-savings knowledge will be more valuable than spillovers from other innovations,
justifying a temporary increase in the optimal emissions tax to account for differences in the
social benefits of spillovers across technologies. Presumably a targeted R&D subsidy could also
accomplish this, and perhaps with greater efficiency. Greaker and Pade (2008) find additional
justification for higher emissions taxes if patent policy is weak – that is, as a second-best policy
if the knowledge market spillover has not been adequately addressed.
The above studies focus on the macro level, and assume that technologies, once created,
are optimally deployed. Fischer and Newell (2008) use a micro approach to study a broader set
of policies, including those encouraging technology adoption, to assess policies for reducing
carbon dioxide emissions and promoting innovation and diffusion of renewable energy. They
evaluate the relative performance of policies according to incentives provided for emissions
reduction and economic efficiency, and also assess how the nature of technological progress (i.e.,
learning versus R&D) and the degree of knowledge spillovers, affects the desirability of different
policies. Although the relative cost of individual policies in achieving emissions reductions
depends on parameter values and the emissions target, in a numerical application to the U.S.
electricity sector, they find the ranking is roughly as follows: (1) emissions price, (2) emissions
performance standard, (3) fossil power tax, (4) renewables share requirement, (5) renewables
subsidy, and (6) R&D subsidy. Nonetheless, an optimal portfolio of policies—including
emissions pricing and R&D—achieves emission reductions at significantly lower cost than any
single policy.
In a similar exercise, Gerlagh and van der Zwaan (2006) find an emissions performance
standard to be cheapest policy for achieving various carbon stabilization goals. They note that,
like a carbon tax, the emissions performance standard directly addresses the environmental
externality. In addition, like a renewable subsidy, the emissions performance standard stimulates

6

innovation in a sector with high spillovers. In comparing the results of these two papers, Gerlagh
and van der Zwaan note that the ordering of policies depends on the assumed returns to scale of
renewable energy technologies. Fischer and Newell assume greater decreasing returns to
renewable energy, due to the scarcity of appropriate sites for new renewable sources. Thus, an
important question raised by Gerlagh and van der Zwaan is whether the cost savings from
innovation will be sufficient to overcome decreasing returns to scale for renewable energy
resulting from limited space for new solar and wind installations.
An additional problem resulting from the long time frame of environmental concerns
such as climate change is uncertainty over future policies. Consider, for example, a firm
planning research on fuel cells for cars. Given that such technologies are not currently
competitive with traditional fuel sources, and that sufficient policies are not in place to overcome
these cost differences, what matters to the firm is not the effective price of carbon emissions
today. Rather, it is the expected price of carbon emissions a decade or more in the future, when
the vehicle might actually be on the market. Such long-term issues arise often when studying
problems such as climate change, and raise the question of whether additional policy measures
are needed that (1) enable the government to manipulate expectations of future prices, or (2)
perform the initial research necessary to get ground-breaking technologies close to market, thus
lowering the cost (and raising political support for) future environmental policy. That is, one can
look at this question as whether environmental policy should come first, and be designed in a
way to encourage long-run innovation, or whether technology policy needs to accompany or
precede environmental policy, so as to lower the costs of implementing environmental cleanup.
A related concern is the credibility of governments to use the promise of high future emissions
prices to boost current innovation, since such high prices may no longer be needed once the
resulting cost reductions arrive (Kennedy and Laplante 1999; Montgomery and Smith 2007).
General purpose technologies (GPT) may also magnify the interaction between the two
market failures. GPTs are technologies that find use in many distinct application sectors within
the economy, such as the electric motor, the steam engine, the internal combustion engine,
semiconductors and the Internet (Bresnahan and Trajtenberg, 1995). The development of such
technologies increases the returns to R&D designed to incorporate them into the different
applications sectors; development of such applications in turn increases the return to improving
the GPT. Because of these dynamic feedback effects, GPTs may be an important factor in
economic growth (Helpman, 1998). The dynamic feedback between a GPT and its applications
sectors also creates an important example of “path dependence.” With respect to the
environment, whether the GPTs that drive a particular era are pollution-intensive or pollutionsaving may have profound implications for the long-term environmental prognosis. These
phenomena can be critical to understanding the existing technological system, forecasting how
that system might evolve, and predicting the potential effect of some policy or event.
3. Microeconomics: Innovation
Most investigations of technological change in environmental economics have been at the
microeconomic level. As is typical in the field of technological change, these studies can be
divided into two broad categories – those focusing on invention and innovation, and those

7

focusing on diffusion. As described in section 2, the externality problem in environmental
economics complicates the process of environmentally-friendly technological change, as market
forces provide insufficient incentive for either the creation or adoption of such technologies
absent environmental policies. Thus, much research has focused on how environmental policy
affects the incentives for both the creation and adoption of environmental technology. This
section reviews the literature linking environmental policy and innovation. We discuss the
diffusion of environmental technologies in section 4.
3.1 Induced Innovation
Better understanding the links between environmental policy and technological change
has been a major research agenda in environmental economics. Much of this literature draws its
motivation from the notion of induced innovation, which recognizes that R&D is a profitmotivated investment activity and that the direction of innovation likely responds positively in
the direction of increased relative prices. Since environmental policy implicitly or explicitly
makes environmental inputs more expensive, the “induced innovation” hypothesis suggests an
important pathway for the interaction of environmental policy and technology, and for the
introduction of impacts on technological change as a criterion for evaluation of different policy
instruments. First articulated by Hicks (1932), for further background on induced innovation
theory and evidence see Jaffe, Newell, and Stavins (2003), Binswanger and Ruttan (1978) and
Thirtle and Ruttan (1987). For a recent review of empirical literature on the impacts of
alternative policy instruments on technological change see Vollebergh (2007).
In the environmental literature, the relationship between innovation and policy has been
explored under two broad themes. Early work focused on theoretical models to compare the
effects of various environmental policy mechanisms (e.g., uniform standards, emissions taxes, or
tradable permits) on environmentally-friendly innovation. These papers tend to predict that
market-based policies, such as a tax or tradable permit, will induce more environmentallyfriendly innovation than a command and control policy, although recent papers have shown that
a precise ranking is theoretically ambiguous and dependent on a number of factors (see Fischer
et al 2003 and section 3.1.2). Empirical studies of the links between environmental policy and
innovation were initially limited by a lack of data. Recently, as measures of innovative activity
such as patents have become more readily available, empirical economists have begun to
estimate the effects that prices and environmental policies have on environmentally-friendly
innovation. We discuss each of these streams of research below.
3.1.1. Empirical evidence on induced innovation in pollution abatement and energy conservation
Increased availability of data pertaining to innovation, such as patent counts and R&D
expenditures has facilitated much research on induced environmental innovation. The remaining
challenge in testing the induced innovation hypothesis for environmental technologies is the
difficulty of measuring the extent or intensity of inducement across firms or industries (Jaffe, et
al. 1995). Ideally, one would like to look at the relationship between innovation and the shadow
price of pollution or environmental inputs. In practice, such shadow prices are not easily
observed. Consequently, one must use proxies for this shadow price, such as characteristics of

8

environmental regulations, expenditures on pollution abatement, or prices of polluting inputs (for
example, energy prices). Table 1 summarizes the key papers in this literature.
TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE
The first empirical studies made use of pollution abatement control expenditures (PACE)
to proxy for environmental regulatory stringency. Jaffe and Palmer (1997) examine the
correlation between PACE by industry and indicators of innovation more broadly. They find
that there is a significant correlation within industries over time between the rate of expenditure
on pollution abatement and the level of R&D spending. They do not, however, find evidence of
an effect of pollution control expenditure on overall patenting. Hamamoto (2006) finds similar
effects on R&D spending in Japan. Brunnermeier and Cohen (2003) estimate the relationship
between PACE and environmental patents across various U.S. industries. They find that patents
increase by just 0.04 percent when PACE increases by $1 million.
One limitation of these papers is that they do not take advantage of the disaggregated
nature of patent data. Each looks at innovation within specific industries. Jaffe and Palmer
include all patents associated with an industry, whether or not they are environmental
technologies, and Hamamoto includes all R&D activities, not just those focused on the
environment. Brunnermeier and Cohen focus specifically on environmental technologies, but
group several such technologies together for each industry. Thus, effects of innovation on
specific technologies may be masked by stagnant trends in other technologies. Research
focusing on specific technologies finds stronger effects. For instance, Lanjouw and Mody
(1996) use the International Patent Classification (IPC) to identify several key environmental
patent classes. Using patent data from the US, Japan, Germany, and 14 low-and middle-income
countries, they find that environmentally-friendly innovation increases as pollution abatement
cost expenditures in the country increase. Hascic et al. (2008) study the effect of environmental
policy stringency on patenting activity for five different types of environmental technology – air
pollution, water pollution, waste disposal, noise protection, and environmental monitoring.
Using both PACE expenditures and a World Economic Forum survey of top management
business executives as alternative measures of environmental stringency, they find that private
expenditures on pollution control lead to greater environmental innovation, but not government
expenditures on pollution control. However, higher levels of government environmental R&D
do lead to more environmental patents. Popp (2006b) finds significant increases in patents
pertaining to sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides emissions reduction in response to the passage of
environmental regulations in the United States, Japan, and Germany.
Evidence of inducement has also been sought by examining the response to changing
energy prices. Similar to Lanjouw and Mody, Popp (2002) uses patent classifications to identify
11 different alternative energy and energy efficiency technologies. Using a distributed lag
model, Popp estimates the elasticity of energy patenting activity with respect to energy prices for
these technologies. The distributed lag model is consistent with an adaptive expectations model
of prices, in which expected future prices depend on a weighted average of past prices. The
regression controls for the quality of knowledge available to an inventor as well as other factors
influencing R&D, such as government support for energy research and technology-specific

9

demand shifters.3 Using this framework, Popp finds a long-run elasticity of energy patenting
with respect to energy prices of 0.354. From the distributed lag model, the mean lag occurs in
3.71 years, and the median lag in 4.86 years. The interpretation here is that over one-half of the
full effect of an energy price increase on patenting will have been experienced after just five
years. Thus, prices (or other regulations that increase the cost of using fossil fuels) can be
expected to stimulate new research quickly.
Popp attributes the gradual decrease in induced innovation over time to diminishing
returns. Furthermore, Popp (2002) shows that controlling for diminishing returns to research
within a specific field does affect induced innovation estimates. To verify the importance of the
existing knowledge stock on innovative activity, Popp uses citation data to create stocks of
existing patented knowledge, where patents in the stock are weighted by their propensity to be
cited. He finds that the stocks have a significant positive effect on energy patenting. Moreover,
both Popp (2002) and Popp (2006c) find evidence that the likelihood of citations to new energy
patents falls over time, suggesting that the quality of knowledge available for inventors to build
upon also falls.4 The intuition here is that, as more and more discoveries are made, it gets harder
to develop a new innovation that improves upon the existing technology. Since the quality of the
knowledge stock is an important determinant of the level of innovative activity, decreasing
quality of the knowledge stock over time means that diminishing returns to R&D investment will
result in lower levels of induced R&D over time. Moreover, because prior research affects the
potential success of future inventors, the returns to research should vary along with the quality of
the existing pool of research, rather than monotonically over time.
To verify the value of using patent citation data to measure the returns to research, Popp
(2002) also includes regressions in which the stock of knowledge is replaced by a time trend. If
diminishing returns proceed monotonically over time, a negative time trend should work as well
as the weighted knowledge stocks. That, however, is not the case. These regressions prove
unreliable. In fact, the elasticity of energy R&D to energy prices appears negative when a time
trend is used in place of the knowledge stocks. Since diminishing returns are a bigger problem
when the level of energy R&D is highest, not controlling for this counteracts the positive effect
of prices on energy R&D. This may also explain the small effects of environmental policy on
patenting activity found by Brunnermeier and Cohen (2003).
Environmental economists have also studied induced innovation by decomposing
changes in energy efficiency into changes due to price-based substitution and changes due to
innovation. Newell et al. (1999) examine the extent to which the energy efficiency of the menu
of home appliances available for sale changed in response to energy prices between 1958 and
1993, using an econometric model of induced innovation as changing characteristics of capital
goods. Hicks formulated the induced innovation hypothesis in terms of factor prices. Newell,
Jaffe, and Stavins (1999) generalize this concept to include inducement by regulatory standards,
such as labeling requirements that might increase the value of certain product characteristics by
3

For example, for patents on using waste products as energy, the price utilities pay to purchase waste products for
fuel is included in the regression. This figure captures the increased supply of waste that became available as fuel
owing to concerns about declining landfill space during the 1980’s.
4
Note that since the probability of a patent being cited depends not only on the quality of the patent, but also on the
number of patents that follow, it is important to look at probability of citation, rather than raw citation counts.

10

making consumers more aware of them. More generally, non-price regulatory constraints can fit
within the inducement framework if they can be modeled as changing the shadow or implicit
price that firms face in emitting pollutants. In their framework, the existing technology for
making a given type of equipment at a point in time is identified in terms of vectors of
characteristics (including cost of manufacture) that are feasible. The process of invention makes
it possible to manufacture “models” (characteristics vectors) that were previously infeasible.
Innovation means the offering for commercial sale of a model that was not previously offered for
sale. Induced innovation is then represented as movements in the frontier of feasible models that
reduce the cost of energy efficiency in terms of other attributes.
By constructing a series of dynamic simulations, they examine the effects of energy price
changes and efficiency standards on average efficiency of the menu of products over time. They
find that a substantial amount of the improvement was what may be described as autonomous
(that is, associated with the passage of time), but significant amounts of innovation are also due
to changes in energy prices and changes in energy-efficiency standards. They find that
technological change in air conditioners was actually biased against energy efficiency in the
1960s (when real energy prices were falling), but that this bias was reversed after the two energy
shocks of the 1970s. In terms of the efficiency of the average model offered, they find that
energy efficiency in 1993 would have been about one-quarter to one-half lower in air
conditioners and gas water heaters, if energy prices had stayed at their 1973 levels, rather than
following their historical path. Most of the response to energy price changes came within less
than five years of those changes. Illustrating the importance of information, they find that the
effect of energy-price increases on model substitution was strongest after product labeling
requirements took effect.
3.1.2. Innovation and the Choice of Policy Instrument
The empirical studies on induced innovation provide some insight as to the pace of
environmental innovation. Also important, however, is the nature of such innovation. Early
theoretical work on environmental innovation focused on the incentives provided by different
types of environmental policy. Environmental policies can be characterized as either uniform
“command-and-control” standards or market-based approaches. Market-based instruments are
mechanisms that encourage behavior through market signals rather than through explicit
directives regarding pollution control levels or methods. Such regulations allow firms flexibility
to choose the least-cost solutions to improved environmental performance. In contrast,
conventional approaches to regulating the environment are often referred to as “command-andcontrol” regulations, since they allow relatively little flexibility in the means of achieving goals.
These regulations tend to force firms to take on similar magnitudes of the pollution-control
burden, regardless of the cost. Command-and-control regulations do this by setting uniform
standards for firms. The most commonly used types of command-and-control regulation are
performance- and technology-based standards. A performance standard sets a uniform control
target for firms (emissions per unit of output, for example), while allowing some latitude in how
this target is met. Technology-based standards specify the method, and sometimes the actual
equipment, that firms must use to comply with a particular regulation.
Holding all firms to the same target can be expensive and, in some circumstances,

11

counterproductive. While standards may effectively limit emissions of pollutants, they typically
exact relatively high costs in the process, by forcing some firms to resort to unduly expensive
means of controlling pollution. Because the costs of controlling emissions may vary greatly
among firms, and even among sources within the same firm, the appropriate technology in one
situation may not be cost-effective in another.
All of these forms of intervention have the potential for inducing or forcing some
amount of technological change, because by their very nature they induce or require firms to do
things they would not otherwise do. Performance and technology standards can be explicitly
designed to be "technology forcing," mandating performance levels that are not currently viewed
as technologically feasible or mandating technologies that are not fully developed. One problem
with these approaches, however, is that while regulators can typically assume that some amount
of improvement over existing technology will always be feasible, it is impossible to know how
much. Standards must either be made unambitious, or else run the risk of being ultimately
unachievable, leading to political and economic disruption (Freeman and Haveman 1972).
Technology standards are particularly problematic, since they can freeze the development
of technologies that might otherwise result in greater levels of control. Under regulations that
are targeted at technologies, as opposed to emissions levels, no financial incentive exists for
businesses to exceed control targets, and the adoption of new technologies is discouraged.
However, there is still an incentive for equipment cost reduction. Under a “Best Available
Control Technology” (BACT) standard, a business that adopts a new method of pollution
abatement may be “rewarded” by being held to a higher standard of performance and thereby not
benefit financially from its investment, except to the extent that its competitors have even more
difficulty reaching the new standard (Hahn and Stavins 1991). On the other hand, if third parties
can invent and patent better equipment, they can — in theory — have a ready market. Under
such conditions, a BACT type of standard can provide a positive incentive for technology
innovation.
In contrast with such command-and-control regulations, market-based instruments can
provide powerful incentives for companies to adopt cheaper and better pollution-control
technologies. This is because with market-based instruments, it always pays firms to clean up a
bit more if a sufficiently low-cost method (technology or process) of doing so can be identified
and adopted. The advantages of market-based policies are particularly true for flexible policies
that allow the innovator to identify the best way to meet the policy goal. For instance, a carbon
tax allows innovators to choose whatever technologies best reduce carbon emissions, whereas a
tax credit for wind power focuses innovative efforts on wind power at the expense of other clean
energy technologies.
Most papers on the effect of different environmental policy instruments on innovation are
theoretical in nature. In addition, these papers pay greater attention to the supply side, focusing
on incentives for firm-level decisions to incur R&D costs in the face of uncertain outcomes.
These papers are summarized in Table 2. We defer a discussion of papers analyzing the effect of
policy on technology adoption and diffusion to Section 4 of this chapter.
TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE

12

3.1.2.1 Theory
The earliest work that is directly relevant is by Magat (1978), who compares effluent
taxes and CAC standards using an innovation possibilities frontier model of induced innovation,
where research can be used to augment capital or labor in a standard production function. He
compares the output rate, effluent rate, output-effluent ratio, and bias (in terms of labor or capital
augmenting technical change), but produced ambiguous results. Subsequently, Magat (1979)
compares taxes, subsidies, permits, effluent standards, and technology standards, and shows that
all but technology standards would induce innovation biased toward emissions reduction. In
Magat’s model, if taxes and permits are set so that they lead to the same reduction in emissions
as an effluent standard at all points in time, then the three instruments provide the same
incentives to innovate.
Taking a somewhat broader view than most economic studies, Carraro and Siniscalco
(1994) suggest that environmental policy instruments should be viewed jointly with traditional
industrial policy instruments in determining the optimal way to attain a given degree of pollution
abatement. They show that innovation subsidies can be used to attain the same environmental
target as other policy instruments, but without the output reductions that result from pollution
taxes. Laffont and Tirole (1996) examine how a tradable permit system could — in theory — be
modified to achieve desired incentive effects for technological change. They demonstrate that
although spot markets for permits cannot induce the socially optimal degree of innovation,
futures markets can improve the situation.
Cadot and Sinclair-Desgagne (1996) consider a potentially regulated industry that has
private information on the costs of technological advances in pollution control, as is frequently
the case. Since the industry has an incentive to claim that such technologies are prohibitively
expensive (even if that is not the case), can the government somehow design an incentive scheme
that will avoid the problems of this information asymmetry? The authors develop a solution to
this game-theoretic problem involving government-issued threats of regulation (which diminish
over time as the firm completes stages of technology development).
It was only recently that theoretical work followed up on Magat’s attempt in the late
1970’s to rank policy instruments according to their innovation-stimulating effects. Fischer et al.
(2003) find that an unambiguous ranking of policy instruments was not possible. Rather, the
ranking of policy instruments was shown by the authors to depend on the innovator’s ability to
appropriate spillover benefits of new technologies to other firms, the costs of innovation,
environmental benefit functions, and the number of firms producing emissions.
The basic model consists of three stages. First, an innovating firm decides how much to
invest in R&D by setting its marginal cost of innovation equal to the expected marginal benefits.
Second, polluting firms decide whether or not to adopt the new technology, use an (inferior)
imitation of it, or do nothing. Finally, firms minimize pollution control expenditures by setting
their marginal costs equal to the price of pollution. Policy instruments affect the innovation
incentives primarily through three effects: (1) an abatement cost affect, reflecting the extent to
which innovation reduces the costs of pollution control; (2) an imitation effect, which weakens
innovation incentives due to imperfect appropriability; and (3) an emissions payment effect,
which can weaken incentives if innovation reduces firms’ payments for residual emissions. The
relative strength of these effects will vary across policy instruments and particular applications,

13

with no instrument clearly dominating in all applications.
In an analysis that is quite similar in its results to the study by Fischer et al. (2003), Ulph
(1998) compares the effects of pollution taxes and command-and-control standards, and finds
that increases in the stringency of the standard or tax had ambiguous effects on the level of R&D,
because environmental regulations have two competing effects: a direct effect of increasing
costs, which increases the incentives to invest in R&D in order to develop cost-saving pollutionabatement methods; and an indirect effect of reducing product output, which reduces the
incentive to engage in R&D. Carraro and Soubeyran (1996) compare an emission tax and an
R&D subsidy, and found that an R&D subsidy is desirable if the output contractions induced by
the tax are small or if the government finds output contractions undesirable for other reasons.
Addressing the same trade-off, Katsoulacos and Xepapadeas (1996) find that a simultaneous tax
on pollution emissions and subsidy to environmental R&D may be better suited to overcoming
the joint market failure (negative externality from pollution and positive externality or spillover
effects of R&D).
Montero (2002) compares instruments under non-competitive circumstances, and finds
that the results are less clear than when perfect competition is assumed. He models a two-firm
oligopoly facing environmental regulation in the form of emissions standards, freely-allocated
permits, auctioned permits, and taxes. Firms can invest in R&D to lower their marginal
abatement costs, and they can also benefit from spillover effects from the other firm’s R&D
efforts. In choosing whether and how much to invest in R&D in order to maximize profits, a
firm must consider two effects of its investment choice: (1) the increase in profits due to a
decrease in its abatement costs (less the R&D cost); and (2) the decrease in profits due to
changes in the other firm’s output, as a result of spillover from the first firm’s R&D. The result
is that standards and taxes yield higher incentives for R&D when the market is characterized by
Cournot competition, but the opposite holds when the market is characterized by Bertrand
competition.
Addressing a policymaker’s choice of the level of environmental regulation, Innes and
Bial (2002) start with the observation that firms often overcomply with environmental
regulation. They explain this behavior using a model of Bertrand competition. In such a model,
a successful innovator may prefer stricter environmental standards so as to raise costs for rival
firms. An environmental tax that is efficient ex post (e.g. after a new innovation is revealed) also
provides incentives for overinvestment in R&D, as firms hope to gain profits by being the first to
invent an environmental technology that will affect regulatory levels and impose costs on other
firms. Innes and Bial show that discriminatory standards for technology “winners” and “losers”
can offset incentives for overinvestment. For example, regulators can offer non-innovating firms
a lower emissions reduction target or additional time to comply with regulatory changes. If the
policy levels are optimally set, technology winners still have incentive to overcomply with
environmental regulation, as their profits exactly equal the social gains from their innovation.
Noting that the stringency of an optimal policy may change after new abatement
technologies become available, Requate (2005) asks when policy adjustments should be made.
The model considers a monopolistic provider of environmental technology that performs R&D in
response to environmental regulation, and a set of competitive firms who purchase
environmental equipment when required by law. The paper considers four policy options: ex
post regulation after adoption of new technology, interim regulation after observing R&D

14

success but before adoption, ex ante regulation with different tax rates contingent on R&D
success, and ex ante regulation with a single tax rate whether or not R&D is successful. In this
model, ex ante commitment with different tax rates dominates all other policies, and tax policies
are always superior to permit policies.
A recent paper by Bauman, Lee, and Seeley (2008) raises the possibility that command
and control policies may induce more innovation under certain scenarios. They note that the
results of previous models follow when innovation lowers the marginal abatement cost curve.
However, these papers assume end-of-pipe solutions to pollution reduction, such as installing a
scrubber on a smokestack. For end-of-pipe solutions, the marginal cost of no abatement is zero,
so that a marginal abatement cost curve starts at the origin. In such cases, innovation always
results in lower marginal abatement costs. However, pollution can also be reduced by changing
processes, such as using cleaner fuel or using a more efficient boiler. In such cases, innovation
may make the marginal abatement cost steeper. For instance, if a plant plans to reduce emissions
by shutting down temporarily, it will forego more output (and profit) when it is using a more
efficient boiler. In these cases, the marginal abatement cost curve after innovation will not be
unambiguously below the original marginal abatement cost curve. Should that occur, command
and control standards may provide greater incentive for innovation than market-based policies.
Note, however, that their analysis is positive rather than normative in nature and does not
directly address the traditional view that market-based policies are overall more efficient than
command and control.
Finally, Baker and Adu-Bonnah (2008) show that the way in which technological change
affects the shape of the marginal abatement cost curve also affects R&D decisions made under
uncertainty. Their model considers both uncertainty about future climate damages (and thus the
optimal level of abatement needed) and uncertainty about the likelihood of success for various
energy research projects. R&D investment affects the probability that a project will be
successful. They consider two types of energy R&D projects: alternative energy that emits no
carbon and efficiency improvements for conventional fossil fuel energy sources. For alternative
energy R&D, technological improvements unambiguously lower the cost of reducing carbon
emissions (e.g. shift marginal abatement costs down). In this case, the socially optimal
investment in technologies is higher for riskier projects. However, the opposite is true for
research on conventional energy technologies, for which technological change rotates the
marginal abatement cost curve. For low levels of abatement, improvements to conventional
technologies, such as increased fuel efficiency, lower abatement costs. However, if high levels
of abatement are required, simply improving energy efficiency will not be sufficient – alternative
clean energy sources will need to replace traditional fossil fuel sources of energy. In this case,
improvements in the efficiency of conventional technologies raise the marginal abatement cost,
as they raise the opportunity cost of eliminating fossil fuels. In such a case, optimal R&D
investment is higher for less-risky R&D projects. These projects have a higher probability of
success, but will only have moderate efficiency gains. However, moderate efficiency gains will
have a large impact on the economy, since fossil fuels are widely used. In contrast, the payoff
from risky R&D projects with larger efficiency gains is not as high. Efficiency gains are most
valuable under low climate damage scenarios. If climate damages are high, energy efficiency
gains will have little value, since fossil fuels won’t be used. Thus, the need for energy efficiency
breakthroughs is not as high as the need for breakthroughs for alternative energy.

15

TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE
3.1.2.2 Empirical evidence
Empirically, there is little work that compares innovation under different policy types.
Table 3 summarizes these papers. One exception is Popp (2003), which compares innovation
before and after SO2 permit trading began in the United States. This paper combines patent data
with plant-level data on flue gas desulfurization (FGD) units, or “scrubbers” to compare
innovation before and after passage of the 1990 Clean Air Act. Popp finds that the level of
innovation, measured by the number of successful patent applications by year, for FGD units was
actually higher before tradable sulfur dioxide (SO2) permits were introduced by the 1990 Clean
Air Act (CAA). However, the nature of innovation changed after passage of the Act. Before the
1990 Clean Air Act, most new coal-fired electric utilities were required to install FGD units with
a removal efficiency of 90%. Since installation of FGD units was mandatory, innovation
focused on reducing the operating costs of these units. However, since there were no incentives
for firms to exceed the 90% limit, innovation had no effect on the removal efficiency of FGD
units. In contrast, because the 1990 CAA required greater SO2 emissions reductions and gave
firms flexibility as to how to meet those goals, post-1990 innovations did have the effect of
improving the removal efficiency of scrubbers. Similarly, Taylor et al. (2003) note that the
scrubber requirement led to a reduction in patents on pre-combustion techniques for reducing
SO2 emissions, such as cleaner coal. However, Taylor (2008) notes that, since most pollution
control innovators are third-party equipment vendors, rather than the regulated firms, uncertainty
over how regulated firms will react to permits (and thus uncertainty over the ultimate permit
price) reduces innovation incentives from permit trading vis-à-vis other policy instruments.
In contrast, Bellas (1998) finds no evidence of progress in scrubber technology.
However, his study only includes plants from 1970-1991. Thus, the analysis only considers
plants under the command and control policy regime. In more recent work, Lange and Bellas
(2005) update this research by estimating the effect of scrubber characteristics on both capital
and operating costs of scrubbers installed before and after the 1990 CAA. The permit trading
system of the 1990 CAA provided, for the first time, incentives for older plants to install
scrubbers. This expanded the market for scrubbers, which, they argue, should increase
incentives for technological change. Indeed, Lange and Bellas find that both capital and
operating expenses drop for scrubbers installed after the 1990 CAA took effect. However, they
find this drop to be a discrete event – costs are lower after the 1990 CAA, but the rate of change
in costs does not change. While they find no evidence of cost differences between scrubbers
installed under the 1970 CAA and the 1977 CAA (which mandated installation of scrubbers at
plants built beginning in 1978), they do not explicitly address whether costs change over time
during this period.
Addressing the value of flexible standards, Lanoie et al. (2007) use a survey of firms in
seven OECD countries to examine the effect of various environmental policy instruments on
environmental R&D. Respondents were asked to describe both the type of environmental
policies faced, as well as the stringency of such policies. They find that greater stringency does
induce a firm to perform more environmental R&D. More flexible performance standards,
which dictate an acceptable level of environmental performance, but do not dictate how that
level be achieved, induce more environmental R&D than technology standards, which require
the use of a specific technology to meet regulatory targets. Surprisingly, being exposed to

16

market-based environmental policies does not induce greater environmental R&D. One
explanation given for this result is that when market-based policies are used, they may be less
stringent than other environmental standards. In related work, Johnstone and Hascic (2008)
show that flexible environmental regulations lead to higher quality innovation. Using a World
Economic Forum survey of business executives, they show that environmental patents have
larger family sizes when executives in the inventor’s home country perceive that there is greater
freedom to choose different options in order to achieve compliance with environmental
regulations.
There is a more extensive literature on the effects of alternative policy instruments on the
innovation of energy-efficiency and alternative energy technologies. The innovation process can
be thought of as affecting improvements in the characteristics of products on the market, and the
process can be framed as the shifting inward over time of a frontier representing the tradeoffs
between different product characteristics for the range of models available on the market. If one
axis is the cost of the product and another axis is the energy flow associated with a product, that
is, its energy intensity, then innovation is represented by inward shifts of the curve — greater
energy efficiency at the same cost, or lower cost for given energy efficiency. With this
approach, Newell, Jaffe, and Stavins (1999) assess the effects of changes in energy prices and in
energy-efficiency standards in stimulating innovation. Energy price changes induced both
commercialization of new models and elimination of old models. Regulations, however, worked
largely through energy-inefficient models being dropped, since that is the intended effect of the
energy-efficiency standards (models below a certain energy efficiency level may not be offered
for sale).
Finally, Johnstone et al. (2008) use a panel of patent data on renewable energy
technologies across 25 OECD countries to examine the effect of different policy instruments on
innovation. They compare price-based policies such as tax credits and feed-in tariffs5 to
quantity-based policies such as renewable energy mandates. They find important differences
across technologies. Quantity-based policies favor development of wind energy. Of the various
alternative energy technologies, wind has the lowest cost and is closest to being competitive with
traditional energy sources. As such, when faced with a mandate to provide alternative energy,
firms focus their innovative efforts on the technology that is closest to market. In contrast, direct
investment incentives are effective in supporting innovation in solar and waste-to-energy
technologies, which are further from being competitive with traditional energy technologies.
These results suggest particular challenges to policy makers who wish to encourage long-run
innovation for technologies that have yet to near market competitiveness.
3.1.3. What Can Technological Change Economists Contribute?
Studying the links between environmental policy and innovation is one of the most active
areas in environmental economics. Still, there are unanswered questions where technological
change economists could contribute. In particular, many of the empirical studies above use
aggregate data, typically at the level of an industry or a technology. More micro-oriented studies
5

Feed-in tariffs, used in various European countries, guarantee renewable energy producers a minimum price for the
electricity they produce.

17

that concentrate on firm behavior would be of particular use. Such questions that might be
addressed in such studies include where environmental R&D comes from (e.g., does
environmental policy lead firms to perform new R&D, or to shift research efforts from other
areas towards the environment) and which types of firms are best able to deliver environmental
innovations. For instance, research on the effects of firm size and/or market structure on
innovation, which has received much attention from technological change economists, has yet to
enter significantly into environmental economics. This may be particularly important for energy,
where market power and deregulation have both been important. For example, Sanyal (2007)
finds that deregulation of electric utility markets has led to a decrease in R&D in the industry.
More research developing a better understanding of these differences across firms could help
policy makers design incentives appropriate for specific industries.
The role of expectations has also not received significant attention in the literature on
environmental technological change. Incentives to innovate require beliefs about the future
returns to innovation. For environmental problems, those future returns depend on the policies
that will be in place. To what extent can policy makers both provide current incentives for
innovation and signal the future costs of pollution to inventors? Are current policy instruments
sufficient to address the uncertainties and long time frames often observed with environmental
problems? Understanding the ways in which policy can manipulate expectations of future
energy and emissions prices and policy would be a fruitful avenue for future research.
3.2. The Impacts of Technological Change
The research described in section 3.1 focuses on the relationship between incentives
(either market prices or policy) and the direction and level of technological change. In addition
to these questions, another important research question is the effect of these new technologies on
the environment. In the broader literature on technological change, economists consistently find
that knowledge spillovers result in a wedge between private and social rates return to R&D.
Examples of such studies include Mansfield (1977, 1996), Pakes (1985), Jaffe (1986), Hall
(1996), and Jones and Williams (1998). Typical results include marginal social rates of return
between 30 and 50 percent.
One would expect to find similar results in the environmental literature. However, two
issues may complicate estimates of social returns on environmental R&D. One is the twin
market failure problem discussed in section 2. The high social rates of return found in most
studies of technological change occur as a result of imperfections in knowledge markets, such as
spillovers. While these market failures are still an issue here, they are magnified by the
externalities problem common in environmental economics. This complicates measuring the
impact of environmental innovation, as the value of any resulting gains in environmental quality
are difficult to quantify. For example, one could study how innovations benefit firms, either by
lowering the cost of compliance with regulation (such as the paper by Bellas and Lange cited in
section 3.1.2), or, in the case of energy efficiency, by lowering the energy costs of firms or
consumers. Such measures should give results analogous to those in the broader literature on
technological change, but will give an incomplete measure of the social returns to environmental
innovation, as they do not measure the value of environmental quality improvements that result.
While there is a broad literature on measuring the benefits of environmental quality (see, for

18

example, Mäler and Vincent, 2005), these measures are often indirect, and have yet to be
incorporated into studies on the return to environmental innovations.
3.2.1 Empirical Evidence
There has been exceptionally little empirical analysis of the effects that innovation has on
the costs of pollution abatement, principally because of the paucity of available data. Carlson et
al. (2000) look at changes in the marginal abatement costs at power plants, and find that about
20%, or $50, of the change in marginal abatement costs that have occurred from 1985 to 1995
can be attributed to technological change. Popp (2003) uses patent data to link innovative
activity to lower operating costs of scrubbers for coal-fired electric power plants. Popp
aggregates patents pertaining to scrubber innovations into a knowledge stock, and then regresses
the operating costs of individual scrubbers on scrubber and plant characteristics, including the
knowledge stock at the time the scrubber was installed. A single patent provides a present value
of $6 million in cost savings across the industry. Assuming approximately $1.5 million of R&D
spent per patent granted, this yields a return similar to those found in the more general works
cited above. However, these savings account only for the benefits to the power industry of lower
environmental regulation compliance costs, as the social benefits of reduced sulfur dioxide
emissions are not included in this estimate.
In contrast, the effects of innovation on energy-efficiency have been studied more widely.
In addition to the studies discussed in section 3.1.2, Pakes, et al. (1993) investigate the effects of
gasoline prices on the fuel economy of motor vehicles offered for sale. They find that the
observed increase in miles per gallon (mpg) from 1977 onward was largely due to the
consequent change in the mix of vehicles on the market. Fewer low-mpg cars were marketed,
and more high-mpg cars were marketed. Subsequently, Berry et al. (1996) combine plant-level
cost data for the automobile industry and information on the characteristics of models that were
produced at each plant to estimate a hedonic cost function — the supply-side component of the
hedonic price function — finding that quality-adjusted costs generally increased over the period
1972–1982, thus coinciding with rising gasoline prices and emission standards.
One of the challenges of studying the effects of technology indirectly can be found by
comparing empirical studies from different eras. Many studies use a time trend to represent
technological change, so that the results are interpreted as the net effect of all technological
change in a given period. For example, in a study of U.S. industrial energy consumption from
1958 to 1974, Jorgenson and Fraumeni (1981) find that technological change was energy-using –
energy use per unit output increased over time. Of course, the time period of their data would
not include any of the energy saving innovations developed after the energy crises of the 1970s.
In contrast, more recent work using a time trend to capture technological change finds that
technology is energy saving. Examples include Berndt et al. (1993), Mountain et al. (1989) and
Sterner (1990).
As an alternative to using a time trend to represent technology, Popp (2001) uses energy
patents to estimate the effect of new technology on energy consumption. Popp begins by
matching energy patents with the industries that use the inventions by using the Yale Technology
Concordance (Evenson et al. 1991, Kortum and Putnam 1989, 1997). Using these patents, Popp
creates stocks of energy knowledge, which are used as an explanatory variable in a system of

19

cost functions for 13 energy intensive industries. The knowledge stocks are defined as a
cumulative function of the number of past energy patents used by each industry, adjusted for
gradual decay and diffusion. Using these knowledge stocks in a cost function of energy usage,
Popp finds that the median patent leads to $14.5 million dollars in long-run energy savings. In
comparison, these industries spend an average of $2.25 million of R&D per patent. In addition, using
estimates of the elasticity of patenting with respect to energy prices for these technologies, Popp
calculates the effect of induced innovation as the combined effect of all new patents induced by a
one-percent energy price increase. Interestingly, the estimated elasticities of energy use with
respect to price found in that paper are lower than typically found, as they include only the effect
of factor substitution, since technological change is controlled for separately. By comparison, rerunning the regressions using only a time trend to represent technological change provides
energy price elasticities that are consistent with those found in other studies, as such studies
include the effect of price-induced innovation in their estimates.
Similarly, Sue Wing (2008) uses patent stocks in a series of industry-level regressions to
identify the effects of changing industry composition, disembodied technological change, factor
substitution, and induced innovation in response to energy prices on declining U.S. energy
intensity. While Popp focuses on energy-intensive industries, Sue Wing’s data includes 35
industries from 1958-2000. He finds changing composition and disembodied technological
change to be the dominant factors. Induced innovation does have an energy-saving effect, but it
is the smallest of the four factors studied.
Finally, Linn (2008) looks at the effect of energy prices on the adoption of energy saving
technology in the US manufacturing sector. Using Census of Manufacturers data to compare
energy use in new and incumbent facilities, he finds that a 10 percent increase in the price of
energy leads to technology adoption that reduces energy demand of entrants by 1 percent. Given
this, Linn concludes that technology adoption explains just a small portion of changes in energy
demand during the 1970s and 1980s.
3.2.2. Estimates of Technological Impact Using Learning-by-Doing
While only a few studies make a direct link between R&D and environmental or energy
impact, a more extensive literature has made use of experience curves to estimate the rates of
cost decreases in energy technology. A long-recognized concept, technological learning first was
quantified by Wright (1936) for the aircraft industry. In economics, the concept is often
described as learning-by-doing (LBD), and generally is defined as the decrease in costs to
manufacturers as a function of cumulative output, or “learning-by-using,” and the decrease in
costs (and/or increase in benefits) to consumers as a function of the use of a technology (Arrow,
1962, Rosenberg, 1982).6 LBD commonly is measured in the form of “learning” or “experience”
curves in terms of how much unit costs decline as a function of experience or production.
Among energy analysts, these estimates are often used to calibrate energy-economic models for
simulating the effects of climate policy, with a particular focus on alternative energy sources.7 A
typical learning curve estimation regresses costs of installation (or production) at different points
6

Note that “learning-by-searching” (based on cumulative R&D expenditures) also has been used in the literature,
but it is essentially R&D-induced technological change (see, e.g., Bahn and Kypreos (2003)).
7
Köhler et al. (2006) includes a review of these studies.

20

in time as a function of cumulative installed capacity (or sometimes cumulative output) in loglog fashion. The resulting elasticity coefficient on cumulative capacity in these models (α) is
often translated into a so-called “learning rate” (1-2-α) giving the percentage change in costs
resulting from a doubling in cumulative capacity. Typically, studies on new energy technologies
find faster learning for younger technologies, with estimates clustering around 15-20% for
alternative energy sources such as wind and solar energy (McDonald and Schrattenholzer 2000).
One significant caveat with estimated learning rates is that they typically focus on
correlations between energy technology usage and costs, rather than causation. Recent papers by
Klaasen et al. (2005), Söderholm and Sundqvist (2007), and Söderholm and Klaasen (2007)
attempt to disentangle the separate contributions of R&D and experience by estimating “twofactor” learning curves for environmental technologies. These two-factor curves model cost
reductions as a function of both cumulative capacity (learning-by-doing) and R&D (learning-bysearching, or LBS). To be comparable with the notion of cumulative capacity, in these models
R&D is typically aggregated into a stock of R&D capital. Thus, endogeneity is a concern, as we
would expect both investments in capacity to be a function of past R&D expenditures and R&D
expenditures to be influenced by capacity, which helps determine demand for R&D. Söderholm
and Sundqvist address this endogeneity in their paper and find LBD rates around 5 percent, and
LBS rates around 15 percent, suggesting that R&D, rather than learning-by-doing, contributes
more to cost reductions. However, these results are very sensitive to the model specification,
illustrating the difficulty of sorting through the various channels through which costs may fall
over time.
To further address the problems associated with estimating and interpreting learning
curves, Nemet (2006) uses simulation techniques to decompose cost reductions for PV cells into
seven categories. Plant size (e.g. returns to scale), efficiency improvements, and lower silicon
costs explain the majority of cost reductions. Notably, most of the major improvements in
efficiency come from universities, where traditional learning by doing through production
experience would not be a factor. Learning from experience (e.g. through increased yield of PV
cells) plays a much smaller role, accounting for just 10 percent of the cost decreases in Nemet’s
sample.
While research on the various sources of cost reductions is limited, these results provide
some guidelines for incorporating estimates of learning into environmental policy models. Most
importantly, these results suggest that the relative importance of both learning by doing and
R&D must be considered when calibrating models that include both. The main lesson here is to
avoid double counting. A LBD rate of just five percent, such as found by Söderholm and
Sundqvist, is lower than typically reported in the LBD literature, where learning rates of 15-20
percent are common. A simple one-factor LBD curve shows an association between capacity
and costs, but does not address causation. A two-factor curve begins to address this problem by
including a major omitted variable. As such, while the combined effect of LBD and LBS in a
two-factor model may be comparable to learning rates from a one-factor model, the individual
components should be smaller. Fischer and Newell (2008) show how one can jointly incorporate
both R&D-based and learning-based technological change into an analytical and numerical
model, while taking care to parameterize the model based on available empirical evidence.

21

3.2.3. Government R&D
Until now, we have focused primarily on the incentives faced, and activities conducted,
by private firms. However, governments also play an important role in energy R&D. The U.S.
Department of Energy spent about $4 billion on energy R&D in 2007 (Newell 2008a).8 This
government investment plays several roles, each of which offers challenges to economists
focusing on environmental innovation.
First, note that government R&D can help to compensate for underinvestment by private
firms. Unlike firms, the government is in position to consider social returns when making
investment decisions. In addition, government R&D tends to have different objectives than
private R&D. Government support is particularly important for basic R&D, as long-term
payoffs, greater uncertainty, and the lack of a finished product at the end all make it difficult for
private firms to appropriate the returns of basic R&D. Thus, the nature of government R&D is
important. For example, Popp (2002) finds that government energy R&D served as a substitute
for private energy R&D during the 1970s, but as a complement to private energy R&D
afterwards. One explanation given for the change in impact is the changing nature of energy
R&D. During the 1970s, much government R&D funding went to applied projects such as the
effort to produce synfuels. Beginning with the Reagan administration, government R&D shifted
towards a focus on more basic applications.
The analyses that have been conducted of U.S. federal research relating to energy and the
environment have come to mixed conclusions. Cohen and Noll (1991) documented the waste
associated with the breeder reactor and synthetic fuel programs in the 1970s, but in the same
volume Pegram (1991) concluded that the photovoltaics research program undertaken in the
same time frame had significant benefits. More recently, the U.S. National Research Council
attempted a fairly comprehensive overview of energy efficiency and fossil energy research at
DOE over the last two decades (National Research Council 2001). Using both estimates of
overall return and case studies, they concluded, as one might expect, that there were only a
handful of programs that proved highly valuable. Their estimates of returns suggest, however,
that the benefits of these successes justified the overall portfolio investment.
In addition to correcting for underinvestment by private firms, many government R&D
projects aim to improve commercialization of new technologies (referred to as “transfer” from
basic to applied research). Such projects typically combine basic and applied research, and are
often done through government/industry partnerships (National Science Board, 2006). For
example, the United States passed several policies in the 1980s specifically designed to improve
transfer from the more basic research done at government and university laboratories to the
applied research done by industry to create marketable products.9 As such, this technology
transfer can be seen as a step between the processes of invention and innovation.
8

Note that this is not the total DOE R&D budget, much of which goes to defense-related projects. Rather, it is DOE
budget items focused on energy supply, energy efficiency, and basic energy sciences. Existing estimates place the
level of U.S. industrial energy R&D at roughly $2 billion per year in 2004; however private sector R&D investments
relevant to energy technology are extremely difficult to assess and these numbers likely represent an underestimate
(Newell 2008a).
9
Examples include the Stevenson-Wylder Technology Innovation Act of 1980, the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980, and the
Federal Technology Transfer Act of 1986.

22

A small number of papers have addressed the role of government R&D plays facilitating
transfer of energy technology. Jaffe and Lerner (2001) study the effectiveness of federally
funded research and development centers (FFRDCs) owned by the U.S. Department of Energy
(DOE). Jaffe and Lerner supplement a detailed patent citation analysis of patents assigned either
directly to the laboratories or to private contractors who collaborated on research at the DOE labs
with case studies of two DOE laboratories where technology transfer efforts increased in the
1980s and 1990s.10 They find that both patenting and the number of citations received per patent
increased at DOE laboratories since the policy shifts of the 1980s. That citations received also
increase after the 1980 policy changes contrasts with the findings of researchers studying
academic patenting, where patenting increases, but the quality of patents appears to decline.
They also find that the type of research performed at a laboratory affects technology transfer.
Transfer is slower when more basic research is performed, or when the research has national
security implications. Interestingly, FFRDCs with greater contractor turnover appear to be more
successful at commercializing new technologies.
Popp (2006c) examines citations made to patents in 11 energy technology categories,
such as wind and solar energy. He finds that energy patents spawned by government R&D are
cited more frequently than other energy patents. This is consistent with the notion that these
patents are more basic. More importantly, after passage of the technology transfer acts in the
early 1980s, the children of these patents (that is, privately-held patents that cite government
patents) are the most frequently cited patents, suggesting that transferring research results from
the government to private industry produces valuable research results.
3.2.4. What Can Technological Change Economists Contribute?
There is much for technological change economists to contribute on the topic of
measuring the impact of technological change. A particular challenge for environmental and
energy technologies is the measurement of research inputs and their impacts. Because of the
long-term, uncertain nature of the environmental problem, government R&D funding plays an
important role in the field. The mix of public and private research funding presents a challenge
for estimating the effect of R&D. In general, one would expect government R&D to take longer
to have an observable effect on outcomes than private R&D, as it is further upstream from the
final commercialized product. At the same time, both private and public R&D are driven by the
same demand-side influences, such as energy prices and environmental policy. This makes
disentangling the effect of each difficult. However, measuring the impact of government R&D is
important for modeling environmental policy. Economic theory suggests that that a wedge
should exist between social and private returns to R&D. Government R&D aims, at least in part,
to close this gap. However, there is little empirical evidence specifically on the returns to
government R&D, nor to the extent to which government R&D effectively closes this gap. This
is due, in part, to the nature of government projects, which are often more basic and long term in
nature, making estimating returns difficult. Given this, estimating the gap between private and
social rates of return that exist after accounting for both private and public energy R&D spending
is an important area for future research
10

The two laboratories are Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and Idaho National Engineering and
Environmental Laboratory.

23

Economists also have much to contribute to the estimation of learning curves for energy
technologies. In the economic literature, these models focus on experience within a single
production process, such as the falling costs of production for Liberty ships during World War II
(Rapping, 1965) or successive generations of silicon chips (Irwin and Klenow, 1994). In
contrast, most of the learning curve studies using energy data make use of more aggregate
industry-level data. That is, they ask how the cost of energy from new installations falls as
cumulative experience in the industry increases. However, it need not be the case that users are
directly learning from their own experiences. While research on learning curves suggests that
energy technology costs do fall over time, only a few studies, cited in section 3.2.2, address the
sources of these cost savings. Understanding the source of these savings has important
implications for policy timing. If experience itself is important—and there are spillovers to other
firms—one could argue that environmental policy should encourage early adoption of
technology, to take advantage of the learning effects that follow. If, instead, cost savings are the
result of R&D and other purposeful research efforts, policy should first attempt to encourage
these activities, so as lower the eventual costs of environmental policy. Moreover, learning is
not just a matter for estimating cost savings, but also affects adoption as well, as cumulative
usage lowers the cost of adoption. Disentangling the cause and effect of the relationship between
experience, R&D, and other factors that drive cost reductions is a fruitful topic for future
research.
4. Microeconomics: Diffusion
Technological advances are of little use unless society ultimately makes use of the
innovation through technology diffusion, that is, the process by which a new technology
penetrates the relevant market. Often times, a technology that appears to surpass competing
technologies in performance and cost will not immediately be chosen over existing technologies.
A key question is whether this slow diffusion is a result of rational actors responding to varying
incentives or due to market inefficiencies. In this section we briefly review the literature on
diffusion of environmental technologies.11 We focus on two key questions. One is the time lag
between invention and adoption, focusing on the adoption of technologies within a single
market. Second is the flow of knowledge across regions.
4.1 Diffusion within Countries
The diffusion of a new technology is a gradual, dynamic process. New technologies are
not adopted en masse. Rather, adoption usually begins with a few early adopters, followed by a
more rapid period of adoption, with the rate of adoption leveling off once most potential users
have adopted the technology. This process generates the well-known S-shaped diffusion curve:
the rate of adoption rises slowly at first, speeds up, and then levels off as market saturation
approaches. Early attempts to explain this process focused on the spread of information
(epidemic models, such as Griliches 1957) and differences among firms (probit models, such as
David 1969). More recently, researchers combine these explanations while adding potential
strategic decisions of firms. These papers find that firm-specific differences explain most
11

Stoneman and Battisti (2008) provide a more general review of the economics of diffusion.

24

variation in adoption rates, suggesting that gradual diffusion is a rational process in response to
varying incentives faced by individual actors.
Environmental technologies can be different, however. Incentives to adopt end-of-pipe
technologies that only serve to reduce emissions must come from environmental regulation.
Therefore, it is not surprising that studies addressing adoption of environmental technologies
find that regulations dominate all other firm-specific factors. In contrast, energy efficiency and
fuel-saving technologies may be adopted more slowly, as it is cost savings, rather than a direct
regulatory requirement, that often matters. This can be influenced by policies that raise energy
prices. However, to the extent that fuel prices do not capture the external costs of energy use,
such as carbon emissions, energy prices alone will not encourage a socially optimal level of
adoption for energy efficiency technologies.
Studies of the diffusion of environmental technologies within countries focus on two
main questions. First, what is the theoretical and empirical potential for “induced diffusion” of
lower-emissions technologies? Specifically, how do environmental policy instruments that
implicitly or explicitly increase the economic incentive to reduce emissions affect the diffusion
rate of these technologies? Second, to what extent have market failures in energy and equipment
markets limited historical diffusion rates of energy efficient technologies? The observation that
energy-efficient technologies that are cost-effective at current prices are diffusing only slowly
dates back to the 1970s, having been identified as a “paradox” at least as far back as Shama
(1983). To the extent that diffusion is limited by market failures, policy measures that simply
increase the economic incentive to adopt environmentally-friendly technologies will be
insufficient. In addition, policies focused directly on the correction of adoption market failures
can be justified.
4.1.1. Theoretical Analyses
The predominant theoretical framework for analyses of diffusion effects has been what
could be called the “discrete technology choice” model: firms contemplate the use of a certain
technology which reduces marginal costs of pollution abatement and which has a known fixed
cost associated with it. While some authors have presented this approach as a model of
“innovation,” it is more appropriately viewed as a model of adoption.
With such models, several theoretical studies have found that the incentive for the
adoption of new technologies is greater under market-based instruments than under direct
regulation (Zerbe 1970; Downing and White 1986; Milliman and Prince 1989; Jung et al. 1996).
With the exception of Downing and White (1986), all of these studies examined the gross
impacts of alternative policy instruments on the quantity of technology adoption.
Theoretical comparisons among market-based instruments have produced only limited
agreement. In a frequently-cited article, Milliman and Prince (1989) examine firm-level
incentives for technology diffusion provided by five instruments: command-and-control;
emission taxes; abatement subsidies; freely-allocated emission permits, and auctioned emission
permits. Firm-level incentives for adoption in this representative-firm model were pictured as
the consequent change in producer surplus. They found that auctioned permits would provide
the largest adoption incentive of any instrument, with emissions taxes and subsidies second, and
freely allocated permits and direct controls last. The Milliman and Prince (1989) study was

25

criticized by Marin (1991) because of its assumption of identical firms, but it was subsequently
shown that the results remain largely unchanged with heterogeneous abatement costs (Milliman
and Prince 1992).
Jung et al. (1996) build on Milliman and Prince's basic framework for comparing the
effects of alternative policy instruments, but rather than focusing on firm-level changes in
producer surplus, they considered heterogeneous firms, and modeled the “market-level
incentive” created by various instruments. Their rankings echoed those of Milliman and Prince
(1989): auctioned permits provided the greatest incentive, followed by taxes and subsidies, free
permits, and performance standards.
Subsequent theoretical analyses (Parry 1998; Denicolò 1999; Fischer et al. 2003) clarify
several aspects of these rankings. First, there is the question of relative firm-level incentives to
adopt a new, cost-saving technology when the price of pollution (permit price or tax level) is
endogenous. Milliman and Prince (1989), as well as Jung et al. (1996), argue that auctioned
permits would provide greater incentives for diffusion than freely-allocated permits, because
technology diffusion lowers the equilibrium permit price, bringing greater aggregate benefits of
adoption in a regime where all sources are permit buyers (that is, auctions). But when
technology diffusion lowers the market price for tradable permits, all firms benefit from this
lower price regardless of whether or not they adopt the given technology (Fischer et al. 2003).
Thus, if firms are price takers in the permit market, auctioned permits provide no more adoption
incentive than freely-allocated permits.
The overall result is that both auctioned and freely-allocated permits have lesser diffusion
incentives than and emission tax (but superior to command-and-control instruments). Under
tradable permits, technology diffusion lowers the equilibrium permit price, thereby reducing the
incentive for participating firms to adopt. Thus, a permit system provides a lower adoption
incentive than a tax, assuming the two instruments are equivalent before diffusion occurs
(Denicolò 1999). See, however, the discussion of Fischer et al. (2003) in section 3.1.2; they find
that an unambiguous ranking of policy instruments with regard to innovation incentives is not
possible.
More broadly, it appears that an unambiguous exhaustive ranking of instruments is not
possible on the basis of theory alone. Parry (1998) finds that the welfare gain induced by an
emissions tax is significantly greater than that induced by tradable permits only in the case of
very major innovations. Similarly, Requate (1998) includes an explicit model of the final output
market, and finds that whether (auctioned) permits or taxes provide stronger incentives to adopt
an improved technology depends upon empirical values of relevant parameters.
Furthermore, complete theoretical analysis of the effects of alternative policy instruments
on the rate of technological change must include modeling of the government’s response to
technological change, because the degree to which regulators respond to technologically-induced
changes in abatement costs affects the magnitude of the adoption incentive associated with
alternative policy instruments. Because technology diffusion presumably lowers the aggregate
marginal abatement cost function, it results in a change in the efficient level of control. Hence,
following diffusion, the optimal agency response is to set a more ambitious target. Milliman and
Prince (1989) examine the incentives facing private industry, under alternative policy
instruments, to oppose such policy changes. They conclude that firms will oppose optimal

26

agency adjustment of the policy under all instruments except taxes. Under an emissions tax, the
optimal agency response to cost-reducing technological change is to lower the tax rate (assuming
convex damages); under a subsidy, the optimal response is to lower the subsidy; under tradable
permit systems, the optimal response is to decrease the number of available permits, and thereby
drive up the permit price. Thus, firms have clear incentives to support the optimal agency
response only under an emissions tax regime.
In a comparison of tradable permits and pollution taxes, Biglaiser et al. (1995) examine
these instruments’ ability to achieve the first-best outcome in a dynamic setting. They find that
effluent taxes can do so, but permits cannot. With an effluent tax, the optimal tax is presumably
determined by marginal damages (which the authors assume to be constant), yielding a policy
which is time consistent. Whether or not firms adopt a cost-saving technology, the government
has no incentive to change the tax rate. From this perspective, however, tradable permits are not
time consistent, because the optimal number of permits in each period depends on both firms’
costs, which are determined by all previous investments, and marginal damages. With constant
marginal damages, and marginal abatement costs decreasing over time, the optimal number of
permits should also be decreasing over time. Firms may internalize this, and thereby invest less
than optimally in pollution control technology.
The result of Biglaiser et al. (1995) depends, however, on the assumption of constant
marginal damages. If marginal damages are not constant, then the optimal policy is determined
by the interaction of marginal damages and marginal abatement costs for both taxes and permits.
The result appears to be analogous to Weitzman's (1974) rule: if the marginal damage curve is
relatively flat and there is uncertainty in marginal costs (from the regulator's perspective) due to
potential innovation at the firm level, then a price instrument is more efficient.
4.1.2. Empirical Studies
Most empirical studies of environmental technology adoption focus on one of two
questions. First are studies examining the relationship between environmental policy and
adoption. Many of these focus on adoption of pollution control techniques. A common finding
in this literature is that environmental regulation is necessary to encourage adoption of pollution
control techniques. Second are studies asking whether adoption eventually reaches socially
efficient levels, or if market failures hinder the adoption of environmentally-friendly
technologies. These studies primarily focus on the adoption of energy efficiency technologies.
4.1.2.1 Environmental Policy and Adoption
TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE
Table 4 provides a summary of empirical studies on the adoption of environmental
technologies. Kerr and Newell (2003) use a duration model to analyze the influence of plant
characteristics and the stringency and the form of regulation on technology adoption decisions by
petroleum refineries during the leaded gasoline phasedown. They find that increased regulatory
stringency (which raised the effective price of lead) encouraged greater adoption of leadreducing technology. They also find that larger and more technically sophisticated refineries,
which had lower costs of adoption, were more likely to adopt the new technology. Related to the

27

choice of policy instruments, Kerr and Newell find that the tradable permit system provided
incentives for more efficient technology adoption decisions, as evidenced by a significant
divergence in the adoption behavior of refineries with low versus high compliance costs.
Namely, the positive differential in the adoption propensity of expected permit sellers (i.e., lowcost refineries) relative to expected permit buyers (i.e., high-cost refineries) was significantly
greater under market-based lead regulation compared to under individually binding performance
standards.
Another prominent application of tradable permit systems which has provided an
opportunity for empirical analysis of the effects of policy instruments on technology diffusion is
the sulfur dioxide allowance trading program, initiated under the U.S. Clean Air Act
amendments of 1990. In an econometric analysis, Keohane (2007) finds evidence of the way in
which the increased flexibility of a market-based instrument can provide greater incentives for
technology adoption. In particular, he finds that the choice of whether or not to adopt a
“scrubber” to remove sulfur dioxide — rather than purchasing (more costly) low-sulfur coal —
was more sensitive to cost differences (between scrubbing and fuel-switching) under the tradable
permit system than under the earlier emissions rate standard.
In an examination of the effects of alternative policy instruments for reducing oxygendemanding water pollutants, Kemp (1998) finds that effluent charges were a significant predictor
of adoption of biological treatment by facilities. In earlier work, Purvis and Outlaw (1995) carry
out a case study of EPA’s permitting process for acceptable water-pollution control technologies
in the U.S. livestock production sector. Those authors conclude that the relevant regulations
encouraged the use of “time-tested” technologies that provided lower levels of environmental
protection than other more innovative ones, simply because producers knew that EPA was more
likely to approve a permit that employed the established approach.
Snyder et al. (2003) study the diffusion of membrane-cell technology in the chlorine
manufacturing industry. Chlorine is produced using an electrolytic process. Of the three types of
cells that can be used in this process, membrane cells have the least environmental impact.
Usage of membrane cells have increased over time, due to three different processes: adoption of
the technology at existing plants, use of membrane technology at new facilities, and the closing
of plants using older cell technologies. Using a hazard model, Snyder et al. look at both the
adoption and exit decisions of chlorine plants. They find that increases in the percentage of
plants using membrane technology comes partially from adoption, but primarily from shutdowns
of older plants. Environmental regulation does not have a statistically significant effect on
adoption of membrane technology. However, the passage of more stringent regulations over
time does appear to hasten the shutdown of older facilities, thus increasing the share of plants
using membrane technology.
Popp (2006d) links the role of innovation and adoption in a study of NOX pollution
control technologies. Advances (and expected advances) in a single technology should affect
both its adoption rate and the adoption of substitute technologies. Popp combines plant-level
data on U.S. coal-fired electric power plants with patent data pertaining to NOX pollution control
techniques to study this link. Plants needing to reduce NOX emissions face two choices. They
can modify the combustion process so as to produce fewer NOX emissions, or they can install
post-combustion treatment to remove NOX from the emissions stream. Modifying the
combustion process is cheaper, but post-combustion treatment reduces a greater percentage of

28

NOX emissions. As in other studies of environmental technologies, the effect of other
explanatory variables is dominated by the effect of environmental regulations, demonstrating that
the mere presence of environmental technologies is not enough to encourage its usage.
Technological advances are important for the adoption of existing combustion modification
technologies. However, these advances are less important for the adoption of newer postcombustion control techniques, which are adopted only when needed to comply with the strictest
emission limits. Moreover, because of the greater capital costs for post-combustion techniques,
the financial strength of a plant’s parent company positively influences adoption.
In general, firms can choose one of two strategies to comply with environmental
regulations. End-of-the-pipe abatement reduces emissions by using add-on technologies to clean
the waste stream coming from a plant. In contrast, cleaner production methods reduce emissions
by generating less pollution in the production process. Frondel et al. (2007) look at the factors
influencing the choice of one strategy over the other. They find that many plants in OECD
nations make use of cleaner production methods. However, environmental regulations are more
likely to lead to the adoption of end-of-the-pipe techniques. In contrast, market forces such as
cost savings or environmental audits lead to the adoption of cleaner production processes.
Another body of research has examined the effects on technology diffusion of commandand-control environmental standards when they are combined with “differential environmental
regulations.” In many situations where command-and-control standards have been used, the
required level of pollution abatement has been set at a far more stringent level for new sources
than for existing ones. There is empirical evidence that such differential environmental
regulations have lengthened the time before plants were retired (Maloney and Brady 1988;
Nelson et al. 1993). Further, this dual system can actually worsen pollution by encouraging
firms to keep older, dirtier plants in operation (Stewart 1981; Gollop and Roberts 1983;
McCubbins et al. 1989).
Another concern with differential environmental regulation is that existing plants may
forego investments that could lead to more stringent regulatory requirements. However, recent
work by Wolfram and Bushnell (2008) suggest that the impact of this effect may be small. They
analyze the effects of New Source Review (NSR) environmental regulations on coal-fired
electric power plants. The 1970 Clean Air Act required new electric generating plants to install
costly pollution control equipment, but exempted existing plants with a grandfathering clause.
Existing plants lost their grandfathering status if they made major modifications to their plants.
Wolfram and Bushnell find some evidence that the risk of NSR enforcement reduced capital
expenditures at plants. However, they find no discernable effect on the operating costs, fuel
efficiency or emissions of these plants.
The regulatory structure of markets may also affect adoption. Fowlie (2007) examines
the adoption of NOX pollution control techniques by U.S. power plants in response to NOX
permit trading in the eastern United States. Fowlie notes that electric utilities face different
incentives depending on the regulatory structure of the industry. She considers how differences
in the regulatory structure of an industry affect the response to pollution permits. State regulators
typically allow firms to recoup the average costs of operating pollution controls and purchasing
permits. However, the opportunity costs of using or holding permits is not reflected in regulated
rates. This gives regulated firms an incentive to invest in more capital intensive abatement
equipment. In contrast, utilities in restructured markets face greater uncertainty, making

29

investments in long-term pollution abatement capital more risky. Using plant-level data on the
cost of installing various NOX abatement techniques, Fowlie finds that plants in restructured
electricity markets are less likely to install capital intensive compliance options. Moreover,
because the regulatory framework faced by utilities varies by state, the interaction between state
utility regulation and permit markets has important environmental effects. As a result of
different adoption incentives faced by deregulated utilities, a larger share of the pollution
allowed by NOX permits is emitted in states with more severe air quality problems.
In addition to economic incentives, direct regulation, and information provision, some
research has emphasized the role that “informal regulation” or community pressure can play in
encouraging the adoption of environmentally clean technologies. For example, in an analysis of
fuel adoption decisions for traditional brick kilns in Mexico, Blackman and Bannister (1998)
suggest that community pressure applied by competing firms and local non-governmental
organizations was associated with increased adoption of cleaner fuels, even when those fuels had
relatively high variable costs. Popp et al (2008) find that consumer concerns over dioxin found
in the wastewater of pulp manufacturers helped spur the adoption of low-chlorine and chlorinefree bleaching techniques at pulp plants, even before regulations requiring such techniques took
effect. An important difference between the technological choice here is that chlorine use not
only has negative environmental impacts near the production site, but also affects the quality of
the final product. Consumer concerns are more likely to be an issue when environmental choices
affect product quality, such as chlorine in paper products or lead paint in children’s toys.
Not surprisingly, prices also serve as an incentive for adoption. This is particularly
important for technologies that improve energy efficiency, as individual users can appropriate
some of the benefits of these technologies through lower energy bills, even if no other regulatory
incentives exist. Rose and Joskow (1990) find a positive effect of fuel price increases on the
adoption of a new fuel-saving technology in the U.S. electricity-generation sector, with the
statistical significance of the effect depending on the year of the fuel price. In a tobit analysis of
steel plant adoption of different furnace technologies, Boyd and Karlson (1993) find a significant
positive effect of increases in a fuel’s price on the adoption of technology that saves that fuel,
although the magnitude of the effect was modest. For a sample of industrial plants in four
heavily polluting sectors (petroleum refining, plastics, pulp and paper, and steel), Pizer et al.
(2001) find that both energy prices and financial health were positively related to the adoption of
energy-saving technologies.
Finally, the energy crises of the 1970s gave rise to several studies addressing automotive
energy efficiency. Most relevant for our purposes is the study of Greene (1990). He uses data
on fuel prices and fuel economy of automobiles from 1978 to 1989 to test the relative
effectiveness of Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards and gasoline prices in
increasing fuel economy. He finds that the big three U.S. firms faced a binding CAFE
constraint, and for these firms compliance with CAFE standards had roughly twice the impact on
fuel economy as did fuel prices. Japanese firms, however, did not face a binding CAFE
constraint, and fuel prices had only a small effect. Luxury European manufactures seemed to
base their fuel efficiency largely on market demand and often exceeded CAFE requirements.
For these firms, neither the standards nor prices seemed to have much effect. Similarly,
Goldberg (1998) combines a demand-side model of discrete vehicle choice and utilization with a
supply-side model of oligopoly and product differentiation to estimate the effects of CAFE

30

standards on the fuel economy of the new car fleet. She finds that automobile fuel operating
costs have had a significant effect, although a gasoline tax of a magnitude that could match the
effect of CAFE on fuel economy would have to be very large.
4.1.2.2. Are there Adoption Market Failures?
Whereas environmental policy is generally a prerequisite for adoption of pollution
control techniques, there are private benefits to adopting energy efficient technology, such as
lower energy bills. Nonetheless, there is a large literature documenting that such technologies
are adopted at seemingly slow rates, even when the upfront capital costs of technology would be
paid back in a few years. Assessing the reasons for this slow diffusion process has been an
important research question, as has the evaluation of policies that seek to increase energy
efficiency. In a retrospective review of past energy-efficiency programs in the United States,
Gillingham, Newell, and Palmer (2006) found that the programs reviewed (e.g., appliance
standards, utility programs) cumulatively reduced total U.S. energy use by at most 4 percent, or
12 percent as a percent of energy use in buildings. The cost-effectiveness of these programs has
been the subject of considerable debate. Table 5 provides a summary of research in this area.
TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE
Jaffe and Stavins (1995) carry out econometric analyses of the factors affecting the
adoption of thermal insulation technologies in new residential construction in the United States
between 1979 and 1988. They examine the dynamic effects of energy prices and technology
adoption costs on average residential energy-efficiency technologies in new home construction,
finding the response of mean energy efficiency to energy price changes to be positive and
significant, both statistically and economically. Interestingly, they also find that equivalent
percentage adoption cost changes were about three times as effective as energy price changes in
encouraging adoption, although standard financial analysis would suggest they ought to be about
equal in percentage terms. This finding offers confirmation for the conventional wisdom that
technology adoption decisions are more sensitive to up-front cost considerations than to longerterm operating expenses. One interpretation of this finding is that energy price changes are
simply not expected to persist, so that a given percentage change in today’s energy price has a
relatively small effect on the expected “average” energy price over the life of the investment.
This possibility has implications for the challenge of devising effective policy to encourage
innovation where the returns to the innovation depend on future prices. Jaffe and Stavins (1995)
also examine the effects of more conventional regulations on technology diffusion, in the form of
state building codes. They find no discernable effects. It is unclear to what extent this is due to
inability to measure the true variation across states in the effectiveness of codes, or to codes that
were in many cases not binding relative to typical practice. This is a reminder, however, that
although price-based policies will always have some effect, standards may have little effect if
they are set below existing standards of practice.
Hassett and Metcalf (1995) find an even larger discrepancy between the effect of changes
in installation cost (here coming through tax credits) and changes in energy prices. Anderson
and Newell (2004) also find a divergence in their investigation of industrial energy efficiency
audits (discussed below)—albeit a much lesser one—with costs have a 40% greater percentage
effect relative to future energy savings. There are three interrelated possible explanations for

31

these findings. One possibility is a behavioral bias that causes purchasers to focus more on upfront cost than they do on the lifetime operating costs of an investment. As discussed above, an
alternative (but probably indistinguishable) view is that purchasers focus equally on both, but
uncertainty about future energy prices makes them give less weight to the current energy price
(which is only an indicator of future prices) than they do to the capital cost, which is known. A
final interpretation might be that consumers actually have reasonably accurate expectations about
future energy prices, and their decisions reflect those expectations, but our empirical proxies for
their expectations are not correct.
In a separate analysis of thermal home insulation, this one in the Netherlands, Kemp
(1997) finds that a threshold model of diffusion (based on a rational choice approach) could not
explain observed diffusion patterns. Instead, epidemic models provided a better fit to the data.
Kemp also finds that there was no significant effect of government subsidies on the adoption of
thermal insulation by households.
Attention has also been given to the effects on energy-efficiency technology diffusion of
voluntary environmental programs. Howarth et al. (2000) examine two voluntary programs of
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency – the Green Lights and Energy Star programs – both
of which are intended to encourage greater private industry use of energy-saving technologies.
A natural question from economics is why would firms carry out additional technology
investments as part of a voluntary agreement? The authors respond that there are a set of agency
problems that inhibit economically wise adoption of some technologies. For example, most
energy-saving investments are small, and senior staff may rationally choose to restrict funds for
small projects that cannot be perfectly monitored. The Green Lights program may be said to
attempt to address this type of agency problem by providing information on savings
opportunities at the level of the firm where decisions are made.
For households and small firms, adoption of new technologies with significant capital
costs may be constrained by inadequate access to financing. And in some countries, import
barriers may inhibit the adoption of technology embodied in foreign-produced goods (ReppelinHill 1999). On the other hand, Nijkamp et al. (2001) present the qualitative results of a survey of
Dutch firms regarding their decisions on how much to invest in energy-efficient technologies.
They found that standard economic “barriers” to energy-efficient technology adoption –
including the existence of alternative investments, low energy costs, and a desire to replace
capital only when it is fully depreciated – are more important than financial barriers and
uncertainty about future technologies and prices.
Information plays an important role in the technology diffusion process. There are two
reasons why the importance of information may result in market failure. First, information is a
public good that may be expected in general to be underprovided by markets. Second, to the
extent that the adoption of the technology by some users is itself an important mode of
information transfer to other parties, adoption creates a positive externality and is therefore likely
to proceed at a socially suboptimal rate. Howarth et al. (2000) explore the significance of
inadequate information in inhibiting the diffusion of more efficient lighting equipment. Metcalf
and Hassett (1999) compare available estimates of energy savings from new equipment to actual
savings realized by users who have installed the equipment. They find that actual savings, while
significant, were less than those promised by engineers and product manufacturers. Their
estimate of the median realized rate of return is about 12%, which they found to be close to a

32

discount rate for this investment implied by a CAPM analysis.
Anderson and Newell (2004) examine the role of information by asking how firms
respond to energy audits offered through the US Department of Energy’s Industrial Assessment
Centers (IAC). This program has offered energy assessments at no cost to small and mediumsized manufacturers since 1976. Data on both the recommendations made and projects
implemented within 2 years of the evaluation are kept by the IAC. Using these data, Anderson
and Newell note that firms adopted only 53 percent of recommended projects, even though the
average payback time for these projects was just 1.29 years. Using fixed effect logit estimation,
they find that adoption rates are higher for projects with shorter paybacks, lower costs, greater
annual savings, higher energy prices, and greater energy conservation. As discussed above,
plants are 40 percent more responsive to initial costs than annual energy savings. Using multiple
decisions for a given firms, they estimate a “payback threshold” for a typical firm, below which
all projects are adopted and above which all projects are rejected. They find that over 98 percent
of firms have payback thresholds of less than five years, with a median payback threshold of just
1.2 years. As in previous studies, these firms demand quick paybacks of 1–2 years (implicit
hurdle rates of 50–100%) for project adoption. These results are consistent with the investment
criteria that small and medium-size firms typically state that they intend to use (Lefley 1996).
Also related to imperfect information are a variety of agency problems that can inhibit the
adoption of superior technology. The agency problem can be either external or internal to
organizations. An example of an external agency problem would be a landlord/tenant
relationship, in which a tenant pays for utilities but the landlord makes decisions regarding which
appliances to purchase, or vice versa. Internal agency problems can arise in organizations where
the individual or department responsible for equipment purchase or maintenance differs from the
individual or department whose budget covers utility costs. DeCanio (1998) explores the
significance of organizational factors in explaining firms’ perceived returns to installation of
energy-efficient lighting.
Uncertainty is another factor that may limit the adoption of new technology (Geroski
2000). Uncertainty can be inherent in the technology itself, in the sense that its newness means
that users are not sure how it will be perform (Mansfield 1968). For resource-saving technology,
there is the additional uncertainty that the economic value of such savings depends on future
resource prices, which are themselves uncertain. This uncertainty about future returns means
that there is an “option value” associated with postponing the adoption of new technology
(Pindyck 1991; Hassett and Metcalf 1995, 1996).
Closely related to the issue of uncertainty is the issue of the discount rate or investment
hurdle rate used by purchasers in evaluating the desirability of new technology, particularly
resource-conserving technology. A large body of research demonstrates that purchasers appear
to use relatively high discount rates in evaluating energy-efficiency investments (Hausman 1979;
Ruderman et al. 1987; Ross 1990). The implicit or explicit use of relatively high discount rates
for energy savings does not represent a market failure in itself; it is rather the manifestation of
underlying aspects of the decision process including those just discussed. At least some portion
of the discount rate premium is likely to be related to uncertainty, although the extent to which
the premium can be explained by uncertainty and option value is subject to debate (Hassett and
Metcalf 1995, 1996; Sanstad et al. 1995). Capital market failures that make it difficult to secure
external financing for these investments may also play a role.

33

Finally, the presence of increasing returns in the form of learning effects, network
externalities, or other positive adoption externalities presents the possibility that market
outcomes for technologies exhibiting these features, including those with environmental
consequences, may be inefficient. For example, the idea that we are “locked into” a fossil-fuelbased energy system is a recurring theme in policy discussions regarding climate change and
other energy-related environmental problems. At a more aggregate level, there has been much
discussion of the question of whether it is possible for developing countries to take less
environmentally-damaging paths of development than have currently industrialized countries, for
example by relying less on fossil fuels. In a theoretical study, Mulder et al. (2003) use a vintage
model to consider the adoption of energy efficiency technologies. They assume
complementarities among technologies, so that there are returns to using technologies from a mix
of vintages. This complementarity allows old technologies to persist, offering a possible
explanation for the energy efficiency paradox. As complementarities increase, adoption levels of
technology decrease. Finally, they introduce learning by doing into the model. This further
reduces the adoption level of new technologies, as firms lose their expertise on past vintages
when choosing a new technology.
While the empirical literature is quite thin, some studies have explored the issue of
increasing returns and technology lock-in for competing technologies within the energy and
environment arenas, including analysis of renewable energy and fossil fuels (Cowan and Kline
1996), the internal combustion engine and alternatively-fueled vehicles (Cowan and Hulten
1996), pesticides and integrated pest management (Cowan and Gunby 1996), technologies for
electricity generation (Islas 1997), nuclear power reactor designs (Cowan 1990), and the
transition from hydrocarbon-based fuels (Kemp 1997).
4.1.3 What Can Technological Change Economists Contribute?
Much of the discussion on the energy paradox focuses on whether or not there are market
failures that slow adoption. One area in which technological change economists could contribute
is to move beyond the focus on market failures. For example, a micro and behavioral
understanding of the decision to adopt could result from a marriage of the economics of
technological change with the new “behavioral economics.” Such work would contribute to our
understanding of why adoption of energy efficiency technologies is slow, and would better
inform policy makers attempts to increase adoption of energy efficient technologies.
4.2 Diffusion Across Countries
While international technology transfer has received much attention in the broader
economic literature, few applications focus specifically on environmental technologies.12 Nearly
all of the papers cited so far focus on highly developed economies. This is not surprising, as
these countries were the first to enact environmental protections and most R&D expenditures
occur in these countries. In 2006, global R&D expenditures were about $960 billion, with 85
percent of this R&D occurring in the OECD, and half in the United States and Japan alone
12

For a general review of the literature on international technology transfer, see Keller (2004).

34

(Newell 2008a, OECD 2008).
Nonetheless, diffusion of environmental technologies, particularly to developing
countries, is currently one of the most pressing environmental concerns. Much of this concern
stems from the need to address climate change, while allowing for economic development.
Rapid economic growth in countries such as China and India not only increases current carbon
emissions from these countries, but results in high emission growth rates from these countries as
well. In 1990, China and India accounted for 13 percent of world carbon dioxide (CO2)
emissions. By 2004, that figure had risen to 22 percent, and it is projected to rise to 31 percent
by 2030 (Energy Information Administration, 2007). Given these concerns, designing policy
that encourages the transfer of clean technologies to developing countries has been a major
discussion point in climate negotiations. Currently, the Kyoto agreement includes the Clean
Development Mechanism (CDM), which allows polluters in industrialized countries with
emission constraints to receive credit for financing projects that reduce emissions in developing
countries, which do not face emission constraints under the Kyoto Protocol.13 Because carbon
emissions are a global public good, CDM can help developed countries reach emission targets at
a lower total cost, by allowing developed country firms to substitute cheaper emissions
reductions in developing countries for more expensive reductions in the home country. For
developing countries, technology transfer and diffusion of clean technologies may be an
additional benefit from CDM.
Dechezleprêtre et al. (2008) study this question, asking how many CDM projects transfer
“hardware”, such as equipment or machinery, as opposed to “software”, which they consider to
be knowledge, skills, or know-how. That is, how often do CDM projects transfer knowledge and
skills that not only allow a developed country investor to meet emission reduction credits, but
also enable the recipient developing country to make continual improvements to their own
emission levels? Dechezleprêtre et al. look at 644 CDM projects registered by the Executive
Board of the UNFCCC. They find that 279 projects, or 43%, involve technology transfer.14 Of
these, 57 transfer equipment, 101 transfer knowledge, and 121 transfer both equipment and
knowledge. A project is more likely to include technology transfer if it is larger, if the project
developer is a subsidiary of a company in a developed country, and if the project includes one or
more carbon credit buyers. Before credits for a project can be sold, the emission reductions must
be certified. Because they have an interest in obtaining emission credits, credit buyers help to
facilitate this process.
Most economic applications of environmental technology transfer have been more
general. In the broadest sense, environmental technological change is addressed in literature on
trade and the environment. There, economists decompose the effect of international trade on
environmental quality in developing countries into three components. First, scale effects account
for increased pollution levels due to the greater wealth and increased economic activity that
follows international trade. Second, composition effects refer to reductions in pollution resulting
from a preference for cleaner goods that develops as countries become richer. Third, technique
effects refer to emission reductions that occur because trade expands access to cleaner
technologies (Esty 2001, Copeland and Taylor 2003). Attempts to identify this technique effect
13

Lecocq and Ambrosi (2007) provide a description of the Clean Development Mechanism.
However, these projects are among the most significant CDM projects, as they account for 84% of the expected
emissions reductions from registered CDM projects.

14

35

can be seen as examples of technology transfer.
Fisher-Vanden and Ho (2006) consider the interaction of scale and technique effects in a
simulation of increased science and technology (S&T) capabilities and energy use in China.
They note that improving S&T capabilities has two offsetting effects. While technological
development can lead to the use of cleaner technologies (the technique effect), increases in S&T
also lead to larger energy intensive industries (the scale effect). Their paper simulates the effect
of S&T growth in China, with R&D intensity reaching 2.5% by 2020, as stated in China’s longterm policy goals. They note that China’s R&D intensity has already increased from 0.6% in
1996 to 1.3% in 2003. Calibrating their model based on econometric results from 1500
industrial enterprises, they find that the S&T takeoff should have an energy-saving bias, resulting
in lower energy prices. However, this leads to more economic growth and greater energy
consumption by households, so that the net effect of the S&T takeoff is greater energy use and
more carbon emissions. Fisher-Vanden and Sue Wing (2008) develop an analytical model that
finds similar results.
Khanna and Zilberman (2001) illustrate the importance of trade to diffusion in a study of
the adoption of energy efficient technologies at electric power plants in India. As is typical in
adoption models, variations in the adoption of these technologies occur due to differences across
heterogeneous plants. Emissions could be reduced by the adoption of high quality coal.
However, such coal would need to be imported. In an effort to protect the domestic coal
industry, such imports were virtually banned by the Indian government. Khanna and Zilberman
find that while an emissions tax is necessary to achieve optimal levels of abatement, simply
removing domestic and trade policy distortions would increase adoption of energy efficient
technology and potentially decrease carbon emissions.
Focusing more directly on the invention and diffusion of environmental technologies,
Lanjouw and Mody (1996) use patent data from the US, Japan, Germany, and 14 low-and
middle-income countries to study technological change for a variety of environmentally-friendly
technologies. They find that environmentally-friendly innovation increases as pollution
abatement cost expenditures in the country increase. For the US, Japan, and Germany, the
majority of these patents are typically domestic patents. For the developing countries, the
majority of these patents come from foreign countries, highlighting the importance of diffusion.
This is especially true of air pollution control technologies, which are typically complex. In
contrast, while air pollution patents in developing countries go primarily to developed country
inventors, water pollution control technologies are more frequently local innovations, as local
conditions affect the potential benefits of such technologies. However, these innovations are less
likely to be patented elsewhere. Lanjouw and Mody also find that policies in one nation may
affect innovation of technologies in a second nation. For example, they note that the majority of
vehicle air emissions patents granted in the U.S. are from foreign nations, even though the
United States was the first country to adopt strict emissions standards.
Popp (2006b) addresses the links between regulations and innovations across countries,
using patent data to study innovation on air pollution control technologies for coal-fired power
plants in the U.S., Japan, and Germany. He finds that inventors respond primarily to domestic
regulatory incentives. In each country, the largest increase in domestic patent applications
occurs after the country passes regulations affecting power plants. Moreover, Popp finds
evidence of innovation even in countries that adopt regulations late, suggesting that these

36

countries do not simply take advantage of technologies “off the shelf” that have been developed
elsewhere. Instead, adaptive R&D seems to be necessary to suit the technology to the local
market, as these later patents are more likely to cite earlier foreign than domestic inventions.
Thus, the foreign knowledge serves as blueprints for further improvements, rather than as a
direct source of technology.
One reason why foreign markets may have little influence on innovation is that electricity
is not a traded commodity, and the bulk of emissions control equipment used in these countries
comes from domestic suppliers. Note, for example, that this result contrasts with the findings of
Lanjouw and Mody (1996), who find that U.S. automotive emission regulations in the 1970s lead
to increased innovation from Japanese and German firms. Similarly, Popp et al. (2008) show
that pulp and paper manufacturers respond to the demands of consumers in key export markets
when adopting cleaner paper bleaching techniques. Finally, Medhi (2008) finds that Korean
automotive manufacturers first incorporated advanced emission controls into their vehicles to
satisfy regulatory requirements in the U.S. and Japanese markets. It was only after fitting these
technologies into their vehicles that the Korean government passed their own regulations
requiring advanced emission controls.
Because most pollution control technologies are first developed in industrialized
countries, and because environmental regulations are needed to provide incentives to adopt these
technologies, Lovely and Popp (2008) focus on the adoption of environmental regulation as the
first step in the international diffusion of environmental technologies. They study the adoption
of regulations limiting emissions of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides at coal-fired power plants
in 39 countries. Their sample includes both developed and developing countries. While the
adoption of pollution control technologies within a country responds quickly to environmental
regulation, they find that adoption of the regulations themselves follows the typical S-shaped
pattern noted in studies of technology diffusion. In their work, they focus on access to
technology as an important factor influencing regulatory adoption. As pollution control
technologies improve, the costs of abatement, and thus the costs of adopting environmental
regulation, fall. As such, they find that, over time, countries adopt environmental regulation at
lower levels of per capita income. Moreover, they find that openness to international trade is
important for providing access to these technologies, providing support for the technique effect
discussed earlier.
Hilton (2001) finds that late adopters of regulation can learn from early adopters. Using
data on 48 nations, he looks at the time it took each country to eliminate lead from fuel. This
time is measured from the time that each country first began phasing out lead in fuel to the time
in which the country achieved lead levels at or below 0.5 grams of lead per gallon. Countries
that began the process after 1979 completed the lead phase-out five years faster, on average, than
those beginning before 1979. Moreover, among those countries that did not completely phase
out lead, countries that begin the phase-out process earlier achieve greater reductions. Hilton
concludes with evidence that late adopters are able to move more quickly because they benefit
from lessons learnt by early adopters.
Finally, in developing country settings, factors inducing adoption of environmentally
friendly technology may differ from factors that are important in developed countries. Blackman
and Kildegaard (2003) study the adoption of three clean leather tanning technologies in Mexico.
They use original survey data on a cluster of small- and medium-scale leather tanneries in León,

37

Guanajuato, noting that small and medium scale enterprises often dominate pollution intensive
industries in developing countries. To explain the adoption of each tanning technique, they
estimate a system of multivariate probit models. They find that a firm’s human capital and stock
of technical information influence adoption. They also find that private-sector trade associations
and input suppliers are important sources of technical information about clean technologies. In
contrast to results typically found in developed countries, neither firm size nor regulatory
pressure are correlated with adoption.
In contrast to pollution control technologies, energy efficiency technologies will diffuse
even without environmental policy in place, as they offer users the opportunity of cost savings.
Fisher-Vanden et al. (2006) use a panel of 22,000 Chinese large and medium enterprises to study
improvements in energy efficiency. Between 1997 and 1999, total energy use fell by 17%. 54%
of this decline can be explained by price changes. Technological change, measured by firm-level
R&D, accounts for 17% of this change, and changes in ownership account for another 12%.
Looking more closely at the role of technological change, they find that imported technology
saves labor and energy, whereas internal R&D from Chinese firms saves capital and energy.
They explain this difference by noting that technological change responds to the resource
scarcities in the country supplying the technology. They also find that a firm’s in-house
technological activities are important for creating absorptive capacity needed for successful
diffusion of imported technology.
Fisher-Vanden (2003) studies the diffusion of continuous casting technology for steel
production at 75 Chinese steel firms. The use of continuous casting has important energy
implications, as it uses 70% less energy than ingot casting. Fisher-Vanden finds that while
centrally managed firms are the first to acquire new technology, locally managed firms complete
integration of the technology throughout the firm more rapidly.
Finally, several papers have looked at the intersection of politics and technology transfer.
Fredriksson and Wolscheid (2008) study the adoption of cleaner steel production technologies
across countries, measured by the percentage of steel produced using electric arc furnaces.
While stricter environmental policy does encourage greater adoption of cleaner techniques, they
surprisingly find that adoption of cleaner technologies is greater in countries with more
corruption. They argue that firms in honest countries underinvest in technology in order to
convince regulators to keep environmental standards weak. In corrupt countries, firms can invest
in better technologies, and instead use bribes to weaken environmental regulations.
Rosendahl (2004) considers the role of learning on optimal environmental taxes across
countries. When the benefits of learning extend beyond the firm, optimal environmental taxes
should be higher, so as to give incentives for providing the positive learning externality.
Because environmental technologies are first developed in industrialized countries, he argues
that optimal environmental taxes should be higher in developed countries than developing
countries, so as to create incentives for learning in developed countries that can then benefit late
adopters in developing countries.
Barrett (2006) asks whether a climate change agreement focusing on the development
and adoption of new technologies could perform better than an agreement focusing on emissions
reduction. In general, the answer is no. However, one exception is when R&D leads to
breakthrough technologies with increasing returns to scale. In such a case, the benefits of

38

adopting the new technology would be great enough that the treaty would be self-enforcing.
Similarly, de Coninck et al. (2008) examine the conceptual arguments and specific options for
technology-oriented climate agreements aimed at knowledge sharing and coordination, R&D,
demonstration, and deployment. They find that technology-oriented climate agreements could
increase the overall efficiency and effectiveness of international climate cooperation, but are
only likely to be successful as a complement to, rather than substitute for, flexible emissionsbased policies.
Golombek and Hoel (2004) raise the possibility that induced technological change could
help alleviate the problem of incomplete participation in climate treaties. The standard
presumption is that when only some countries commit to reducing carbon emissions, high-carbon
industries will migrate to non-participating countries, resulting in carbon leakage. Golombek
and Hoel note that, in the countries committed to carbon reductions, induced technological
change will lower abatement costs. In some cases, these cost reductions will be sufficient to
encourage non-participating countries to reduce carbon emissions as well. In Golombek and
Hoel’s model, R&D is chosen by a central planner. Di Maria and van der Werf (2008) perform a
similar analysis, but allow technological change to be truly endogenous, as it is performed by
profit-maximizing firms. They show that induced technological change always reduces the rate
of carbon leakage, although the results depend on assumptions about key elasticities, particularly
the elasticity of energy supply. Others have also investigated how the nature of global
environmental problems, technological diffusion, and international trade can provide arguments
for issues linkage where more countries may participate and comply with international
agreements on environmental policy and technology policy if they are linked than if they are
treated separately (see, for example, Folmer and van Mouche 1993, Carraro and Egenhofer 2002,
and Kemfert 2004).
Finally, Newell (2008b) considers opportunities for improved and expanded international
development and transfer of climate technologies. He clarifies the importance of options for
inducing technology market demand through domestic GHG pricing, international trade, and
international development assistance, and then turns to upstream innovation strategies, including
international coordination and funding of climate technology R&D, and knowledge transfer
through intellectual property. Newell concludes that a successful international effort to accelerate
and then sustain the rate of development and transfer of GHG mitigation technologies must
harness a diverse set of markets and institutions beyond those explicitly related to climate, to
include those for energy, trade, development, and intellectual property.
4.2.1. What Can Technological Change Economists Contribute?
International diffusion of environmental technologies is an area where much work
remains to be done. While there is a broad, more general literature on international technology
diffusion, specific applications to the environment are few. However, the lessons from this
literature, such as documenting links between trade and diffusion, are just beginning to filter into
environmental economics. Among the questions waiting to be addressed include the role of
absorptive capacity. What must be in place for developing countries to be able to adopt cutting
edge environmental technologies? To what extent will developing countries need to adapt these
innovations to local market conditions? Disentangling the role of embodied and disembodied
technological change, such as in the work by Fisher-Vanden et al. (2006) is also important. To

39

what extent will improvements in developing countries come from imports of advanced
technology, as opposed to innovations made in developing countries? At what speed do these
international technology transfers occur? Answers to questions such as these would be very
useful for economists wishing to model the role of technological change for sustainable
development.
5. Technological Change in Aggregate Energy-Environment Models
As noted in the introduction, the potential environmental impacts of technological change
play an important role in the long-term sustainability of economic growth. This is particularly
true in the realm of climate policy, for which most impacts will not be felt for years to come, and
for which current technologies are not sufficient to meet many of the emissions targets advocated
at politically acceptable cost. To assess the role of technological change on long-term
environmental and economic well-being, economists have developed aggregate economic
models that integrate economic growth, technological change, and environmental impacts.
These models demonstrate both the potential for new technologies to limit the environmental
impact of economic growth, and the challenges of accurately forecasting long-term technological
trends.
Indeed, one of the most difficult questions remaining in aggregate energy-economic
modeling is the appropriate treatment of technological change—particularly for analyzing longterm environmental and resource problems. The approach to modeling technological change is
widely considered to be one of the most important determinants of the results of climate policy
analyses; that is, the level of emissions abatement that can be achieved at a given cost. However,
the detailed microeconomic analyses of the previous two sections suggest complex mechanisms
by which these processes work. These mechanisms are not captured easily in modeling
frameworks, creating significant difficulties for modelers attempting to determine the effects of
policies that inevitably are intertwined with technological change in energy supply and demand
technologies. Gillingham, Newell, and Pizer (2008)—from which this section draws
considerably—provides an in-depth review of this issue.15 Our focus here is on the techniques
used to include technological change in these models, as well as the implications of these
modeling choices.
The most widespread method of treating technological change in environmental policy
modeling is to consider it an exogenous variable—simply an autonomous function of time. The
fundamental distinction between exogenous technological change and endogenous technological
change is that with exogenous technological change production possibilities depend only on
time, whereas with endogenous technological change, these possibilities can depend in a variety
of ways on past, present, and/or future expected prices and policy. Thus, with endogenous
technological change current technological possibilities for producing output with various
combinations of capital, labor, and emission limits depend on past activities. In turn, there is a
dependence of future technological possibilities on current actions.
15

For surveys of the literature and other overviews of modeling methodology, see the references given in
Gillingham, Newell, and Pizer (2008), including Loschel (2002); Clarke and Weyant (2002); Grubb, Köhler, and
Anderson (2002); Goulder (2004); Smulders (2005); Vollebergh and Kemfert (2005); Edenhofer et al. (2006);
Köhler et al. (2006); Sue Wing (2006); Edmonds et al. (2000).

40

Given the large number of other reviews of the endogenous modeling literature, as
applied to climate modeling, we focus on select papers that illustrate key concepts and provide
insight into the theoretical basis for this modeling methodology. With only a few exceptions
most studies find that the ramifications and insights elucidated by incorporating endogenous
technological change are important quantitatively.
5.1 Exogenous Technological Change
There are several different ways that climate policy modelers have incorporated
technological change even when it is only a function of time. The simplest approach to
technological change is to assume that a Hicks-neutral productivity gain governs the overall
progress of the economy. However, this approach does not capture the potential for technological
change to proceed in an energy (and carbon)-saving (or energy-using) manner. An easy
modification that reflects an energy-saving direction to productivity improvements—within
either the economy as a whole, or an individual sector—is to include a so-called autonomous
energy-efficiency improvement (AEEI) parameter, which increases the energy-efficiency of the
economy by some exogenous amount each year. The use of an AEEI parameter is particularly
common in more aggregated models (e.g., McCracken et al. (1999), Nordhaus (1994)).
In more disaggregated models, overall energy-saving progress can also be implemented
by Hicks-neutral productivity gains in a more energy-efficient sector or technology, or by adding
a new energy-efficient technology to the menu of available technologies at a given point in time.
Autonomous energy-efficiency improvement has the primary advantage of simplicity and
transparency, and in addition reduces the risk of model nonlinearities, multiple equilibria, and
permits ready sensitivity analysis with different AEEI values.
In a similar vein, the incorporation of “backstop technologies” into models can also be
thought of as a form of exogenous technological change. Backstop technologies are typically
carbon-free energy sources that may be already known, but are not yet commercialized widely. It
often is assumed that such a backstop technology is available in a virtually unlimited supply at a
constant, but relatively high, marginal cost (e.g., advanced solar power, nuclear fusion). If the
price of energy inclusive of carbon policy becomes high enough, the backstop technology will
penetrate the market and prevent the price of energy from rising further. Modelers often assume
that the cost of the backstop technology is decreasing with time at its own autonomous rate—
effectively implying that if the backstop comes into effect, then technology is improving solely
as a function of time.
Finally, in some econometric models with flexible functional forms there may be
multiple trends determining the overall level and direction of technological change. For example,
Jorgenson and Wilcoxen (1993) include five parameters describing technological change—two
describing the overall level and three describing the direction (i.e., the vector of factor biases).
5.2 Endogenous Technological Change
While modeling technological change exogenously simplifies the modeling of
technological change, there is a wide literature acknowledging that technological change is a

41

complex process that is dependent on more than just the passage of time. This implies, among
other things, that the cost function depends not just on time and current prices, but also on
historic indicators of prices and activity. This view has motivated considerable modeling work
on the processes by which historic prices (and policies) influence today’s production
possibilities.16 In particular, some of these studies criticize the use of AEEI as neglecting the
causes that affect the evolution of technologies, leading to distorted and inappropriate model
results.17 Table 6 presents some of the key papers in this rapidly growing literature.
TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE
One approach is to summarize the influence of historic prices and activity in terms of an
unobserved “knowledge stock” that governs overall level and direction (i.e., input-bias) of
technological change. The difficulty lies in determining exactly how this stock accumulates and
affects future energy use and emissions. As the empirical evidence in section 3 suggests, prices,
R&D, and learning through past experience all play some role in the accumulation of this stock,
yet there is no single structural theory that addresses exactly how this occurs, and hence, how
each influences future production possibilities.
An important element of incorporating endogenous technological change is whether one
assumes the “base case” behavior of technological change—in the absence of climate policy—is
roughly optimal. One line of reasoning is that exogenous technological change represents a
constraint that, when relaxed, yields lower costs for reducing emissions. A number of studies
find this result when endogenous technological change is coupled with the possibility that
technological change is undersupplied due to innovation market imperfections (Grubb, et al.,
2002). In contrast, other studies implicitly or explicitly assume that technological change in the
base case is (roughly) optimal; therefore, allowing it to change in response to policy changes
may not affect mitigation costs very much (e.g., Nordhaus 2002; Goulder and Schneider 1999,
Goulder and Mathai 2000, Sue Wing 2003, and Smulders and de Nooij 2003). These implicit
assumptions about the optimality of technological change in the base case often confound
comparisons of the implications of different approaches for endogenizing technological change.
Another factor that can influence results across models is whether other technological change
parameters are adjusted once endogenous technological change is added, in order to allow for
even-handed comparisons (Gerlagh 2007, Fischer and Newell 2008).
Although difficult to categorize neatly, the most commonly used approaches model
endogenous technological change in one of three ways: direct price-induced, R&D-induced, and
learning-induced. Direct price-induced technological change implies that changes in relative
prices can spur innovation to reduce the use of the more expensive input (e.g., energy) in
accordance with the Hicks-induced innovation hypothesis. R&D-induced technological change
allows for R&D investment to influence the rate and direction of technological change. It often
involves an explicit knowledge capital stock. Finally, learning-induced technological change
allows for the unit cost of a particular technology to be a decreasing function of the experience
16

This extensive literature of endogenous technological change includes an edited book (Grübler, et al., 2002), and
four special journal issues (Resource and Energy Economics, 2003, vol, 25; Energy Economics, 2004, vol. 26;
Ecological Economics, 2005, vol. 54; and The Energy Journal, Special Issue 2006)
17
This is related to the Lucas (1976) critique in that AEEI is not a “deep” structural parameter and it is unlikely to
remain stable as policymakers change their behavior.

42

with that technology. Learning-by-doing (LBD) is the most commonly employed method used in
this approach, where the unit cost of a technology is typically modeled as a decreasing function
of its cumulative output (see section 5.2.3).
5.2.1 Direct Price-Induced Technological Change
Direct price-induced technological change is a relatively straightforward method of
endogenizing technological change with conceptual roots dating back to Hicks (1932). In the
context of climate policy modeling, if the price of energy rises, price-induced technological
change will lead to greater energy efficiency, often through a productivity parameter that is tied
to historic prices (or whose change is tied to current prices) or through earlier diffusion of
energy-efficient technologies. The exact pathway through which this occurs depends greatly on
the model structure. There are only a few examples of direct price-induced technological change
used in climate policy models due to the somewhat ad hoc, reduced-form nature of specifying the
relationship between price and technological change. In particular, there is no accounting for the
cost of achieving these changes, which may involve R&D investments (see next section). It is
most common for models that use price-induced technological change to use an AEEI parameter
or a LBD approach as well.
Perhaps the most faithful representation of price-induced technological change is
Jakeman et al. (2004), who assume a fixed amount of technological change in each region and
time period, which is allocated across inputs to all industries according to the relative prices of
the inputs. In this case, including price-induced technological change reduces the cost of meeting
carbon mitigation targets. Other examples in energy-economic modeling include (Dowlatabadi
1998) and the U.S. Energy Information Administration’s NEMS model (EIA 2003). The
empirical evidence presented in section 3.1 suggests that the price-inducement form of
technological change has merit as a partial explanation; higher energy prices clearly are
associated with faster improvements in energy efficiency. However, the reduced-form approach
largely has been passed over for the R&D- or learning-induced technological change
methodologies.
5.2.2 R&D-induced technological change
R&D-induced technological change is one of the most common approaches used to
endogenize technological change, and a variety of models have been developed along these lines.
R&D-based technological change has a long-running theoretical foundation beginning with the
early work by Kennedy (1964), Kamien and Schwartz (1968), and Binswanger and Ruttan
(1978) in developing the innovation possibility frontier (IPF) and the theory behind induced
technological change. More recent work by Acemoglu (2002) addresses how the tradeoff
between innovation in different directions inherent in the IPF results endogenously from a firm’s
dynamic optimization. This approach parallels the endogenous-growth literature (e.g., Lucas
(1988), Romer (1990), Grossman and Helpman (1994), Aghion and Howitt (1998), Acemoglu
(1998), Kily (1999), and Kortum and Eaton (2008)) in including a stock of “knowledge capital”
when modeling economic growth. Recently, the concept of induced innovation has enjoyed a
renaissance in economics through Acemoglu’s work on directed technological change.

43

Climate policy modelers have introduced a knowledge stock in a variety of different
ways. While the theoretical basis for relative prices inducing technological change in a particular
direction is quite well-developed, exactly how the knowledge stock accumulates and influences
production possibilities is not completely settled in the literature. In some models, the concept of
the knowledge stock is made more concrete by using an IPF to govern how investments in R&D
increase the knowledge stock. Popp (2004) develops one such model and discusses the use of
empirical evidence to parameterize the IPF. Model structures vary in terms of whether they
permit embedding the IPF within a perpetual inventory framework for the knowledge stock,
analogous to inventory methods for standard capital stocks.
Several themes resonate throughout the R&D model literature. Two key points are
whether R&D-induced technological change is associated with an innovation market
imperfection due to spillovers, and whether carbon-saving R&D crowds out R&D in other
sectors. There clearly exists a tension between spillovers and crowding out, with the former
tending to point to greater cost savings when endogenous technological change is included and
the latter dampening or even overturning that effect. In many models, the degree to which
spillovers and crowding out arise is a complex interaction among underlying assumptions about
model structure and distortions in the R&D market. Yet, these assumptions have important
ramifications for the total cost of a climate policy as well as the conclusions drawn about the
degree to which estimates based on exogenous technology assumptions are biased. There is only
a small empirical and conceptual literature to guide assumptions of the degree of crowding out,
primarily on the elasticity of the science and engineering workforce in relation to greater R&D
incentives (Goolsbee 1998, David and Hall 2000, Wolff and Reinthaler 2008).
A third point is whether there is a substitutability, as in most papers, or complementarity
between the generation of output (i.e., conventional production) and the generation of new
knowledge (i.e., innovation). Most approaches have some mechanism where the generation of
output substitutes for the generation of knowledge, implying a larger role for crowding out and
less opportunity for gains from endogenous technological change. Related to this issue is the
important difference among models in the elasticity of the supply, or opportunity cost, of
additional R&D. If there is a relatively inelastic supply of R&D (e.g., capable engineers and
scientists), more effort on climate mitigation R&D reduces the ability of other firms or sectors to
perform R&D, effectively crowding out R&D activity. This implies that the cost of a carbon
constraint could be more or less costly with the inclusion of endogenous technological change
(versus presumptively leading to lower costs).
5.2.2.1 Theoretical Models of R&D-Induced Technological Change
Including a knowledge stock in the production function does not on its own imply a
pathway for inducing carbon-saving technological change. In the simple formulation of a
knowledge stock that is most true to the endogenous growth literature, the knowledge stock
increases the productivity of all inputs equally. For example, Buonanno et al. (2003) extend the
Nordhaus and Yang (1996) RICE model to implement such a knowledge stock in the
endogenous technological change-RICE numerical model. This simple methodology for
endogenizing technological change may be useful to capture important aggregate dynamics, but
it does not provide a pathway for relative prices to influence energy-saving or carbon-saving

44

innovation.
Smulders and de Nooij (2003) and van Zon and Yetkiner (2003) both build on the
endogenous growth literature that includes a continuum of intermediate goods (e.g., Romer
(1990)) and apply a variation of this modeling approach to an economy that includes energy as
an input to production. In Smulders and de Nooij, endogenous technological change is achieved
by improvements in the quality of the continuum of intermediate goods through investment in
R&D, while van Zon and Yetkiner achieve endogenous technological change through increases
in the variety of the continuum of intermediate goods through R&D investment. Both papers
demonstrate the important theoretical point that profit maximization by innovating intermediate
goods producers can give rise to a change in the direction of technological change toward
energy-saving technological change based on increasing energy prices or constrained energy
quantities.
Smulders and de Nooij’s modeling framework allows for policy analysis examining the
short- and long-run growth implications of energy conservation policies but does not address
questions of economic welfare. They find that energy-conservation policy will lead to reduced
net per capita income levels due to the direct costs of the policy outweighing the offsetting effect
of induced innovation. Nonetheless, the endogenous technological change framework does
reduce the cost of a policy, although non-energy R&D activities may be crowded out, with no
increase in total R&D. In fact, a theoretical result based on this model structure is that the gains
from induced innovation will never offset the initial policy-induced decline in per capita income
levels, obviating the possibility of “win-win” situations. As a general proposition, endogenous
technological change should induce higher long-run output only if spillovers are relatively high
in carbon-saving innovation compared to other areas that would otherwise receive R&D effort.
This appears not to be the case in Smulders and de Nooij’s model. The same messages arise in
Goulder and Schneider (1999) and Gerlagh (2008).
In contrast, van Zon and Yetkiner use a blueprint framework to find that an energy tax
that is recycled in the form of an R&D subsidy may increase long-run growth, through R&Dinduced technological change. This result stems from two different market imperfections in the
R&D market: (1) firms do not consider the effect that current R&D has on increasing the
productivity of future R&D investment because it is not captured appropriately in the price of the
blueprints and (2) a market imperfection in the supply of intermediates that leads to too low of a
demand for those intermediates relative to the social optimum. Effectively, these market
imperfections imply an intertemporal spillover for each firm, rather than a spillover from the
research of one firm to other firms. Crowding out also plays a less prominent role in the van Zon
and Yetkiner model than in Smulders and de Nooij.
Sue Wing (2006) further develops this theory in the context of climate change policy by
adding externalities and environmental taxation to Acemoglu’s (2002) model. Sue Wing shows
that an environmental tax always biases production away from the dirty good towards the clean
good. However, this does not necessarily mean that the environmental tax also biases innovation
towards research on the clean good. Rather, this depends on the substitutability between clean
and dirty inputs. If the clean input is not readily substitutable for the more expensive dirty input,
the absolute quantity of dirty R&D exhibits a hump-shaped profile, so that it increases under
small environmental taxes, but declines under higher environmental taxes. That is, a low

45

environmental tax encourages research to make the dirty input more productive, so as to get
more output from each unit of the dirty input.
5.2.2.2 Numerical Models of R&D-Induced Technological Change
Unfortunately, theoretical models with continuous intermediate goods and abstract
representations of blueprints are not well-suited to match technological change up to measurable
real-world variables or technologies that most numerical models attempt to represent. However,
the more general notion of including a Hicks-neutral knowledge stock, as shown above in
Buonanno et al. (2003) or factor-augmenting knowledge stock, as in Smulders and de Nooij
(2003), is a common choice for numerical models that include an economy-wide production
function. Popp (2004) provides a good example of this approach in an economy-wide production
function. Gerlagh and Lise (2005), Hart (2008), and Gerlagh (2008) also employ simple
calibrated R&D models within an assessment of climate policy-induced innovation.
In the DICE model (Nordhaus 1994), one of the best known models of climate policy,
carbon intensity (i.e., carbon per unit of GDP) is affected by the substitution of capital and labor
for carbon energy. This is modified in the R&DICE model in Nordhaus (2002), so that carbon
intensity is determined by an IPF, which is a function of R&D inputs into the carbon-energy
sector. The cost of investing in knowledge through R&D is subtracted from consumption in the
DICE model’s output balance equation, analogous to conventional investment. In the case of
R&D investment, however, the cost of research is multiplied by four to reflect a generic
innovation market imperfection; that is, that the social opportunity cost of R&D exceeds its
private cost due to crowding out.
Nordhaus (2002) compares this endogenous technological change specification with the
specification in DICE (where carbon intensity only is affected by mitigation efforts substituting
abatement for consumption). His primary conclusion is that induced innovation is likely to be
less powerful of a factor in reducing emissions than substitution. This result is related directly to
the calibration that assumes the returns to R&D equal the opportunity costs, allowing crowding
out to have an important effect. Buonanno et al. (2003) provide a different variation on
Nordhaus’ approach by making emission intensity a function of a knowledge stock that
accumulates one-to-one with R&D investment and depreciates at an exogenous rate; however,
there is no potential for climate-friendly R&D to compete with or crowd out other R&D. As
such, they find a much larger role for induced innovation. Using the ENTICE model, Popp
(2004) investigates the importance of R&D crowding out more carefully. The base case of
ENTICE assumes that one-half of new energy R&D crowds out other R&D. In this case,
induced innovation increases welfare by 9%. Assuming no crowding out increases the welfare
gains from induced innovation to as much as 45%. Similarly, assuming full crowding of R&D
reduces welfare gains to as little as 2%. Finally, Gerlagh (2008) extends this work by separately
modeling the choice of carbon-energy producing R&D, carbon-energy saving R&D, and neutral
R&D. In such a case, it is carbon-producing R&D, rather than neutral R&D, that is crowded out
by induced carbon-energy saving R&D. As a result, the impact of induced technological change
is larger, with optimal carbon taxes falling by a factor of 2.
Multi-sector general equilibrium models differ from the previous approaches in that the
economy is disaggregated into distinct sectors and the economic activity within and between

46

sectors is modeled.18 The strength of the approach is that it may provide additional insights on
the effects of interactions between sectors, such as spillovers—or crowding out—from R&D.
The cost is that general equilibrium models tend to be data intensive and computationally
demanding. Just as in several of the models discussed above, some general equilibrium models
explicitly endogenize technological change through the inclusion of knowledge capital in the
production function, albeit at a sectoral level, rather than economy-wide.
One notable example is Goulder and Schneider (1999). Goulder and Schneider develop a
partial equilibrium analytical framework and then implement some of the resulting insights in a
numerical general equilibrium model that endogenizes technological change, with a particular
emphasis on spillover effects. Specifically, in their general equilibrium model, Goulder and
Schneider divide the knowledge stock into appropriable knowledge and non-excludable
knowledge. The non-excludable knowledge represents the spillover knowledge enjoyed by all
firms in each industry (but not across industries). A scaling factor is then used to determine the
effect of spillovers on output in a CES production function for a representative firm in each
industry. R&D thus influences output both through the firm’s input of appropriable knowledge
and the spillovers from non-excludable knowledge generated in the industry. Goulder and
Schneider find that the presence of endogenous technological change in their model leads to
lower costs of achieving a given abatement target, but higher gross costs of a given carbon tax
(i.e., costs before netting out climate benefits). In fact, both costs and benefits of a given carbon
tax are higher relative to their model with only exogenous technological change, due to more
extensive carbon abatement, for the economy responds more elastically to price shocks from the
policy. With environmental benefits included, Goulder and Schneider find greater net benefits of
this higher abatement level for a given carbon tax when endogenous technological change is
present. This outcome can be reinforced or muted if there are prior distortions in R&D markets,
depending on the type of distortions.
One important feature underlying these results is a crowding out effect where expansion
of knowledge generation in one sector comes at a cost to other sectors due to the limited pool of
knowledge-generating resources (i.e., there is a positive and increasing opportunity cost to R&D
in one sector). A carbon-tax policy serves to spur R&D in the alternative energy sector, but
discourages R&D in non-energy and conventional energy sectors due both to slower growth of
output in those industries and the limited pool of knowledge-generating resources. On the other
hand, the knowledge spillover effects, whereby policy-induced R&D has social returns above
private returns, provide additional benefits from a climate policy above the environmental
benefits. However, the presence of endogenous technological change with spillovers does not
imply the possibility of zero-cost carbon abatement, unless the spillovers overwhelm the
crowding out effect, a largely empirical question.
Sue Wing (2003) incorporates endogenous technological change into a detailed general
equilibrium model, building on several of the concepts in Goulder and Schneider (1999) and
others. At the core of Sue Wing’s model is a recursive, dynamic general equilibrium model in
which a representative agent maximizes welfare. A major difference between Sue Wing’s model
and previous models is that Sue Wing further distinguishes several of the factors influencing
innovation to gain insight into the general equilibrium effects of inducing innovation in one
18

Others have taken a macroeconometric approaches (e.g., Carraro and Galeotti 1997).

47

sector and its consequences for the cost of carbon policies. Conceptually, Sue Wing describes his
approach in terms of two commodities: a “clean” commodity and a “dirty” commodity. Sue
Wing (2003) finds that a carbon tax reduces aggregate R&D, slowing the rate of technological
change and the growth in output. Given the fixed-saving rule and absence of knowledge
spillovers in the model, this follows from having a smaller economy due to the carbon tax.
However, the relative price effects of a carbon tax lead to considerable reallocation of knowledge
services, enabling the economy to adjust to the carbon tax in a more elastic manner, reducing the
total costs of the carbon tax.
5.2.3 Learning-Induced Technological Change
Learning-induced technological change approaches tend to be quite different than R&Dinduced approaches. These models use the concept of learning-by-doing (LBD) described in
section 3.2.2, in which costs to manufacturers decrease as a function of cumulative output, or
“learning-by-using,” in which the decrease in costs (and/or increase in benefits) to consumers
comes as a function of the use of a technology (Arrow, 1962, Rosenberg, 1982). The primary
disadvantage to the incorporation of learning-induced technological change into aggregate
economic modeling is its reduced-form nature. LBD can be inserted mechanically into many
models, but it is difficult to identify the mechanisms behind LBD—or even be confident about
the causality. The ease with which learning curves can be estimated may give a false sense of
comfort and precision that may belie the R&D or other resources that went into the technology
development (Clarke and Weyant, 2002). For instance, it may be that the part of the underlying
force driving learning curves is R&D, which tends to be roughly proportional to sales. In fact,
some have used learning curve estimates to calibrate an R&D-based model (Gerlagh and Lise
2005).
Despite its disadvantages, the tractability of learning curves has led to the use of
learning-induced technological change throughout the literature, particularly in disaggregated or
so-called “bottom-up” models. Disaggregated models are well-suited for incorporating learning
because of their rich technology specificity, which easily lends itself to a learning curve for each
technology. Some more aggregated models also use learning, but it is not as common.
A common result of including endogenous technological change through LBD is that the
carbon tax needed to attain a specific CO2 concentration target tends to be lower than in models
without LBD. This result is intuitive—with LBD modeled as described above, no R&D
expenditure is needed and any additional capacity of carbon-free energy technologies will lower
the costs of that technology in the future, leading to more emissions reductions per dollar of
further investment. Another commonly observed result of incorporating LBD in climate policy
models is that the optimal abatement path to reach a given concentration target involves
increased near-term abatement and less abatement later (Grübler and Messner, 1998). This result
occurs because increased near-term abatement encourages earlier LBD in low-carbon
technologies, which lowers the long-term costs of abatement. Van der Zwaan et al. (2002) also
find a strong effect of LBD on the timing of abatement, showing that earlier abatement is
desirable when LBD is included in climate models, and that the carbon taxes needed to achieve
these reductions are lower, due to the cost savings resulting from LBD.
Other studies suggest that there are actually two competing effects. On one hand, there is

48

the added value to near-term technology investment due to LBD, as just mentioned. On the other
hand, LBD also leads to lower costs of future abatement, which implies that abatement should be
delayed. The net result of the two opposing effects may be theoretically ambiguous, but
numerical simulations by Manne and Richels (2004) suggest that the slope of the abatement
curve over time actually may be steeper with LBD included, contrary to previous findings, such
as those of Grübler and Messner (1998) described above.
Goulder and Mathai (2000) look at optimal carbon abatement policy in a dynamic setting,
considering not only the optimal overall amount of abatement but also its timing. They consider
separately cases in which innovation comes through R&D and in which innovation comes via
learning-by-doing. In the R&D model, there are two effects of induced innovation on optimal
abatement: it reduces marginal abatement costs, which increases the optimal amount of
abatement. But it also increases the cost of abatement today relative to the future, because of
lower abatement costs in the future. The combination of these effects implies that with R&Dinduced innovation, optimal abatement is lower in early years and higher in later years than it
would otherwise be. In contrast, in the learning-by-doing model, there is a third effect:
abatement today lowers the cost of abatement in the future. This reinforces the tendency for
cumulative optimal abatement to be higher in the presence of induced innovation, but makes the
effect on optimal near-term abatement ambiguous. Bramoullé and Olson (2005) formalize the
relationship between learning and policy, noting that if technology improves by learning by
doing, abatement across time should be allocated so that marginal abatement costs are equal
across time, with an adjustment for the cumulative marginal savings that current abatement
provides for future costs.
5.3 What Can Technological Change Economists Contribute?
Given the considerable variety of approaches used to include endogenous technological
change in economic models for analyzing climate policy, it is clear that there is no agreement in
the literature regarding a single best approach. All of the approaches have their limitations and
all are approximations that miss some important phenomena underlying the complex nature of
technological change, with important effects on the results of climate policy models. Perhaps
more importantly, all struggle with an inherent lack of empirical data to calibrate model
parameters convincingly. Thus, while exceptionally promising, there is a sense that our ability to
conceptually model technological change has outstripped our ability to validate the models
empirically, making this an area for high-value research and where policymakers and other
normative users need to be particularly careful.
Looking forward, there are several promising areas for continued research on the
modeling of induced technological change in energy-economic models. Most models simulate
policy through a simple emissions constraint or by using carbon taxes to impose a price on
emissions. In contrast, real-world climate policy often makes use of a variety of smaller policies,
such as subsidies for technology adoption, R&D funding and tax incentives, information
programs, renewable portfolio standards, and energy efficiency standards. Improving the ability
of assessment models to assess the effects of both price and non-price technology policies would
be a valuable contribution. This may require relaxing assumptions that the only relevant market
failure is that related to the climate externality. The current generation of models addresses
diffusion only to the extent that improperly priced pollution makes adoption of clean

49

technologies less likely. However, as discussed in section 4.1.2.2, empirical evidence suggests
that diffusion is slow for other reasons. In this regard, greater attention to knowledge spillovers,
adjustment costs, and informational market failures may be necessary. For instance, Schwoon
and Tol (2006) use adjustment costs to develop a climate model with slower penetration of new
technology. Given the lack of consensus as to why energy-efficient technologies are
underutilized, it isn’t clear that one “correct” representation of gradual diffusion exists.
Developing alternative means for modeling the gradual diffusion process, such as incorporating
higher discount rates for potential adopters, could enable a comparison of diffusion mandates
across a range of assumptions about why diffusion is gradual.
Another potential role for technological change economists is critical assessment,
synthesis, and extension of the existing empirical literature on learning curves in energy
technologies. This includes improving the ability of assessment models to incorporate learning
effects in an economically coherent manner, as well as new empirical research avoiding the
pitfalls of previous studies and that can potentially be incorporated into computational models.
Assessment models would also benefit from improved treatment of technology spillovers and the
opportunity cost of R&D directed toward carbon mitigation technology. Finally, given the longterm nature of the climate problem, empirical, analytical and numerical research on the treatment
of long-term discounting in assessment models and its influence on technological change would
be beneficial.

6. Conclusions
Technological change plays an important role in environmental policy. While new
technologies can make cleaner production and more efficient resource use possible, markets are
unlikely to provide proper incentives for the development of clean technologies, absent public
policy. As in other areas of technological change, knowledge spillovers lead to underinvestment
in R&D by private firms. However, even if all knowledge market failures were addressed, firms
would still underinvest in environmental R&D, as many of the benefits to providing a cleaner
environmental are external. By addressing the externality problem, environmental policy
increases incentives for environmental R&D.
Much of the research described in this chapter addresses the links between environmental
policy and innovation. While any environmental policy should provide some additional
incentive for environmentally-oriented R&D, environmental economists have focused much
research on how the proper design of policy will lead to greater innovation. In particular,
flexible policy instruments that provide rewards for continual environmental improvement and
cost reduction tend to have better dynamic efficiency properties than policies that specify a
specific behavior.
Measuring the effects of environmental technological change is equally if not more
challenging. There are three main challenges here. Because policy is needed to encourage
adoption of environmental technology, one needs to separately identify the effects of both
environmental policy and innovation to ascertain the gains from environmental technological
change. Moreover, while innovation on alternative energy sources has increased in recent years,
diffusion is still slow, as these technologies still are not cost competitive with fossil fuels without

50

policy intervention. As a result, while there are good data on the cost of traditional energy
sources, due to thorough market penetration, quality data on the cost savings accruing from early
research on alternative energy sources is lacking, as such technologies have yet to become wellestablished in the market place. The data that do exist are often aggregate in nature, making
identifying the various effects of R&D, experience, and policy difficult, as in our discussion of
learning curves in section 3.2.2.
A third challenge for estimating the effects of environmental technological change is the
role of government R&D, particularly with respect to environmentally-friendly energy R&D.
Government R&D is particularly important for energy, where many technologies are still years
from being commercially viable. The combination of long-term payoffs and high uncertainty
make government R&D a popular policy choice. However, there is little research evaluating the
effectiveness of these programs, making this a fruitful topic for technological change scholars
interested in doing research on environmental topics.
As with environmental innovation, studies on the diffusion of environmental technologies
also find that regulation is necessary for diffusion to occur. One notable difference is between
environmental technologies (e.g. pollution control) and energy efficiency technologies. Without
environmental regulation, there is little private benefit to pollution control. Thus, as expected,
regulation is necessary for diffusion to occur. Individual consumers or firms can benefit from
choosing energy efficient technologies, as adopters benefit from lower energy bills. However,
research on the adoption of energy efficiency technologies suggests that decision-making by both
firms and consumers is potentially subject to market and behavioral failures (Gillingham,
Newell, and Palmer 2009). Both environment and technological change have, in the last several
decades, benefitted greatly from an increased attention to the micro over the macro, and to
empirical measurement over pure theory. To address questions such as the “energy paradox,”
one might expand the scope of micro-empirical analysis to include a wider array of factors
affecting people’s decisions – what could be termed as a Behavioral Economics of
Environmental Technology Innovation and Diffusion.
In recent years, environmental economists have begun to investigate the role of
international technology diffusion for environmental technologies. International diffusion is
particularly important for problems such as climate change, as carbon emissions are growing
faster in developing nations than in the developed world. Recent research suggests that these
developing countries can take advantage of clean technologies developed in high income
countries, but that both environmental and trade policy will affect the pace and quality of
international technology diffusion. Compared to the more general literature on international
technology transfer, applications pertaining to the environment are scarce, and are another area
where technological change scholars could have a significant impact.
Aggregate economic models combining economic growth, technological change, and
environmental policy demonstrate the important long term benefits that can come from
environmentally-friendly technological change. Unchecked by environmental policy, increased
economic growth is likely to come with increased environmental impacts. While the costs of
mitigating these impacts could lower future growth, technological change offers the opportunity
to offset increasing environmental compliance costs. Still, just as the modeling of technological
change itself in macroeconomics is still evolving, there is much work to be done on aggregate
economic representations of environmental technological change. Moreover, both technological

51

change and environmental policy are areas where the usual presumption of efficiency of
competitive markets is reversed—the presumption is of market failure. Yet recommendations
regarding good policy still depend on important empirical magnitudes that are often not well
measured.
One key question is estimating baseline technological change. Even without policy
changes, some environmentally technologies will develop. This is particularly important for
climate change, as energy efficiency has historically improved over time. Rates of future
technological change have a large impact on projections of future carbon emissions. As policy
evolves to reduce future carbon emissions, baseline projections help determine how stringent
climate policies must be in order to attain certain environmental goals, and in turn what the
economic cost of these constraints may be. Also important here is integrating the
microeconomic foundations of technological change into macroeconomic representations of
climate policy. Many models still overlook basic features of knowledge markets, such as the
role of knowledge spillovers. As shown in section 5, the assumptions about technological
change used in these models can greatly influence projections about future policy costs.
We conclude by considering challenges that may be unique to environmental
technological change. One question is how the dual market failures of environmental
externalities and knowledge spillovers interact. Is simply combining environmental policy to
address externalities with general technology policy to address spillovers sufficient, or do these
two market failures interact in ways that necessitate specific technology policies for the
environment?
Uncertainty may provide one interaction causing first-order policies to be insufficient. In
“pure” environment issues, uncertainty is about the behavior of natural systems. In technological
change this “natural” uncertainty is exacerbated by uncertainty about the behavior of human and
social systems. For example, the huge uncertainties surrounding the future impacts of climate
change, the magnitude of the policy response, and thus the likely returns to R&D investment,
would seem to exacerbate the challenge of encouraging private environmental investment. What
the future will look like will be determined, to a very significant extent, by the rate and direction
of technological change between now and then. But it is also true that what happens today with
respect to the investments that will determine that rate and direction is highly dependent on
people’s beliefs about what will happen in the future. For instance, given the need for
environmental policy to encourage environmental innovation, policy makers need to both
provide current incentives and signal the future costs of pollution to inventors. Are current
policy instruments and institutions sufficient to address the uncertainties and long time frames
often observed with environmental problems? This is a major challenge for environmental policy
makers, perhaps the single greatest challenge. We hope that research on such questions can
provide a framework for future work linking policy and environmental technological change.

52

References
Acemoglu, D. (1998). “Why do new technologies complement skills? Directed technical change
and wage inequality”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 1055-1089.
Acemoglu, D. (2002). “Directed technical change”. Review of Economic Studies 69, 781-809.
Aghion, P. Howitt, P. (1998). Endogenous Growth Theory. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Ahmad, S. (1966). “On the theory of induced innovation”. Economic Journal 76, 344-357.
Anderson, S.T., Newell, R.G. (2004). “Information programs for technology adoption: the case
of energy-efficiency audits”. Resource and Energy Economics 26(1), 27-50.
Arrow, K.J. (1962). “The Economic implications of learning by doing”. Review of Economic
Studies 29, 155-173.
Baker, E. Adu-Bonnah, K. (2008). “Investment in risky R&D programs in the face of climate
uncertainty”. Energy Economics 30(2), 465-486.
Barrett, S. (2006). “Climate treaties and ‘breakthrough’ technologies”. American Economic
Review 96(2), 22-25.
Bauman, Y., Lee, M. Seeley, K. (2008). “Does technological innovation really reduce marginal
abatement costs? Some theory, algebraic evidence, and policy implications”.
Environmental and Resource Economics 40, 507-527.
Bellas, A.S. (1998). “Empirical evidence of advances in scrubber technology”. Resource and
Energy Economics 20, 327-343.
Berndt, E.R., Kolstad, C.D. Lee, J. (1993). “Measuring the energy efficiency and productivity
impacts of embodied technical change”. The Energy Journal 14, 33–55.
Berry, S., Kortum, S. Pakes A. (1996). “Environmental change and hedonic cost functions for
automobiles”. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences U.S.A. 93, 1273112738.
Biglaiser, G., Horowitz, J.K. Quiggin, J. (1995). “Dynamic pollution regulation”. Journal of
Regulatory Economics 8, 33-44.
Binswanger, H., Ruttan. V. (1978), Induced Innovation: Technology Institutions and
Development. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD.
Binswanger, H.P. (1974). “A Microeconomic approach to innovation”. Economic Journal 84,
940-958.
Blackman, A. Bannister, G.J. (1998). “Community pressure and clean technology in the informal
sector: An econometric analysis of the adoption of propane by traditional Mexican
brickmakers”. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 35(1), 1-21.
Blackman, A. Kildegaard, A. (2003). “Clean technological change in developing-country
industrial clusters: Mexican leather tanning”. Resources for the Future Discussion Paper
03-12.

53

Boyd, G.A.. Karlson, S.H. (1993). “The impact of energy prices on technology choice in the
United States steel industry”. The Energy Journal 14(2), 47-56.
Bramoullé, Y. Olson, L.J. (2005). “Allocation of pollution abatement under learning by doing”.
Journal of Public Economics 89, 1935-1960.
Bresnahan, T.J. Trajtenberg, M. (1995). “General purpose technologies: ‘Engines of growth’?”
Journal of Econometrics 95, 83-108.
Brunneimer, S. Cohen, M. (2003). “Determinants of environmental innovation in US
manufacturing industries”. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 45,
278-293.
Buonanno, P., Carraro, C., Galeotti, M. (2003). “Endogenous induced technical change and the
costs of Kyoto”. Resource and Energy Economics 25(1), 11-34.
Cadot, O. Sinclair-Desgagne. B. (1996). “Innovation under the threat of stricter environmental
standards”. In: C. Carraro et al., eds., Environmental Policy and Market Structure.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 131-141.
Carlson, C., Burtraw, D., Cropper, M. Palmer, K. (2000). “Sulfur dioxide control by electric
utilities: What are the gains from trade?” Journal of Political Economy 108, 1292–1326.
Carraro, C. Egenhofer, C. (2002), Firms, governments, and climate policy: Incentive-based
policies for long-term climate change. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Carraro, C. Soubeyran, A. (1996). “Environmental policy and the choice of production
technology”. In: C. Carraro et al., eds., Environmental Policy and Market Structure.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht 151-180.
Carraro, C. Siniscalaco, D. (1994). “Environmental policy reconsidered: The role of technology
innovation”. European Economic Review 38, 545-555.
Carraro, C. Galeotti, M. (1997). “Economic growth, international competitiveness and
environmental protection: R&D and innovation strategies with the WARM model”.
Energy Economics 19(1), 2-28.
Clarke, L. Weyant, J. (2002). “Modeling induced technological change: An overview”. In: A.
Grübler, N. Nakicenovic and W. Nordhaus (Ed.), Technological Change and the
Environment. Resources for the Future Press, Washington, DC.
Cohen, L.R. Noll, R.G. (1991), The Technology Pork Barrel. Brookings, Washington, DC.
Copeland, B.R. Taylor, M.S. (2003), Trade and the Environment: Theory and Evidence.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Cowan, R. (1990). “Nuclear power reactors: A study in technological lock-in”. Journal of
Economic History 50, 541-567.
Cowan, R. Kline, D. (1996), The Implications of Potential 'Lock-In' in Markets for Renewable
Energy. National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO.
Cowan, R. Gunby, P. (1996). “Sprayed to death: Path dependence, lock-in and pest control
strategies”. Economic Journal 106, 521-542.

54

Cowan, R. Hulten, S. (1996). “Escaping lock-In: The case of the electric vehicle”. Technological
Forecasting and Social Change 53, 61-79.
David, P. (1969). “A contribution to the theory of diffusion”. mimeo. Forthcoming as Chapters
1-3 of P. David, ed., Behind the Diffusion Curve. Westview Press, Boulder.
de Coninck, H., Fisher, C. Newell, R.G. Ueno, T. (2008). “International technology-oriented
agreements to address climate change”. Energy Policy 36, 335-356.
DeCanio, S.J. (1998). “The efficiency paradox: Bureaucratic and organizational barriers to
profitable energy-saving investments”. Energy Policy 26, 441-454.
Dechezleprêtre, A., Glachant, M. Ménière Y. (2008). “The clean development mechanism and
the international diffusion of technologies: An empirical study”. Energy Policy 36, 12731283.
Denicolo, V. (1999). “Pollution-reducing innovations under taxes or permits”. Oxford Economic
Papers 51, 184-199.
Di Maria, C. Werf, E. van der (2008). “Carbon leakage revisited: unilateral climate policy with
directed technological change”. Environmental and Resource Economics 39(1), 55-74.
Dowlatabadi, H. (1998). “Sensitivity of climate change mitigation estimates to assumptions
about technical change”. Energy Economics 20(5-6), 473-493.
Downing, P.B. White, L.J. (1986). “Innovation in pollution control”. Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 13, 18-29.
Edenhofer, O., Lessmann, K. Kemfert, K.C., Grubb, M., Kohler, J. (2006). “Induced
technological change: exploring its implications for the economics of atmospheric
stabilization: Synthesis report from the innovation modelling comparison project”. The
Energy Journal, Endogenous Technological Change and the Economics of Atmospheric
Stabilisation Special Issue.
Edmonds, J., Roop, J., Scott, M. (2000), Technology and the Economics of Climate Change
Policy. (Pew Center on Global Climate Change, Arlington, VA).
Energy Information Administration (2003), National Energy Modeling System: An Overview
2003. DOE/EIA-0581 (U.S. Department of Energy, Washington, DC).
Energy Information Administration (2007), International Energy Outlook: 2007. U.S.
Department of Energy, Washington, DC.
Esty, D.C. (2001). “Bridging the trade-environment divide”. Journal of Economic Perspectives
15(3), 113-130.
Evenson, R.E., Putnam, J., Kortum (1991). “Estimating patent counts by industry using the YaleCanada concordance,” Final Report to the National Science Foundation.
Fischer, C. Newell, R. (2008). “Environmental and technology policies for climate mitigation”.
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 55(2), 142-162.
Fischer, C. (2008). “Emissions pricing, spillovers, and public investment in environmentally
friendly technologies”. Energy Economics 30(2), 487-502.

55

Fischer, C., Parry, I.W.H., Pizer, W.A. (2003). “Instrument choice for environmental protection
when technological innovation is endogenous”. Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 45(3), 523–545.
Fisher-Vanden, K. (2003). “Management structure and technology diffusion in Chinese stateowned enterprises”. Energy Policy 31(3), 247-257.
Fisher-Vanden, K., Jefferson, G., Ma, J. Xu, J. (2006). “Technology development and energy
productivity in China”. Energy Economics 28(5/6), 690-705.
Fisher-Vanden, K., Sue Wing, I. (2008). “Accounting for quality: Issues with modeling the
impact of R&D on economic growth and carbon emissions in developing countries”.
Energy Economics 30(6), 2771-2784.
Fisher-Vanden, Karen, Ho, M.S. (2006). “Technology, development, and the environment,”
Working paper, Dartmouth College.
Folmer, H., van Mouche, P. (1993). “Interconnected games and international environmental
problems”. Environmental and Resource Economics 3, 313-335.
Fowlie, M. (2007). “Emissions trading, electricity industry restructuring, and investment in
pollution abatement”. Working Paper, University of Michigan.
Fredriksson, P.G., Wollscheid, J.R. (2008). “The political economy of investment: The case of
pollution control technology”. European Journal of Political Economy 24(1), 53-72.
Freeman, A.M., Haveman, R.H. (1972). “Clean rhetoric and dirty water”. Public Interest 28, 5165.
Frondel, M., Horbach, J., Rennings, K. (2007). “End-of-pipe or cleaner production? An
empirical comparison of environmental innovation decisions across OECD countries”.
Business Strategy and the Environment 16, 571-584.
Gerlagh, R., van der Zwaan, R. (2006). “Options and instruments for a deep cut in CO2
emissions: Carbon dioxide capture or renewables, taxes or subsidies?”. The Energy
Journal 27(3), 25-48.
Geroski, P.A. (2000). “Models of technology diffusion”. Research Policy 29, 603-626.
Gillingham, K., Newell, R.G., Palmer, K. 2009. Energy Efficiency Economics and Policy.
Manuscript prepared for the Annual Review of Resource Economics.
Gillingham, K., Newell, R.G., Pizer, W.A. (2008). “Modeling endogenous technological change
for climate policy analysis”. Energy Economics 30(6), 2734-2753.
Gillingham, K., Newell, R.G., Palmer, K. (2006). “Energy efficiency policies: A retrospective
examination”. Annual Review of Environment and Resources 31, 162-192.
Goldberg, P.K. (1998). “The effects of the corporate average fuel efficiency standards in the
U.S.”. Journal of Industrial Economics 46, 1-33.
Gollop, F.M., Roberts, M.J. (1983). “Environmental regulations and productivity growth: The
case of fossil-fueled electric power generation”. Journal of Political Economy 91, 654674.

56

Golombek, R., Hoel, M. (2004). “Unilateral emission reductions and cross-country technology
spillovers”. Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy 4(2), Article 3. Available at:
http://www.bepress.com/bejeap/advances/vol4/iss2/art3.
Goulder, L.H., Schneider, S. (1999). “Induced technological change and the attractiveness of
CO2 abatement policies.” Resource and Energy Economics 21, 211-253.
Goulder, L.H., Mathai, K. (2000). “Optimal CO2 abatement in the presence of induced
technological change”. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 39, 1-38.
Goulder, L.H. (2004), Induced Technological Change and Climate Policy. (Washington, DC:
Pew Center on Global Climate Change).
Greaker, M., Pade, L. (2008). “Optimal CO2 abatement and technological change: Should
emission taxes start high in order to spur R&D?” Discussion Papers No. 548, Statistics
Norway, Research Department.
Greene, D.L. (1990). “CAFE or price?: An analysis of the effects of federal fuel economy
regulations and gasoline price on new car MPG, 1978-89”. The Energy Journal 11(3), 3757.
Griliches, Z. (1957). “Hybrid corn: An exploration in the economics of technical change”.
Econometrica 48, 501-522.
Grossman, G., Helpman, E. (1994). “Endogenous innovation in the theory of growth”. Journal of
Economic Perspectives 8, 23-44,
Grubb, M., Köhler, J., Anderson, D. (2002). “Induced technical change in energy and
environmental modeling”. Annual Review of Energy and the Environment 27, 271-308.
Grübler, A., Messner, S. (1998). “Technological change and the timing of mitigation measures”.
Energy Economics 20, 495-512.
Grübler, A., Nakicenovic, N., Nordhaus, W. eds., (2002), Technological Change and the
Environment. Resources for the Future Press, Washington, DC.
Grübler, A., Nakicenovic, N., Victor, D. (1999). “Modeling technological change: Implications
for the global environment”. Annual Review of Energy and the Environment 24, 545569.
Hahn, R.W., Stavins, R.N. (1991). “Incentive-based environmental regulation: A new era from
an old idea?”. Ecology Law Quarterly 18, 1-42.
Hall, B.H. (1996). “The private and social returns to research and development,” in Smith and
Barfield, eds., Technology, R&D and the Economy. The Brookings Institution and
American Enterprise Institute, Washington, DC, 140-162.
Hamamoto, M. (2006). “Environmental regulation and the productivity of Japanese
manufacturing industries,” Resource and Energy Economics, 28, 299-312.
Harrington, W., Morgenstern, R.D., Nelson, P. (2000). “On the accuracy of regulatory cost
estimates”. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 19(2), 297-322.

57

Hart, R. (2008). “The timing of taxes on CO2 emissions when technological change is
endogenous”. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 55(2), 194-212.
Hascic, I., Johnstone, N., Michel, C. (2008). “Environmental policy stringency and technological
innovation: Evidence from patent counts”. Paper presented at the European Association
of Environmental and Resource Economists 16th Annual Conference, Gothenburg,
Sweden, June 26, 2008.
Hassett, K.A., Metcalf G.E. (1995). “Energy tax credits and residential conservation investment:
Evidence form panel data”. Journal of Public Economics 57, 201-217.
Hassett, K.A., Metcalf, G.E. (1996). “Can irreversibility explain the slow diffusion of energy
saving technologies?”. Energy Policy 24, 7-8.
Hausman, J.A. (1979). “Individual discount rates and the purchase and utilization of energyusing durables”. Bell Journal of Economics 10, 33.
Helpman, E., ed., (1998) General Purpose Technologies and Economic Growth. (MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA).
Hicks, J. (1932), The Theory of Wages. Macmillan, London.
Hilton, F.H. (2001). “Later abatement, faster abatement: Evidence and explanations from the
global phaseout of leaded gasoline”. Journal of Environment and Development 10(3),
246-265.
Howarth, R.B., Haddad, B.M., Paton, B. (2000). “The economics of energy efficiency: Insights
from voluntary participation programs”. Energy Policy 28, 477-486.
Innes, R., Bial, J.J. (2002). “Inducing innovation in the environmental technology of
oligopolistic firms”. Journal of Industrial Economics 50(3), 265-287.
IPCC (2007), Climate Change 2007: Mitigation. Contribution of Working Group III to the
Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, B. Metz,
O.R. Davidson, P.R. Bosch, R. Dave, L.A. Meyer Eds.), United Kingdom and New York,
NY, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Irwin, D.A. Klenow, P.W. (1994). “Learning-by-doing spillovers in the semiconductor industry”.
Journal of Political Economy 102, 1200-1227.
Islas, J. (1997). “Getting round the lock-in in electricity generating systems: The example of the
gas turbine”. Research Policy 26, 49-66.
Jaffe, A.B, Stavins, R.N. (1995). “Dynamic incentives of environmental regulations: The effects
of alternative policy instruments on technology diffusion”. Journal of Environmental
Economics & Management 29, S43-S63.
Jaffe, A.B. (1986). “Technological opportunity and spillovers of R&D: Evidence from firms’
patents, profits and market value”. American Economic Review 76, 984-1001.
Jaffe, A.B., Palmer, K. (1997). “Environmental regulation and innovation: A panel data study”.
Review of Economics and Statistics 79, 610-619.

58

Jaffe, A.B., Stavins, R.N. (1994). “The energy paradox and the diffusion of conservation
technology”. Resource and Energy Economics 16, 91-122.
Jaffe, A.B., Peterson, S., Portney, P., Stavins, R.N. (1995). “Environmental regulation and the
competitiveness of U.S. manufacturing: What does the evidence tell us?”. Journal of
Economic Literature 33, 132-163.
Jaffe, A.B., Lerner, J. (2001). “Reinventing public R&D: Patent policy and the
commercialization of national laboratory technologies”. RAND Journal of Economics
32(1), 167-198.
Jaffe, A.B., Newell, R.G., Stavins, R.N. (2003). “Technological change and the environment”. in
K.-G. Mäler and J. Vincent, eds., Handbook of Environmental Economics, Vol. 1. Edited
by Handbooks in Economics series, K.J. Arrow and M.D. Intriligator, series eds.
Amsterdam: North-Holland/Elsevier, 461-516.
Jaffe, A.B., Newell, R.G., Stavins, R.N. (2005). “A tale of two market failures: Technology and
environmental policy”. Ecological Economics 54, 164–174.
Jakeman, G., Hanslow, K., Hinchy, M., Fisher, B., Woffenden, K. (2004). “Induced innovations
and climate change policy”. Energy Economics 26(6), 937-960.
Johnstone, N., Hascic, I., Popp, D. (2008). “Renewable energy policies and technological
innovation: Evidence based on patent counts”. NBER Working Paper #13760.
Johnstone, N., Hascic, I. (2008). “Environmental policy design and the fragmentation of markets
for innovation,” paper presented at the Venice Summer Institute 2008 Workshop on
“Reforming Rules and Regulations - Laws, Institutions and Implementation,” (Venice,
Italy, July 19, 2008).
Jones, C., Williams, J. (1998). “Measuring the social return to R&D”. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 113, 1119-1135.
Jorgenson, D., Wilcoxen, P. (1993). “Reducing US carbon emissions: An econometric general
equilibrium assessment”. Resource and Energy Economics 15, 7-25.
Jorgenson, D.W., Fraumeni, B.M. (1981). “Relative prices on technical change”. In: B.C. Field,
and E.R. Berndt, eds., Modeling and Measuring Natural Resource Substitution. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA, 17–47.
Jung, C.H., Krutilla, K., Boyd, R. (1996). “Incentives for advanced pollution abatement
technology at the industry level: An evaluation of policy alternatives”. Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 30, 95-111.
Kamien, M.I., Schwartz, N.L. (1968). “Optimal induced technical change”. Econometrica 36, 117.
Katsoulacos, Y., Xepapadeas, A. (1996). “Environmental innovation, spillovers and optimal
policy rules”. In: C. Carraro et al., eds., Environmental Policy and Market Structure.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 143-150.
Keller, W. (2004). “International technology diffusion”. Journal of Economic Literature 42, 752782.

59

Kemfert, C. (2004). “International climate coalitions and trade: Assessment of cooperation
incentives by issue linkage.” Energy Policy 32, 455-465.
Kemp, R. (1997), Environmental Policy and Technical Change (Cheltenham, UK: Edward
Elgar).
Kemp, R. (1998). “The diffusion of biological waste-water treatment plants in the Dutch food
and beverage industry”. Environmental and Resource Economics 12, 113-136.
Kennedy, C. (1964). “Induced bias in innovation and the theory of distribution”. The Economic
Journal 74(295), 541-547.
Kennedy, P.W., Laplante, B. (1999). “Environmental policy and time consistency: emissions
taxes and emissions trading”. In: Petrakis, Sarzetakis, and Xepapadeas, eds.,
Environmental Regulation and Market Power: Competition, Time Consistency and
International. Trade Edward Elgar Publishing, Northampton, MA.
Keohane, N.O. (2007). “Cost savings from allowance trading in the 1990 Clean Air Act:
Estimates from a choice-based model”. In: Charles E. Kolstad and Jody Freeman, eds.,
Moving to Markets in Environmental Regulation: Lessons from Twenty Years of
Experience. Oxford University Press, New York.
Kerr, S., Newell, R.G. (2003). “Policy-induced technology adoption: Evidence from the U.S.
lead phasedown”. Journal of Industrial Economics 51(3), 317-343.
Khanna, M., Zilberman, D. (2001). “Adoption of energy efficient technologies and carbon
abatement: the electricity generating sector in India”. Energy Economics 23, 637-658.
Kily, M.T. (1999). “The supply of skilled labor and skill-biased technological progress”.
Economic Journal 109, 708-724.
Klaassen, G., Miketa, S., Larsen, K., Sundqvist, T. (2005). “The impact of R&D on innovation
for wind energy in Denmark, Germany and the United Kingdom”. Ecological Econ 54,
227-240.
Köhler, J., Grubb, M., Popp, D., Edenhoffer, O. (2006). “The transition to endogenous technical
change in climate-energy models: A technical overview to the innovation modeling
comparison project,” The Energy Journal Special Issue, Endogenous Technological
Change and the Economics of Atmospheric Stabilization 17-55.
Kortum, S., Eaton, J. (2008). “Endogenous innovation and growth theory,” In: B.H. Hall and N.
Rosenberg, eds., Handbook of Economics of Technological Change, this volume.
Kortum, S., Putnam, J. (1989). “Estimating patents by industry: Part I and II,” (unpublished
manuscript, Yale University).
Kortum, S., Putnam, J. (1997). “Assigning patents by industry: tests of the Yale Technology
Concordance”. Economic Systems Research 9, 161–175.
Laffont, J., Tirole, J. (1996). “Pollution permits and compliance strategies”. Journal of Public
Economics 62, 85-125.
Lange, I., Bellas, A. (2005). “Technological change for sulfur dioxide scrubbers under marketbased regulation”. Land Economics 81(4), 546-556.

60

Lanjouw, J.O., Mody, A. (1996). “Innovation and the international diffusion of environmentally
responsive technology”. Research Policy 25, 549-571.
Lanoie, P., Laurent-Lucchetti, J., Johnstone, N., Ambec, S. (2007). “Environmental policy,
innovation and performance: New insights,” GAEL Working Paper 2007-07.
Lecocq, F., Ambrosi, P. (2007). “The clean development mechanism: History, status, and
prospects”. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 1(1), 134-151.
Lefley, F. (1996). “The payback method of investment appraisal: a review and synthesis”.
Journal of Production Economics 44, 207–224.
Linn, J. (2008). “Energy prices and the adoption of energy-saving technology,” Economic
Journal 118 (533), 1986-2012.
Loschel, A. (2002). “Technological change in economic models of environmental policy: A
survey”. Ecological Economics 43(2-3), 105-126.
Lovely, M., Popp, D. (2008). “Trade, technology and the environment: Why do poorer countries
regulate sooner?” NBER Working Paper #14286.
Lucas, R. (1988). “On the mechanics of economic development”. Journal of Monetary
Economics 100, 223-251.
Lucas, R. (1976). “Econometric policy evaluation: A critique”. Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy 1, 19-46.
MacCracken, C., Edmonds, J., Kim, S., Sands, R. (1999). “The economics of the Kyoto
Protocol”. The Energy Journal Special Issue 25-72.
Magat, W.A. (1978). “Pollution control and technological advance: A dynamic model of the
firm”. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 5, 1-25.
Magat, W.A. (1979). “The effects of environmental regulation on innovation”. Law and
Contemporary Problems 43, 3-25.
Mäler, K. Vincent, J. eds. (2005), Handbook of Environmental Economics: Valuing
Environmental Changes, K.J. Arrow and M.D. Intriligator, series eds. Amsterdam: NorthHolland/Elsevier.
Maloney, M.T., Brady G.L. (1988). “Capital turnover and marketable Pollution rights”. Journal
of Law and Economics 31, 203-226.
Manne, A., R. Richels, R. (2004). “The impact of learning-by-doing on the timing and costs of
CO2 abatement”. Energy Economics 26, 603-619.
Mansfield, E. (1968), Industrial Research and Technological Innovation (Norton, New York).
Mansfield, E. (1996), Estimating social and private returns from innovations based on the
Advanced Technology Program: Problems and opportunities. NIST GCR 99-780.
Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards and Technology.
Mansfield, E. (1977). “Social and private rates of return from industrial innovations”. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 91, 221-240.

61

Marin, A. (1991). “Firm incentives to promote technological change in pollution control:
Comment”. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 21, 297-300.
McCubbins, M.D., Noll, R.G., Weingast, B.R. (1989). “Structure and process, politics and
policy: Administrative arrangements and the political control of agencies”. Virginia Law
Review 75, 431-482.
McDonald A., Schrattenholzer, L. (2000). “Learning rates for energy technologies”. Energy
Policy 29, 255-261.
Medhi, N. (2008). “Regulatory matters: What factors matter in regulating the environment?”
(Working Paper, Syracuse University).
Metcalf, G.E., Hassett, K.A. (1999). “Measuring the energy savings from home improvement
investments: Evidence from monthly billing data”. The Review of Economics and
Statistics 81, 516-528.
Milliman, S.R., Prince, R. (1989). “Firm incentives to promote technological change in pollution
control”. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 17, 247-265.
Milliman, S.R., Prince, R. (1992). “Firm incentives to promote technological change in pollution
control: Reply”. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 22, 292-296.
Montero, J.P. (2002). “Market structure and environmental innovation," Journal of Applied
Economics 5(2), 293-325.
Montgomery, W.D., Smith, A.E. (2007). “Price, quantity and technology strategies for climate
change policy”. In: Human-Induced Climate Change: An Interdisciplinary Assessment.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Mountain, D.C., Stipdonk, B.P., Warren, C.J. (1989). “Technological innovation and a changing
energy mix―A parametric and flexible approach to modeling Ontario manufacturing”.
The Energy Journal 10, 139-158.
Mulder, P., de Groot, H.L.F., Hofkes, M.W. (2003). “Explaining slow diffusion of energy-saving
technologies; a vintage model with returns to diversity and learning-by-using”. Resource
and Energy Economics 25(1), 105-126.
National Research Council (2001), Energy Research at DOE: Was it Worth It? National
Academy Press.
National Science Board (2006), Science and Engineering Indicators 2006. National Science
Foundation. Chapter 4: Research and Development: Funds and Technology Linkages,
Arlington, VA.
National Science Foundation, Division of Science Resources Statistics (2006), Research and
Development in Industry: 2003. NSF 07-314, Arlington, VA.
Nelson, R., Tietenberg, T., Donihue, M. (1993). “Differential environmental regulation: Effects
on electric utility capital turnover and emissions”. Review of Economics and Statistics
75, 368-373.
Nemet, G.F. (2006). “Beyond the learning curve: Factors influencing cost reductions in
photovoltaics”. Energy Policy 34(17), 3218-3232.

62

Newell, R.G. 2008a. A U.S. Innovation Strategy for Climate Change Mitigation. Hamilton
Project Discussion Paper 2008-15, Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
Newell, R.G. 2008b. International Climate Technology Strategies. Discussion Paper 08-12,
Harvard Project on International Climate Agreements, Cambridge, MA.
Newell, R., Jaffe, A., Stavins, R. (1999). “The induced innovation hypothesis and energy-saving
technological change”. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(3), 941-975.
Newell, R.G., Jaffe, A.B., Stavins, R.N. (2004). “The economics of energy efficiency”. In: C.
Cleveland, ed., Encyclopedia of Energy, Vol. 2. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 79–90.
Nijkamp, P., Rodenburg, C.A., Verhoef, E.T. (2001). “The adoption and diffusion of
environmentally friendly technologies among firms”. International Journal of
Environmental Technology and Management 1(1/2), 87-103.
Nordhaus, W.D. (1994), Managing the Global Commons: The Economics of Climate Change.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Nordhaus, W.D. (2002). “Modeling induced innovation in climate change policy”. In: A.
Grubler, N. Nakicenovic and W. Nordhaus, eds., Technological Change and the
Environment. Resources for the Future Press, Washington, DC.
Nordhaus, W.D. and Z. Yang (1996). “A regional dynamic general-equilibrium model of
alternative climate-change strategies”. American Economic Review 86(4), 741-765.
Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2008. Main Science and
Technology Indicators, Volume 2008/1. Paris: OECD.
Pakes, A. (1985). “On patents, R&D, and the stock market rate of return”. Journal of Political
Economy 93(2), 390-409.
Pakes, A., Berry, S., Levinsohn, J.A. (1993). “Applications and limitations of some recent
advances in empirical industrial organization: Prices indexes and the analysis of
environmental change”. American Economic Review 83, 240-246.
Parry, I.W.H. (1998). “Pollution regulation and the efficiency gains from technological
innovation”. Journal of Regulatory Economics 14, 229-254.
Pegram, W.M. (1991). “The photovoltaics commercialization program,” In: Cohen, L. and Noll,
R. eds., The Technology Pork Barrel. Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
Pindyck, R. (1991). “Irreversibility, uncertainty, and investment”. Journal of Economic
Literature 29, 1110-1152.
Pizer, W.A., Harrington, W., Kopp, R.J., Morgenstern, R.D., Shih, J. (2001). “Technology
Adoption and Aggregate Energy Efficiency”. Resources for the Future Discussion Paper
01-21 (Resources for the Future, Washington, DC).
Popp, D. (2001), The effect of new technology on energy consumption”. Resource and Energy
Economics 23(3), 215-239.
Popp, D. (2002). “Induced innovation and energy prices”. American Economic Review 92(1),
160-180.

63

Popp, D. (2004). “ENTICE: Endogenous technological change in the DICE model of global
warming”. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 48, 742-768.
Popp, D. (2005). “Lessons from patents: Using patents to measure technological change in
environmental models”. Ecological Economics 54(2-3), 209-226.
Popp, D. (2003). “Pollution control innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990”. Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management 22, 641-660.
Popp, D. (2006a). “R&D subsidies and climate policy: Is there a ‘free lunch’?”. Climatic Change
77(3-4), 311-341.
Popp, D. (2006b). “International innovation and diffusion of air pollution control technologies:
The effects of NOX and SO2 regulation in the U.S., Japan, and Germany”. Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 51(1), 46-71.
Popp, D. (2006c). “They don't invent them like they used to: An examination of energy patent
citations over time”. Economics of Innovation and New Technology 15(8), 753-776.
Popp, D. (2006d). “Exploring the links between innovation and diffusion: Adoption of NOX
control technologies at U.S. coal-fired power plants”. NBER Working Paper #12119.
Popp, D., Hafner, T., Johnstone, N. (2008). “Policy vs. consumer pressure: Innovation and
diffusion of alternative bleaching technologies in the pulp industry,” NBER Working
Paper #13439.
Purvis, A. Outlaw, J. (1995). “What we know about technological innovation to achieve
environmental compliance: Policy issues for an industrializing animal agriculture
sector”. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 77, 1237-1243.
Rapping, L. (1965). “Learning and World War II production functions”. Review of Economics
and Statistics 47(1), 81-86.
Reppelin-Hill, V. (1999). “Trade and environment: An empirical analysis of the technology
effect in the steel industry”. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 38,
283-301.
Requate, T. (1998). “Incentives to innovate under emission taxes and tradeable permits”.
European Journal of Political Economy 14, 139-165.
Requate, T. (2005). “Timing and commitment of environmental policy, adoption of new
technology, and repercussions on R&D,” Environmental and Resource Economics 31,
175-199.
Romer, P. (1990). “Endogenous technological change”. Journal of Political Economy 98(5)S71S102.
Rose, N. Joskow, P. (1990). “The diffusion of new technologies: Evidence from the electric
utility industry”. Rand Journal of Economics 21, 354-373.
Rosenberg, N. (1982), Inside the Black Box: Technology and Economics. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK.

64

Rosendahl, K.E. (2004). “Cost-effective environmental policy: implications of induced
technological change”. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 48(3),
1099-1121.
Ross, M. (1990). “Capital budgeting practices of twelve large manufacturers”. In: P. Cooley, ed.,
Advances in Business Financial Management. Dryden Press, Chicago, 157-170.
Ruderman, H., Levine, M.D., McMahon, J.E. (1987). “The behavior of the market for energy
efficiency in residential appliances including heating and cooling equipment”. The
Energy Journal 8, 101-123.
Sanstad, A., Blumstein, C., Stoft, S. (1995). “How high are option values in energy-efficiency
investments”. Energy Policy 23, 739-743.
Sanyal, P. (2007), The effect of deregulation on environmental research by electric utilities,
Journal of Regulatory Economics.
Scherer, F., Harhoff, D., Kukies, J. (2000). “Uncertainty and the size distribution of rewards
from technological innovation”. Journal of Evolutionary Economics 10, 175-200.
Schneider, S., Goulder, L. (1997). “Commentary: achieving low-cost emissions targets”. Nature
389(4 September), 13-14.
Schwoon, M., Tol, R. (2006). “Optimal CO2-abatement with socio-economic inertia and induced
technological change”. The Energy Journal 27(4), 25-59.
Shama, A. (1983). “Energy conservation in U.S. buildings, solving the high potential/low
adoption paradox from a behavioral perspective”. Energy Policy 11, 148-168.
Smulders, S., de Nooij, M. (2003), The impact of energy conservation on technology and
economic growth,” Resource and Energy Economics 25(1), 59-79.
Smulders, S. (2005). “Endogenous technological change, natural resources, and growth”. In:
R.D. Simpson, M.A. Toman, and R.U. Ayres, eds., Scarcity and Growth Revisited.
Resources for the Future, Washington, DC.
Snyder, L.D., Miller, N.H., Stavins, R.N. (2003). “The effects of environmental regulation on
technology diffusion: The case of chlorine manufacturing”. American Economic Review
93(2), 431-435.
Söderholm P., Klaassen, G. (2007). “Wind power in Europe: A simultaneous innovationdiffusion model”. Environmental and Resource Economics 36, 163-190.
Sterner, T. (1990). “Energy efficiency and capital embodied technical change: the case of
Mexican cement manufacturing”. The Energy Journal 11, 155–167.
Stewart, R.B. (1981). “Regulation, innovation, and administrative law: A conceptual
framework”. California Law Review 69, 1256-1270.
Stoneman, P,. Battisti, G. (2008). “Modeling diffusion,” In: B.H. Hall and N. Rosenberg, eds.,
Handbook of Economics of Technological Change, this volume.

65

Sue Wing, I. (2003). “Induced technical change and the cost of climate policy.” Joint Program on
the Science and Policy of Global Change Report no. 112. (Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA).
Sue Wing, I. (2006). “Representing induced technological change in models for climate policy”.
Energy Economics 28, 539-562.
Sue Wing, I. (2007). “Explaining the declining energy intensity of the U.S. economy”. Resource
and Energy Economics.
Sue Wing, I. (2006). “Induced technological change: Firm innovatory responses to
environmental regulation”. (Working Paper, Boston University).
Sue Wing, I. (2008). “Explaining the declining energy intensity of the U.S. economy”. Resource
and Energy Economics 30(1), 21–49.
Taylor M.R. (2008). “Cap-and-trade programs and innovation for climate safety,” (Working
Paper, University of California-Berkeley).
Taylor, M.R., Rubin, E.S., Hounshell, D.H. (2003). “Effect of government actions on
technological innovation for SO2 Control”. Environmental Science & Technology 37,
4527-4534.
Thirtle, C.G., Ruttan, V.W. (1987). “The role of demand and supply in the generation and
diffusion of technical change”. Fundamentals of Pure and Applied Economics, vol. 21.
Harwood Academic Publishers, New York.
Ulph, D. (1998). “Environmental policy and technological innovation," In: C. Carraro and D.
Siniscalaco, eds., Frontiers of Environmental Economics. Edward Elgar, Cheltenhsam,
UK.
US Department of Energy (2004), US Department of Energy’s FY2005 Budget Request to
Congress.
US
Department
of
Energy,
Washington,
DC.
http://www.mbe.doe.gov/budget/05budget/content/orgcont.pdf.
van Zon, A., Yetkiner, I.H. (2003). “An endogenous growth model with embodied energy-saving
technical change”. Resource and Energy Economics 25(1), 81-103.
Vollebergh, H.R.J., Kemfert, C. (2005). “The role of technological change for a sustainable
development”. Ecological Economics 54(2-3), 133-147.
Weitzman, M.L. (1974). “Prices vs. quantities”. Review of Economic Studies 41, 477-491.
Wolfram, C., Bushnell, J.B. (2008). “Enforcement of vintage differentiated regulations: The case
of new source review”. (Working paper, University of California).
Wright, T.P. (1936). “Factors affecting the costs of airplanes”. Journal of Aeronautical Sciences
3, 122-128.
Zerbe, R.O. (1970). “Theoretical efficiency in pollution control”. Western Economic Journal 8,
364-376.

66

Table 1 – Empirical Studies of Environmental Induced Innovation
Article

What is induced?

What causes innovation?

Data

Lanjouw and Mody (1996)

Environmentally-friendly
patents

Pollution Abatement Costs and
Expenditures (PACE)

U.S., Japan, Germany, 14
other countries industry

Jaffe and Palmer (1997)

Overall R&D spending/patents

PACE

U.S. industry 1974-1991

Newell et al. (1999)

Energy efficiency
technologies

Regulatory standards
Energy price changes

Appliance characteristics and
energy price 1958-1993

Popp (2002)

Energy and energy efficiency
technologies

Price of fossil fuels
Existing knowledge stock

U.S. energy patents 19701994

Brunnermeier and Cohen
(2003)

Environmental patents

PACE

U.S. industry

Hamamoto (2006)

Overall R&D spending

PACE

Japanese industry 1966-76

Popp (2006b)

SO2 and NOX emission
reduction patents

Environmental regulations

U.S., Japan, Germany
patents, 1970-2000

Hascic et al. (2008)

Patents for 5 environmental
technology: air pollution,
water pollution, wastes
disposal, noise protection, and
environmental monitoring

PACE and environmental
stringency

PACE expenditures 19852004 &World Economic
Forum survey

Key results
PACE leads increase in
environmentally-friendly
innovation.
PACE affects R&D
spending, but not patenting
activity.
Energy prices and
regulatory standards affect
energy efficiency
innovation.
Both energy prices and the
existing knowledge stock
induce R&D.
PACE has small effects on
patents (0.04%/$1 mil).
PACE leads to increased
R&D expenditures.
Environmental regulations
significantly increase SO2
and NOx reduction patents.
Private PACE leads to
environmental innovation
but government PACE does
not. However,
governmental R&D
promotes increase of
environmental patents.

67

Table 2 – Key Theoretical Papers on Innovation and Environmental Policy Instruments
Article

Policies

Key results

Magat (1978)

Effluent taxes, uniform standards
Taxes, subsidies, permits, effluent standards,
technology standards

Ranking is ambiguous.
All except technology standards induce innovation. Taxes,
permits, and effluent standard have similar effects.
Innovation subsidies have the same effects as environmental
policy instruments, except for emissions reduction from
pollution taxes.
Futures markets for permits lead to innovation.
Government-issued threats of regulation can be a solution for
information asymmetry.
R&D subsidies are desirable if decrease of product output is
small or considered negative.
Tax and subsidy together can overcome the market failure.
Stricter standards and taxes do not have significant effect on
R&D level. There are two competing effects: policies increase
costs (and R&D), but also lower output (which decreases R&D).
Types of market affect the level of R&D incentives from
standards and taxes. Cournot competition leads to higher
incentive while Bertrand competition leads to lower incentive.
Technology leaders favor stricter environmental regulations, as
these policies raise the costs of competitors.
Ranking is ambiguous, and depends on ability to diffuse
technologies, cost, and number of polluting firms.

Magat (1979)
Carraro and Siniscalco (1994)

Environmental policy instruments, industrial policy
instruments

Laffont and Tirole (1996)

Tradable permit system

Cadot and Sinclair-Desgagne (1996)

Incentive scheme

Carraro and Soubeyran (1996)

Emission tax & R&D subsidy

Katsoulacos and Xepapadeas (1996)

Tax & environmental R&D subsidy

Ulph (1998)

Pollution taxes, uniform standards

Montero (2002)

Various policy instruments under non-competitive
environments

Innes and Bial (2002)

Environmental regulation , firm’s behavior

Fischer et al. (2003)

Market-based policies, uniform standards

Requate (2005)

Ex post regulation, interim regulation, ex ante
regulation (with different tax rates), ex ante
regulation (with a single tax rate)

Baker and Adu-Bonnah (2008)

Alternative energy with no carbon emission,
conventional energy with efficiency improvement

Bauman, Lee, and Seeley (2008)

Market-based policies, uniform standards

Ex ante policies with different tax rates dominate, and tax
policies are always preferred to permit policies.
With uncertainty, stringency of policy matters. With weak
environmental policy, improvements in conventional energy
efficiency are acceptable. However, strong standards require
alternative energy (no carbon emissions).
If command and control policies lead to innovation which
lowers the marginal abatement cost curve, they may induce
more innovation than market-based policies.

68

Table 3 – Key Empirical Papers on Innovation and Environmental Policy Instruments
Article

Policies

Data

Newell et al. (1999)

Energy price-based policies, energy
efficiency standards, labeling

Appliance model characteristics and
energy prices 1958-1993

Popp (2003)

SO2 permits , direct regulation

U.S. coal-fired power plants 1985-97

Lange and Bellas (2005)

Clean Air Act

U.S. coal-fired power plants 19852002

Lanoie et al. (2007)

Environmental policy instruments,
environmental R&D

Survey of firms in 7 OECD countries

Johnstone et al. (2008)

Environmental policy instruments,
environmental R&D

EPO pollution control patents to
OECD countries, 1978-2004

Taylor (2008)

SO2 permits, direct regulation

U.S. patents 1975-2004

Johnston et al. (2008)

Price-based policies, quantity-based
policies

EPO renewable energy technology
patents from 25 OECD countries,
1978-2003

Key results
Energy price changes lead to the
introduction of new technologies in the
market and removal of old models, while
regulation works only by eliminating old
models.
CAC innovation led to cost savings.
Innovation with permit trading led to both
cost savings and emissions reductions.
Permit trading system lead to lower capital
and operating costs. Mandatory regulation
alone does not promote change in costs.
For inducing environmental R&D,
stringency of policies is more important
than policy type.
Flexible policies lead to higher quality
innovations (measured by patent family
size).
Uncertainty over future permit prices
reduces innovation incentives for 3rd party
producers.
Price-based policies lead to solar and wasteto-energy technologies, while quantitybased policies lead to wind energy (closest
to current energy market).

69

Table 4 – Factors Affecting Adoption of Environmental Technology
Article

Technology

Data

Kerr and Newell (2003)

Lead-reducing refining technology

U.S. oil refineries, 1971-1995

Keohane (2007)

SO2 scrubbers

Kemp (1998)

Water pollution treatment facilities

Purvis and Outlaw (1995)

Water pollution control technologies
for U.S. livestock production

N/A

Snyder et al, (2003)

Membrane-cell technology for
chlorine production

U.S. Chlorine Manfacturers, 19762001

Popp (2006d)

Combustion modification and post
combustion controls for NOX
emissions from coal-fired power
plants

U.S. coal-fired power plants, 19902003

Frondel et al. (2007)

End-of-pipe vs. process abatement

Survey of OECD firms

Wolfram and Bushnell (2008)

Modifications at coal-fired electric
power plants

U.S. power plants, 1998-2004

Effect of New Source Review on capital
investment is small

Fowlie (2007)

NOX pollution control techniques

702 U.S. coal-fired power plants
covered by the NOX Budget Program,
2000-2004

Plants in restructured markets are less likely
to install costly abatement equipment.

Blackman and Bannister (1998)

Cleaner fuels

Traditional brick kilns in Mexico

Community pressure and local nongovernmental organizations are important

Popp et al (2008)

Low-chlorine production of pulp and
paper

Pulp plants in the U.S., Canada,
Sweden, Finland, Norway, and Japan,
1990-2005

Consumer pressure spurred adoption

U.S. coal-fired power plants, 19951999
Dutch food and beverage plants
1974–91

Key results
Increased stringency increases adoption.
Larger and more sophisticated refineries
adopted first.
Adoption decision was more sensitive to
cost differences under tradable permits.
Effluent charges increase adoption
Regulations led to adoption of “time-tested”
rather than innovative technologies,
because EPA was more likely to approve
permits for these.
Regulation not only encourages adoption,
but also leads to the shutdown of plants
using older technologies.
Regulation is the dominant factor.
Technology improvements lead to more
adoption for combustion modification, but
not for more expensive post-combustion
controls, which are only adopted when
needed because of regulatory pressures.
Regulations are more likely to lead to endof-pipe solutions. Market forces influence
cleaner production processes.

70

Table 5 – Barriers to Adoption of Environmentally-Friendly Technologies
Article

Technology

Barrier(s) to adoption

Data

Jaffe and Stavins (1995)

Thermal insulation

Up-front costs matter more

US residential construction
1979-88

Hassett and Metcalf (1995)

Residential energy
conservation

Up-front costs matter more

US households 1979-1981

Kemp (1997)

Thermal home insulation

Inadequate information

Netherlands households

Metcalfe and Hassett (1999)

Attic insulation

Inadequate information

Reppelin-Hill (1999)

Clean steal technologies

Import barriers

Howarth et al. (2000)

Energy-saving technology
(efficient lighting equipment)

Agency decision making
problems
Inadequate information

Green Lights and Energy
Star programs

Nijkamp et al. (2001)

Energy-efficient technology

Economic barriers
alternative investment
low energy costs
capital replacement

Survey of Dutch firms

Mulder et al. (2003)

Energy efficiency
technologies

Complementarities among
technologies

N/A

Anderson and Newell (2004)

Firm-level adoption of energysaving projects recommended
by energy audits

Inadequate information on
technologies
Initial costs and payback years
of adoption

U.S. Department of Energy’s
Industrial Assessment
Centers database, 1981-2000

U.S. Residential Energy
Consumption Survey, 1984,
1987, & 1990
Adoption of electric arc
furnace in 30 countries,
1970-1994

Key results
Lower adoption costs 3x
more likely to encourage
adoption than increased
energy costs
Installation cost savings via
tax credits encourage
adoption
Government subsidies do
not lead to adoption.
Epidemic model fits data
better than rational choice
model.
Actual energy savings are
less than promised
Import barriers restrain the
adoption from foreignproduced goods
Voluntary programs lead to
wider adoption in private
firms.
Inadequate information
inhibits adoption.
Economic barriers affect
adoption more than
financial and uncertainty
barriers
Complementarities and
learning-by-doing process
impede adoption
Firms adopt additional
projects with improved
information. Up-front costs
have 40% greater effect
than energy costs.

71

Table 6 – Technology in Climate Change Models
Article

Model
Type

Technological
change

Key results

Jakeman et al. (2004)

CGE

PI

Popp (2004)

IAM

R&D

PI technological change lead to decrease in abatement costs.
Induced innovation increases welfare by 9%. Partial crowding out of other R&D
assumed.

Buonanno et al. (2003)

IAM

R&D

Gerlagh (2008)

ME

R&D

CGE

R&D

ME

R&D

Sue Wing (2006)

CGE

R&D

Goulder & Schneider (1999)

CGE

R&D

Nordhaus (2002)

IAM

R&D

Sue Wing (2003)

CGE

R&D

Grübler and Messner (1998)

ES

LBD

Manne and Richels (2004)

CGE/IAM

LBD

Carbon tax reduces overall growth by slowing down technological change.
Abatement activity is optimized with large abatement in earlier period and small
abatement in later period.
Optimal abatement activity includes small abatement in earlier period and large
abatement in later period.

Goulder and Mathai (2000)

CF

LBD/R&D

LBD does not significantly affect optimizing abatement profile.

Smulders and de Nooij
(2003)
Von Zon and Yetkiner
(2003)

Induced innovation plays larger role. Climate R&D does not crowd out other R&D.
Models clean, dirty, and neutral R&D. Policy-induced clean R&D crowds out dirty
R&D, enhancing the benefits of induced R&D.
Endogenous technological change lowers costs of energy conservation policy, but
crowd out non-energy R&D resulting in no increase in total R&D. Energy conservation
policy reduces net per capita income levels.
Energy tax recycled as R&D subsidy promotes long term growth by induced
technological change.
Effect on R&D depends on substitutability between clean and dirty inputs. The
stringency of environmental tax affects the dirty R&D activities. With low taxes, dirty
R&D may increase. The higher the tax, cleaner the R&D.
Endogenous technological change lowers costs of achieving a given target, but leads to
higher gross costs of a carbon tax.
Substitution more important than innovation. Assumes climate R&D crowds out other
R&D.

Models: CGE, computable general-equilibrium model; ME, macroeconometric model; IAM, integrated assessment model; ES, disaggregated energy technology
and system model; CF, cost-function model; IAM, integrated assessment model
Technological Change: PI (price-induced); LBD (learning-by-doing); R&D (research and development)

