                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE LAW OF ONE PRICE WITHOUT THE BORDER:
                     THE ROLE OF DISTANCE VERSUS STICKY PRICES

                                            Mario J. Crucini
                                           Mototsugu Shintani
                                           Takayuki Tsuruga

                                         Working Paper 14835
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14835


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2009




We are indebted to Chikako Baba, Paul Evans and Masao Ogaki for valuable comments on the earlier
draft. We also thank seminar participants at Hitotsubashi, Osaka, Queen's, and Tohoku University
and Bank of Canada and Bank of Japan for helpful comments and discussions. Mario J. Crucini and
Mototsugu Shintani gratefully acknowledge the financial support of National Science Foundation (SES-0136979,
SES-0524868). Takayuki Tsuruga gratefully acknowledges the financial support of Grant-in-aid for
Scientific Research. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Mario J. Crucini, Mototsugu Shintani, and Takayuki Tsuruga. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Law of One Price Without the Border: The Role of Distance Versus Sticky Prices
Mario J. Crucini, Mototsugu Shintani, and Takayuki Tsuruga
NBER Working Paper No. 14835
April 2009
JEL No. D4,F40,F41

                                                ABSTRACT

We examine the role of nominal price rigidities in explaining the deviations from the Law of One Price
(LOP) across cities in Japan. Focusing on intra-national relative prices isolates the border effect and
thus enables us to extract the pure effect of sticky prices. A two-city model with nominal rigidities
and transportation costs predicts that the variation of LOP deviations is lower for goods with less frequent
price adjustment after controlling for the distance separating the cities. Using retail price data for individual
goods and services collected in Japanese cities, we find strong evidence supporting this prediction.
Adapting the Engel and Rogers (1996) regression framework to our theoretical setting, we quantify
the separate roles of nominal rigidities and trade costs (proxied by distance) in generating LOP variability.
Our estimates suggest that the distance equivalent of nominal rigidities can be as large as the `width'
of the border typically found in the literature on international LOP deviations. The findings point to
both the utility of the regression framework in identifying qualitative effects (i.e., sign of a coefficient)
and the challenges interpreting their quantitative implications.


Mario J. Crucini                                        Takayuki Tsuruga
Department of Economics                                 Faculty of Economics, Kansai University
Vanderbilt University                                   3-3-35 Senri-cho #105
Box 1819 Station B                                      Suita, 564-8680
Nashville, TN 37235-1819                                Japan
and NBER                                                ttsuruga@kansai-u.ac.jp
mario.j.crucini@vanderbilt.edu

Mototsugu Shintani
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
Box 1819 Station B
Nashville, TN 37235-1819
mototsugu.shintani@vanderbilt.edu
1        Introduction

The failure of the strict version of the Law of One Price (LOP) between cities is often attributed
to the spatial segmentation of commodity markets. As in the gravity models of trade, distance is
typically used as a proxy for trade costs that handicap arbitrage across locations. In an influential
paper, Engel and Rogers (1996, hereafter ER) confirmed the importance of distance in explaining
the variation of the prices of similar goods in different cities. However, holding distance constant,
they found that volatility was much higher for city pairs separated by a national border. They
tentatively concluded that nominal price stickiness accounted for a significant portion of the mag-
nitude of the border effect, and suggested a marriage of the new-Keynesian literature on menu costs
and the new trade literature emphasizing the role of geography as a promising direction for future
research.
        This paper uses highly disaggregated Japanese retail price data and directly examines the role of
nominal price stickiness in the variation of LOP deviations, after controlling for distance. Since we
are interested in isolating the effect of nominal rigidities and transportation costs from international
trade barriers and nominal exchange rate volatility, we focus on price differences across city-pairs
within Japan.1 We adapt the ER borders regression of price volatility on distance and a border
dummy, dropping the border dummy and adding a good-specific proxy for price stickiness. Within
this regression framework, we also quantify the importance of price stickiness in terms of physical
distance, analogous to measuring the ‘width’ of the border in ER.
        To motivate our regression model, we construct a dynamic general equilibrium model which
incorporates: (i) pricing to market behavior of monopolistically competitive firms; (ii) transporta-
tion costs; and (iii) nominal price rigidities generated by Calvo pricing. These three features are
common ingredients of the New Open Economy Macroeconomics recipe. For example, Bergin and
Feenstra (2001) and Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2002) employ a two-country model with these
features in their attempt to explain aggregate real exchange rate fluctuations. Here the focus is on
cross-sectional implications: How does the model perform in terms of explaining differences in the
nature of fluctuations in LOP deviations across goods and across city-pairs?
        The empirical part of our analysis employs data on the retail prices of individual goods and
services and is closely related to the recent macroeconomics literature on nominal rigidities. Using
US CPI micro data, Bils and Klenow (2004) find the median duration between posted price changes
    1
        A similar strategy was adopted by Parsley and Wei (1996) for the US.




                                                           2
of 4.3 months, considerably shorter than the earlier consensus level of about a year. Using more
detailed data, Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) and Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) estimate the
median duration between regular price changes to be 8-11 months and 7 months, respectively.
These studies have documented both fast adjustment of retail prices over time and substantial
heterogeneity in the speed of adjustment across goods.
   In the context of international price convergence, Kehoe and Midrigan (2007) examine the
relationship between the good-specific frequency of price changes and the persistence of good-level
real exchange rates using a two-country monetary model with Calvo-type price stickiness. Crucini,
Shintani, and Tsuruga (2008) extend their analysis by introducing sticky information to the model.
However, none of these studies attempt to assess the separate roles of distance and empirical
frequency of price changes in accounting for the variance of LOP deviations.
   One stylized fact about absolute LOP deviations is the clear rejection of their long-run con-
vergence to zero. This observation has been documented using a wide array of data sources by
Goldberg and Verboven (2004), Crucini, Telmer, and Zachariadis (2005), Broda and Weinstein
(2008) and Crucini and Shintani (2008). Based on these findings, we allow pricing to market with
good-specific markups as well as transportation costs. In our two-city equilibrium model, deviations
from the common stochastic trend in productivity is allowed to occur at the level of individual goods
and cities. These productivity differences are permitted to be zero also in the long-run, nesting
both the absolute and relative version of LOP in our framework.
   Our main theoretical proposition is that LOP variability (around their long-run level) in the
intra-national context can indeed be smaller for a sticky price economy than a flexible price economy.
This contrasts to models focusing on cross-border LOP deviations where the deviations are rising in
the level of price stickiness, due to the dominant role of nominal exchange rate fluctuations among
cross-border pairs.
   Our hypothesis is that the volatility of the relative price of a good across two Japanese cities
should be positively related to the distance separating those cities and negatively related to the
degree of price stickiness of the good in question. We examine these predictions pooling all available
goods in an ER-like regression, an approach similar to the pooling regression method used by Parsley
and Wei (2001, hereafter PW) in their analysis of the border effect. Our result shows that both
distance and price stickiness play a significant role in determining the variability of LOP deviations.
This empirical finding is robust to changes in the regression specification and alternative measures
of relative price volatility. Thus, our theoretical model and empirical results support the conjecture


                                                  3
of ER on the importance of integrating models of price stickiness with the new economic geography
models of trade.


2        The model

2.1        A benchmark economy

The economy consists of two cities A and B, with mass of households equal to 1/2 each. Both
cities are located in the same country. Each city is subject to city-specific shocks, but parameters
of preferences and technologies are the same. Households in the two cities hold complete state-
contingent money claims. Trade is over a continuum of goods between the two cities. Under
monopolistic competition, a continuum of firms set prices to satisfy demand for a particular good
in a particular city (pricing to market). Households in each city choose consumption and labor
supply over an infinite horizon subject to a cash-in-advance (CIA) constraint.
        We consider two levels of constant elasticity of substitution (CES) aggregation. The lower
level of aggregation is the brand v of a particular good. Brands of each good produced in city
A are indexed by v ∈ [0, 1/2], while the brands of each good produced in city B are indexed by
v ∈ (1/2, 1]. Integrating over brands, we obtain the CES index for consumption of good i in city j,
at date t:                                     Z                                   θ
                                                                  θ−1               θ−1
                                  Cj,t (i) =        Cj,t (i, v)    θ      dv              for j = A, B,

where Cj,t (i, v) is consumption of brand v of good i in city j. The upper level of aggregation is
across goods i. The aggregate consumption of city j is:
                                               Z                             θ
                                                               θ−1            θ−1
                                    Cj,t =          Cj,t (i)    θ    di             , for j = A, B,

The elasticity of substitution among goods, θ, is assumed to exceed one.2
    2
        Allowing for different elasticities between the lower and upper levels of aggregation does not change our main
results.




                                                                     4
Households

Households in each city maximize the discounted sum of utility subject to an intertemporal budget
constraint and a CIA constraint. Households in city j solve
                                                   ∞
                                                   X
                           max                E0         β t (ln Cj,t − Lj,t )                                      (1)
                    Cj,t ,Lj,t ,Mj,t ,Dj,t
                                                   t=0
                                     s.t.     Mj,t + Et (Υt,t+1 Dj,t+1 ) = Rt−1 Wj,t−1 Lj,t−1 + Dj,t                (2)

                                                     +(Mj,t−1 − Pj,t−1 Cj,t−1 ) + Tj,t + Πj,t

                                              Mj,t ≥ Pj,t Cj,t ,                                                    (3)

for j = A and B. Here, β is the discount factor of households satisfying 0 < β < 1, Et (·) is the
expectation operator conditional on the information available in period t and Lj,t is hours of work
supplied by the household in city j.
       The left hand side of the intertemporal budget constraint (2) represents the nominal value of
total wealth of the household brought into the beginning of period t + 1. It consists of cash Mj,t
and one-period state-contingent bonds Dj,t+1 with nominal stochastic discount factor Υt,t+1 . On
the right hand side of (2), the household receives nominal labor income Wj,t−1 Lj,t−1 from the labor
market in city j in period t − 1 and earns gross nominal interest Rt−1 per unit of labor income until
period t.3 Also, the household carries nominal bonds in amount Dj,t and cash holding remaining
after consumption expenditures (Mj,t−1 − Pj,t−1 Cj,t−1 ) into period t. The aggregate price level,
                                             1
Pj,t , is given by Pj,t = [ Pj,t (i)1−θ di] 1−θ , where Pj,t (i) is the price index for good i in city j; Pj,t (i)
                           R
                                                                                      1
is a CES aggregate over differentiated brands: Pj,t (i) = [ Pj,t (i, v)1−θ dv] 1−θ . Finally, Tj,t and Πj,t
                                                                   R

are nominal lump sum transfers from the government and nominal profits of firms operating in city
j, respectively.
       The first-order conditions in city j are standard:
                                              Wj,t
                                                      = Cj,t                                                        (4)
                                              Pj,t
                                                         "                 −1            #
                                                                   Cj,t+1          Pj,t
                                             Υt,t+1 = β                                                             (5)
                                                                    Cj,t          Pj,t+1
                                              Mj,t = Pj,t Cj,t ,                                                    (6)

for j = A and B. Equation (4) is the intratemporal optimality condition for labor and consumption.
Equation (5) represents intertemporal consumption choice between consecutive months. Equation
   3
       We assume that the government pays interest rate Rt (= 1/Et Υt,t+1 ) on labor income in period t. This assumption
permits households’ intra-temporal first-order condition to be undistorted.


                                                                   5
(6) means that the CIA constraint always binds. Combining (4) and (6), we obtain

                                          Mj,t = Pj,t Cj,t = Wj,t ,                                (7)

for j = A and B. That is, in each city, the nominal money demand, nominal consumption expen-
diture and the nominal wage rate are all equal to each other.


Firms

Output is proportional to labor input:

                                        Yj,t (i, v) = Zj,t (i)Lj,t (i, v),

where Yj,t (i, v), Lj,t (i, v), and Zj,t (i) denote output, labor demand and exogenous labor productiv-
ity. Note that Zj,t (i) is city- and good-specific, following the stochastic process given by:

                       ln Zj,t (i) = µZ
                                      j (i) + ηt + εj,t (i)                                        (8)

                              ηt = ηt−1 + νt            νt ∼ i.i.d(0, σν2 )

                          εj,t (i) = ρεj,t−1 (i) + ξj,t (i)        ξj,t (i) ∼ i.i.d.(0, σξ2j ),

where µZ
       j (i) is a fixed effect specific to good i and city j, ηt is a stochastic trend common to all

goods and both cities and εj,t (i) is a persistent idiosyncratic stochastic component, with |ρ| < 1.
   The output is perishable so that the consumption equals output in the current period:

                              1                       1
                                CA,t (i, v) + (1 + τ ) CB,t (i, v) = YA,t (i, v),                  (9)
                              2                       2

for v ∈ [0, 1/2] and
                                      1             1
                              (1 + τ ) CA,t (i, v) + CB,t (i, v) = YB,t (i, v),                   (10)
                                      2             2
for v ∈ (1/2, 1]. Here τ is an iceberg transportation cost.


Calvo pricing

We introduce nominal rigidities à la Calvo (1983): each period, a randomly selected fraction of
firms 1 − λi are allowed to reset prices. As suggested by the subscript on λi , the frequency of price
changes varies by good i, but not by city j.
   Because firms choose the same optimal price when they reset prices, we define the optimal
price that firms producing good i in city A charge consumers in city A as PAA,t (i) and the optimal


                                                        6
price that firms producing good i in city A charge consumers in city B as PAB,t (i). Thus, the
first subscript represents the city of production and the second subscript represents the city of
consumption. The price PAA,t (i) solves the following maximization problem:
                            ∞                                                              −θ
                            X                                   WA,t+h           PAA,t (i)
                max Et            λhi Υt,t+h       PAA,t (i) −                                      CA,t+h (i).   (11)
              PAA,t (i)                                        ZA,t+h (i)        PA,t+h (i)
                            h=0

Here, we used the demand function as a constraint on the maximization problem:

                                             PAA,t (i) −θ
                                                       
                           CA,t+h (i, v) =                CA,t+h (i).
                                             PA,t+h (i)

On the other hand, PAB,t (i) solves the following maximization problem:
                      ∞
                                                                          PAB,t (i) −θ
                                                                                  
                      X                                      WA,t+h
           max Et           λhi Υt,t+h PAB,t (i) − (1 + τ )                            CB,t+h (i),                (12)
          PAB,t (i)                                         ZA,t+h (i)    PB,t+h (i)
                      h=0

Similarly, the optimal reset prices for firms located in city B, PBA,t (i) and PBB,t (i), solve
                      ∞
                                                                          PBA,t (i) −θ
                                                                                  
                      X                                      WB,t+h
            max Et          λhi Υt,t+h PBA,t (i) − (1 + τ )                            CA,t+h (i)                 (13)
          PBA,t (i)                                         ZB,t+h (i)    PA,t+h (i)
                      h=0

and
                            ∞
                                                                          PBB,t (i) −θ
                                                                                  
                            X                                WB,t+h
                max Et            λhi Υt,t+h    PBB,t (i) −                            CB,t+h (i).                (14)
              PBB,t (i)                                     ZB,t+h (i)    PB,t+h (i)
                            h=0


Equilibrium

The monetary authority in this economy controls the growth rate of the money stock such that the
                               s , is exogenous. The market clearing condition for each money
money supply given to city j, Mj,t
           s =M
market is Mj,t                                   s
                j,t for j = A and B. The log of Mj,t follows a non-stationary process given by


                              s
                          ln Mj,t = µM    M
                                     j + ηt
                                                                                                                  (15)
                                     Φ(L)∆ηtM = Ψ(L)νtM ,               νtM ∼ i.i.d(0, σν2M ),

where Ψ(L) and Φ(L) are arbitrary lag polynomials and µM
                                                       j is a city-specific parameter. These

parameters are determined by the monetary authority. Here we assume that ∆ηtM follows a station-
ary ARMA process and that the shock νtM is common to both cities so the growth rate of money
supply ∆ηtM is identical in the two cities.
   Transfers from the government to each city equal money injections minus the lump sum taxes
                                                 s −M s
from the government paying interest: Tj,t = Mj,t       j,t−1 −(Rt−1 −1)Wj,t−1 Lj,t−1 for j = A and B.
                                                                                 R R 21
The profits of firms in city j accrue exclusively to households in city j: ΠA,t = i v=0  ΠA,t (i, v)dvdi

                                                               7
                R R1
and ΠB,t =       i v= 12   ΠB,t (i, v)dvdi, where Πj,t (i, v) is the profit of a firm in city j, producing brand
v of good i.
       The labor market clearing conditions are
                       Z 1 "Z 1                #                                  Z   1
                                                                                          "Z
                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                #
              1                2                                       1
                LA,t =            LA,t (i, v)dv di,                      LB,t =                     LB,t (i, v)dv di.
              2         i=0   v=0                                      2           i=0      v= 12

                                                                                   1
State-contingent bond markets clear at each date and state:                        2 DA,t   + 12 DB,t = 0.4 Market clearing
conditions for goods were given by (9) and (10) earlier.
       An equilibrium of this economy is a collection of allocations and prices: (i) {CA,t (i, v)}i,v ,
MA,t , DA,t and LA,t for households in city A; (ii) {CB,t (i, v)}i,v , MB,t , DB,t and LB,t for house-
holds in city B; (iii) {PA,t (i, v), PB,t (i, v), LA,t (i, v), YA,t (i, v)}i,v∈[0,1/2] for firms in city A; (iv)
{PA,t (i, v), PB,t (i, v), LB,t (i, v), YB,t (i, v)}i,v∈(1/2,1] for firms in city B; and (v) nominal wages and
bond prices satisfy the following conditions: (a) households’ allocations solve their maximization
problem, (1) - (3); (b) prices and allocations of firms solve their maximization problem (11) -
(14); (c) all markets clear; (d) the money supply process and transfers for each city satisfy the
specifications described above.


2.2       Characterizing equilibrium dynamics

We now consider the short-run fluctuations of LOP deviations in the benchmark economy. The
first-order condition for pricing when the place of production and consumption are the same implies
                   ∞
                                                                Pjj,t (i) −θ
                                                                       
                  X
                       h                     θ    Wj,t+h
               Et    λi Υt,t+h Pjj,t (i) −                                   Cj,t+h (i) = 0.  (16)
                                           θ − 1 Zj,t+h (i)    Pj,t+h (i)
                       h=0

The first-order condition when the place of production and consumption are different implies
              ∞
                                                                      Pjk,t (i) −θ
                                                                             
             X                                     θ    Wj,t+h
          Et     λhi Υt,t+h Pjk,t (i) − (1 + τ )                                   Ck,t+h (i) = 0. (17)
                                                 θ − 1 Zj,t+h (i)    Pk,t+h (i)
                 h=0

       Let P̄jk,t (i) = Zj,t (i)Pjk,t (i)/Mj,t and p̄ˆjk,t (i) = ln P̄jk,t (i) − ln P̄jk (i) (i.e., the log-deviation
of the normalized optimal price from the steady state). Given that Mj,t = Wj,t , we obtain the
common log-linearized expression for (16) and (17):
                                                          ∞
                                                          X
                             p̄ˆjk,t (i) = (1 − λi β)Et         (λi β)h (ĝj,t+1,t+h
                                                                           M             Z
                                                                                     − ĝj,t+1,t+h (i)).                (18)
                                                          h=0
   4
       Dividing bond markets into city-specific markets is simply redundant because allocations of state-contingent
bonds in two cities are indeterminate.



                                                                   8
       X
Here ĝj,t+1,t+h (i) is given by
                                                 
                           X
                                                             0            for h = 0
                         ĝj,t+1,t+h (i) =
                                                  Ph          X           for h = 1, 2, · · · ,
                                                         d=1 ĝj,t+d (i)
                                X
                              ĝj,t+d (i)   = ln(Xj,t+d (i)/Xj,t+d−1 (i)).

for j = A, B and X = M, Z.
    The intuition behind (18) is that firms choose prices according to current and future paths of
money and labor productivity growth. Due to time-invariant trade cost (τ ), prices in the source
and destination markets move in proportion this is why the terms on the right-hand-side of (18)
lack k subscripts.
    We define P̄j,t (i) as the normalized price index for good i (i.e., P̄j,t (i) = Zj,t (i)Pj,t (i)/Mj,t ). We
define p̄ˆj,t (i) as the log-deviation of P̄j,t (i) from the steady state. Due to Calvo-type price stickiness,
the fluctuation in the price index in city A for good i, p̄ˆA,t (i), can be written recursively as

                                                       Z           M
                     p̄ˆA,t (i) = λi [p̄ˆA,t−1 (i) + ĝA,t (i) − ĝA,t ]
                                                                                                          (19)
                              + (1 − λi ){SA (i)p̄ˆAA,t (i) + [1 − SA (i)][p̄ˆBA,t (i) + ẑt (i)]},

where ẑt (i) is the labor productivity differential, between cities A and B, for good i, relative to its
unconditional mean (i.e., ẑt (i) = [ln ZA,t (i) − µZ                        Z
                                                    A (i)] − [ln ZB,t (i) − µB (i)]).

    The steady-state expenditure share on home brands of good i, for city A, is SA (i) = 1/{1 +
(1 + τ )1−θ exp[(1 − θ)(µB (i) − µA (i))]}. The trade cost plays its usual role here in generating home
bias in the consumption of home brands relative to imported brands. Higher trade costs generate
greater home bias (driving the share above 0.5).
    The elasticity of the home bias with respect to the trade cost is greater the higher is the
elasticity of substitution across varieties, θ. The additional channel is the differential of the µj (i)
with each term given by µM    Z
                         j − µj (i). To understand our notation of µj (i), note that Wj,t = Mj,t

in equilibrium. Hence, we can interpret µj (i) as a deterministic component of the log of nominal
marginal cost (i.e., ln{Wj,t /Zj,t (i)}). The cost differential enters as a standard relative price effect
on the choice of consumption of the home and imported varieties. That is, if the foreign variety
of a particular good is relatively inexpensive to produce due to higher productivity, it may end up
constituting a higher share of home consumption of that good than the domestic variety, despite
the trade cost.
    To understand (19), note that a fraction λi of firms are randomly drawn from [0, 1] interval
and do not change prices whereas the remaining 1 − λi of firms choose the optimal prices. The

                                                               9
expression inside the bracket in the first component of the right-hand side of (19) represents prices
charged by firms who do not reset prices and this expression is adjusted for technological and money
growth. The expression inside the curly bracket in the second component shows the average newly
reset price for good i, which is an expenditure weighted average of P̄AA,t (i) and P̄BA,t (i). For the
latter price, we need to adjust by ẑt (i) to be consistent with the normalization of p̄ˆA,t (i). Note
that p̄ˆA,t (i) is stationary because ln ZA,t (i) and ln ZB,t (i) have a common stochastic trend and they
are cointegrated. Indeed, due to elimination of a stochastic common trend, ẑt (i) is actually just
εA,t (i) − εB,t (i).
     Similar argument gives the evolution of the price index in city B for good i:
                                                         Z           M
                       p̄ˆB,t (i) = λi [p̄ˆB,t−1 (i) + ĝB,t (i) − ĝB,t ]
                                                                                                        (20)
                                + (1 − λi ){SB (i)p̄ˆBB,t (i) + [1 − SB (i)][p̄ˆAB,t (i) − ẑt (i)]},

where SB (i) = 1/{1 + (1 + τ )1−θ exp[(1 − θ)(µA (i) − µB (i))]}.
     Using the definitions of p̄ˆj,t (i), we obtain the log-deviation of the relative price in city B to the
price in city A,
                                            q̂t (i) = [p̄ˆB,t (i) − p̄ˆA,t (i)] + ẑt (i).              (21)

The presence of ẑt (i) is basically an implication of the way the raw prices are normalized in the
model.
     When the productivity differential is i.i.d., ρ = 0, Appendix A shows the stochastic process of
q̂t (i) is:
                        q̂t (i) = λi q̂t−1 (i) + (1 − λi )(1 − λi β)(SA (i) + SB (i) − 1)ẑt (i).       (22)

     Our focus is the volatility of intra-national LOP deviations and its relationships to price stick-
iness, λi and transportation costs τ . Transport cost increases drive SA (i) + SB (i) above 1 (this is
for the case of common steady-state productivity levels) so that the term multiplying the shock
becomes a larger positive number, increasing the variance of the LOP deviations.
     In our empirical work, a battery of alternative volatility measures are used: (i) the standard
                                                             p
deviation of the one-month first difference, std(∆q(i)) = E[∆q̂t (i)]2 ; (ii) the standard deviation of
                                      p
the quasi-difference, std(∆λ q(i)) = E[q̂t (i) − λi q̂t−1 (i)]2 ; (iii) the standard deviation of the non-
                                    p
filtered series (level), std(q(i)) = E[q̂t (i)]2 . The next proposition establishes the key implication
of our model, which is valid for all of these transformations of the LOP deviation.

Proposition 1. Under the preference ln Cjt − Ljt , CIA constraints, technology shock specified by
(8), the exogenous money growth rates specified by (15), and good-specific Calvo pricing, std(∆q(i)),

                                                                 10
std(∆λ q(i)) and std(q(i)) decrease with price stickiness λi and increase with an iceberg transporta-
tion cost τ .

Proof. See Appendix A.

    The intuition behind this proposition is as follows. Consider the role of price rigidity in the case
when ρ = 0. The variance of the quasi-difference is clearly falling in the extent of price stickiness
because the shock is pre-multiplied by (1 − λi )(1 − λi β); this is approximately equal to (1 − λi )2
since β = 0.99 in monthly data(see equation (22)). Thus the impact of the shock is rapidly damped
as λi moves toward 1 since the coefficient on the shock goes to zero. This effect on the innovation
component to the q̂t (i) process is always present. The unconditional variance is more subtle since
for the level of q̂t (i), persistence is rising in price stickiness which counteracts the reduction in the
innovation variance noted above. However, the offset is less than one-for-one so long as λi < 1.
The Appendix shows this result as well as the case of first-differencing. The bottom line is that
shocks tend not to pass-through to nominal prices under a sticky-price scenario, even though the
persistence rises.
    Turning to the trade cost, notice that Sj (i) is strictly increasing in τ for all i and j. That is, a
higher trade cost leads to more home bias in expenditure, pushing both SA (i) and SB (i) upward
(and therefore doing the same for their sum). Thus, a productivity shock in the production of the
home varieties of good i, while lowering the relative price of home varieties in both markets (for
price adjusters), carries a larger (lower) weight in home (foreign) consumption and thus results
in an asymmetric price index adjustment of that good, across cities, and more relative price (i.e.
LOP) variation.


2.3    Implications of price stickiness for intra-national LOP deviations

This sub-section discusses the role of price stickiness on the volatility of LOP deviations across
intra-national and international contexts.
    Kehoe and Midrigan (2007) argue that volatility and price stickiness should be positively cor-
related in the international context. In contrast, our model predicts that they are negatively
correlated in the intra-national context. Why does this difference arise?
    Recall, equation (22), provides the dynamics of LOP deviations in our model:

                     q̂t (i) = λi q̂t−1 (i) + (1 − λi )(1 − λi β)(SA (i) + SB (i) − 1)ẑt (i).       (23)



                                                        11
where ẑt (i) is the relative labor productivity shock.
       On the other hand, the Calvo pricing model used by Kehoe and Midrigan (2007), under the
same preference and constraints as ours, but in the absence of labor productivity shocks, implies
international relative prices follow an AR(1) process of the form:

                                             q̂t (i) = λi q̂t−1 (i) + λi ∆ŝt ,                             (24)

where q̂t (i) = ŝt + p̂∗t (i) − p̂t (i) and p̂t (i) (p̂∗t (i)) equals the domestic (foreign) log price index for
good i. The logarithm of the nominal exchange rate is ŝt , which Kehoe and Midrigan (2007) assume
is a random walk.
       The cities of Japan share a common monetary shock. While they do not share a common
productivity shock, in general, the productivity shock does not alter relative price of non-adjusters,
by definition. Thus sticky prices lead to more stable prices. Moreover, the LOP deviation across
adjusting firms only changes if there is a demand asymmetry (induced by either trade costs or a
long-run productivity asymmetry). This is because the increased supply in one location would have
a symmetric impact on price indices in both cities in the absence of a demand asymmetry (i.e.,
when SA (i) + SB (i) − 1 = 0).
       In the Kehoe-Midrigan model, the cross-border relative price for non-adjusters moves one-for-
one with the nominal exchange rate shock, as evident in the definition of the LOP deviation. This
is where the correlation of real and nominal exchange rates is perfect. It is the firms that adjust
prices in response to the nominal exchange rate that mitigate the overall impact of price rigidities
on the LOP deviation. As the frequency of price adjustment falls, the former effect dominates and
LOP variability increases.
       Figure 1 uses (22) to generate two simulated paths of LOP deviations for the intra-national
case under different values of λi .5 The figure shows that stickier prices (λi = 0.98) result in much
less volatile fluctuations compared to more flexible prices (λi = 0.85). When prices are sticky,
they do not adjust in any of the cities, so the LOP movements look nothing like the productivity
movements.
       Figure 2 uses (24) to generate two simulated paths of LOP deviations for the international case.6
In contrast to the intra-national case, stickier prices (λi = 0.98) generate more volatile fluctuations
than the more flexible price case (λi = 0.50). When prices are sticky in local currency units, the
   5                                            1
     We set τ = 0.05, µA (i) = µB (i), β = 0.96 12 , θ = 11, and ẑt ∼ N (0, 0.052 ) for this simulation.
   6
     To simulate the theoretical time series, we assume that ŝt = ŝt−1 + ωt , where ωt ∼ N (0, 0.052 ).



                                                            12
real exchange rate tends to track the nominal exchange rate and the real exchange rate and the
nominal exchange rate shock share similar stochastic properties.
        Figures 3 and 4 also confirm that this contrast is preserved under differenced series ∆q̂t (i). These
comparisons tell us that the intra-national setting is useful in isolating the effect of sticky prices.
In the international model, real exchange rates are volatile with flexible prices in the presence of
productivity shocks or with sticky prices in the presence of nominal exchange rate shocks. In the
intranational model, the real exchange rate is volatile under flexible prices and stable under sticky
prices. Thus, the intranational context helps us to isolate the role of sticky prices by not muddling
real and nominal shocks, which have opposite effects on volatility under local currency pricing.


3        Data

3.1        Retail price survey

The price data is from the Retail Price Survey published by Ministry of Internal Affairs and
Communications (MIAC) in Japan.7 Every month, the survey collects retail price observations
from outlets in town and cities; it provides the basic data used to construct Japan’s Consumer
Price Index. The surveyed items (i.e., goods and services) cover most of the items in the household
consumption basket. For many goods, prices are available in several specifications based on the
quality of the product, the quantity sold in a package and other characteristics.
        In terms of locations, our dataset covers all cities with prefectural government and cities with
population of 150,000 or more (71 cities). The sample period of our dataset is from January 2000
to December 2006. The number of goods surveyed exceeds 600, though it varies over time due to
missing observations. Most specifications of goods and services appear consistently over our sample
period, but some are added into or dropped from the sample because MIAC changes the surveyed
items based on changing household consumption patterns.8
        MIAC surveys retail prices of each good, maintaining a fixed set of survey outlets, to the
extent possible. The number of outlets that MIAC surveys in each sample district depends on the
population size of districts and the classification of items. For example, while food prices in cities
with prefectural government are surveyed from four outlets, those in Tokyo metropolitan area are
    7
        The previous studies on LOP in Japan often use this data source. Examples include PW, Baba (2007), Choi and
Matsubara (2007), and Cheung and Fujii (2008).
  8
    For example, printer for personal computers and DVD software are only added recently, in 2003 and 2005,
respectively.


                                                          13
surveyed from 42 outlets. In contrast, public utility charges such as water charges are surveyed
from only one outlet in both districts because the price is considered to be almost uniform within
each district. When more than one outlet is surveyed, MIAC takes the simple arithmetic mean of
these prices and this is the published data we have available for use in this study.


3.2       Intra-national LOP deviations

The LOP deviation, qj,t (i), is measured as the log of the relative price of good i in city j to the
price of the same good in the Tokyo metropolitan area.9

                                        qj,t (i) = ln Pj,t (i) − ln PT okyo,t (i),

for j = 1, 2, ...n and n is the number of cities (excluding Tokyo). In the model, Pj,t (i) and PT okyo,t (i)
are price indices rather than the prices of individual brands. When MIAC computes the arithmetic
mean of prices, more outlets are surveyed in Tokyo metropolitan area and cities with prefectural
governments than cities without prefectural governments. Since we are interested in the relative
price index, we treat the arithmetic mean of a survey price as the price index for that good.10 To
ensure the averages are computed over a sufficient number of outlets, we restrict the cities to those
with prefecture governments. This reduces the number of relative prices to 46, because there are
47 prefectural governments in Japan, including Tokyo.
       We also drop the relative price data where the number of the observations for each of the
three filtered time series qj,t (i) is less than 48 months. With this sample selection, the number of
observations are 17,797 for one-month differenced and quasi-differenced series and 21,926 for non-
filtered series. While our dataset has information on more than 600 goods, our sample selection
reduces the number of goods to 389 for differenced series and to 489 for raw series.


3.3       Frequency of price adjustment

Let fi be the ratio of the number of months in which prices changed for good i to the total number
of the months available in the sample for that good. The standard method of measuring price
stickiness is to set λi = 1 − fi . This measure is problematic in our setting because the number of
outlets surveyed is positively related to the size of the city in which the survey is conducted. Since
   9
       Our results are robust to the use of Tokushima, the approximate geographic center of Japan, as an alternative
numeraire city.
  10
     Admittedly, a caveat is that MIAC does not take a geometric mean as the theory does.



                                                           14
the published data we work with is an average price across the city, the measured fraction, fi , will
tend to be larger in larger cities partly as an artifact of the different timing of price changes across
outlets within the city.
       To mitigate this bias, we use the information on the number of outlets surveyed in each city,
which is provided by MIAC’s publication, Outline of the Retail Price Survey.11 We categorize city-
by-city outlet variation across 24 item groups. For example, foods and alcoholic beverages belong
to the same item group. In this particular item group, MIAC surveys the retail prices from 42, 12,
8, and 4 outlets depending on city population.
       Based on the information on outlet variation, we measure (city-by-city) price stickiness by
           1
(1 − fi ) r where r is the number of outlets. To see how this works to mitigate the bias, suppose that
MIAC collects price data in a city from two outlets over the sample period. Under the Calvo-type
price stickiness assumption, price changes are independent across outlets and occur with probability
1−λi . If no change in the arithmetic mean is observed at a point of time, it suggests that both prices
remained constant. Because the probability is λ2i , the probability that a change in the arithmetic
                                                                             1
mean occurs, fi , becomes 1 − λ2i . Consequently, λi = (1 − fi ) 2 . Similarly, if MIAC collects price
                                                                                                  1
data from 42 outlets as in food items, our measure of price stickiness is (1 − fi ) 42 in such a case.
This computation varies city-by-city and good-by-good, depending on the population size of cities
and item groups.
       To obtain good-specific price stickiness for each good, we take the simple arithmetic mean of city-
by-city probabilities of no price adjustment computed by the method above. This method critically
depends on the Calvo-type price stickiness assumption that price changes occurs independently
over time. Thus, the measured price stickiness might be too high if price changes are synchronized
across outlets within the city. To mitigate the problem of synchronization, we use all available
retail price data from 71 cities including the ones where the number of outlets are relatively small,
instead of limiting the sample to 47 cities with prefectural government.
       Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) and Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) highlight the importance of
considering the effect of sales and product substitutions in the measurement of price stickiness. In
the Retail Price Survey, MIAC does not collect sale prices and asks retailers to report regular prices
instead.12 In contrast, MIAC does not explicitly adjust product substitutions or changes in retail
  11
       It is available at http://www.stat.go.jp/english/data/kouri/pdf/outline.pdf.
  12
       In particular, MIAC defines sales as temporary price decrease which are continually observed for less than seven
days.




                                                           15
prices stemming from changes in detailed specifications. Though we admit the presence of product
substitutions may lead us to understate price stickiness, we define regular price changes as price
changes including product substitutions.
         Table 1 summarizes our findings on price stickiness for categories of goods between January
2000 and December 2006. According to our method, the median frequency of price change is about
8.8 percent per month and the implied duration is 11.3 months for all goods. Our median estimate
is lower than the value reported by Higo and Saita (2007) who measure the frequency of price
changes in Japan between 1989 and 2003. They find that the annual average of frequencies ranges
from about 18 to 24 percent. Our results imply that the degree of price stickiness in Japan is higher
than the existing literature suggests.13
         As Table 1 shows, we observe enormous heterogeneity in the infrequency of price changes across
groups. This high degree of heterogeneity is also found in Higo and Saita (2007). In the extreme
case of transportation, prices remain fixed with probability 0.99.14 At the opposite extreme case,
prices of women’s apparel are much less rigid.15
         The last column of Table 1 reports the medians of the unconditional standard deviation for
qj,t (i) by group. LOP volatility tend to be large when λi is low. For example, the categories
with the three highest standard deviations (food at home, household furnishings and operations
and men’s and boy’s apparel) are among the lowest four categories in terms of their corresponding
λi . Transportations and fuel and other utilities lie at the other end of the distribution with low
volatility and high price rigidity.


4         The regressions

4.1         Main regression results

Our regressions are designed to evaluate the role of price stickiness and trade cost in explaining
the volatility of qj,t (i). We follow ER in hypothesizing the volatility of the prices of similar goods
    13
         It should be noted that Higo and Saita (2007) also try to mitigate the problem we address. In particular, they
limit the number of the sample districts to 55 cities and do not use any retail price data in the largest cities of Japan.
By eliminating price data in large cities, the number of outlets reduces to at most four in their data.
 14
    The inflexibility of prices for this category may partly reflect the absence of airline fares.
 15
    This high frequency could arise from product substitutions that MIAC does not explicitly consider. Nakamura
and Steinsson (2008) have argued that the effect of product substitution on the regular price of apparel is large in
relative to other groups.




                                                            16
sold in different locations is related to the distance between the locations and other explanatory
variables. The main difference between the regressions of ER and our intra-national LOP regressions
is that the key explanatory variable, namely, their dummy variable for crossing a national border,
is replaced by a variable of price stickiness specific to each product but common to all cities.
       The baseline regression is,
                                                                      n
                                                                      X
                                                                                C
                                 V (qij ) = β1 ln(distj ) + β2 λi +         γk Dkj + uij                          (25)
                                                                      k=1

Note that this is a pooled regression using all goods i = 1, ..., m and cities j = 1, ..., n, with a
restriction nk=1 γk = 0, where distj is the greater-circle distance between two locations, namely
           P

                                                                             C is a city-pair dummy
city j and Tokyo (the benchmark city), λi is price stickiness for a good i, Dkj
variable which takes on a value of one when k = j, and uij is the regression error.
       ER measure LOP volatility as the standard deviation of either: i) the differenced series; or ii)
the AR filtered series of the log of the relative price.16 They also check robustness of their results
using the 10-90th percentile range, defined as the spread between the 10th and 90th percentiles.
PW examine the standard deviation of the first differenced series and the inter-quartile range,
defined as the spread between 25th and 75th percentiles, of the first differenced series.
       We measure LOP volatility using both the standard deviation and the inter-quartile ranges for
each of the following transformations of the data: (i) one-month first differenced series, ∆qj,t (i) =
qj,t (i) − qj,t−1 (i); (ii) quasi-differenced series; ∆λ qj,t (i) = qj,t (i) − λi qj,t−1 (i); and (iii) the raw series,
qj,t (i).
       Distance is used as a proxy for unobserved trade costs. As in the ER regression and the standard
gravity model of trade, we take log of distance to impose a concave relationship between relative
price volatility and distance. Since trade costs are expected to rise with distance, the theory predicts
a positive coefficient on distance (β1 > 0). The coefficient on the price stickiness parameter, λi , is
predicted to be negative (β2 < 0).
       Table 2 reports our regression results using three real exchange rate measures and two volatility
metrics. In all six cases, both β1 and β2 are of the hypothesized sign and highly significant based
on heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors reported below the point estimates.17 Explanatory
  16
       To be more specific, ER take the two-month difference because some prices were only reported every other month.
For the AR filtered measure, two-month-ahead in-sample forecast error from the regression of price on six lags and
seasonal dummies is used.
  17
     We also ran regressions where city-pair dummies are replaced with a constant term for robustness. Our analysis
revealed that the signs of β1 and β2 remain unaltered.


                                                           17
power is generally very good when volatilities are computed for the first differenced or quasi-
differenced series.
   Note that our approach is similar to PW in running a two-way cross-sectional regression by
pooling all goods and cities, which extends the one-way cross-sectional analysis of ER who pooled
locations, but not goods. When the standard deviation is used as the volatility measure for the
first differenced series, the regression fit is very close to that of PW in terms of the adjusted R2 .
When inter-quartile range is used, the adjusted R2 becomes as high as 73 percent, higher than PW.
Similar coefficients of determination are obtained for the quasi-differenced series.
   Significantly positive estimates of β1 confirm the importance of distance in explaining the intra-
national relative price dispersion. On the whole, the distance effects measured by the point esti-
mates are somewhat larger in magnitude than the values previously reported. In particular, our
point estimate of 0.035 for the case of standard deviation of differenced series, is much higher than
estimates using international data and moderately higher than estimates using intra-national data.
For example, ER report that the estimate of β1 is 0.001 for the US-Canadian cities and PW find
that it is 0.005 for the US-Japanese cities. On the other hand, Parsley and Wei’s (1996) intra-
national estimates range between 0.004 - 0.018 for the US cities and Ceglowski’s (2003) estimate is
0.018 for the Canadian cities.
   Significantly negative estimates of β2 imply that, holding distance constant, volatility is lower
for goods with less frequent price adjustments. Our interest is in line with that of ER who examined
the role of the nominal price stickiness in accounting for a part of the border effect. The problem
we noted earlier, however, is that real and nominal shocks have opposite effects on LOP volatility
in the presence of sticky prices for cross-border pairs, such as studied by ER. Isolating the exercise
to intranational analysis while measuring price stickiness directly circumvents this problem.


4.2   The distance equivalent of price stickiness

Using the estimated coefficients in the volatility regression on distance and border dummy, ER claim
that crossing the US-Canada border is equivalent to an intranational distance of 75,000 miles. PW
recommend using a modification to ER estimates so that the results would be unaffected by a
change in the unit of distance measurement (e.g., changes from miles to kilometers). They show
that their modification results in much higher implied distance than the ER estimates. Here, we
ask how much extra distance, δ, do we need to add to an initial distance level dist0 to match the
increased LOP variability associated with an increase in price stickiness of 0.01 from an initial level


                                                  18
of λ0 . This distance equivalent of the price stickiness change can be obtained by solving

                             β1 ln(dist0 ) + β2 λ0 = β1 ln(dist0 + δ) + β2 (λ0 + 0.01)

where β1 and β2 are coefficients in the regression model (25). Solving the equation for the increment
to distance, δ, yields
                                     δ = dist0 × {exp(−(β2 /β1 ) × 0.01) − 1}

for a 0.01 increment starting from λ0 .
      Substituting the estimates of β1 and β2 from Table 2 for the first differenced series, we obtain
the implied distance growth of 5 percent when the standard deviation is used, and 6 percent when
inter-quartile range is used. Note that the formula is valid for any benchmark distance level dist0 .
      Using the average distance between the cities of 284 miles (456 kilometers), implied distance
equivalent is 15 miles (24 kilometers) when the standard deviation is used and 17 miles (27 kilo-
meters) when the inter-quartile range is used. The other two measures of relative price variability
yield similar distance equivalence.
      Our implied distance growth for each percentage point can be also used to evaluate the effect
of introducing price stickiness to a hypothetical flexible price economy. When the price stickiness
increases from λ0 = 0 (complete price flexibility) to an observed median of 0.91, the average
distance of 284 miles needs to be increased to about 27,500 miles, exceeding the circumference of
the earth.18 In this sense, the role of price stickiness in explaining intra-national LOP deviations
may be as important as that of the border effect in explaining the international LOP deviations.


4.3      Robustness

Good-specific distance effect

The specification employed in (25) is appropriate when all goods have a common distance effect in
the sense that the rate of price change increases at the rate proportional to the growth in distance.
Here we consider the case when the coefficient on distance depends on the good. The heterogeneity
of the coefficient on distance is expected since transport costs vary across goods with different
characteristics (such as their weight, physical volume or cost per unit). Our second specification of
the regression model takes the form:
                                   m                                n
                           (                 )
                                  X                                 X
                                          G                               C
                 V (qij ) = β1 +     β1` D`i   ln(distj ) + β2 λi +   γk Dkj + uij
                                           `=1                                  k=1
 18
      For this case, our implied distance of price stickiness can be calculated as 284 × (1.052)91 miles.


                                                            19
                       Pm                      G is a good-specific dummy variable which takes one
with the restriction     `=1 β1`   = 0, where D`i
when ` = i.
   Table 3 reports the results from this regression using all volatility measures and relative price
series. We reconfirm that relative price volatility increases with distance and decreases with price
stickiness. For all cases, signs of estimated coefficients are the same as predicted by the theory and
estimates are statistically significant. Importantly, the regression fit of each case is significantly
improved from corresponding results in Table 2. Even for the raw series, adjusted R2 with the
standard deviation used as a volatility measure has now become comparable to that of PW.
   On the whole, the estimates of the average distance effect β1 become somewhat smaller than
the estimates of β1 in equation (25). For example, the value of 0.021 for the specification using
the standard deviation of differenced series is now similar to 0.018, the value obtained by Parsley
and Wei (1996) and Ceglowski (2003). However, since drops in the value are also observed for the
estimates of β2 , the implied distant equivalent of the price stickiness remains about the same as
before.
   Finally, Figures 5 and 6 show the empirical distributions of β1 +β1` based on standard deviation
and inter-quartile range of the first differenced series, respectively. While some good-by-good
variation of the distance effect are observed, they are all positive and tightly distributed around
the average value β1 .


Effect of volatility of labor productivity

Both the benchmark and extended specifications above implicitly assumed that volatility of the
cross-city labor productivity difference is the same for all city-pairs and among all goods. However,
when the volatility of labor productivity differs across cities and goods, this has implications for
LOP volatility as well. Goods and cities with unusually high productivity variation are predicted
to have higher LOP variation. For this reason, it is desirable to control for the volatility of the
labor productivity differential in the regression equation.
   Because data on labor productivity specific to both the city and the good is not available, we
focus on the city-specific component and run the following two specifications:

                 V (qij ) = β1 ln(distj ) + β2 λi + β3 σj + α + uij
                                    m
                            (                   )
                                   X
                                             G
                 V (qij ) =   β1 +      β1` D`i   ln(distj ) + β2 λi + β3 σj + α + uij ,
                                        `=1

where α is a constant term and σj is the time-series standard deviation of the labor productivity

                                                   20
difference between Tokyo and the prefecture to which city j belongs in one-to-one correspondence.19
Note that the new regressions exclude the city-pair dummy and include a constant because adding
σj to the regression leads to a co-linearity with a city-pair dummy variable. The second equation
includes the good-specific distance effect we discussed earlier.
       Tables 4 and 5 report the regression results for the above specifications. All signs of the estimates
on distance and price stickiness are consistent with the theory and statistically different from zero.
The standard deviation of the labor productivity differential, σj , is estimated to be positively
correlated with relative price volatility though it is imprecisely estimated when we use the first-
differenced series.
       In these specifications, the estimates of β1 fall in magnitude and are now comparable to those
estimated by ER and PW. This implies that the implied distance equivalent of price stickiness
becomes greater. Using the formula of the implied distance equivalent to one percentage point
increase in price stickiness, it increases from 15 miles (24 kilometers) to 393 miles (632 kilometers)
when the standard deviation of the filtered series of the relative price is used. The implied distance
equivalent again suggests an important role of price stickiness in explaining intra-national LOP
deviations.


Category-by-category regressions

So far, effects of distance and price stickiness are evaluated by pooling all goods in a single regression.
Unlike ER who run good-by-good regressions (using sub-aggregates) in their evaluation of the
border effect, we cannot estimate the effect of price stickiness for each good since price stickiness of
a good is assumed to be identical for all the cities. However, we can still investigate more detailed
effect of price stickiness by running a regression pooling the goods from a group sharing similar
good characteristics. Here we use 13 categories of goods described in Table 1. The idea is that
such category-by-category regressions allow variations in the coefficients which may perhaps stem
from different stochastic processes of technological difference among categories of goods.
       Table 6 reports the regression results for each of the 13 good categories, without good-specific
distance effects in the specification. In order to conserve space, we only report the results for the
  19
       To compute labor productivity, we use annually sampled prefecture-by-prefecture real GDP and the number of
workers which are available from the website of Economic and Social Research Institute in the government of Japan.
Total hours are computed by multiplying the number of workers by annual hours of work available in Monthly Labor
Survey published by the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare of Japan. Prefecture-by-prefecture labor productivity
is then obtained as the real GDP divided by the total hours. The sample period is from 1980 to 2005.


                                                        21
first differenced series with city-pair dummies. Similar results are obtained by using two other
price series or by introducing city-specific volatility of technological difference. Note that our
categorization of goods closely matches the sub-indices used in ER, thus making it convenient to
compare our values to theirs.
    When ER run the regression of LOP variability on distance for each of the 14 sub-indices
separately using only US cities and only Canadian cities, positive coefficient estimates are obtained
for 12 of 14 sub-indices in the US and for all 14 sub-indices in Canada. The number of sub-indices
with significantly positive estimates are 8 and 13, respectively for the US and Canada. In contrast,
our results yield the correct (hypothesized) sign for cases. The coefficients are also statistically
significant with the exception of the standard deviation metric for one out of 13 good categories.
As in ER, the explanatory power varies greatly across categories of goods and there are a few
categories with a very low adjusted R2 .
    Lastly, Table 7 reports the case when good-specific distance effects are allowed in the specifica-
tion. As in the case of the previous regression results pooling all goods, significant improvement in
the regression fit is obtained by introducing the good-specific distance effect. However, with this
specification, the number of good categories with coefficients with correct sign is reduced to 11 of
13 categories for standard deviations, and 12 of 13 categories for inter-quartile range. When the
sign is wrong, however, the coefficients are not significantly different from zero for all cases.


5    Conclusions

The fact that the aggregate real exchange rate, or the average of the good-level real exchange rates
tracks the nominal exchange rate closely is often considered indirect evidence on the importance
of price stickiness in generating high volatility of the Law of One Price deviations. Engel and
Rogers (1996) also point out that some of the border effects are accounted for by sticky prices. We
investigate the role of price stickiness in explaining the volatility of Law of One Price deviations
when cities are located in the same country. Focusing on the intra-national dimension is advan-
tageous in extracting the pure effect of price stickiness after eliminating the effect of international
trade barriers or nominal exchange rate fluctuations. Using a simple general equilibrium model, we
show that the direction of the effect will be opposite in the intra-national context – price stickiness
reduces the volatility of good-level real exchange rate. We empirically evaluate the prediction of
the model using the micro data of more than 350 highly disaggregated individual good prices from



                                                  22
47 cities in Japan.
    The main finding of our empirical analysis is that both distance and the price stickiness matter
for intra-national relative price variability. To evaluate the importance of the price stickiness,
we also provide a computationally simple measure, namely the distance equivalent of the price
stickiness. In the benchmark specification, reduction of price stickiness by a one percentage point
is equivalent to 5 to 6 percent increase in distance between cities in generating the same amount of
increased volatility. Using the average distance among Japanese cities in our sample, it corresponds
to an addition of 15 to 17 miles. We conclude that an approach of integrating the nominal price
stickiness features and the framework of new economic geography models of trade is promising in
understanding the mechanism of the relative price movements.


Appendix A                   Derivation for (22) and proof of Proposition 1

In this appendix, we derive (22) and prove Proposition 1. First, consider p̄ˆjk,t (i):
                                                         ∞
                                                         X
                         p̄ˆjk,t (i) = (1 − λi β)Et        (λi β)h [ĝj,t+1,t+h
                                                                      M             Z
                                                                                − ĝj,t+1,t+h (i)]
                                                         h=0
                                                      ∞
                                                      X
                                       = (1 − λi β)Et   (λi β)h [ĝj,t+1,t+h
                                                                   M             Z
                                                                             − ĝj,t+1,t+h (i)],
                                                         h=1

         M
because gj,t+1,t+h          Z
                   = 0 and gj,t+1,t+h (i) = 0 for h = 0. Focusing on the second term inside the
bracket, we obtain

                                     Z                       Z
               (1 − λi β)(λi β)Et [ĝj,t+1,t+1 (i) + (λi β)ĝj,t+1,t+2 (i) + (λi β)2 ĝj,t+1,t+3
                                                                                       Z
                                                                                                 (i) + · · · ]
                                     Z
             = (1 − λi β)(λi β)Et [ĝj,t+1 (i)
                                                 Z             Z
                                      + (λi β)(ĝj,t+1 (i) + ĝj,t+2 (i))

                                      + (λi β)2 (ĝj,t+1
                                                   Z             Z
                                                         (i) + ĝj,t+2         Z
                                                                       (i) + ĝj,t+3 (i)) + · · · ].

              Z
Noting that ĝj,t+d+1 (i) = νt+d+1 + εj,t+d+1 (i) − εj,t+d (i), we obtain

                                                  Z
                                            Et (ĝj,t+d+1 (i)) = ρd (ρ − 1)εj,t (i).

Therefore,
                             ∞
                             X
p̄ˆjk,t (i) = (1 − λi β)Et         (λi β)h [ĝj,t+1,t+h
                                              M
                                                        ] + (1 − λi β)(λi β)(1 − ρ)
                             h=1
                                                                                                                         
        × εj,t (i) + (λi β)εj,t (i) + (λi β)ρεj,t (i) + (λi β)2 εj,t (i) + (λi β)2 ρεj,t (i) + (λi β)2 ρ2 εj,t (i) + · · · .


                                                                23
Arranging terms yields
                             ∞
                             X
p̄ˆjk,t (i) = (1 − λi β)Et         (λi β)h [ĝj,t+1,t+h
                                              M
                                                        ] + (1 − λi β)(λi β)(1 − ρ)
                             h=1

         × [(1 + λi β + (λi β)2 · · · ) + λi βρ(1 + λi β + (λi β)2 · · · ) + (λi βρ)2 (1 + λi β + (λi β)2 · · · ) + · · · ]εj,t (i)
                             ∞
                             X
          = (1 − λi β)Et           (λi β)h [ĝj,t+1,t+h
                                              M
                                                        ] + λi β(1 − ρ)(1 + λi βρ + (λi βρ)2 + · · · )εj,t (i).
                             h=1

Hence,
                                                      ∞
                                                      X                               λi β(1 − ρ)
                        p̄ˆjk,t (i) = (1 − λi β)Et          (λi β)h [ĝj,t+1,t+h
                                                                       M
                                                                                 ]+               εj,t (i).         (A1)
                                                                                       1 − λi βρ
                                                      h=1
                                                Z (i) − ĝ Z (i) = −ẑ (i) + ẑ
Next, we subtract (19) from (20). Noting that ĝB                                             M     M
                                                          A           t         t−1 (i) and ĝA = ĝB for

all t and using (A1), we obtain

                        [p̄ˆB,t (i) − p̄ˆA,t (i)] = λi [p̄ˆB,t−1 (i) − p̄ˆA,t−1 (i) − ẑt (i) + ẑt−1 (i)]
                                                  (1 − λi )λi β(1 − ρ)
                                              −                        [SA (i) + SB (i) − 1]ẑt (i)
                                                       1 − λi βρ
                                              +(1 − λi )(SA (i) + SB (i) − 2)ẑt (i).

Combining the relative price equation given by (21) with the above equation, we have
                                                                                        
                                                                           λi β(1 − ρ)
             q̂t (i) = λi q̂t−1 (i) + (SA (i) + SB (i) − 1)(1 − λi ) 1 −                   ẑt (i)
                                                                            1 − λi βρ
                                                                                                                    (A2)
                                                            (1 − λi )(1 − λi β)
                     = λi q̂t−1 (i) + (SA (i) + SB (i) − 1)                     ẑt (i),
                                                                1 − λi βρ

from which one can prove (22) by setting ρ = 0.
    Next, we show
                                                      SA (i) + SB (i) > 1,

for any τ > 0 and any µ(i) defined as µ(i) = µB (i) − µA (i). First, because both SA (i) and SB (i)
is strictly increasing in τ under θ > 1, it suffices to show limτ →0 (SA (i) + SB (i)) ≥ 1. From the
definition of SA (i) and SB (i),

                                                           1             exp[(1 − θ)µ(i)]
                  lim [SA (i) + SB (i)] =                             +                     = 1.
                 τ →0                             1 + exp[(1 − θ)µ(i)] 1 + exp[(1 − θ)µ(i)]

Second, one can show that SA (i) + SB (i) is increasing in µ(i) < 0 and decreasing in µ(i) > 0.
Also, by symmetry between SA (i) and SB (i), it suffices to show that limµ(i)→∞ [SA (i) + SB (i)] ≥ 1.
Indeed,
                                                   lim [SA (i) + SB (i)] = 1.
                                                µ(i)→∞


                                                                 24
Therefore, SA (i) + SB (i) > 1 for any τ > 0 and any µ(i).
    Finally, we prove the relationships obtained in Proposition 1. First, let us consider the volatility
of quasi-difference. Using (A2), we have

                                                               (1 − λi )(1 − λi β)
                          ∆λ q̂t (i) = (SA (i) + SB (i) − 1)                       ẑt (i),
                                                                   1 − λi βρ

where ∆λ q̂t (i) = q̂t (i) − λi q̂t−1 (i). Because ẑt (i) follows an AR(1) process,

                                                                        (1 − λi )(1 − λi β)
                  ∆λ q̂t (i) = ρ∆λ q̂t−1 (i) + (SA (i) + SB (i) − 1)                        ξt (i),
                                                                            1 − λi βρ

where ξt (i) = ξA,t (i) − ξB,t (i). Let V ar(∆λ q(i)) = E[∆λ q̂t (i)]2 . Since ξt (i) and ∆λ q̂t−1 (i) are
uncorrelated, V ar(∆λ q(i)) = ρ2 V ar(∆λ q(i)) + {(SA (i) + SB (i) − 1)(1 − λi )(1 − λi β)/(1 − λi βρ)}2 σξ2 ,
            q
where σξ = σξ2A + σξ2B . Hence,

                                                                                               σξ2
                                                                                        2
                                                                   (1 − λi )(1 − λi β)
                  V ar(∆λ q(i)) = (SA (i) + SB (i) − 1)2                                               ,
                                                                       1 − λi βρ              1 − ρ2

which is decreasing in λi and increasing in τ .
    Second, we compute std(q(i)). From (A2), we obtain

                                                                                (1 − λi )(1 − λi β)
          q̂t (i) = (λi + ρ)q̂t−1 (i) − λi ρq̂t−2 (i) + (SA (i) + SB (i) − 1)                       ξt (i).   (A3)
                                                                                    1 − λi βρ

Thus, the stochastic process of q̂t (i) is an AR(2) process. In a general autocovariance computation
for an AR(2) process, the variance of q̂t (i) satisfies

                              1 + φ2 
                                      1 − 2φ2 + φ22 − φ21 V ar(q(i)) = ψ 2 σξ2 ,
                                                         
                              1 − φ2

where φ1 = λi + ρ, φ2 = −λi ρ, ψ = (SA (i) + SB (i) − 1)(1 − λi )(1 − λi β)/(1 − λi βρ) and V ar(q(i)) =
E[q(i)]2 . Substituting these parameters yields

                       1 − λi ρ 
                                 1 + 2λi ρ + (λi ρ)2 − (λi + ρ)2 V ar(q(i)) = ψ 2 σξ2 .
                                                                
                       1 + λi ρ

Thus,

                                                        1            1 + λi ρ (1 − λi )2 (1 − λi β)2 2
        V ar(q(i)) = (SA (i) + SB (i) − 1)2                                                         σξ
                                            (1 + λi ρ)2 − (λi + ρ)2 1 − λi ρ      (1 − λi βρ)2
                                                                                       2
                                                                       1 − λi β 2 σξ
                                                                           
                                          2    1 − λi     1 + λi ρ
                   = (SA (i) + SB (i) − 1)                                                 ,
                                              1 − λi ρ     1 + λi     1 − λi βρ 1 − ρ2

which implies that std(q(i)) is decreasing in λi and increasing in τ .



                                                       25
   Finally, we move on to std(∆q(i)). By taking the difference of (A3), we obtain

                     ∆q̂t (i) = (λi + ρ)∆q̂t−1 (i) − λi ρ∆q̂t−2 (i)
                                                   (1 − λi )(1 − λi β)
                          +(SA (i) + SB (i) − 1)                       (ξt (i) − ξt−1 (i)).
                                                       1 − λi βρ

Let γ0 = E(∆q̂t (i)∆q̂t (i)), γ1 = E(∆q̂t (i)∆q̂t−1 (i)), and γ2 = E(∆q̂t (i)∆q̂t−2 (i)). By simple algebra,
we can obtain

                                          γ0 = φ1 γ1 + φ2 + [2 − φ1 ]ψ 2 σξ2

                                 (1 − φ2 )γ1 = φ1 γ0 − ψ 2 σξ2

                                          γ2 = φ1 γ1 + φ2 γ0 .

Eliminating γ1 and γ2 yields

                                   2ψ 2                             2ψ 2
                   γ0 =                           σξ2 =                              σ2.
                          (1 + φ1 − φ2 )(1 + φ2 )       (1 + λi + ρ + λi ρ)(1 − λi ρ) ξ

In other words, from the definition of ψ

                              2(SA (i) + SB (i) − 1)2 1 − λi              1 − λi β 2 2
                                                                             
                                                                1 − λi
           V ar(∆q(i)) = γ0 =                                                       σξ ,
                                       1+ρ             1 + λi 1 − λi ρ 1 − λi βρ

which immediately follows that std(∆q(i)) decreases with λi and increases with τ .


References

Baba, C. (2007): “Price Dispersion across and within Countries: The Case of Japan and Korea,”
  Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 21(2), 237–259.

Bergin, P. R., and R. C. Feenstra (2001): “Pricing-to-market, Staggered Contracts, and Real
  Exchange Rate Persistence,” Journal of International Economics, 54(2), 333–359.

Bils, M., and P. J. Klenow (2004): “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 112(5), 947–985.

Broda, C., and D. E. Weinstein (2008): “Understanding International Price Differences Using
  Barcode Data,” NBER Working paper # 14017.

Calvo, G. (1983): “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 12(3), 383–398.



                                                      26
Ceglowski, J. (2003): “The Law of One Price: Intranational Evidence for Canada,” Canadian
  Journal of Economics, 36(2), 373–400.

Chari, V. V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2002): “Can Sticky Price Models Generate
  Volatile and Persistent Real Exchange Rates?,” Review of Economics Studies, 69(3), 533–563.

Cheung, Y.-W., and E. Fujii (2008): “Deviations from the Law of One Price in Japan,” CESifo
  Working paper No 1456.

Choi, C.-Y., and K. Matsubara (2007): “Heterogeneity in the Persistence of Relative Prices:
  What Do the Japanese Cities Tell Us?,” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies,
  21(2), 260–286.

Crucini, M. J., and M. Shintani (2008): “Persistence in Law of One Price Deviations: Evidence
  from Micro-data,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(3), 629–644.

Crucini, M. J., M. Shintani, and T. Tsuruga (2008): “Accounting for Persistence and Volatil-
  ity of Good-level Real Exchange Rates: the Role of Sticky Information,” NBER Working Paper
  # 14381.

Crucini, M. J., C. I. Telmer, and M. Zachariadis (2005): “Understanding European Real
  Exchange Rates,” American Economic Review, 95(3), 724–738.

Engel, C., and J. H. Rogers (1996): “How Wide is the Border?,” American Economic Review,
  86(5), 1112–1125.

Goldberg, P. K., and F. Verboven (2004): “Market Integration and Convergence to the Law
  of One Price: Evidence from the European Car Market,” Journal of International Economics,
  65(1), 49–73.

Higo, M., and Y. Saita (2007): “Price Setting in Japan: Evidence from CPI Micro Data,” Bank
  of Japan Working Paper Series E-20.

Kehoe, P. J., and V. Midrigan (2007): “Sticky Prices and Sectoral Real Exchange Rates,”
  Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Working Paper No 656.

Klenow, P., and O. Kryvtsov (2008): “State-Dependent or Time-Dependent Pricing: Does It
  Matter for Recent U.S. Inflation?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(3), 863–904.


                                              27
Nakamura, E., and J. Steinsson (2008): “Five Facts About Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu
  Cost Models,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4), 1415–1464.

Parsley, D. C., and S.-J. Wei (1996): “Convergence to the Law of One Price Without Trade
  Barriers or Currency Fluctuations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(4), 1211–1236.

        (2001): “Explaining the Border Effect: the Role of Exchange Rate Variability, Shipping
  Costs, and Geography,” Journal of International Economics, 55(1), 87–105.




                                              28
             Figure 1: Volatility of intra-national LOP deviations and price stickiness

                              −3                  Intra−national: volatility decreases with λ
                           x 10
                     2.5
                                                                                λ = 0.85
                      2
                                                                                λ = 0.98
                                                                                Constant (λ = 1)
                     1.5

                      1

                     0.5
               qt




                      0

                    −0.5

                     −1

                    −1.5

                     −2

                    −2.5
                        0          10   20   30           40          50          60            70   80    90          100




NOTES: Simulated from (22).




             Figure 2: Volatility of international LOP deviations and price stickiness

                                                  International: volatility increases with λ
                     0.3
                                                                                                          λ = 0.50
                     0.2                                                                                  λ = 0.98
                                                                                                          RW (λ = 1)
                     0.1

                      0

                    −0.1
               qt




                    −0.2

                    −0.3

                    −0.4

                    −0.5

                    −0.6
                        0          10   20   30           40          50          60            70   80    90          100




NOTES: Simulated from (24).




                                                                  29
  Figure 3: Volatility of the first differenced intra-national LOP deviations and price stickiness

                                −3                         Intra−national: volatility decreases with λ
                            x 10
                       2


                      1.5


                       1


                      0.5
              ∆ qt




                       0


                     −0.5


                      −1


                     −1.5                                                                                     λ = 0.85
                                                                                                              λ = 0.98
                      −2
                        0            10    20        30            40          50           60           70         80    90    100




NOTES: Simulated from (22).




  Figure 4: Volatility of the first differenced international LOP deviations and price stickiness

                                                            International: volatility increases with λ
                      0.15


                       0.1


                      0.05


                            0
                t
               ∆q




                     −0.05


                      −0.1


                     −0.15
                                                λ = 0.50
                                                λ = 0.98
                      −0.2
                          0           10   20         30           40          50          60            70        80    90    100




NOTES: Simulated from (24).




                                                                           30
           Figure 5: Kernel density estimation of the distance effect (standard deviation)

                                        90


                                        80


                                        70


                                        60


                                        50
                              density




                                        40


                                        30


                                        20


                                        10


                                     0
                                    −0.01        0          0.01           0.02            0.03          0.04      0.05
                                                                      distance effect




NOTES: The dotted line represents the average effect of 0.021.




           Figure 6: Kernel density estimation of the distance effect (inter-quartile range)

                              120



                              100



                                  80
                    density




                                  60



                                  40



                                  20



                                 0
                                −0.01        0       0.01          0.02             0.03          0.04      0.05    0.06
                                                                      distance effect




NOTES: The dotted line represents the average effect of 0.028.




                                                                        31
Table 1: Infrequency of regular price changes and standard deviations of first-differenced LOP
deviations by categories of goods

                                  Category (number of goods)             Obs.      λi             std(∆q(i))
                     1     Food at home (210)                            13052    80.5   [0.28]          6.3
                     2     Food away from home (24)                       1363    97.7   [0.01]          1.6
                     3     Alcoholic beverages (14)                        850    92.5   [0.04]          1.5
                     4     Shelter (26)                                   1487    98.0   [0.15]          1.5
                     5     Fuel and other utilities (33)                  2068    97.8   [0.07]          0.9
                     6     Household furnishings and operations (91)      5077    90.6   [0.13]          5.7
                     7     Men’s and boys’ apparel (32)                   1934    88.9   [0.10]          5.2
                     8     Women’s and girls’ apparel (34)                1808    73.7   [0.17]          4.9
                     9     Footwear (8)                                    567    93.7   [0.01]          4.8
                    10     Transportation (28)                            1449    99.2   [0.06]          0.4
                    11     Medical care (31)                              1715    96.8   [0.05]          2.1
                    12     Personal care (25)                             1391    95.9   [0.09]          2.0
                    13     Entertainment (66)                             3423    97.0   [0.11]          2.5
                   1-13    All goods (622)                               36184    91.2   [0.22]          4.3

NOTES: All categories are grouped to make close matches to the ELI code issued by Bureau of Labor Statistics in the US

for comparisons. The numbers in parenthesis following the category name shows the number of goods for computation of

infrequencies of price changes. The number of observations (Obs.) is the one used for calculating the frequencies and not for

calculating standard deviations of LOP deviations. Infrequencies of price changes are the median infrequencies and shown as

a percent per month. The numbers in the brackets are standard deviations for the computed infrequencies. The last column

shows the median of unconditional standard deviations of the first differenced relative prices used in the regressions described

in Table 6. The unit is in percent.




                                                              32
                                         Table 2: Price volatility regressions

                 Transformation               Standard deviation                        Inter-quartile range
                                    Log dist.     Infreq.(λi )   Adj. R2      Log dist.     Infreq.(λi )   Adj. R2
                   Difference         0.035         -0.173         0.51         0.043          -0.249          0.73
                                    (0.0003)        (0.002)                   (0.0003)        (0.002)
                Quasi-difference      0.032         -0.156         0.49         0.043          -0.241          0.70
                                    (0.0002)        (0.002)                   (0.0003)        (0.002)
                      None            0.034         -0.132         0.11         0.045          -0.167          0.07
                                    (0.0003)        (0.002)                   (0.0005)        (0.003)

NOTES: All regressions have 46 city-pair dummies as explanatory variables as well as the variables shown in the table. ‘Log

dist.’, ‘Infreq.’ and ‘Adj. R2 ’ abbreviate log distance, the infrequency of price changes and adjusted R2 , respectively. Numbers

in parenthesis are heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors. The first three columns show regression results when the

regressand is the standard deviation. The standard deviations are calculated from the first differenced, the quasi-differenced

and the non-filtered relative price. The second three columns show regression results when inter-quartile range is used. To

compute time-series variability, we use the sample period from January 2000 to December 2006.




                   Table 3: Price volatility regressions with good-specific distance effect

                 Transformation               Standard deviation                        Inter-quartile range
                                    Log dist.     Infreq.(λi )   Adj. R2      Log dist.     Infreq.(λi )   Adj. R2
                   Difference         0.021         -0.077         0.74         0.028          -0.138          0.85
                                     (0.001)        (0.007)                    (0.001)        (0.008)
                Quasi-difference      0.019         -0.066         0.72         0.026          -0.123          0.82
                                     (0.001)        (0.007)                    (0.001)        (0.0097)
                      None            0.024         -0.060         0.48         0.032          -0.075          0.37
                                     (0.001)        (0.009)                    (0.002)        (0.016)

NOTES: All regressions have 46 city-pair dummies and good-specific distance effect as explanatory variables as well as the

variables shown in the table. See also the footnote of Table 2 for the other detail.




                                                                 33
  Table 4: Price volatility regressions with city-pair-specific volatility of technological difference


  Transformation                       Standard deviation                                            Inter-quartile range
                     Log dist.    Infreq.(λi )   Tech. Diff.(σj )    Adj.   R2     Log dist.    Infreq.(λi )   Tech. Diff. (σj )   Adj. R2
    Difference         0.002        -0.173            0.025              0.50        0.001        -0.249            0.020            0.72
                      (0.0003)      (0.002)          (0.016)                       (0.0003)       (0.002)          (0.014)
 Quasi-difference      0.002        -0.156            0.040              0.48        0.001        -0.241            0.038            0.70
                      (0.0003)      (0.002)          (0.015)                       (0.0003)       (0.002)          (0.015)
       None            0.005        -0.132            0.100              0.11        0.007        -0.167            0.159            0.07
                      (0.0005)      (0.002)          (0.032)                        (0.001)       (0.003)          (0.051)

NOTES: Constant terms are suppressed in all regressions. Regressions include the standard deviation of city-pair-specific

volatility of technological difference, denoted by ‘Tech. Diff.’ as an explanatory variable. See also the footnote of Table 2 for

the other detail.




Table 5: Price volatility regressions with city-pair-specific volatility of technological difference and
good-specific distance effect


  Transformation                       Standard deviation                                           Inter-quartile range
                     Log dist.    Infreq.(λi )   Tech. Diff.(σj )    Adj.   R2     Log dist.    Infreq.(λi )   Tech. Diff.(σj )    Adj. R2
    Difference         0.002        -0.077            0.025              0.72        0.001        -0.138            0.020           0.84
                      (0.0002)      (0.007)          (0.011)                       (0.0002)       (0.008)          (0.010)
 Quasi-difference      0.002        -0.066            0.041              0.71        0.002        -0.123            0.038           0.81
                      (0.0002)      (0.007)          (0.011)                       (0.0002)       (0.010)          (0.012)
       None            0.005        -0.060            0.106              0.47        0.007        -0.075            0.167           0.36
                      (0.0004)      (0.010)          (0.025)                        (0.001)       (0.016)          (0.042)

NOTES: Constant terms and are suppressed in all regressions. Regressions have good-specific distance effects and include the

standard deviation of city-pair-specific volatility of technological difference, denoted by ‘Tech. Diff.’ as an explanatory variable.

See also the footnote of Table 2 for the other detail.




                                                                    34
                          Table 6: Price volatility regressions by categories of goods

               Category               Standard deviation                           Inter-quartile range           Obs.
                            Log dist.     Infreq.(λi )   Adj.   R2        Log dist.    Infreq.(λi )   Adj.   R2
                    1         0.034         -0.166         0.55            0.042          -0.234          0.67    7747
                             (0.0003)       (0.002)                       (0.0003)       (0.002)
                    2         0.218         -1.267         0.46            0.008          -0.047          0.04     690
                             (0.012)        (0.072)                       (0.001)        (0.008)
                    3         0.048         -0.276         0.27            0.035          -0.206          0.39     597
                             (0.004)        (0.027)                       (0.003)        (0.017)
                    4         0.011         -0.042         -0.01           0.011          -0.063          0.20     736
                             (0.002)        (0.012)                       (0.001)        (0.005)
                    5         0.014         -0.066         0.11            0.002          -0.014          0.00     552
                             (0.003)        (0.016)                       (0.0004)       (0.002)
                    6         0.031         -0.134         0.21            0.038          -0.215          0.58    2519
                             (0.001)        (0.006)                       (0.001)        (0.005)
                    7         0.122         -0.697         0.65            0.116          -0.688          0.80     574
                             (0.004)        (0.027)                       (0.003)        (0.021)
                    8         0.170         -0.981         0.52            0.071          -0.406          0.08     230
                             (0.010)        (0.058)                       (0.008)        (0.046)
                    9         0.016         -0.040         0.13            0.038          -0.216          0.05     321
                             (0.016)        (0.097)                       (0.013)        (0.081)
                   10         0.012         -0.058         -0.03           0.018          -0.102          0.73     446
                             (0.002)        (0.011)                       (0.0005)       (0.003)
                   11         0.059         -0.326         0.28            0.055          -0.325          0.70    644
                             (0.003)        (0.019)                       (0.002)        (0.012)
                   12         0.066         -0.372         0.67            0.053          -0.312          0.75    1012
                             (0.002)        (0.009)                       (0.001)        (0.008)
                   13         0.029         -0.144         0.17            0.037          -0.218          0.81    1729
                             (0.001)        (0.006)                       (0.001)        (0.006)
                  1-13        0.035         -0.173         0.51            0.043          -0.249          0.73    17797
                             (0.0003)       (0.002)                       (0.0003)       (0.002)

NOTES: Numbers in Category column from 1 to 13 correspond to categories in Table 1. ‘Obs.’ denotes the number of

observations. Regressands are volatility measures of the first differenced relative price. See also the footnote of Table 2 for the

detail.




                                                                     35
   Table 7: Price volatility regressions by categories of goods with good-specific distance effect

               Category              Standard deviation                           Inter-quartile range           Obs.
                           Log dist.     Infreq.(λi )   Adj.   R2        Log dist.    Infreq.(λi )   Adj.   R2
                  1         0.018          -0.037         0.73            0.024          -0.081          0.79    7747
                            (0.001)        (0.008)                       (0.001)        (0.009)
                  2         0.327          -1.915         0.58            0.014          -0.080          0.68     690
                            (0.065)        (0.383)                       (0.008)        (0.047)
                  3         0.042          -0.242         0.48            0.042          -0.250          0.51     597
                            (0.024)        (0.151)                       (0.017)        (0.105)
                  4         0.025          -0.132         0.56            0.001          -0.003          0.76     736
                            (0.012)        (0.075)                       (0.002)        (0.013)
                  5         -0.013          0.096         0.41            0.002          -0.009          0.86     552
                            (0.009)        (0.053)                       (0.001)        (0.004)
                  6         0.025          -0.095         0.51            0.028          -0.146          0.77    2519
                            (0.004)        (0.027)                       (0.003)        (0.022)
                  7         0.145          -0.843         0.75            0.131          -0.781          0.86     574
                            (0.018)        (0.115)                       (0.020)        (0.124)
                  8         0.233          -1.363         0.57            0.116          -0.681          0.81     230
                            (0.049)        (0.300)                       (0.035)        (0.213)
                  9         0.101          -0.567         0.25            -0.026         0.186           0.57     321
                            (0.092)        (0.569)                       (0.052)        (0.322)
                  10        -0.009          0.068         0.35            0.016          -0.090          0.94    446
                            (0.007)        (0.044)                       (0.002)        (0.011)
                  11        0.058          -0.320         0.51            0.082          -0.490          0.85    644
                            (0.015)        (0.094)                       (0.014)        (0.086)
                  12        0.061          -0.345         0.81            0.059          -0.349          0.79    1012
                            (0.007)        (0.041)                       (0.008)        (0.051)
                  13        0.008          -0.012         0.51            0.011          -0.056          0.89    1729
                            (0.004)        (0.025)                       (0.003)        (0.022)
                 1-13       0.021          -0.077         0.74            0.028          -0.138          0.85    17797
                            (0.001)        (0.007)                       (0.001)        (0.008)

NOTES: See the footnote of Tables 2 and 6 for the detail.




                                                                    36
