                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          SURPRISING COMPARATIVE PROPERTIES OF MONETARY MODELS:
                       RESULTS FROM A NEW DATA BASE

                                           John B. Taylor
                                           Volker Wieland

                                        Working Paper 14849
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14849


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2009




We are grateful for excellent research assistance by Tobias Cwik and Maik Wolters from Goethe University
Frankfurt. Helpful comments by Frank Smets and session participants at the AEA meetings in San
Francisco, January 2009, and the German Economic Association monetary committee meeting in Frankfurt
are gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by John B. Taylor and Volker Wieland. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Surprising Comparative Properties of Monetary Models: Results from a New Data Base
John B. Taylor and Volker Wieland
NBER Working Paper No. 14849
April 2009
JEL No. C52,E30,E52

                                            ABSTRACT

In this paper we investigate the comparative properties of empirically-estimated monetary models
of the U.S. economy. We make use of a new data base of models designed for such investigations.
We focus on three representative models: the Christiano, Eichenbaum, Evans (2005) model, the Smets
and Wouters (2007) model, and the Taylor (1993a) model. Although the three models differ in terms
of structure, estimation method, sample period, and data vintage, we find surprisingly similar economic
impacts of unanticipated changes in the federal funds rate. However, the optimal monetary policy
responses to other sources of economic fluctuations are widely different in the different models. We
show that simple optimal policy rules that respond to the growth rate of output and smooth the interest
rate are not robust. In contrast, policy rules with no interest rate smoothing and no response to the
growth rate, as distinct from the level, of output are more robust. Robustness can be improved further
by optimizing rules with respect to the average loss across the three models.


John B. Taylor
Herbert Hoover Memorial Building
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
John.Taylor@stanford.edu

Volker Wieland
Goethe University Frankfurt
House of Finance, PF H 31
D-60323 Frankfurt/Main
wieland@wiwi.uni-frankfurt.de
       Ever since the 1970s revolution in macroeconomics, monetary economists have been

building quantitative models that incorporate the fundamental ideas of the Lucas critique, time

inconsistency, and forward-looking expectations, in order to evaluate monetary policy more

effectively. The common characteristic of these monetary models, compared with earlier

models, is the combination of rational expectations, staggered price and wage setting, and

policy rules, all of which have proved essential to policy evaluation.

       Over the years the number of monetary models with these characteristics has grown

rapidly as the ideas have been applied in more countries, as researchers have endeavoured to

improve on existing models by building new ones, and as more data shed light on the

monetary transmission process. The last decade, in particular, has witnessed a surge of

macroeconomic model building as researchers have further developed the microeconomic

foundations of monetary models and applied new estimation methods. In our view it is

important for research progress to document and compare these models and assess the value

of model improvements in terms of the objectives of monetary policy evaluation. Keeping

track of the different models is also important for monetary policy in practice because by

checking the robustness of policy in different models one can better assess policy.

       With these model comparison and robustness goals in mind we have recently created a

new “monetary model base,” an interactive collection of models that can be simulated,

optimized, and compared. The monetary model base can be used for model comparison

projects and policy robustness exercises. Perhaps because of the large number of models and

the time and cost of bringing modellers together, there have not been many model comparison

projects and robustness exercises in recent years. In fact the most recent policy robustness

exercise, which we both participated in, occurred 10 years ago as part of an NBER




                                               2
conference.1 Our monetary model base provides a new platform that makes model comparison

much easier than in the past and allows individual researchers easy access to a wide variety of

macroeconomic models and a standard set of relevant benchmarks.2 We hope in particular

that many central banks will participate and benefit from this effort as a means of getting

feedback on model development efforts.

        This paper investigates the implications of three well-known models included in the

model base for monetary policy in the U.S. economy. The first model, which is a multi-

country model of the G-7 economies built more than fifteen years ago, has been used

extensively in the earlier model comparison projects. It is described in detail in Taylor

(1993a). The other two models are the best known representatives of the most recent

generation of empirically estimated new Keynesian models, the Christiano, Eichenbaum and

Evans (2005) model of the United States and the Smets and Wouters (2007) model of the

United States.

        The latter two models incorporate the most recent methodological advances in terms

of modelling the implications of optimizing behavior of households and firms. They also

utilize new estimation methods. The Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) model is

estimated to fit the dynamic responses of key macroeconomic variables to a monetary policy

shock identified with a structural vector autoregression. The Smets and Wouters (2007) model

is estimated with Bayesian methods to fit the dynamic properties of a range of key variables

in response to a full set of shocks.

        First, we examine and compare the monetary transmission process in each model by

studying the impact of monetary policy shocks in each model. Second, we calculate and


1
  The results are reported in the conference volume, Monetary Policy Rules, Taylor (1999). Several of the
models in this earlier comparison and robustness exercise are also included in our new monetary model base,
including Rotemberg-Woodford (1999), McCallum and Nelson (1999), and Taylor (1993).
2
  See the Appendix of this paper for the current list of models and Wieland, Cwik, Müller, Schmidt and Wolters
(2009) for a detailed exposition of the platform for model comparison. This platform relies on the DYNARE
software for model solution and may be used with Matlab. For further information on DYNARE see Collard and
Juillard (2001) and Juillard (1996) and http://www.cepremap.cnrs.fr/dynare/.

                                                      3
compare the optimal monetary policy rules within a certain simple class for each of the

models. Third, we evaluate the robustness of these policy rules by examining their effects in

each of the other models relative to the rule that would be optimal for the respective model.

         The model comparison and robustness analysis reveals some surprising results. Even

though the two more recent models differ from the Taylor (1993a) model in terms of

economic structure, estimation method, data sample and data vintage, they imply almost

identical estimates of the response of U.S. GDP to an unexpected change in the federal funds

rate, that is, to a monetary policy shock. This result is particular surprising in light of earlier

findings by Levin, Wieland and Williams (1999, 2003) indicating that a number of models

built after Taylor (1993a) exhibit quite different estimates of the impact of a monetary policy

shock and the monetary transmission mechanism.3 We also compare the dynamic responses to

other shocks. Interestingly, the impact of the main financial shock, that is the risk premium

shock, on U.S. GDP is also quite similar in the Smets and Wouters (2008) and the Taylor

(1993) model. This finding is of interest in light of the dramatic increase in risk premia

observed since the start of the financial crisis in August 2007.4 Differences emerge with

regard to the consequences of other demand and supply shocks.

         The analysis of optimized simple interest rate rules reveals further interesting

similarities and differences across the three models. All three models prefer rules that include

the lagged interest rate in addition to inflation deviations from target and output deviations

from potential. The two more recent new Keynesian models favour the inclusion of the

growth rate of output rather than simply the current output gap. The robustness exercise,

however, delivers a more pessimistic conclusion. Only the rules that respond to inflation and


3
  For example, the model of Fuhrer and Moore (2000) and the Federal Reserve’s FRB/US model of
Reifschneider, Tetlow and Williams (1999), both exhibited longer-lasting effects of policy shocks on U.S. GDP
that peak several quarters later than in Taylor (1993a). See Levin, Wieland and Williams (1999, 2003) for a
comparison.
4
  As noted by Smets and Wouters (2007) the risk premium shock represents a wedge between the interest rate
controlled by the central bank and the return on assets held by the households and has similar effects as so-called
net-worth shocks in models with an explicit financial sector such as Bernanke et al (1999).

                                                        4
the output gap exhibit reasonably robust performance across models, when a rule optimized in

one model is applied in another one. Rules that also include the lagged interest rate, or the

lagged output gap, are not robust. Robustness can be improved a lot by optimizing the policy

rule with respect to the average loss across the models.



1. Brief Description of the Models

Taylor (1993a)

       This is an econometrically-estimated rational expectations model fit to data from the

G7 economies for the period 1971:1 to 1986:4. All our simulations focus on the United States.

The model was built to evaluate monetary policy rules and was used in the original design of

the Taylor rule. It has also been part of several model comparison exercises including Bryant

et al (1985), Klein (1991), Bryant et al (1993) and Taylor (1999). Shiller (1991) compared

this model to the “old Keynesian” models of the pre rational expectations era, and he found

that there were large differences in the impact of monetary policy due largely to the

assumptions of rational expectations and more structural models of wage and price stickiness.

       To model wage and price stickiness Taylor (1993a) used the staggered wage and price

setting approach rather than ad hoc lags of prices or wages which characterized the older pre-

rational expectations models. However, because the Taylor (1993a) model was empirically

estimated it used neither the simple example of constant-length four-quarter presented in

Taylor (1980) nor the geometrically-distributed contract weights proposed by Calvo (1983).

Rather it lets the weights have a general distribution which is empirically estimated using

aggregate wage data in the different countries. In Japan some synchronization is allowed for.

       The financial sector is based on several “no-arbitrage” conditions for the term

structure of interest rates and the exchange rate. Expectations of future interest rates affect

consumption and investment, and exchange rates affect net exports. Slow adjustment of

consumption and investment is explained by adjustment costs such as habit formation or

                                                5
accelerator dynamics. A core principle of this model is that after a monetary shock the

economy returns to a growth trend described by a model with flexible prices. The growth

trend is assumed to be exogenous to monetary policy as in the classical dichotomy.

       Most of the equations of the model were estimated with Hansen’s instrumental

variables estimation method, with the exception of the staggered wage setting equations

which were estimated with maximum likelihood.



Christiano, Eichenbaum, Evans (2005)

       Many of the equations in the model of Christian, Eichenbaum and Evans (CEE 2005

in the following) exhibit similarities to the equations in the Taylor model, but they are

explicitly-derived log-linear approximations of the first-order conditions of optimizing

representative firms and households. Their model also assumes staggered contracts but with

Calvo weights and backward-looking indexation in those periods when prices and wages are

not set optimally. Long-run growth and short-run fluctuations are modelled jointly rather than

separately as in Taylor’s model. Thus, the CEE (2005) model explicitly accounts for labor

supply dynamics as well as the interaction of investment demand, capital accumulation and

utilization. Furthermore, their model includes a cost-channel of monetary policy. Firms must

borrow working capital to finance their wage bill. Thus, monetary policy rates have an

immediate impact on firms’ profitability.

       The CEE (2005) model was estimated for the U.S. economy over the period 1959:2-

2001:4 by matching the impulse response function to the monetary shock in a structural VAR.

An important assumption of the VAR that carries over to the model is that monetary policy

innovations affect the interest rate in the same quarter, but other variables, including output

and inflation, only by the following quarter.

       The monetary policy innovation represents the single, exogenous economic shock in

the original CEE model. However, additional shocks can be incorporated in the structural

                                                6
model and the variance of such shocks may be estimated using the same methodology. The

additional shocks would first be identified in the structural VAR. Then, the parameters of the

structural model including innovation variances would be re-estimated by matching the

impulse response functions implied by the model with their empirical counterparts from the

VAR. Altig, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Linde (2004), (ACEL 2004 in the following),

follow this approach and identify two additional shocks – a neutral and an investment-specific

technology shock. These shocks exhibit serial correlation and have permanent effects on the

level of productivity. Together with the monetary policy shock they account for about 50%

of the variation in output. The impulse response function for the monetary policy shock in

ACEL (2004) is almost identical to CEE (2005). Therefore, we will use the ACEL (2004)

parameterization of the CEE model for the computational analysis in our paper. A drawback

of this model is that it does not yet provide a complete characterization of the observed output

and inflation volatility.

          The CEE model, which was initially circulated in 2001, represented the first medium-

sized, estimated example of the new generation of New-Keynesian dynamic stochastic

general equilibrium models explicitly derived from optimizing behavior of representative

households and firms.5 It stimulated the development of similar optimization-based models

for many other countries once Smets and Wouters (2003) showed how to make use of new

advances in Bayesian techniques (see e.g. Geweke (1999) and Schorfheide (2000)) in

estimating such models.



Smets and Wouters (2007)

      The model of the U.S. economy estimated by Smets and Wouters (2007) (SW 2007 in the

following) with U.S. data from 1966:1 to 2004:4 may be viewed as an extended version of the

CEE/ACEL model. The SW model contains a greater set of macroeconomic shocks and aims

5
    The paper was published in 2001 as NBER Working Paper 8403.

                                                     7
to fully explain the variation in key variables, such as aggregate output and its components as

well as inflation, wages and interest rates. They use a Bayesian estimation methodology that

allows the use of priors on model parameters informed from theory and literature. The

posterior distributions then incorporate the information in the available macroeconomic data.

Whenever the data does not help in pinpointing parameter values very precisely, theoretical

priors dominate. Such priors can in some cases be based on evidence from microeconomic

studies. The Bayesian estimation methodology has quickly been popularized and widely

applied by researchers in central banks and academia. It has been implemented for use with

the DYNARE software that we also utilize in our model base.

   Smets and Wouters (2007) modify some of the structural assumptions embodied in the

CEE/ACEL model. In the long-run, the SW model is consistent with a balanced steady-state

growth path driven by deterministic labor-augmenting technological progress. While the CEE

model assumes wages and prices are indexed to last period’s inflation rate in the absence of a

Calvo-style signal, the SW model allows firms to index to a weighted average of lagged and

steady-state inflation. Furthermore, SW drop two more assumptions that have important short-

run implications in the CEE/ACEL model. First, they do not impose the delayed effect of

monetary policy on other variables that CEE built into the structural model so as to match the

constraints required by the structural VAR to identify monetary policy shock. Second, SW

(2007) do not require firms to borrow working capital to pay the wage bill. Thus, the so-called

cost channel is absent from the model. Smets and Wouters note that they did not find this

channel necessary for fitting the dynamics in U.S. data. In our simulations, we will also

investigate the implications of adopting the SW assumptions of no cost channel and no timing

constraints on monetary policy shocks in the original CEE/ACEL model.




                                               8
2. Shocks to Monetary Policy as Deviations from Two Policy Rules



      We first use model base to assess the extent of differences between models regarding the

transmission of monetary policy to output and inflation. To this end we compare the effect of

monetary policy shocks in the three models. A monetary policy shock is defined as a surprise

deviation from systematic policy behavior which is characterized by interest rate policy rules.

      In our comparison, we focus on two estimated rules used by SW 2007 and CEE 2005

respectively to characterize systematic central bank policy. Smets and Wouters estimate the

coefficients of this interest rate rule along with the other equations in their model. We refer to

it as the SW rule in the remainder of the paper. They call it a generalized Taylor rule, because

it includes the lagged federal funds rate and the growth rate of output, in addition to the

inflation rate and the output gap that appear in the Taylor (1993b) rule. It implies the

following setting for the federal funds rate, it:



(1)                          it = 0.81it −1 + 0.39π t + 0.97 yt − 0.90 yt −1 + ε ti



Here, πt refers to the annualized, quarterly inflation rate and yt to the output gap.6 In the

Taylor model (and the original Taylor rule) the output gap is defined as difference between

actual output and long-run potential output.7 In the SW and CEE model the gap measure used

in the policy rule is defined as the difference between the actual output level and the level that

would be realized if prices adjust flexibly to macroeconomic shocks, the so-called flex-price

output level. The policy shock is denoted by εti. Due to the inclusion of the lagged interest

rate in the reaction function, such a one-time shock will have a persistent effect on nominal

6
  Note, the response coefficients differ from the values reported in SW 2007. In equation (1), interest and
inflation rates are annualized, while SW used quarterly rates. The original specification in SW 2007 corresponds
to itq = (1 − 0.81)(2.04π tq + 0.09 yt ) + 0.22Δyt + 0.81itq−1 + ε ti , where the subscript q refers to quarterly rates.
7
 Smets and Wouters set wage and price markup shocks equal to zero in the derivation of the flex-price output
measure used to define the output gap.

                                                           9
interest rates and due to price rigidity also on real rates and aggregate output. Under the

original Taylor (1993b) rule a one-time shock εti influences the nominal interest rate only for

one period.

          CEE (2005) define the central bank’s policy rule in terms of a reaction function for the

growth rate of money.8 They identify monetary policy shocks in a structural VAR as

orthogonal innovations to the interest rate reaction function. Then, they estimate the

parameters of the structural model including the parameters of the money growth rule by

matching the impulse response in the structural model and the VAR. In addition, they contrast

their findings under the money growth rule with the effect of a policy shock under an

extended Taylor rule for the federal funds rate:9

(2)                            it = 0.80it −1 + 0.3Etπ t +1 + 0.08 yt + ε ti

Just like the SW rule it incorporates partial adjustment to the lagged federal funds rate.

However, it is forward-looking and responds to the expected inflation rate for the upcoming

quarter. The coefficient on the output gap is much smaller than in the SW rule and it does not

include the lag of the output gap. In the following we refer to this rule as the CEE rule.




3. Monetary Policy Shocks in Three Monetary Models of the U.S. Economy

      We compare the consequences of a monetary policy shock in the Taylor, SW and

CEE/ACEL models to shed light on their implications for the transmission of Federal Reserve

interest rate decisions to aggregate output and inflation. In particular, we want to find out to

what extent the current-generation DSGE models, CEE/ACEL (2004) and SW (2007), imply

quantitatively different effects of monetary policy than the model by Taylor (1993a). Since

8
  CEE (2005) and ACEL(2004) model monetary policy in terms of innovations to the growth-rate of money that
they denote by μt: μt = μ + θ 0ε t + θ1ε t −1 + θ 2ε t − 2 + θ 3ε t −3 ...
9
 Note, we use annualized interest and inflation rates and transcribe the CEE rule accordingly. In CEE 2005 they
define their rule as: itq = (1 − 0.80)(1.5Etπ tq+1 + 0.1yt ) + 0.8itq−1 + ε ti . CEE (2005) attribute this estimated rule to Clarida
et al (1999). However, the coefficients reported in Clarida et al (1999) are different. Their rule corresponds to
it = (1 − 0.79)(2.15 Etπ t +1 + 0.93 yt ) + 0.79it −1 + ε ti .

                                                                10
the models differ in terms of economic structure and parameter estimates are obtained for

different data series, estimation periods and data vintages, we would expect to obtain

quantitatively different assessments of the monetary transmission mechanism.

     Figure 1 reports the consequences of a 1 percentage point shock to the federal funds rate

for nominal interest rates, output and inflation. The panels on the left-hand side refer to the

outcomes when the Federal Reserve sets interest rates following the initial shock according to

the prescriptions of the SW rule, while the right-hand-side panels refer to the outcome under

the CEE rule. Each panel shows the findings from four model simulations. The dark solid

line refers to the Taylor model, the light solid line to the SW model, the dashed line to the

CEE/ACEL model and the dotted line to the CEE/ACEL model with SW assumptions.10

     Surprisingly, the effect of the policy shock on real output and inflation given a common

policy rule is very similar in the four models. For example, under the SW rule the nominal

interest rate increases on impact by 0.8 to 1 percentage points and then returns slowly to stead

state, real output falls over three to four quarters to a trough of about -0.28 percent before

returning to steady-state, and inflation declines more slowly with a trough of 15 basis points

about 2 quarters later than output.

     The quantitative implications for real output in the Taylor (1993) and SW (2007) models

are almost identical. The outcome under the CEE/ACEL model initially differs slightly from

the other two models. In the quarter of the shock we observe a tiny increase in output, while

inflation does not react at all. From the second quarter onwards output declines to the same

extent as in the other two models but the profile is shifted roughly one quarter into the future.

The decline in inflation is similarly delayed. Once we implement the CEE/ACEL model with


10
  The CEE/ACEL model with SW Assumptions implies the following modifications: We remove the timing
constraints that were imposed on the structural model by the authors so that it coincides with the identification
restrictions on the VAR that they used to obtain impulse responses for the monetary policy shock. Furthermore
we remove the constraint from the ACEL model that requires firms to finance the wage bill by borrowing cash in
advance from a financial intermediary. As a result of this constraint the interest rate has a direct effect on firms’
costs.


                                                         11
the SW assumptions of no timing constraint on policy and no cost channel, the output and

inflation dynamics are more similar to the other two models.

   The original Lucas critique stated that a change in the systematic component of policy

would have important implications for the dynamics of macroeconomic variables. This effect

becomes apparent when we switch from the SW rule to the CEE rule. Under the CEE rule the

policy shock has a greater effect on output which reaches a trough between -0.32 and -0.37

percent. Again, however, the magnitude of the effect of the policy shock on real output and

inflation is almost identical in the Taylor model, the SW model and the ACEL/CEE model,

particularly when the latter model is implemented with the SW assumptions.

   Furthermore, we have computed the real output effects of a monetary policy shock with

different response coefficients (for example, a four times smaller response to output),

different inflation measures (such as year-on-year inflation) and different rules such as the

original Taylor rule or the benchmark rules considered in Levin, Wieland and Williams

(2003) and Kuester and Wieland (2008). Different rules have quite different implications for

the real consequences of monetary policy shocks. However, the Taylor model, the SW model

and the CEE model continue to imply surprisingly similar dynamics of aggregate real output

and inflation in response to policy shock for a given, common policy rule.

   The finding that the two best-known models of the recent generation of new Keynesian

models provide very similar estimates of the impact of a policy shock on U.S. real GDP as the

model of Taylor (1993a) is particularly surprising in light of earlier comparison projects. For

example, the comparison in Levin, Wieland and Williams (1999) and (2003) indicated that

models built and estimated after Taylor (1993a) such as the model of Fuhrer and Moore

(1995) or the Federal Reserve’s FRB/US model of Reifschneider, Tetlow and Williams

(1999) provided different assessments of the U.S. monetary transmission mechanism. In

particular, these models suggested that the impact of monetary policy shocks on real output



                                               12
would be longer-lasting and reach its peak more than a year after the initial impulse. This

view is often considered conventional wisdom among practitioners.

       So far we have focused on the overall effect of the policy shock on output and inflation.

Now we turn to the effects on other macroeconomic variables. Figure 2 illustrates some

additional common aspects of the transmission mechanism in the three models of the U.S.

economy, while Figure 3 highlights interesting differences. Monetary policy is assumed to

follow the SW rule after the policy shock.11 The real interest rate increases almost to the

same extent in all three models as shown in panel 2a. As a result, aggregate consumption and

aggregate investment decline. The decline in consumption is smaller in the Taylor model than

in the other two models, while the decline in investment is much greater. Also, real wages

decline along with aggregate demand in all three models.

       The three models also exhibit some interesting differences regarding the transmission of

monetary policy shocks. For example, panels a. and b. in Figure 3 indicate that only the

Taylor model accounts for international feedback effects. As a result of the policy shock the

US dollar appreciates temporarily in real trade-weighted terms. Exports and imports, both,

decline. However, the fall in imports is much greater than in exports and as a result net

exports increase. The strong decline in imports occurs due to the domestic demand effect that

figures very importantly in the U.S. import demand equation. The resulting increase in net

exports partly offsets the impact of the large negative decline in investment demand on

aggregate output in the Taylor model. Furthermore, panels c. through f. in Figure 3 illustrate

that only the SW and CEE models account for the effects of the policy shock on labor supply,

capital stock, the rental rate of capital and capital utilization. All four measures decline in

response to the monetary shock. This explanation of supply-side dynamics is missing from the

Taylor model.




11
     Similar figures for the case of the CEE rule are provided in the appendix.

                                                          13
4. Other shocks and their implications for policy design



   Unexpected changes in monetary policy are of interest in order to identify aspects of the

monetary transmission mechanism. When it comes to the question of policy design, however,

the standard recommendation is to avoid policy surprises since they only generate additional

output and inflation volatility. Instead optimal and robust policy design focuses on the proper

choice of the variables and the magnitude of the response coefficients in the policy rule that

characterizes the systematic component of monetary policy. The policy rule is then designed

to stabilize output and inflation in the event of shocks emanating from other sectors of the

economy. In this respect, it is of interest to review and compare the potential sources of

economic shocks in the three models under consideration.

   In light of the recent financial crisis, we start by comparing the effect of particular

financial shocks. Only the Taylor and SW models contain such shocks. Figure 4 illustrates

the effect of an increase in the term premium by 1 percentage point on real output and

inflation in the Taylor and SW models. The initial impact of these shocks on real output is

almost identical in the two models and lies between -0.22 and -0.24 percent of output. This

finding is particularly surprising since the shocks are estimated quite differently in the two

models. In the Taylor model the term premium shock is estimated from the term structure

equation directly using data on short- and long-term interest rates, that is, the federal funds

rate versus 10-year US treasuries. In the SW model the risk premium shock is estimated from

the consumption and investment equation. It assumes the term structure relation implicitly but

uses no data on long-term rates. In earlier work on the euro area, Smets and Wouters (2003)

included instead a consumption demand or preference shock. This shock is omitted in their

model of the U.S. economy to keep the number of shocks in line with the number of observed

variables. SW emphasize that the premium shock represents a wedge between the interest rate

controlled by the central bank and the return on assets held by the households and has similar

                                                14
effects as so-called net-worth shocks in models with an explicit financial sector such as

Bernanke et al (1999).12

     Figure 5 provides a comparison of what could be termed “demand” or “spending” shocks

in the three models. These are shocks that push output and inflation in the same direction. The

Taylor model contains many such shocks. Panels a. and b. show the effects of shocks to non-

durables consumption, equipment investment, inventory investment, government spending

and import demand on the output gap and inflation. The SW model contains two shocks of

this type, an exogenous spending shock that comprises government spending as well as net

exports and an investment-specific technology shock. The ACEL model contains an

investment-specific technology shock that initially lowers inflation but then raises it. It has

stronger long-term effects than the investment-specific technology shock in SW (2007).

     Figure 6 compares supply shocks in the three models, i.e. shocks that push output and

inflation in opposite directions. The Taylor model has a number of such shocks, in particular

innovations to the contract wage equations, the final goods price equation, import prices and

export prices. The SW model contains price mark-up and wage markup shocks that are

somewhat similar to the contract wage and aggregate price shocks in the Taylor model. Only

the SW and the ACEL models include neutral technology shocks. In the ACEL model these

shocks have a long-term effect on productivity growth, while their effect on productivity

growth in the SW model is temporary.

        Comparing the three models, it is important to keep in mind that only the Taylor and

SW model aim to fully explain the variation in the macroeconomic variables included in the

model as an outcome of exogenous shocks and endogenous propagation. The ACEL model


12
  In the model file available from the AER website along with the SW (2007) paper the shock is multiplied with
minus the consumption elasticity. This is consistent with figure 2 of that paper, where the shock appears as a
“demand” shock, i.e. an increase has a positive effect on output. It is not consistent with equation (2) in SW
(2007) that identifies the shock as a risk premium shock (i.e. an increase has a negative effect). We have
modified the model file consistent with the notation as risk premium shock in equation (2) in SW (2007). In
addition, we have checked that re-estimating the SW model with the shock entering the consumption Euler
equation as defined by equation (2) in their paper does not have an important effect on the parameter estimates.

                                                      15
only aims to explain that part of the variation that is caused by the three shocks in the

structural VAR that was used to identify them. Figures 5 and 6 indicate that the investment-

specific and neutral technology shocks in the ACEL model have negligible effects on

inflation. Consequently, the ACEL model omits most sources of inflation volatility outside of

policy shocks and is of limited usefulness for designing monetary policy rules. With this

caution in mind, we will nevertheless explore the implications of the ACEL model for policy

design together with the other two models.



5. Optimal simple policy rules in the Taylor, CEE/ACEL and SW models



       The first question on policy design, that we address concerns the models´

recommendations for the optimal policy response to a small number of variables in a simple

interest rate rule. We start by considering rules that incorporate a policy response to two

variables, that is, the current year-on-year inflation rate and the output gap as in the original

Taylor (1993b) rule:

(3)                             it = απ t + β 0 yt

In a second step, we extend the rule to include the lagged nominal interest rate as in Levin,

Wieland and Williams (1999, 2003):



(4)                             it = ρ it −1 + απ t + β 0 yt



Finally, we also include the lagged output gap as in the estimated rule in the Smets and

Wouters (2007) model:



(5)                             it = ρ it −1 + απ t + β 0 yt + β1 yt −1



                                                     16
We choose the response coefficients of the rules (i.e. ρ, α, β0, β1) in each of the models by

minimizing a loss function L that includes the unconditional variances of inflation, the output

gap and the change of the nominal interest rate:



(6)                        L = Var (π ) + λ yVar ( y ) + λΔiVar (Δi )



A range of alternative weights on output and interest rate volatility is considered: λy=(0, 0.5,1)

and λΔi =(0.5,1). The output gap y is defined as the deviation of actual output from the level

of output that would be realized if the price level were fully flexible. In the Taylor model this

level of output grows at an exogenous rate. In the SW and ACEL models, however, flexible-

price output varies in response to some of the economic shocks. We use the same definition of

flexible price output as in Smets and Wouters (2007).

         The optimized response coefficients are shown in Table 1. It reports results for two-,

three- and four-parameter rules in the Taylor, SW and CEE/ACEL models. The central

bank’s objective is assumed to assign a weight of unity to inflation and interest rate volatility

and either a weight of zero or unity to output gap volatility.13 First, with regard to two-

parameter rules all three models prescribe a large response coefficient on inflation and a small

coefficient on the output gap, if the output gap does not appear in the loss function. If the

output gap receives equal weight in the loss function then the optimal coefficient on output

increases but remains quite a bit below the response to inflation. The coefficient on inflation

declines in the SW and CEE/ACEL models but increases in the Taylor model when output

appears in the loss function.




13
  Additional findings for a weight of 0.5 on the unconditional variance of the change of the nominal interest rate
are reported in the appendix. Further sensitivity studies for intermediate weights have been conducted but are not
shown.

                                                       17
           For three-parameter rules the optimized value of the coefficient on the lagged nominal

interest rate is near unity. This property applies in all three models and with different values

of the objective function weights except for one case that is discussed below. The coefficients

on inflation are much smaller than in the two-parameter rules but they typically remain

positive. In the ACEL model the loss function is very flat. There appear to be multiple local

optima and the global optimum we identify has very extreme coefficients in the case of the

three-parameter rule with a positive weight on output gap volatility in the loss function.14 We

attribute this property of the ACEL model to the fact that it only contains two technology

shocks that explain little of the variation of inflation and output gaps but have permanent

effects on the growth of steady state output. The ACEL model contains no short-run demand

and supply shocks as do the other two models. For this reason the model may not be

considered suitable in its current form for an evaluation of the role of interest rate rules in

stabilization policy. Nevertheless, we continue to replicate the analysis conducted in the other

two models also in the ACEL model throughout this paper.

      Next, we turn to the rules with four parameters that include the lagged output gap in

addition to current output, inflation and the lagged interest rate. The coefficients on the

lagged interest rate typically remain near unity. Interestingly, the coefficient on the lagged

output gap, that is β1, in the CEE/ACEL and SW models is almost equal to –β0, the coefficient

on the current output gap. Thus, the CEE/ACEL and SW models appear to desire a policy

response to the growth rate of the output gap rather than its level. This is not the case in the

Taylor model.

      Table 2 reports on the relative stabilization performance with two-, three- and four-

parameter rules. Two different measures are reported, the percentage increase in loss and, in

parentheses, the absolute increase in loss when one reduces the number of parameters (and

therefore variables) in the policy rule starting from the case of four-parameter rules. In the

14
     A local optimum at less extreme values is observed for ρ = 0.01, α = 2.9, β0 = 0.5.

                                                          18
following, we will focus on the absolute loss differences because the percentage differences

tend to give misleading signals.

    The particular measure of the increase in absolute loss that is shown is the implied

inflation variability premium proposed by Kuester and Wieland (2008) (referred to as the IIP

in the following). This measure translates a particular increase in absolute loss into the

increase in the standard deviation of inflation (in percentage point terms) that would raise the

loss to the same extent keeping all else equal (i.e. for a constant output or interest volatility).

The advantage of this measure is that it is easily interpreted in practical terms and therefore

provides a clear signal of those properties of interest rate rules that are of economic

importance.

    To give an example, consider the number in the first row and fourth column of Table 2 in

parentheses. Its value is 2.14 and it implies the following: if the Taylor model represents the

U.S. economy and the central bank considers using the optimized two-parameter rule instead

of an optimized three-parameter rule, and if the central bank’s loss-function assigns equal

weight to output and inflation, the resulting increase in loss (due to higher inflation, output

and interest volatility) is equivalent to an increase in the standard deviation of inflation of

2.14 percentage points all else equal. This difference is economically important. Although, it

is the largest IIP reported in the table the associated percentage increase of 98.8% is only the

fourth-largest in the table. The third-largest percentage increase in the table is 229%. It is

associated with a switch from the three-parameter to the two-parameter rule in the ACEL

model when the central bank’s loss function assigns zero weight to output volatility.

However, the associated IIP of 0.04 is tiny. Thus, the particular switch in rule is

economically irrelevant in spite of the large percentage increase in loss. In this case, the

reason is that the ACEL model only contains two shocks that cause little inflation volatility

and very small losses.



                                                 19
   The findings in Table 2 suggest that there is little additional benefit from including the

lagged output gap in the rule. Dropping the lagged output gap from the rule barely increases

the central bank’s loss. The associated IIP’s lie between 0.001 and 0.47. However, it appears

very beneficial to include the lagged interest rate in the rule. Dropping the lagged interest rate

from the rule and moving from three to two response parameters implies an economically

significant increase in the central bank’s loss function, in particular in the Taylor and SW

models.



6. Robustness



   What if the model used by the central bank in designing a policy rule is not a good

representation of the economy and one of the other two models provides a much better

representation of the U.S. economy? In other words, how robust are model-specific

optimized policy rules with respect to the range of model uncertainty reflected in the three

models considered in this paper? Table 3 provides an answer to these questions. Robustness

is measured in the following manner. The rule optimized for model X is implemented in

model Y. The resulting loss in model Y is compared to the loss that would be realized under

the rule with the same number of parameters that has been optimized for that particular

model. The difference is expressed in terms of IIP only.

   The findings in Table 3 show that from the perspective of a central bank that aims to

minimize inflation and interest rate volatility but assigns no weight to output volatility (λy =0),

all three classes of policy rules are quite robust. Typically, a rule optimized in one of the

models performs quite well in any of the other model compared to the best possible rule with

the same number of parameters in that model.

   Unfortunately, the preceding conclusion is almost completely reversed when one takes the

perspective of a policy maker who cares equally about output and inflation volatility, i.e.

                                                20
when λy=1. In this case, the policy rules with four parameters are not robust. For example,

using the four-parameter rule that is optimal in the SW model instead in the Taylor model,

implies an IIP of 2.71. Alternatively, the four-parameter rule optimized for the Taylor model

implies an IIP of 7.18 in the SW model and generates multiple equilibria in the ACEL model.

   As indicated previously in Table 2, setting the policy response to the lagged output gap to

zero comes at little cost in terms of increased output, inflation and interest volatility in a given

model. Unfortunately, however, the findings in the middle, two columns of Table 3 indicate

that rules with three parameters also lack robustness. Only the rules with two parameters that

respond to inflation and the current output gap deliver a fairly robust stabilization

performance across the three models. The IIP’s are always substantially below unity and often

near zero.

     Table 4 shows that an evaluation of robustness properties delivers the same conclusions

if the CEE/ACEL model is dropped from the analysis. A policymaker with a strong

preference for robustness against model uncertainty may therefore prefer to choose an

optimized two-parameter rule that responds to inflation and the output gap but not the lagged

interest rate. Unfortunately, such rules perform quite a bit worse than the three parameter

rules that include the lagged interest rate when it is known which of the models best captures

the true dynamics in the economy. To quantify this loss, we re-compute the robustness

properties of the two-parameter rules in Table 4 with respect to the best four-parameter rule in

the respective model. The implied increase in absolute loss as measured by the IIP is shown

in parentheses in the first column of Table 4. These IIP’s are relatively high but still indicate

that the 2-parameter rules remain more robust to model uncertainty than a three- or four

parameter rule.

       Using the model data base it is possible to optimize a particular policy rule with

respect to multiple models by minimizing the average loss across models. This approach has

been proposed, for example, by Levin, Wieland and Williams (2003) and Brock, Durlauf and

                                                21
West (2003). In this case, the response coefficients of the rules (i.e. ρ, α, β0, β1) are chosen to

minimize the average loss across the three models:

                         3           3
                             1           1
(6)                     ∑
                        m =1 3
                               Lm = ∑
                                    m =1 3
                                           (Var (π m ) + λ yVar ( ym ) + λΔiVar ( Δim ))


Here, the subscript m refers to a particular model. We focus on the performance of such rules

in those cases where model-specific rules were not robust such as when the central bank

assigns similar weights to output and inflation in the loss functions. The parameter values for

the model averaging rules are reported in Table 5. The 2-parameter rules are similar to the

model-specific optimization because those were already quite robust. The interest-smoothing

coefficient for 3- and 4-parameter rules now lies in between the values that are optimal in the

SW and the TAYLOR model, while the response to inflation is increased.

       The robustness of the model averaging rules is studied in Table 6. The findings

confirm that the model-specific 2-parameter rules are quite robust. Model averaging,

however, helps to identify rules with interest smoothing that are also robust across the three

models and regain much of the improvement in stabilization performance that is promised by

the model-specific rules with interest rate smoothing.



7. Conclusions



The preceding comparison of the Taylor (1993a) model with the two well-known examples

from the current generation of new Keynesian models of the U.S. economy by Christiano,

Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2007) indicates a surprising similarity

of the U.S. monetary transmission mechanism. The empirical, model-based assessment of the

impact of an unanticipated change in the federal funds rate on real U.S. GDP has not changed

in 14 years that lie in between the publication of these models. This finding is encouraging for

policy makers that want to rely on such models. It differs from earlier comparison projects


                                                    22
which showed that models built later in the 1990s such as the FRB/US model suggested that

the impact of policy shocks on real output was much more drawn out over time. Conventional

wisdom on the lags of monetary policy decisions may therefore need to be revised.

       The robustness analysis of simple policy rules with the three models is less

encouraging than the comparative assessment of the transmission mechanism. If the central

bank has the task of stabilizing both output and inflation, then an optimal rule in one of our

models is not robust in the other models. However, by sacrificing optimality in each model

one can find a policy rule which is robust across all three models. For example, rules with no

interest rate smoothing and no response to the growth rate, as distinct of the level of output,

are surprisingly robust. Furthermore, model averaging provides an avenue for improving the

robustness of rules with interest rate smoothing.




                                               23
References

Altig, David, Lawrence, Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Jesper Linde. (2004). "Firm-
Specific Capital, Nominal Rigidities and the Business Cycle." Working Paper Series, WP-05-
01, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler and Simon Gilchrist, (1999). "The Financial Accelerator in a
Quantitative Business Cycles Framework." in John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds.,
Handbook of Macroeconomics Volume 1C. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, North-Holland.

Brock, William, Steven Durlauf, and Kenneth West, (2003), “Policy Evaluation in Uncertain
Environments”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1:2003, 235-302.

Bryant, Ralph, David Currie, Jacob Frenkel, Paul Masson, and Richard Portes, eds. (1989).
Macroeconomic Policies in an Interdependent World. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings
Institution.

Bryant, Ralph, Peter Hooper, and Catherine Mann, eds. (1993). Evaluating Policy Regimes:
New Research in Empirical Macroeconomics. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.

Calvo, Guillermo (1983). "Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework." Journal of
Monetary Economics 12: 383–98.

Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans. (2005). "Nominal Rigidities
and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy." Journal of Political Economy 113,
1: 1–45.

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler (1999). "The Science of Monetary Policy: A
New-Keynesian Perspective." Journal of Economic Literature 37 (December): 1661–1707.

Collard, Fabrice and Michael Juillard (2001). "Accuracy of Stochastic Perturbation Methods:
The Case of Asset Pricing Models." Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 25: 979–
999.

Fuhrer, Jeffrey and George Moore. (1995), "Inflation Persistence." Quarterly Journal of
Economics 110, 1: 127–159.

Geweke, John (1999). "Using Simulation Methods for Bayesian Econometric Models:
Inference, Development and Communication." Econometric Reviews 18: 1-126.

Juillard, Michel. (1996), "Dynare: A Program for the Resolution and Simulation of Dynamic
Models with Forward Variables Through the Use of a Relaxation Algorithm." CEPREMAP
working paper, 9602.

Klein, Lawrence, ed. (1991). Comparative Performance of U.S. Econometric Models. Oxford,
Eng.: Oxford University Press.

Kuester, Keith, and Volker Wieland (2008). "Insurance Policies for Monetary Policy in the
Euro Area." Journal of the European Economic Assocation, forthcoming.



                                             24
Levin, Andrew, Volker Wieland, and John. C. Williams. (1999), "Robustness of Simple
Monetary Policy Rules under Model Uncertainty," in John B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy
Rules. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.

Levin, Andrew, Volker Wieland, and John. C. Williams. (2003). "The Performance of
Forecast-Based Monetary Policy Rules under Model Uncertainty." American Economic
Review 93, 3: 622–645.

Lucas, Robert (1976). "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique." Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy 1: 19–46.

McCallum, Bennett, and Edward Nelson. (1999), "Performance of Operational Policy Rules
in an Estimated Semi-Classical Structural Model," in John B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy
Rules. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.

Reifschneider, David, Tetlow, Robert and John C. Williams. (1999), "Aggregate
Disturbances, Monetary Policy, and the Macroeconomy: The FRB/US Perspective." Federal
Reserve Bulletin, 85, 1: 1–19.

Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford. (1999), "Interest-Rate Rules in an Estimated Sticky
Price Model," in John B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1999.

Schorfheide, Frank (2000). "Loss Function Based Evaluation of DSGE Models." Journal of
Applied Econometrics 15, 6: 645-670.

Smets, Frank and Raf Wouters. (2003), "An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General
Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area." Journal of the European Economic Association 1, 5:
1123–1175.

Smets, Frank and Raf Wouters. (2007). "Shocks and Frictions in U.S. Business Cycles: A
Bayesian DSGE Approach." American Economic Review 97, 3: 506–606.

Shiller, Robert J. (1991). "Comment." In Comparative Performance of U.S. Econometric
Models, edited by Lawrence Klein. Oxford, Eng.: Oxford University Press.

Taylor, John, B. (1993a). Macroeconomic Policy in a World Economy. New York: Norton,
1993.

Taylor, John, B. (1993b). "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice." Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 39: 195-214.

Taylor, John, B. (1999). ed. Monetary Policy Rules. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1999.

Taylor, John, B. (1980). "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts." Journal of Political
Economy 88: 1–24.

Volker Wieland, Tobias Cwik, Gernot Mueller, Sebastian Schmidt and Maik Wolters (2009).
“A New Comparative Approach to Macroeconomic Modelling and Policy Analysis"
Manuscript, Center for Financial Studies, Frankfurt.

                                             25
                                                   Table 1
                               Optimized 2-, 3- and 4-Parameter Rules
                                    it = ρ it −1 + απ t + β 0 yt + β1 yt −1

Model                                 λy = 0                                               λy = 1
                           ρ        α        β0                β1          ρ           α            β0           β1
                       2 Parameters
TAYLOR                           2.54       0.19                                     3.00        0.52
SW                               2.33      -0.10                                     2.04        0.26
CEE/ACEL                         4.45       0.28                                     2.57        0.45
                       3 Parameters
TAYLOR                   0.98    0.37       0.09                         0.98        0.21        0.53
SW                       1.06    0.49       0.01                         1.13       0.012       0.015
CEE/ACEL                 0.97    0.99       0.02                         2.84        7.85       -2.12
                       4 Parameters
TAYLOR                   0.98    0.37       0.07              0.02       0.96        0.18        0.41       0.19
SW                       1.06    0.46      -0.03             0.03        1.07        0.16        1.63       -1.62
CEE/ACEL                 1.01    1.11       0.18             -0.18       1.04        0.51        2.24       -2.30
Note: The loss function includes the variance of inflation and the variance of the first-difference of nominal
interest rates with a weight of unity. λy denotes the weight on the variance of the output gap.



                                             Table 2
                   Increase in Loss when Reducing the Number of Parameters
                               Percentage Increase (Increase in IIP*)

                                          λy = 0                                           λy = 1
                           4 versus 3               3 versus 2             4 versus 3             3 versus 2
Model                      Parameters               Parameters             Parameters             Parameters
TAYLOR                   0.12% (0.001)             278% (1.38)            1.81% (0.07)           98.8% (2.14)
SW                       0.22% (0.001)             316% (0.78)            10.6% (0.47)           25.6% (1.17)
CEE/ACEL                 5.10% (0.001)             229% (0.04)            14.4% (0.11)           9.67% (0.11)
* The values in parentheses measure the increase in absolute loss in terms of the implied inflation (variability)
premia proposed by Kuester and Wieland (2008). The IIP corresponds to the increase in the standard deviation
of the inflation rate (in percentage point terms) that would imply an equivalent increase in absolute loss.




                                                        26
                                                Table 3
                                        Robustness of Policy Rules

Rule                  TAYLOR-2-Par. Rule              TAYLOR-3-Par. Rule               TAYLOR-4-Par. Rule
Model                  SW       ACEL                   SW       ACEL                    SW       ACEL
IIP (λy=0)             0.37      0.03                  0.83      0.12                   0.90      0.14
IIP (λy=1)             0.17     0.001                  5.41     M.E.                    7.18     M.E.

Rule                   SW-2-Par. Rule                   SW-3-Par. Rule                  SW-4-Par. Rule
Model               TAYLOR      ACEL                 TAYLOR      ACEL                TAYLOR      ACEL
IIP (λy=0)            0.27       0.15                  0.13       0.02                 0.15       0.02
IIP (λy=1)            0.86       0.03                  3.20       0.21                 2.71       0.13

Rule                    ACEL-2-Par. Rule                ACEL-3-Par. Rule                 ACEL-4-Par. Rule
Model                   SW      TAYLOR                  SW      TAYLOR                   SW      TAYLOR
IIP (λy=0)              0.54       0.76                 0.11       0.27                  0.09       0.34
IIP (λy=1)              0.07       0.12                 108        24.9                  0.53       3.85

Note: The values in this table concern the increase in absolute loss under a particular rule relative to the
comparable simple policy rule optimized in the respective model. The increase is measured in terms of the
implied inflation (variability) premia proposed by Kuester and Wieland (2008). The IIP corresponds to the
increase in the standard deviation of the inflation rate (in percentage point terms) that would imply an equivalent
increase in absolute loss.
M.E. refers to indeterminacy and the existence of multiple self-fufilling equilibria.

                                               Table 4
                                       Robustness of Policy Rules
                                     (SW and TAYLOR Models only)
Rule                  TAYLOR-2-Par. Rule               TAYLOR-3-Par. Rule              TAYLOR-4-Par. Rule
in Model                     SW                              SW                             in SW
IIP (λy=0)               0.37 (1.08)*                       0.83                             0.90
IIP (λy=1)               0.17 (1.53)*                       5.41                             7.18

Rule                      SW-2-Par. Rule                   SW-3-Par. Rule                  SW-4-Par. Rule
in Model                    TAYLOR                           TAYLOR                          TAYLOR
IIP (λy=0)                 0.27 (1.58)*                        0.13                            0.15
IIP (λy=1)                 0.86 (2.64)*                        3.20                            2.71

Note: The values in this table concern the increase in absolute loss under a particular rule relative to the
comparable simple policy rule optimized in the respective model. The increase is measured in terms of the
implied inflation (variability) premia proposed by Kuester and Wieland (2008). The IIP corresponds to the
increase in the standard deviation of the inflation rate (in percentage point terms) that would imply an equivalent
increase in absolute loss.
* The values in parenthesis refer to the IIP that results from implementing the 2-parameter rule optimized for the
TAYLOR (SW) model instead in the SW (TAYLOR) model and comparing it to the optimized 4-parameter rule
for that model.




                                                        27
                                               Table 5
                  Optimized Model-Averaging Rules (2-, 3- and 4-Parameters)
                                it = ρ it −1 + απ t + β 0 yt + β1 yt −1

                  Equal weights on SW
                  TAYLOR and ACEL                        ρ           α          β0          β1

                     2-parameter rule                             2.75        0.52
                     3-parameter rule                  1.05       0.41        0.23
                     4-parameter rule                  1.06       0.19        0.67       -0.59
                  Note: The loss function includes the variance of inflation, the variance of the
                  output gap and the variance of the first-difference of nominal interest rates with
                  a weight of unity




                                           Table 6
                       Robustness of Model-Averaging Policy Rules (IIP’s)

Model                       2-Par. Rule                       3-Par. Rule                     4-Par. Rule

SW                          0.11 (1.50)*                         1.02                             0.47
TAYLOR                      0.03 (0.17)*                         0.56                             1.28
ACEL                        0.00 (2.18)*                         0.27                             0.12
Note: The values in this table concern the increase in absolute loss under a particular rule relative to the
comparable simple policy rule optimized in the respective model. The increase is measured in terms of the
implied inflation (variability) premia proposed by Kuester and Wieland (2008). The IIP corresponds to the
increase in the standard deviation of the inflation rate (in percentage point terms) that would imply an equivalent
increase in absolute loss.
* The values in parenthesis refer to the IIP that results from implementing the 2-parameter rule optimized for the
TAYLOR (SW) model instead in the SW (TAYLOR) model and comparing it to the optimized 4-parameter rule
for that model.




                                                        28
                              Figure 1
The Effect of a Policy Shock on Interest Rates, Output and Inflation
          1 Percentage Point Increase in the Nominal Policy Rate




                                   29
                                 Figure 2
Common Aspects of the Transmission Mechanism in the Three Models (SW Rule)




                                   30
                                 Figure 3
Differences in the Transmission Mechanism in the Three Models (SW Rule)




                                  31
                        Figure 4
Term Premium Shock in the Taylor and SW Models (SW Rule)
         1 Percentage Point Increase in the Term Premium




                               32
                         Figure 5
“Demand” Shocks in the Taylor, SW and CEE Models (SW Rule)
           1 Percentage Increase in the Relevant Variables




                                 33
                                   Figure 6
Short-Run and Long-Run “Supply” Shocks in Taylor, SW and CEE Models (SW Rule)
                     1 Percentage Increase in the Relevant Variables




                                           34
Appendices

A 1: Models Included in or Submitted to the Model Base as of March 200915

1. Small Calibrated Models

1.1 Woodford, Rotemberg (1997)                                                         NK_RW97
1.2 Levin Wieland Williams (2003)                                                      NK_LWW03
1.3 Clarida Gali Gertler (1999)                                                        NK_CGG99
1.4 Clarida Gali Gertler 2-Country (2002)                                              2C_CGG02
1.5. Ravenna-Walsh (2003)                                                              NK_RW03
1.6. McCallum, Nelson (1999)                                                           NK_MCN99

2. Estimated US Models

2.1 Fuhrer & Moore (1995)                                                              US_FM95
2.2 FRB Monetary Studies, Orphanides, Wieland (1998)                                   US_MSR98
2.3 FRB-US model linearized by Levin, Wieland, Williams (2003)                         US_FRB03
2.4 FRB-US model 08 linearized by Laubach (2008)                                       US_FRB08
2.5 FRB-US model 08 mixed expectations, linearized by Laubach (2008)                   US_FRB08mx
2.6 Smets Wouters (2007)                                                               US_SW07
2.7 CEE/ACEL Altig, Christiano, Eichenbaum, Linde (2004)                               US_ACELm
    (m=monetary policy shock, t=technology shock, sw=SW                                US_ACELt
    assumptions = no cost channel, no timing constraints)                              US_ACELswm
                                                                                       US_ACELswt
2.8. New Fed US Model by Edge Kiley Laforte (2007)                                     US_NFED08

3. Estimated Euro Area Models

3.1 Coenen Wieland (2005) (ta: Taylor-staggered contracts)                             EA_CW05ta
3.2 Coenen Wieland (2005) (fm: Fuhrer-Moore staggered contracts)                       EA_CW05fm
3.3 ECB Area Wide model linearized by Kuester & Wieland (2005)                         EA_AWM05
3.4 Smets and Wouters (2003)                                                           EA_SW03
3.5. Euro Area Model of Sveriges Riksbank (Adolfson et al. 2008a)                      EA_SR08
3.6. QUEST III: Euro Area Model of the DG-ECFIN EU                                     EA_QUEST3
3.7. ECB New-Area Wide Model of Coenen, McAdam, Straub (2008)                          EA_NAWM08

4. Estimated Small Open-Economy Models (other countries)

4.1. RAMSES Model of Sveriges Riskbank, Adolfson et al.(2008b)                         SE_RAMSES08

5. Estimated/Calibrated Multi-Country Models

5.1 Taylor (1993) G7 countries                                                         G7_TAY93
5.2 Coenen and Wieland (2002, 2003) G3 countries                                       G3_CW03
5.3 IMF model of euro area & CZrep, Laxton & Pesenti (2003)                            USCZ_GEM03
5.4 FRB-SIGMA Erceg Gust Guerrieri (2008)                                              G2_SIGMA08


15
  See Wieland, Cwik, Müller, Schmidt and Wolters (2009) for a detailed exposition of the platform for model
comparison.

                                                     35
A 2: Additional Tables

The following tables provide information on a sensitivity study with a smaller weight of 05 on
the standard deviation of changes in the short-term nominal interest rate. Further sensitivity
studies (not shown) were conducted with respect to a weight of 0.5 on the output gap, with
respect to the definition of the output gap relative to steady-state output rather than flexible-
price output (SW and CEE/ACEL model), and with respect to a version of the CEE/ACEL
model with the SW assumptions of no cost-channel and no exogenous delay of the impact of
policy.

                                                 Table A2-1
                               Optimized 2-, 3- and 4-Parameter Rules
                                    it = ρ it −1 + απ t + β 0 yt + β1 yt −1

Model                                     λy = 0                                           λy = 1
                           ρ        α              β0          β1          ρ           α            β0           β1
                       2 Parameters
TAYLOR                           3.00             0.22                               3.46        0.78
SW                               2.81            -0.12                               2.15        0.30
CEE/ACEL                         5.91             0.27                               2.87        0.49
                       3 Parameters
TAYLOR                   0.97    1.44            0.02                    0.97        0.27        0.76
SW                       1.05    0.71            0.01                    1.12       0.012       0.015
CEE/ACEL                 0.97    0.99            0.02                    2.14       8.29        -1.99
                                                                         (0.01)*     (2.90)*    (0.50)*
                       4 Parameters
TAYLOR                   0.98    0.51             0.09         0.02      0.95        0.24        0.60       0.26
SW                       1.05    0.65            -0.04        0.05       1.07        0.21        2.22       -2.21
CEE/ACEL                 1.01    1.86             0.15        -0.15      1.01        0.75        3.11       -3.18
Note: The loss function includes the variance of inflation and the variance of the first-difference of nominal
interest rates with a weight of unity. λy denotes the weight on the variance of the output gap.
*
  The ACEL model, which is has only two shocks, exhibits only very small values of the loss function and
multiple local optima. For example, a local optimum with much smaller parameter values is displayed in
parenthesis in smaller font.

                                            Table A2-2
                   Increase in Loss when Reducing the Number of Parameters
                               Percentage Increase (Increase in IIP*)

                                          λy = 0                                           λy = 1
                           4 versus 3               3 versus 2             4 versus 3             3 versus 2
Model                      Parameters               Parameters             Parameters            Parameters
TAYLOR                   0.10% (0.001)             210% (1.04)            1.78% (0.06)          88.0% (1.81)
SW                       0.26% (0.001)             253% (0.62)            12.4% (0.53)          23.7% (1.10)
CEE/ACEL                 3.51% (0.001)             217% (0.03)            13.7% (0.10)          11.18% (0.12)
* The values in parentheses measure the increase in absolute loss in terms of the implied inflation (variability)
premia proposed by Kuester and Wieland (2008). The IIP corresponds to the increase in the standard deviation
of the inflation rate (in percentage point terms) that would imply an equivalent increase in absolute loss.




                                                         36
                                              Table A2-3
                                        Robustness of Policy Rules

Rule                 TAYLOR-2-Par. Rule               TAYLOR-3-Par. Rule              TAYLOR-4-Par. Rule
Model                 SW       ACEL                    SW       ACEL                   SW       ACEL
IIP (λy=0)            0.34      0.02                   0.70      0.11                  0.77      0.12
IIP (λy=1)            0.18      0.02                   6.04     M.E.                   7.63     M.E.

Rule                   SW-2-Par. Rule                   SW-3-Par. Rule                  SW-4-Par. Rule
Model               TAYLOR      ACEL                 TAYLOR      ACEL                TAYLOR      ACEL
IIP (λy=0)            0.19       0.11                  0.12       0.01                 0.13       0.02
IIP (λy=1)            1.09       0.02                  3.36       0.23                 2.39       0.13

Rule                    ACEL-2-Par. Rule                ACEL-3-Par. Rule                ACEL-4-Par. Rule
Model                   SW      TAYLOR                  SW      TAYLOR                  SW      TAYLOR
IIP (λy=0)              0.47       0.82                 0.10       0.28                 0.12       0.46
IIP (λy=1)              0.08       0.27                 55.4       24.4                 0.54       3.57

* The values in this table concern the increase in absolute loss under a particular rule relative to the comparable
simple policy rule optimized in the respective model. The increase is measured in terms of the implied inflation
(variability) premia proposed by Kuester and Wieland (2008). The IIP corresponds to the increase in the standard
deviation of the inflation rate (in percentage point terms) that would imply an equivalent increase in absolute
loss.




                                                        37
A 3: Figures

                                  Figure A3-1
  Common Aspects of the Transmission Mechanism in the Three Models (CEE Rule)




                                      38
                          Figure A3-2
Only the TAYLOR Model Accounts for International Feedback (CEE Rule)




                                39
                                 Figure A3-3
Only SW and CEE Account for Labor Supply, Capital Stock and Utilization (CEE Rule)




                                       40
