NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FACE VALUE: INFORMATION AND SIGNALING IN AN ILLEGAL MARKET
Trevon Logan
Manisha Shah
Working Paper 14841
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14841

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2009

George Akerlof, Rodney J. Andrews, Raj Arunachalam, Andrea A. Cann, Lisa D. Cook, Brahima
Coulibaly, Scott Cunningham, Angus Deaton, Avinash Dixit, Claudia D. Goldin, Karla Hoff, Joseph
Kaboski, Simon Loertscher, Joseph M. Newhard, Christina Paxson, Ruth Peterson, Patricia Reagan,
Seth Sanders, Ebonya Washington, Nathan Woodfork, and numerous seminar participants provided
helpful suggestions. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Trevon Logan and Manisha Shah. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Face Value: Information and Signaling in an Illegal Market
Trevon Logan and Manisha Shah
NBER Working Paper No. 14841
April 2009, Revised December 2009
JEL No. D4,D8,J4,K4,L8
ABSTRACT
Economists argue that rich information environments and formal enforcement of contracts are necessary
to prevent market failures when information asymmetries exist. We test for the necessity of formal
enforcement to overcome the problems of asymmetric information by estimating the value of information
in an illegal market with a particularly rich information structure: the online market for male sex work.
We assemble a rich dataset from the largest and most comprehensive online male sex worker website
to estimate the effect of information on pricing. We show how clients of male sex workers informally
police the market in a way that makes signaling credible. Using our institutional knowledge, we also
identify the specific signal male sex workers use to communicate quality to clients: face pictures. We
find that there is a substantial return to information, and that it is due entirely to face pictures. Interestingly,
the return is in the range of returns to information estimated for legal markets. We also provide suggestive
evidence that our premium to face pictures is not being driven by a beauty premium. The findings
provide novel evidence on the ability of rich information environments to overcome the problems
of asymmetric information without formal enforcement mechanisms.

Trevon Logan
The Ohio State University
410 Arps Hall
1945 North High Street
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
logan.155@osu.edu
Manisha Shah
Department of Economics
University of California-Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
m.shah@uci.edu

Formal enforcement is often seen as the cornerstone of contract design. While
information can overcome the problems of asymmetric information (Akerlof 1970; Spence
1973), principals are unlikely to engage agents unless the information conveyed is credible and
verifiable. While the use of formal institutions such as courts is rare relative to the volume of
transactions, the standard argument is that the presence of formal institutions gives contracts
their authority. In Schelling’s (1960) classic terminology, the power to sue and be sued give
parties the ability to make credible, enforceable commitments, a prerequisite to most
transactions. Without means of redress, the information that principals and agents share would,
a priori, have little value.
Numerous studies have documented how informal networks, long-term relationships, and
reputations overcome problems of asymmetric information. Indeed, researchers have developed
large literatures that look at limited contractibility (Hart 1995; Tirole 1999) and situations where
formal enforcement is costly (Greif 1993) to consider the additional mechanisms that must be in
place if existing institutions are lacking or unable to mediate disputes. However, the literature
has not developed an empirical answer to whether the value of information without formal
enforcement approaches its value when formal enforcement is present.
In this paper we ask two questions: Are formal enforcement mechanisms necessary for
the information that principals and agents share to have value? If not, then what is the value of
information in an environment without formal enforcement? Ideally, we would like to analyze
an illegal market to answer these questions. If the underlying contract is illegal, it is by
definition unenforceable. Similarly, the information that principals and agents convey to one
another may not be credible or verifiable. Illegal markets also rule out the possibility that market
function or variation in the information environment is due to the presence of formal
enforcement. The problem is most illegal markets have coarse information environments. It is
therefore challenging to obtain information on prices, quantities, and consumer and producer
behavior, making empirical answers to these questions especially difficult. We overcome these
problems by analyzing an illegal market with a rich information structure: the online market for
male sex work.
We begin with a general description of this seldom-studied market. We then document
the ways in which the clients of male sex workers informally police the market: by informing
other clients of deceptive sex workers and by reviewing sex workers on independent, client-

-1-

owned websites. The informal policing in the market raises the cost of misrepresentation for
would-be fraudulent escorts and rewards the truthful self-disclosure of honest escorts,
encouraging truthful self-disclosure. We further exploit this institutional knowledge to identify
the specific information clients treat as signals of escort quality. Both clients and escorts
explicitly mention face pictures in discussions of escort credibility and misrepresentation. Using
narrative evidence from qualitative studies, news reports, and online forums, we show that
clients look for face pictures in an escort’s advertisement as a sign that the escort is trustworthy.
To empirically estimate the value of information in this illegal market, we assemble a
unique and rich dataset from the largest male escort website in the United States. We gather
information on every male escort on the website: his demographics, hourly price, two measures
of reputation, and detailed information about his advertisement. Unlike other studies of
information which use scripts to download the information in advertisements, we manually
inspect each advertisement and every accompanying picture and record both the quantity and
quality of pictures in each advertisement.
We find that this illegal market values information in that there is a significant return to
the information provided in escort advertisements. Interestingly, the per picture price premium
we estimate, 1.7%, is similar to the per picture premium estimated by Lewis (2009) for used
automobiles on eBay.com; one of the few studies to estimate the value of pictures in legal online
markets. Consistent with our institutional identification, we find that escorts who post pictures
of their faces receive a sizable price premium: twice the premium to pictures in general. Spot
prices—specific transaction prices recorded by clients—independently confirm our central
estimates. Our main findings are robust to a number of considerations: they hold when looking at
escorts with no reputation, when looking at spot prices only, and when controlling for beauty of
the male escort.
Our paper makes several contributions. First, we exploit a case where we are able to
empirically estimate the return to providing information in an illegal market. It is intuitive to
think that information will be of some value in any market, but the value of information in illegal
markets is empirically unknown. While previous empirical work looks at how information
technology improves market function (Brown and Goolsbee 2002; Jensen 2007; Lewis 2009;
Goyal 2008), we provide the first evidence that an illegal online market is quite responsive to
information, even when it cannot be verified and/or where misrepresentations cannot be

-2-

punished. Additionally, our paper adds to the relatively sparse empirical work on signaling
behavior.
Second, we show how this market functions without formal enforcement, describing how
clients police the market and identify the specific information consumers take as the signal of
quality in this market. Irrespective of the reputational concerns of escorts, we document how
client policing can increase the costs of doing business for low-quality escorts. This is in
contrast to the traditional focus on aggregate measures of information, reputation and consumer
search patterns in online markets (Bajari and Hortacsu 2004; Bakos 2001). In particular, we
show that the market does not respond to all types of information: the premium to information in
this market is driven entirely by face pictures.
Third, our work expands the scope of the existing scholarship in the economics of crime
by considering the male side of the sex work market, sex work that is neither street nor brothelbased, and pricing behavior in illegal markets more generally (Browne and Minichiello 1996;
Weitzer 2005). It is difficult to test theories of pricing behavior in markets for sex work because
price data and survey responses may be incomplete, inaccurate, or biased. We overcome these
selection problems by constructing data from the primary source that escorts and clients
themselves use: the largest, most comprehensive and geographically diverse website for male
escort work in the United States. Our paper also contributes to the large and growing literature
which exploits the vast potential of online interactions. While we present the first empirical
results from an illegal online market, previous research has used online data from eBay and
yahoo! (Lewis 2009; Brown and Morgan 2006; Jin and Kato 2006; Lee and Malmendier 2008),
dating websites (Hitsch, Hortacsu, and Ariely, 2009), insurance markets (Brown and Goolsbee
2002) and peer-to-peer lending (Pope and Sydnor 2008; Duarte, Siegel and Young 2009).
Our novel look at the market for male sex work provides a case where the richness of the
information environment overcomes some of the problems of asymmetric information. The
illegality of the market and the near-impossibility of guaranteed truthful disclosure imply that the
market should diverge into a “lemons” market or one where information has dubious value.
However, we find that clients informally police the market, punish misrepresentation, and reward
credible disclosure. This enables male escorts to credibly signal their quality, and prices in the
market respond accordingly.

-3-

I.

The Online Market for Male Escort Services
Male sex workers are a sizable portion of the sex worker labor force. The market for male

escort services is large, with estimated annual revenues in excess of $1 billion in the US, with
millions of transactions per year (Steele and Kennedy 2006; Pompeo 2009). Unlike their female
counterparts, the majority of male sex workers work independently. There are few
intermediaries in the male sex trade in the United States (West 1993; Itiel 1998; Aggleton 1999;
Kaye 2003; Friedman 2003; Halkitis 2004; Parsons, Koken and Bimbi 2007). As such, male sex
workers are independent owner-operators whose fees are not shared with others and who
compete with one another for clients. This is in stark contrast to female sex work, where fees for
services are usually set by and shared with pimps or madams, who act as intermediaries. Despite
these interesting market features, this market is seldom studied by economists. 1
Changes in technology have modified or eliminated older forms of male escort work.
Before the internet, escorts would place ads in local gay-orientated newspapers for clients, who
would contact them and arrange appointments. The male sex work market now largely takes
place online (Steele and Kennedy 2006; Pompeo 2009). Although female sex work has recently
begun to appear online in internet forums such as Craigslist.com (Murphy and Venkatesh 2006;
Lambert 2007), male escorts have had access to large and profitable websites devoted to the male
sex trade for well over ten years (Friedman 2003; Parsons, Koken and Bimbi 2007; Halkitis
2004). Unlike escort agencies and other online transactions between two parties, such as
eBay.com, the websites themselves do not derive any profits from the transactions that escorts
make with clients, they simply allow escorts to post their advertisements and contact
information. The websites charge a set fee to escorts for hosting an advertisement and act as a
clearinghouse where escorts advertise their services and clients choose between escorts.
Consequently, these sites do not screen clients for escorts or vice versa, make no claims or
guarantees about the quality of the escorts, and offer no recourse to clients in cases of poor escort
performance or fraud.
1

There are few works in the economics literature on male sex work. Theoretical approaches which focus on female
sex workers have been offered by Edlund and Korn (2002) and Giusta, Tommaso and Strom (2009), and some
theoretical predictions for male sex workers have been tested empirically (Arunachalam and Shah 2008; Logan
2009; Edlund, Engelberg, and Parsons 2009). The literature on male sex work in the historical, sociological, and
public health literatures is many times larger and includes Boyer (1989), Dorias (2005), Ginsberg (1976), Hoffman
(1972), Kaye (2003), Luckenbill (1986), McNamara (1994), Pettiway (1996), and Salamon (1989). We avoid the
use of the term “gay” to describe this market since many participants do not self-identify as gay men. See Scott
(2003) for more on the semiotics of male prostitution.

-4-

The ability of male escorts to price directly without intermediaries and the large number
of escorts create a market setting similar to competitive market assumptions where we expect
markets to function well. Since this market is an illegal market, however, there is potential for
escorts to mislead clients and engage in fraud. In particular, an escort’s ability to post unreliable
information should lead to adverse selection in the market. While escort claims are verifiable ex
post, there are no formal institutional penalties for ex ante misrepresentation. Similarly, it is
unclear how much weight a reputation in an illegal online market carries. Without formal
enforcement and with the stakes particularly high (especially for men who are married and/or not
generally assumed to partake in homosexual behavior), it is unclear if a rich information
environment alone can prevent adverse selection. Previous research based on newspaper
advertisements for male escorts found no differences in pricing due to information (Cameron,
Collins, and Thew 1999). The open question is whether the rich information environment
offered by the internet increases opportunities for escorts to disclose positive information about
themselves, and whether the pricing of male escort services is related to this information.
The market for escort services is one of the few instances where illegal behavior is
openly advertised. While this is extremely rare for illegal markets, there are reasons why escorts
publicly announce their prices for services. First, it minimizes the legal risks of sex work. In
most police stings for solicitation, the sex worker and the client must agree to both a price and
sexual conduct. The illegal contract must specify, verbally or otherwise, the terms of the
transaction. By posting prices and sexual behaviors online, clients and escorts do not discuss
payment or prices. In fact, escorts are wary of clients who discuss prices, as this is taken as
evidence that they could be police officers (Friedman 2003). As described below, how-to guides
for clients and escorts advise both to keep contractual discussions to a minimum:
Understand, though, that they might not be able to fully describe over the phone what
they do because they don't want to get busted…Most escorts will not discuss specific
sexual acts for sale. Such is illegal and their services are for time and companionship
only. Money is exchanged for time only, the decision to have sex would be a mutual and
consensual decision two adults make. Upon meeting the escort, you may be asked certain
questions about any possible affiliation with law enforcement (From Rentboy.com “First
Time Hiring an Escort?” Accessed April 28, 2008).
Second, escorts compete with one another on these websites. While clients calling a
traditional escort agency can be steered to a particular sex worker, clients of male escorts can
freely choose between hundreds of options. Qualitative interviews with escorts have revealed

-5-

that escorts post prices as a way to ensure that clients who contact them can afford their
services. 2 Third, by setting their prices publicly, escorts avoid the time spent haggling with
clients over prices, a staple of street prostitution (West 1993; Gertler, Shah, and Bertozzi 2005).
Escorts assume that any client contacting them knows their price and will pay the posted rate for
services, just as any other business owner would expect customers to pay the advertised rate.
Despite this publicly posted information about illegal activity, police raids of male escorts are
surprisingly rare.
There are numerous sources that describe the generic male escort encounter (Itiel 1998;
Hart 1998). Clients contact escorts directly and arrange for appointments either at the home of
the escort (an “incall”), or at the home/hotel of the client (an “outcall”). In the most basic form
of an outcall, a client will search escort advertisements and choose an escort. If an appointment
is immediately desired, such as the same day, the client will usually phone the escort.
Appointments for future dates may be arranged by email, although some escorts prefer to make
all appointments by phone. Escorts generally encourage clients to describe the length of the
desired appointment and to note any circumstances the escort should be aware of (e.g., manner of
dress required by client, clients who may be disabled, etc.). Escort and client then discuss the
time and location of the appointment. Once the escort arrives at the location, he meets the client
and the two may have a brief discussion to reaffirm the earlier phone conversation. Money is
almost never discussed face-to-face. Money is usually exchanged after the appointment ends,
but clients are encouraged to place the money in plain view, such as on a dresser or desk, either
before the escort arrives or at the beginning of the appointment.
Itiel (1998) notes that male escorts and clients have less leeway to informally penalize
misrepresentation than street sex workers and their clients. While street sex workers and clients
can freely disengage from a transaction for whatever reason by simply walking away, the
clandestine nature of an “incall” or “outcall” make it difficult for either party to escape penalty
free if there has been misrepresentation. For example, once the escort has arrived at the hotel
door or home of a client, it may be difficult to induce him to leave without payment. Also, once
the misrepresentation is revealed, the client (and potentially the escort) is already exposed: the
escort knows the client’s location, some form of contact information, and is open to blackmail
and harassment depending on his circumstances. Moreover, clients cannot appeal to an
2

This roundtable interview with escorts was accessed at http://www.rentboy.com on April 28, 2008.

-6-

intermediary’s reputation to minimize their exposure. The very nature of the male sex market
alters the usual interpretation of the risks involved in sex work. While male escorts are seen as a
“safer bet” than male street sex workers (Sadownick 1996; Itiel 1998; Friedman 2003; Dorias
2005), the overall structure in the market is one in which the client is at risk of harm. 3
Unlike female sex workers, who are at greater risk of being violated by clients, male sex
workers are prone to violate their clients. Clients are at risk in a number of ways, and the harm
from hiring an unsavory escort can have serious consequences. First, escorts may simply rob
clients; a traditional scam is to request payment up front and then feign an excuse to leave, never
to return. Another common ploy is to steal the client’s wallet in the course of an appointment.
In online forums, by far the most frequent complaint from clients are escorts who take payment
but do not deliver services.
Second, escorts may blackmail or expose their client’s sexual behaviors. As noted
earlier, clients and escorts usually communicate by way of telephone or email before the
appointment. Most escorts refuse calls from clients with “blocked” phone numbers, which
exposes clients to risk of blackmail because escorts can trace the client’s phone number. Escorts
could threaten to “out” a client, inform his family of his sexual practices, threaten to contact his
employer, or even threaten to contact legal authorities since the client has solicited prostitution.
The case of Ted Haggard (the former President of the National Association of Evangelicals who
became embroiled in a sex scandal involving a male escort in 2006) is one where the escort kept
voicemail messages from the client and later released them to the press. The additional social
stigma attached to being exposed as a homosexual can be career-ending. 4
Finally, since escorts are relatively young and virile men, physical violence is not
uncommon. While escorts usually have an informant they keep abreast of the location and
contact information for every appointment in case of an emergency, clients most likely do not let
others know of their whereabouts, leaving them particularly vulnerable (Itiel 1998; Friedman

3

As a linguistic (perhaps semiotic) sign of the risk borne by the client, male escorts are also known as “hustlers,” a
term also used for drug dealers, hoodlums and thieves (Scott 2003).
4
Several prominent political careers have been damaged by allegations of involvement with male prostitutes (Steele
and Kennedy 2006). Rep. Barney Frank (D-MA) was reprimanded by the House of Representatives in 1990 when it
was revealed that an escort acquaintance of his was operating out of his home. In 2003, Utah state representative
Brent Parker (R) resigned when accused of soliciting an undercover police officer and in 2006 Tom Malin lost a
Democratic primary bid for the Texas state legislature when it was revealed that he had formerly been an escort.
Occasionally the consequences are tragic—Republican lobbyist Craig Spence committed suicide in 1989 when he
was accused of taking male sex workers on unauthorized tours of the White House.

-7-

2003). In online forums, clients themselves mention instances where escorts either attacked
them or threatened bodily harm. 5 Clients describe being punched, kicked, threatened or beaten
with knives, guns, and other deadly weapons. Moreover, these crimes are likely to be unreported
since the client would be forced to reveal how he came to know the escort in question.
Unlike the markets for other services, where clients may not choose to pursue legal
redress for small matters, clients of male escorts do not have the option of seeking redress for
any grievances regardless of their size. While one may be compensated in-kind for poor service
at a restaurant, for example, we found no evidence of similar arrangements in the male escort
market, even for small grievances. This, in turn, increases the incentive for clients to police the
market, although we note that there are limits to how effectively an illegal market can be policed.
In the next section, we show how clients informally police the market to minimize the
probability that they will hire an unscrupulous escort.

II.

Evidence from the Demand Side of the Male Escort Market
a. Informal Enforcement in the Male Escort Market
Why would clients be driven to police the market for male escort services? Theoretically,

in order for signals or disclosure to be informative, there must be a reasonable basis for the
receiver to trust the accuracy of the signal (Spence 2002, Lewis 2009). Most models of
disclosure assume that disclosure is truthful and that misrepresentation does not exist, in these
instances disclosure acts as a commitment device (Jovanovic 1982). The key issue is whether to
disclose truthful information. This issue is pertinent for firms that would expose themselves to
significant liability if they knowingly mislead consumers. In an illegal market, however, such
guarantees cannot be made and informal policing may be the only option. A large part of the
answer is that clients have little choice if they would like to minimize the probability of meeting
a deceptive escort. Since the websites that host advertisements for male escorts derive no
income from clients and maximize profits by hosting the largest number of advertisements, they
pay little attention to clients’ complaints about deceptive escorts who advertise on the websites.
Interestingly, one client framed the situation in the classic used-car reference familiar to most
economists:

5

One client noted “The time an escort grabbed me by the throat and slammed me up against wall rifling my pockets
for my wallet. Then punched me a couple of times for not bringing my ATM and credit card.” [Unless otherwise
noted, all further quotes from forums come from the online forum hosted by http://mc.daddysreviews.com.]

-8-

That site is a advertising site, not an agency. If the used car you buy turns out to be a
lemon, do you take it up with the paper that ran the classified ad for it? Could you
imagine what managing that he said/ he said would be like?
Just as the purchaser of a car advertised in the newspaper does not hold the newspaper
responsible for the car being a lemon, clients of escorts cannot hold the advertiser responsible for
hosting advertisements of escorts who are less than truthful. 6
Clients police escorts in two ways: through posts to independent client-owned forums and
through detailed reviews of escort services on the escort websites, which are linked to the
respective escort’s specific advertisement. The primary feature of client-based forums is
information gathering by potential clients. Clients ask other clients for leads to good escorts in
an area that they are unfamiliar with, and clients post unsolicited information about escorts as
well. 7 This information is automatically available to all interested users. 8 These forums can be
used to highlight a number of dangers regarding escorts. Escorts can create deceptive
advertisements on escort websites, use multiple aliases, and even steal from their clients. The
forum acts to ensure that these rogue escorts are exposed to clients.9
Additionally, clients can also write reviews of escort services on escort websites, such as
our data source. These reviews allow for free-form opinions of the escort’s services. They
usually contain a great deal of information about the escort and his behavior during that
particular appointment—clients give information on how the appointment was made, specific
information regarding the escort during the appointment, such as escort hygiene, physical
appearance, conversational ability, the escort’s manner of dress, sexual activities provided, and
the price charged. 10 While the escort websites do give escorts the option of allowing themselves
to be reviewed by clients (nearly 95% in our data allow it), escorts have no control over the
reviews and all reviews are posted if the escort allows reviews. This all-or-nothing nature of
6

The most popular client based site has been in existence since the early 1990s.
Not all exchanges are negative. Indeed, many clients give glowing recommendations to escorts.
8
The following exchange is typical. “CLIENT #1: I've been drooling over an ad in Chicago who had been listed on
XXX as "XXX". Anybody know more? CLIENT#2 (Response): I can add some information on this guy. I actually
can't remember the name he used, but I do remember the photos. He quoted me $300 and listed himself as a
dominate top. He showed up at my hotel on time and when I opened the door I didn't think his face looked the same
as the face pic on the ad. I don't think the other pics on his current ad are him though. So in a nutshell, buyer
beware.”
9
The following is an example of such a warning. “[Link to escort advertisement] I hope this link works and I want
to let everyone to know to STAY AWAY!!!! He stole $500 from my house and is in partnership with John, Johnny,
Joe … [he] also goes by Jake, Michael and many other names….”
10
Some clients also participate in client-based online reviews that are not linked to escorts’ websites. These reviews
serve the same purpose as the reviews which are linked to escort websites.
7

-9-

reviews is a key advantage of these reputation measures in that escorts have no control over their
reviews: all reviews for the escort are retained on the website, not a selected sample posted or
chosen by the escort. We describe the features of client reviews on escort advertisement
websites in more detail in the data description below.
The vigorous policing by clients allows for the stock of information to be large: clients
who would never meet exchange information about escorts. While the cost per client to share
information is relatively low, the returns to the accumulated knowledge are large. These policing
measures also allow disclosure to be credible. They raise the cost of deception for the
untrustworthy escort, creating a wedge where the honest escort can credibly signal and receive a
premium for doing so. A deceptive escort would need to create a totally new advertisement with
new pictures and new contact information to continue to operate in the market once he is
discovered. These new identities are not costless. This means the cost of being a deceptive
escort is greater than that of being a truthful escort. This cost differential is a necessary
condition for signaling to be informative.
b. Identifying the Signal
Due to the inherent dangers in male sex work and the unique situation where male sex
workers have to provide information to their clients with regard to their honesty and safety, the
information flow is from escorts to clients. Clients choose escorts from many available options,
and clients reveal that they choose escorts based on both physical characteristics and cues as to
who will not pose a threat to their security and privacy. High quality escorts will show up on
time, match their advertised description, provide the agreed upon services at the advertised price,
be discreet, and generally act in a manner respectful of the client’s privacy and safety.
What information do clients consider when they hire a male escort? What type of
information is more likely to be observed given a particular type? We use the same client-based
forums that serve as policing to identify the types of information that escorts and clients take as
important in male escort advertisements. Clients reveal that they pay particular attention to the
presence of face pictures (ideally multiple face pictures) in an escort’s advertisement as a signal
of truthfulness. Clients explicitly and implicitly note that face pictures are more likely to be
observed when the escort is high quality.
I've been tempted [to hire an escort with no face pictures] but have always ended up
feeling let down by anyone without a face-shot so I've stayed away.

- 10 -

As far as pics that are probably not real, same deal, do not hire. No one has just a
professional modeling pic or two and no other pics. They need to have more than one
face pic in their ads.
Escorts agree that face pictures transmit information about quality in their advice to
clients and in their advice to other escorts. Even in their advertisements, escorts note that face
pictures are what clients take into account.
Don't get fooled by escorts using headless picture, they are often fake! Choose the
certified one! A real man!
Indeed, escorts who do not have face pictures in their advertisements apologize for the lack of
them.
Goodlooking all-American…clean-cut type…Sorry no face pic but you won't be
disappointed!!
All of the qualitative evidence suggests that escorts and clients treat face pictures as particularly
valuable information and a signal that the escort is unlikely to misrepresent himself.
There are several reasons why face pictures would be a signal of quality. Face pictures
give a key measure of immediate representativeness: upon meeting the escort the client would
know whether the escort was “as advertised.” This would allow a client to minimize any
potential losses since misrepresentation would be obvious. Escorts who do show their face
convey that they have less to hide. They are willing to be publicly identified, making it less
likely they will violate the client or expose him to blackmail or harassment since they could be
readily recognized by third parties. Posting a face picture is similar to posting a bond— it
decreases the probability that an escort would misrepresent himself, and therefore act as
advertisements for quality (Laband 1986; Milgrom and Roberts 1986; Pope and Sydnor 2008;
Duarte, Siegel and Young 2009). We conjecture that showing face pictures acts as a signal of
quality, but could also be interpreted by clients as commitment device (a special case of
disclosure). A deceptive escort, once discovered, cannot costlessly reinvent himself. Also,
clients can use face pictures as a search characteristic when looking for male escort services.
Escorts who do not show their faces may not want to be identified because of their occupation
and/or because they are not high quality. Not signaling is one way of ensuring anonymity, which
makes it easier to deceive clients.

- 11 -

III.

Conceptual and Empirical Framework
a. A Simple Signaling Model
To bring the description presented earlier into clearer focus we describe a simple

signaling model in the spirit of Spence (1973, 2002). To increase the exposition, we use the
simple two-type model where escorts are of two quality types and attempt to signal to a potential
client, but we note below how our model is consistent with a disclosure model. We construct a
simple one-shot model, but our central result holds in repeated signaling games since signaling
and reputation act as substitutes for one another in repeated games (Kaya 2009). 11
To begin, we assume that escorts are either high or low quality escorts, which we note as

θ H and θ L , respectively. In the population of escorts, some fraction λ are type H, and (1-λ) are
type L. The cost (c) of signaling (s) is a function of the type of escort and the signal itself

c(s,θ ) , which we assume has the traditional properties of a signal: the high quality escort can
signal more easily than the low quality, and the single crossing property holds, such that
c s (s,θ ) > 0 , css (s,θ ) > 0 , cθ (s,θ ) < 0 , and c sθ (s,θ ) < 0 . 12 Escorts can either signal/disclose
( s > 0 ) or not signal/disclose ( s = 0 ). As noted earlier, if one signals and is exposed as a low
type he must incur the costs of creating an entirely new identity, which is substantial in both time
and money. The high probability of being detected increases the cost of signaling for the low
type, justifying the assumption.
While policing raises the probability of detection, policing in the market will not lead
every high quality escort to show his face, nor will it lead every low quality escort to hide his.
Disclosure is not always truthful in this market, as the client forums attest. There are several
reasons why a high quality escort may choose not to show his face in escort advertisements.
Since sex work is illegal, disclosure could draw unwanted attention to the escort. If an escort
plans to escort for only a certain length of time, or if escorting is not his full-time occupation, he
may not want long-lived, easily-identifiable evidence of his previous occupation to hound him.
News stories abound of men who had been sex workers, and the discovery of their previous life
of prostitution had serious consequences (Steele and Kennedy 2006). Exposure as a male sex
worker could bring into question one’s sexual orientation, which could bring about further
11

Kaya (2009) shows that the degree of substitutability will depend on the agent’s desire for a smooth payoff
stream. We test for substitution in section VI.C.
12
We stress here that the costs of signaling may be both material and/or psychic. For example, if escorts have
negative attitudes towards gays or would be subjecting themselves to negative outcomes if the public knew they
participate in gay sex, it would be more costly (psychically) for them to signal to clients.

- 12 -

negative consequences. To capture this fact, we assume that the cost function contains a random
element ε that is unrelated to type

(

c( s,θ , ε ) = c(s,θ ) + ε where ε ~ N 0, σ 2

(1)

)

This new term in the cost function still allows all of the conditions to hold as before, but now in
any perfect Bayesian equilibrium the client would have to take into account that a certain
fraction (1 − α ) of signalers would be low quality, and a certain fraction of non-signalers (1 − β )
would be high quality. The variance of the random term will cause the client to revise his
expectations of α and β ( ∂α ∂σ 2 < 0 and ∂β ∂σ 2 < 0 ). Another way of modeling this feature
would be to have two dichotomous nodes: one for escort type as either high/low quality
( q ∈ {H , L}) and another for disclosure/signaling ( s ∈ {Y , N } ), which can be yes/no. The key
point is that in either model disclosure/signaling does not fully reveal type, and the model hinges
on how well correlated disclosure/signaling and quality are believed to be by the client.
We assume that escort utility is a function of the earnings they receive from escorting (w)
less the cost of signaling u (w, s | θ ) = w − c(s,θ ) . 13 In any pure strategy perfect Bayesian
equilibrium, the client must assign a wage that is equal to the escort’s expected productivity, and
the wage of the high quality escort is greater than the wage of the low quality escort,

w(θ H ) > w(θ L ) . As described earlier, if a client observes the signal (the escort discloses), then
with probability α he will expect the worker to be of type H. If no signal is observed (the escort
does not disclose), the client will expect the worker to be of type H with probability (1−β). This
gives the belief structure for the client

µ (θ | s > 0) = αθ H + (1 − α )θ L ;

(2)

µ (θ | s = 0) = βθ L + (1 − β )θ H .

The wages offered by the client are therefore a function of the signal

w | s > 0 → αw(θ H ) + (1 − α )w(θ L ) ;

(3)

w | s = 0 → βw(θ L ) + (1 − β )w(θ H ) .

This wage offer is consistent with the escort’s strategy when two conditions hold. First, for the
high type, the utility of disclosure/signaling must exceed the wage offered when no signal is
observed.
(4)

w | s > 0, θ H → [αw(θ H ) + (1 − α )w(θ L )] − c(s > 0, θ H , ε ) > β w(θ L ) + (1 − β )w(θ H )

13

Since we deal only with men who are escorts, and are not concerned with selection into male escort work, we
normalize the standard reservation wage to zero.

- 13 -

If this does not hold, then high types would have no incentive to disclose/signal. Second, for low
types, the utility of signaling must be less than the wage offered when not signaling,
(5)

w | s > 0, θ L → [αw(θ H ) + (1 − α )w(θ L )] − c(s > 0, θ L , ε ) < βw(θ L ) + (1 − β )w(θ H )

or else the low type would always signal.
In the pooled equilibrium the signal does not lead to wage separation—all escorts would
be paid the same. In the separating equilibrium, there is separation between types where the
signalers receive a higher wage than non-signalers. In this case the signal is informative as it
leads clients to believe that the escort is more likely to be a high type. In an illegal market such
as this one, it is difficult to specify which equilibrium would hold. Most signaling models
implicitly assume that some type of formal enforcement or institution guarantees truthful
disclosure. 14
There are several reasons we might expect a pooled equilibrium. First, the degree of
uncertainty could be large, which can cause clients to react weakly to signals, if at all. Second,
the cost differential for signaling by type may be particularly small in this market. Although
clients act to police the market, this may not result in a substantial cost differential such that (5)
may not bind. This revises estimates of α downward and reduces the value of signaling in the
market for the high type. As we discussed earlier, it is possible that escorts themselves create
deceptive reputations, making it difficult for any client to be truly informed as to any escort’s
quality, even with client policing. Any client without direct experience with a given escort
would be fundamentally uninformed (or less than fully informed) as to the escort’s true quality
since deception is a distinct possibility. Since the cost of signaling for the low type may not be
much higher than that of the high type, it is difficult to argue that other players would properly
infer that an action is equilibrium dominated or not (Cho and Kreps 1987). By the same token, it
is not clear if the least cost separating equilibrium is the one that we would observe if there is
separation, nor is it clear that reputation would solve the problem since those describing the
reputation of the escort may have ulterior motives. For example, positive reviews may be left by
the escort or his associates, negative reviews by competitors.

14

For example, consider the simplest version of the signaling model in Spence (1973), where workers obtain
otherwise useless education to signal their ability to employers. If schools could not certify that an agent had
actually obtained the years of schooling she claimed (for example, by printing fraudulent degrees or transcripts),
anyone could act as if they had the highest level of education possible. Such fraud would obviously decrease the
value of the signal.

- 14 -

We therefore test for whether information in this market leads to separation. If there is
separation, then the market overcomes (at least partially) the problem of asymmetric information
without formal enforcement. One might expect, however, that in any market with some form of
communication that information would be of some value. We noted earlier that face pictures
could be interpreted by clients as a commitment device, a type of disclosure, but this would
imply that the posting of face pictures determines the commitment, and our institutional analysis
revealed that escorts signal against type in both directions. Testing for signaling behavior is also
more robust—it is the weaker condition since signaling is inherently inefficient. While
theoretically the question is whether or not the signal has value, an additional empirical question
is how much value the signal has relative to the value of a signal in a market where formal
enforcement is present— whether legal and illegal markets value information to the same degree.
b. Empirical Strategy
The key empirical question is the value of the signal. Our task is to test if the average
price of male sex workers who use face pictures, the signal we identified earlier, is greater than
the average price of those that do not, holding other observables (x) constant
(6)

E (w | x, s > 0) > E (w | x, s = 0)

Following empirical studies of information in markets, we use a hedonic regression of the
escort’s price on the information he provides in his advertisement. We take the usual
interpretation that the coefficients reflect a consumer’s willingness to pay for each characteristic,
and therefore reflect the characteristic’s value. While there have been criticisms of this
interpretation due to restrictive assumptions, Bajari and Benkard (2005) show the interpretation
holds and that the price function is identified under very general conditions that apply to our
case. 15 If the market separates based on the signal we identified, then face pictures will have
value in terms of escort prices. We therefore regress the escort’s hourly price on the signal in the
advertisements (Signal), reputation and reviews (R), personal characteristics (Z), and identifiers
for location/market (X). 16
15

Bajari and Benkard show that the interpretation is still valid even if there is imperfect competition or a small
number of products, and prove that even with unobserved product characteristics the price function is identified.
16
We use the hourly outcall price as the dependent variable. Results are unchanged when using the incall price (see
the appendix). Individual characteristics include race, weight, height, age, and sexual behaviors advertised. See the
data appendix for complete variable definitions. We control for the escort’s location not only because price may
vary with geography, but specific locations may have more or fewer competitors. We use state fixed effects in the
regressions, and cluster the errors at the state level. Results were similar (but standard errors smaller) when we
included city-specific effects and/or clustered the standard errors at the city level.

- 15 -

ln (Pi ) = ϕ + γSignali + φRi + δZ i + λX i + ε i

(7)

In contrast to other studies that analyze the total amount of information in the market, we
disaggregate the information in order to estimate the value of particular types of information.
We estimate the value of pictures in general and specific types of pictures, namely face pictures.
Based on the institutional analysis presented earlier, we hypothesize that face pictures are the key
type of information that leads to separation in the market for male sex work. If the market takes
face pictures as a signal of escort quality, we would expect γ to be positive. If not, then
participants do not respond to the signal either because it is not believed or because it is a noisy
signal of quality.

IV.

Data from the Online Male Escort Market
To measure the role of information in the market for male sex work, we assemble a

unique data set of approximately 2,000 men from the largest and most comprehensive website
for male sex workers in the United States. 17 Since escorts post their prices publicly, we can
estimate the role of information directly as opposed to inferring prices (Moffatt and Peters 2004).
Relative to other data sources, our online source has several advantages. First, this data allows
us to collect information on escorts’ attributes, prices and information without regard to the
selection problems that we would encounter in a survey of escorts. We include every unique
advertisement on the website in our data. Our data contains everything a client sees when
choosing an escort from this site. Second, escorts have one account on our website and may list
themselves in multiple cities that they serve. With other online outlets for male sex work, escorts
have unique advertisements in each city, and therefore it is impossible to know the number of
escorts that work from a particular base with certainty. Third, the escort characteristics that we
use are entered by escorts from dropdown menus; this is particularly advantageous for features
one would like to control for in pricing models, such as body type or hair color, where free-form
responses may be difficult to evaluate consistently or are missing altogether. Fourth, the website
is free for viewing by all: there is no charge or account required to view any advertisements,
photos, or reviews of escorts. Lastly, escorts are reviewed on the site in two different ways, and
both types of reviews are available to all visitors.
17

See the data appendix for further details of data construction and a comparison of our data source to its two largest
competitors.

- 16 -

Beyond its geographic coverage, our source also includes a rich information environment
in which escorts can potentially signal to clients. Figure I shows a diagram of an escort
advertisement. Escorts list their age, height, weight, race, hair color, eye color, body type, and
body-hair type. They give clients contact information and also their preferred mode of contact
(phone or e-mail), their availability to travel, and their prices and availability for incalls and
outcalls. In what follows, we take the hourly outcall price as the price of escort services,
although our results are robust to using the incall price. Escorts also provide clients with the
range of services they offer in addition to escort work such as modeling, erotic massage, and
stripping. Escorts have a simple table where they can let clients know their weekly availability.
There is also the actual text of the advertisement itself, which allows escorts to write about their
services and quality. The largest piece of the advertisement is the escort’s pictures, which are
uploaded by the escort. These pictures may be of any feature of the escort that he chooses, and
may be clothed or nude. 18
We collect information on an escort’s attributes as listed in his advertisement, using all of
the information that is available to clients. Our data source is unique in that it provides two types
of reputation measures, survey reviews (similar to feedback on eBay.com) and detailed reviews
of escorts. The survey reviews ask the reviewer five questions about the escort (four of which
are “Yes/No”) and a rating on a four-star scale. 19 The detailed reviews, which we term “text
reviews,” are the detailed free-form client reviews described earlier. In addition to providing a
review of escort services, clients also give the date of their encounter with the escort, the type of
appointment made (incall, outcall, or an extended appointment such as an evening or weekend),
and the price paid, which we term the “spot price,” as it reflects the price paid in a specific
transaction. As we noted earlier, a key advantage of these reputation measures is that escorts
have no control over their reviews—all reviews of both types are retained if the escort allows
reviews, not a selected sample posted or chosen by the escort.
Since we are interested in both the quantity and quality of pictures, we recorded not only
the number of pictures, but also the quality of pictures. In particular, we look at three categories
of pictures—pictures that show an escort’s face in a distinguishable way (which may or may not
18

While nudity is allowed, escorts may not post pictures that display sex acts and may not display pictures which
include persons other than the escort. Uploaded pictures are placed in an online holding tank until cleared by the
website’s management. Every advertisement must be accompanied by at least one picture.
19
The questions are: Did he show up? Did he match his description? Did he provide desired services? Would you
recommend him? How hot was he?

- 17 -

include nudity), pictures that show a nude body only (either from the front or the back, but with
no face shown), and pictures that show neither nudity nor an escort’s face (e.g., pictures of
torsos, biceps, legs, feet, etc.). We treat the third category as our omitted category in the
empirical specification. Since these determinations must be made on sight, the picture
information variables were all entered manually.
Table I shows the summary statistics for the escorts in our data. On average, escorts
charge more than $200 an hour. This is consistent with other estimates of escort services, which
are close to the $200 an hour range (Steele and Kennedy 2006; Pompeo 2009). Escorts are
reasonably fit and relatively young; on average they are 28 years old, 5’10” tall and weigh
around 165 pounds. Escorts are racially diverse; while more than half of all escorts are white,
more than a fifth are black and more than a tenth are Hispanic. In terms of information, escorts
post an average of six pictures in their advertisements, have three survey reviews, and one-inthree escorts has a text review. Two-thirds of escorts post at least one face picture and, on
average, escorts post three pictures containing their face and two containing their nude body with
no face shown. There are some differences when looking at the summary statistics for escorts by
whether they post face pictures. For example, the average escort who shows pictures of his face
posts nearly seven pictures, four of which are of his face. The average escort who does not show
pictures of his face posts five pictures, three of which are of his nude body. Escorts who post
face pictures charge approximately $230 an hour, while escorts who do not post face picture
charge approximately $190 an hour. In the next section, we check to see if these differences in
prices hold after controlling for various individual, reputation, and geographic differences.

V.

Face Value
Table II reports OLS regression results from the basic specification, where we regress the

escort’s log hourly price on the number of pictures and a large number of controls such as escort
characteristics and location. We consider this to be our naïve specification since it treats all
information equally and considers only the quantity of the information. Column 1 shows that the
number of pictures in an escort’s advertisement is strongly related to the escort’s price,
controlling for individual characteristics and market location. Each additional picture increases
an escort’s price by 1.7%, and is significant at the 0.01 level. A one standard deviation in the
number of pictures increases the escort’s price by 0.16 of a standard deviation, a sizable effect.

- 18 -

The magnitude of the premium for pictures is close to the premium noted by Lewis (2009) for
used cars on eBay.com (1.66% and 1.82%), one of the few estimates for the value of information
in legal markets. We find that information has value in this illegal market just as it does in legal
markets where enforcement is formal and thorough. 20
In column 2 we add the more coarse measure of reputation—survey reviews—and find
that the number of survey reviews does not vary significantly with escort prices. In column 3 we
add the more detailed and informative measure of reputation: free-form text reviews. Text
reviews are strongly and positively related to prices, a one standard deviation in the number of
text reviews increases escort prices by .3 standard deviations. Consistent with other results in the
literature, reputation affects prices in the male escort market. In fact, text reviews affect the
price more than the total number of pictures.
In column 4 of Table II we add a dichotomous measure for the presence of face pictures
in an advertisement. The institutional evidence we presented earlier suggests that face pictures
are the key measure of truthfulness in the market, and we therefore expect their presence to be
positively related to escort prices if they are a signal of quality. The effect of face pictures on
prices is large. Escorts who post pictures of their faces have prices that are more than 20%
higher than those that do not, even after controlling for both measures of reputation and a host of
individual escort and market characteristics. 21 Additionally, including a measure of whether face
pictures are present significantly reduces the relationship between total pictures and the escort’s
price—the coefficient on number of pictures is reduced by more than 50% once the indicator for
face pictures is included. In column 5 we include a dichotomous measure of having a nude body
picture with no face shown. The effect of having nude, headless photos actually reduces the
price by more than 5%.
We can use the results from Table II to bound the cost of signaling for each type. Recall
from the model presented earlier that for both high and low types, the utility of signaling must
exceed the wage offered when no signal is observed (equations 4 and 5). Rearranging terms in
equations (4) and (5) and simplifying the expression yields
(8)

(w | s > 0) − (w | s = 0) > c(s > 0, θ H , ε )

20

Lewis (2009) describes the lengths taken by eBay to eliminate fraud in their used car sales, including prosecution.
Since the specification is semi logarithmic, the percentage change is approximated by exp(γ)-1 (Halvorsen and
Palmquist 1980).
21

- 19 -

(w | s > 0) − (w | s = 0) < c(s > 0, θ L , ε )

(9)

We know the value of the difference between the signal and no signal, (w | s > 0 ) − (w | s = 0 ) , is
a 20% difference in hourly price as shown in Table II. Taking $200 as the average hourly price
of escort services in our data, the difference is roughly $40. This implies that $40 is greater than
the cost of signaling for the high type and lower than the cost of signaling for the low type in this
market. If an escort sees an average of twenty clients per month, the difference would amount to
roughly $10,000 per year in additional earnings for the signalers.
While Table II examines the role of information at the extensive margin, we would like to
know if intensive measures of information are consistent with the extensive margin results.
Table III presents the results from our preferred specifications, in which we use the number of
face and body pictures in the specification. We investigate the premium to each additional face
picture and body picture to see how much of the total premium to pictures can be attributed to
each type.
In Panel A of Table III we use the number of face and body-only pictures as our
measures of information. Column 1 shows that the premium to each face picture is large—each
additional face picture increases the price charged by an escort by roughly 3%, nearly twice the
premium of total pictures reported in Table II. Put another way, a one standard deviation in the
number of face pictures increases escort prices by 0.3 of a standard deviation and is significant at
the 0.01 level. In column 2 of Panel A we add body-only pictures and find that they are not
significantly related to prices. In columns 3 and 4 we add the two measures of reputation and
find that they behave similarly to the results in Table II, where survey reviews are not related to
prices and where text reviews are strongly related to escort prices. In column 5 we control for a
host of escort and market specific characteristics and the result holds—the premium to face
pictures is much larger than the premium to pictures overall, and body-only pictures are not
significantly related to prices.
In Panel A of Table III we allow picture types to enter directly, but this can be
problematic since escorts who convey different information may also use different numbers of
pictures. In Panel B of Table III we use a specification that controls for the total number of
pictures in an advertisement to focus on the composition of the information rather than the size.
In column 1 of Panel B we include the number of pictures and the share of pictures that are face
pictures. Consistent with the results in Panel A, the fraction of face pictures is strongly related to

- 20 -

escort prices. A one standard deviation in the fraction of face pictures increases escort prices by
0.12 of a standard deviation. In column 2 we add the fraction of pictures that are body-only
pictures and find that they are negatively related to prices, but their effect on prices (in absolute
value) is much smaller than the effect of face pictures. In columns 3 and 4 we add measures of
reputation, and in column 5 we add the fraction of each reputation measure that is positive, but
since these are almost always positive they have little effect on the results. 22 The inclusion of the
additional reputation measures does lessen the magnitude of the effect of body-only pictures, and
in column 5 they cease to be statistically significant. The effect of face pictures is robust to the
inclusion of reputational measures.
Taken together, Tables II and III establish that information and reputation are important
in the market for male sex work. While the amount of information matters (each picture
increases prices by roughly 1.5%), the quality of the information matters more (each face picture
increases prices by 3%). In fact, the entire premium to information in the market is driven by
face pictures. 23 Also, reputation matters in the market, but only in the form of free-form text
reviews, which contain more information about an escort’s quality and behavior than survey
reviews. The results support the idea that the information environment afforded by the internet
allows male sex workers to disclose their type and receive a premium for doing so, and also
supports the hypothesis that face pictures are a specific signal of quality in this market. More
importantly, our results suggest that the value of information conveyed in an illegal market is
similar to the value of information provided in a legal market environment.

VI.

Considering Alternative Explanations
The previous section presented evidence in support of our interpretation of face pictures

as a signal of quality. However, our interpretation is suspect to several criticisms given the
cross-sectional nature of our data. First, though we show that price responds positively to the
presence of face pictures, we also need to establish that the value of face pictures is not infinite,
as that would be implausible. Below we show just that the marginal value of face pictures
decreases as a function of face pictures. Second, it is possible that clients respond to empty
signals of quality, and we explore this possibility below and find it to be inconsistent with the
22

Specifications that used the fraction of reviews that were negative were negatively related to escort prices, but
were not statistically significant.
23
Note that the omitted category in Table III is non-face, non-nude pictures. This omitted category is not related to
escort prices. See Appendix Table III for specifications that include all three picture types.

- 21 -

evidence. Third, our results could be driven by a beauty premium as opposed to a signal of
quality. We provide suggestive evidence that beauty is not the driving force behind the face
picture premium. Lastly, we construct a counterfactual and show that where client policing is
stymied the value of the signal decreases substantially, confirming the claim that information
only has value when the signal is credible.
a. Marginal Face Value
Since our interpretation hinges on face pictures being a signal of quality, it is critical to
estimate the marginal value of face pictures. The marginal value of face pictures should be a
decreasing function of the number of face pictures. Once a threshold of credibility is attained,
additional pictures should not convey additional quality. If not, escorts could be rewarded for
infinite face pictures. This would imply that the signal had infinitely positive value, and that
would certainly be difficult to justify. In our review of client forums, clients note that they look
for multiple pictures of an escort’s face, however, there should be a limit to their value.
To estimate the marginal value of face pictures, we estimate a polynomial function of the
value of face pictures. 24 We plot the marginal value as a function of the number of face pictures
in Figure II. As the figure shows, the marginal value of face pictures decreases sharply,
approaching zero at the seventh picture. We believe that these marginal values are consistent
with our interpretation of the results. The average value of face pictures is large, but the
marginal value of the 8th additional face picture is indistinguishable from zero. While the signal
has value, excessive signaling is not rewarded in this market.
b. True Quality
It could be that clients are responding to empty signals of quality. Jin and Kato (2006)
conducted an experiment on eBay.com auctions for baseball cards and found that while
advertised quality was positively related to price, actual quality was not. They conclude that
sellers in online markets target uninformed buyers, and that eBay.com’s system of universal
ratings and anonymous identities allows this situation to persist. Buyers could also be lulled into
a false sense of security given the fraud protection offered by online auctions. Lewis (2009)
contends that Jin and Kato’s result may be due to the fact that the stakes are relatively low in the
auctions that they study. It would certainly be true that the stakes for misrepresentation are high
in the market we study, both in dollar value and the potential negative outcomes from
24

We give the results for a third-degree polynomial specification in the appendix.

- 22 -

misrepresentation. Furthermore, while buyers in online markets such as eBay.com have some
form of formal protection from fraud, the clients of a male escort do not have any formal or
implied guarantees against fraud: it is not possible for them to be lulled into a false sense of
security by an escort’s guarantee. The active policing we documented earlier shows that clients
are not easily or consistently fooled. As such, while some portion of these results could be
explained by uninformed consumers, it is likely to be small. Also, nearly every escort advertises
that he is of the best quality. While signals of quality vary, claims of quality do not.
c. Beauty
One concern with the interpretation of our results is that the face picture premium could
be due to a beauty premium and not signaling. Many papers document the premium to beauty in
the labor market, and it would be reasonable to conjecture that the premium may be even higher
among sex workers. 25 In our sample of sex workers it could certainly be the case that more
attractive escorts are more likely to display pictures of their faces and, conditional on displaying
any face picture, display more face pictures. 26
We tackle the issue of beauty directly by obtaining beauty measures for the escorts in our
dataset. We first discuss the issue that more attractive sex workers may display more face
pictures, conditional on displaying any picture. We then discuss the potential selection issue that
more attractive sex workers might be more likely to display face pictures in general. We asked a
group of gay men to rate the beauty of our male escorts from the perspective of a potential client.
Beauty was scored from 1 to 5, with 1 being the least attractive, and 5 being the most attractive.
Both gay and closeted men were requested to serve as enumerators since heterosexually
identified men comprise a non-negligible portion of the client base (Friedman 2003; Sadownick
1996; Wright 2008; Logan 2009). Nearly 90% of the escorts who show their face pictures in our
data were given beauty scores; the mean beauty score is 3 and the standard deviation 1.2. 27
In Panel A of Table IV we estimate the relationship between beauty and escort prices.
Since subjective ratings of beauty and other personal characteristics may differ across
enumerators, giving rise to spurious correlation, we include enumerator fixed effects in all
specifications. In column 1 we re-estimate the premium to face pictures, for the sample of men
25

See Daniel Hamermesh's website for a summary of findings from a number of studies.
It is doubtful that all attractive escorts show their faces since men may not want long-lived evidence of their
careers in commercial sex on the internet.
27
We note the substantial baseline variation in escort beauty, even among those who show their faces.
26

- 23 -

for whom we also have beauty scores. 28 Conditional on posting face pictures, the premium for
each additional face picture is 1.5%, which is similar to our previous estimates. In column 2 we
include the measure of beauty, and find that while positively correlated with log hourly price, the
coefficient is not statistically significant. However, our main face picture result remains
statistically significant at the .01 level and has a magnitude of 1.5%. Therefore, even after
controlling for escort beauty, our main result remains consistent and statistically significant. In
column 3, we include all the various control variables, such as race, height, weight, body type,
eye color, etc. and the beauty coefficient, though smaller and still positive, is not statistically
significant.
In columns 4-5 in panel A of Table IV, we explore whether returns to beauty may be nonlinear by including a dummy variable indicator for above average beauty (beauty score equals 4
or 5) and below average beauty (beauty score equals 1 or 2). Again, neither of the beauty
measures is statistically significant, although the point estimates show that above average beauty
is rewarded and below average beauty is not. However, the face premium coefficient is still 1.5%
and significant at the .01 level. It appears that the inclusion of beauty and face pictures has no
significant effect on the relationship between face pictures and escort prices. This relative lack
of a relationship between escort beauty and prices is consistent with the literature on the variety
of beauty standards in gay and heterosexual communities. For example, Carpenter (2003) has
shown differential partnership and attractiveness patterns between gay men and heterosexuals by
measures of physical well-being such as BMI. Also, there could be premiums in the market for
men who would otherwise be considered unattractive if they had other attributes that were valued
by the market, such as expertise in specific sexual conduct (Itiel 1998; Cameron, Collins, and
Thew 1999; Friedman 2003).
Recall that the results in Panel A of Table IV estimate the beauty premium among men
who show their faces. Therefore, there might be selection by beauty into posting—i.e. more
beautiful men might be more likely to post face pictures. Ultimately, we cannot rule out this
explanation, but we can use the results of Table IV to roughly calculate how much beauty could
explain the difference between men who do and do not show their face pictures. To estimate the
maximum of the proportion of the results that could be due to beauty, we assume that all men

28

Our baseline specification with escort beauty that does not include face pictures shows a marginally significant
beauty coefficient of 0.0073 (.004).

- 24 -

who do not post their face picture are rated a beauty that is strictly less than the lowest rated
beauty (that men who do not show their faces have a beauty rating of zero, where the lowest
beauty rating allowed is one) and that men who do post their faces are rated as the highest beauty
score, the differences in the beauty premium between the two groups in Table IV (4.5%) could
explain, at best, less than one-quarter of the face picture premium (our lowest estimate of the
face picture premium being 19.7%). 29 Put another way, even the least attractive man is still
much better off showing a picture of his face than not, as the “no picture” penalty is more than
four times as large as the “unattractive” penalty. This back-of-the-envelope calculation implies
that beauty can explain, at best, a small fraction of the estimated face picture premium.
We can also address this issue indirectly by considering second order implications of our
interpretation of the face picture premium. We conjecture that text reviews reveal information
about the quality of the escort, but not the escort’s beauty. If the premium to face pictures is due
to beauty, then the interaction of face pictures with text reviews should be positive: beauty would
be a complement to quality as described in the text reviews. If face pictures are a measure of
quality, however, the interaction of face pictures and text reviews should be negative as face
pictures are substitutes for client descriptions of quality. This also acts as a test of our
conceptual framework—in repeated signaling games the signal and reputation substitute for one
another (Kaya 2009), which we conjecture is the case among these sex workers. When we
include the interaction of face pictures and text reviews in Panel B of Table IV, the interaction is
negative in both instances (-0.009 [0.004] and -0.028 [0.031] for number and fraction,
respectively). The results do not change when we interact the number or fraction of face pictures
with the number of positive text reviews (-0.004 [0.002], -0.009 [0.013] for number and fraction,
respectively). We take this as suggestive evidence that face pictures convey the same quality
information as text reviews, and therefore are substitutes for quality measures.
We also estimate a regression where we control for the presence of face pictures with a
dichotomous indicator and also estimate the value of marginal pictures. 30 This is similar to the
marginal estimates presented in Figure II. If face pictures only conveyed beauty, then the
marginal value of additional face pictures would be zero. Otherwise, additional pictures would
29

We use the beauty premium estimated in column 2 of Table IV, the largest estimate of the beauty premium when
we include the number of face pictures.
30
In this specification the premium to posting face pictures (the coefficient on the dichotomous indicator) is 15.3%.
This implies that the beauty calculation we described earlier (4.5%) explains less than 30% of the face picture
premium, even when excluding the marginal value of face pictures from the face picture premium.

- 25 -

have value, although, as we argued earlier, that value would decrease with the number of
pictures. The results indicate that, on average, additional face pictures come with a 1.5% price
premium, similar to the estimate in Table IV. The premium we find applies to additional face
pictures—two escorts of the same beauty would be paid differently if one supplied one face
picture and the other supplied five. This is more consistent with the notion that face pictures
establish quality rather than beauty, which can be ascertained from a single picture. 31 Given the
evidence presented above, we believe it is unlikely that the majority of the face picture premium
is driven by beauty.
d. A Counterfactual—Signaling Without Informal Enforcement
A key to our interpretation is the belief that informal policing conducted by clients causes
the signals that escorts send to be credible. Without the informal enforcement, the value of the
signal would certainly be suspect. Additionally, informal policing would have little effect on
beauty premiums or true quality in the market since policing would not be related to escort
beauty itself or the claims that escorts make about the quality of their services. Unfortunately,
informal enforcement is difficult to test directly. Our data does give us one unique instance
where we can observe the value of the signal when informal enforcement is lacking.
As noted earlier, in our online source escorts can choose whether or not they will allow
themselves to be reviewed on the website. Disallowing reviews is all or nothing: escorts do not
have the option of deleting or selectively posting reviews of either type. An escort who
disallows reviews cannot establish a reputation in our data source. The vast majority of escorts
(nearly 95%) allow themselves to be reviewed. In general the issue is moot since there is little
variation. 32 The escorts in Las Vegas, however, allow themselves to be reviewed only 40% of
the time. Las Vegas is particularly unique—there is no other city where less than 90% of the
escorts disallow reviews. Of all escorts who disallow reviews, over 35% are located in Las
Vegas. It is doubtful that this is a state effect since escorts in other Nevada cities allow reviews
31

In our data we also have the physical characteristics of the escorts. If more beautiful escorts select into providing
face pictures and have different physical characteristics, then a comparison of the distribution of characteristics of
escorts who do and do not show face pictures would reveal such differences. Overall, the results show that along
nearly every dimension of physical characteristics, the escorts who provide face pictures are statistically similar to
those who do not. Out of more than twenty physical characteristics (e.g., hair color, eye color, body type), there are
only three instances where escorts who show their face pictures are significantly different from those that do not:
escorts who show their face pictures are more likely to be blond (14% versus 10%) and have an
“athletic/swimmer’s” build (50% versus 42%); escorts who do not show their faces are more likely to be muscular
(34% versus 28%).
32
In our regressions we control for whether the escort allows himself to be reviewed.

- 26 -

more than 90% of the time. While the exact cause of this curiosity is unknown, 33 we are able to
test for the value of the signal in a location with little client policing. As we described earlier,
client policing allows signaling to be credible, so without client policing, the value of the signal
should be negligible.
For comparison, Table V shows summary statistics for escorts based in Las Vegas and
escorts based in five other randomly selected cities with similar numbers of escorts. As the table
shows, the cities are all similar in terms of rates and escort attributes such as height and weight.
Similarly, escorts in Las Vegas post the same average number of face pictures as those in other
cities. In general, the Las Vegas market looks similar to the other markets shown in Table V and
to the overall market, except for the fact that only 40% of escorts allow reviews.
In Table V we replicate the regressions of Tables II and III for each city separately. In
every other city we find a large and significant premium to face pictures that matches the
population estimates. Both the dichotomous and continuous measures of face pictures yield
estimates close to the overall values for each city except Las Vegas.
While the value of signaling is reasonably stable across markets, the results for Las
Vegas are striking. In the Las Vegas market there is no premium to posting face pictures in an
advertisement. This is not merely an artifact of statistical significance, the point estimates for the
value of face pictures in Las Vegas (-0.09 for the dichotomous measure, 0.007 for the continuous
measure) are much lower than for every other city in Table V. In the one location where client
policing is stymied, the credibility of the signal is in doubt and market prices do not respond to
the signal. Even among escorts who allow reviews in Las Vegas, the value of face pictures is not
statistically significant. 34 This result conforms to our interpretation of the premium to face
pictures in the market. 35 We also note that these results are inconsistent with either a beauty or
true quality interpretation, unless one is willing to argue that escorts in Las Vegas are markedly
less attractive than other escorts or are of uniformly different quality than escorts in other cities.

33

For examples of the narrative evidence that led us to consider the Las Vegas market, see the appendix. We
conjecture that the disproportionate number of tourists in the Las Vegas market leads escorts to place little value in
their reputations, or they may feel uniquely prone to poor reviews due to cultural misunderstandings with clients.
34
The coefficient on face pictures among the men who allow reviews in Las Vegas is -0.0037 (.40).
35
It would be cavalier to suggest that these results for Las Vegas are definitive. Since there is no other location in
the data with this same information differences, it is not possible to distinguish this effect from a location effect.
While there is evidence that clients are aware of the increased probability of encountering low quality escorts, it is
unclear if the escorts in Las Vegas are aware of the low value of information in their market.

- 27 -

VII.

Robustness
a. Prices
A primary concern for our results is the quality of the price measure. We use the prices

quoted by escorts in their advertisements, but it could be that the actual prices differ for a number
of reasons. Though our qualitative evidence suggests that the prices posted are the prices paid, it
could be that escorts are more willing to price discriminate once they are in the bedroom. If this
is the case, our empirical strategy will yield biased estimates of the value of the signal.
Fortunately, we have spot prices, specific transaction prices recorded by clients from the most
recent text reviews of escorts, which we manually inspected and which we can compare to the
prices that escorts post in their advertisements. Additionally, there are a small number of escorts
who do not post their price, but have a spot price. As these are prices actually paid by clients in
specific appointments, we can check our results with these prices.
We should note that spot prices are well correlated with posted prices (r = 0.89). Even
so, we check our results with spot prices in two ways. First, we replace existing prices with spot
prices where available. These results are reported in Columns 1-3 of Table VI, which replicate
the regressions in column 5 of Table II (1), column 5 of Table III- Panel A (2), and column 5 of
Table III- Panel B (3). The results with the spot prices replacing the posted prices do not alter
the results. As a more stringent test, we use only spot prices in columns 4-6 of Table VI. Using
only spot prices as our dependent variable substantially reduces the size of our sample, but we
still find that the presence of face pictures yields a premium of more than 15%. The premium to
each face picture is slightly smaller and may be due to the fact that the variation in the number of
face pictures is much smaller for men with text reviews.
Another potential concern with our results is that they could be driven jointly by
reputation and information. Although we have included measures of reputation in all of our
specifications, it could be that men supply higher quality information once their reputation is
established, rather than the reverse. In a repeated game, for example, one can conjecture that face
pictures are not the signal, but positive first encounters which lead to positive reputations and
repeat clients that help clients differentiate. If the market is dominated by clients returning to the
same escorts with whom they have had a good first encounter, it will drive our results.
We test for this reverse determination by looking at escorts who have no reputation to
speak of; they have neither survey reviews nor text reviews. These could be new escorts in the
market or old escorts who are abandoning an older profile. On the one hand, escorts with no

- 28 -

reputation are unknown and could be more likely to signal against type. On the other hand, the
only information a client can use to determine the quality of these escorts is the information
conveyed in their advertisement, so the signal may be particularly valuable. In either case, those
with no reputation can only disclose their type through the information in their advertisement.
In columns 7-9 of Table VI we regress price on our usual set of covariates for escorts
with no reputation. The results show that face pictures matter more for escorts with no
reputation. The premium to the presence of face pictures is over 18%. The premium to each
individual face picture is more than 3%, slightly higher than the premium estimated for escorts
overall. Therefore, it seems that when escorts do not have an established reputation, signaling
may be even more important.
b. Selection
Escorts do not have to post their prices in their advertisements, although well over 85%
of the men in our data do. For example, an escort can list that he provides a given service (incall
or outcall), but may not post the price for that service. Our results could overstate the effects of
information if there is selection into posting prices that varies with the information content of the
advertisement, which could lead to selection in either direction. It could be that escorts who post
more pictures or more face pictures are more likely to post their prices since they have signaled
their quality. Conversely, they could be less likely to not post their prices in order to seize as
much consumer surplus as possible from clients, and similar ideas could be given for escorts
with few pictures or no face pictures. These types of arguments could be extended to the
reservation wages of escorts who do or do not provide a certain set of information to the market,
which itself could alter the estimate of the returns to signaling quality in the market. To test
whether the number or type of pictures has any impact on the decision to post prices, we estimate
a probit model where the outcome is whether the escort posts prices. The results of these
regressions are reported in Table VII. We find that the number of pictures, the presence of face
and/or body pictures, and the number of face and body pictures do not significantly predict the
decision to post prices. This holds when we consider a number of alternative specifications and
when we include or exclude additional controls. We take this as evidence that the decision to
post prices is not influenced by the other information in the advertisement itself.

- 29 -

VIII. Conclusion
Male sex workers are unique in illegal markets: they price independently without
intermediaries, use a rich information environment to solicit clients, and their large number
creates a competitive setting where we expect markets to function. Since formal institutional
enforcement is non-existent, the market could be plagued with adverse selection. However, we
find that escorts do convey a great deal of information through their advertisements and that the
market rewards this information. Empirically, the reward to face pictures is substantial; it is the
driving force behind the premium to information in this market. Not only do we find a sizable
information premium in this market,but the magnitude is similar to the premium seen in legal
markets.
We note a caveat to our results. Although it would be tempting to argue that our results
show that informal institutions such as client-policing are close substitutes for formal institutions
such as courts, it could well be true that the premium to information we observe is due entirely to
the complementary effects of informal institutions. Even in markets with formal contracts and
enforcement, the types of forums created by the clients of male sex workers are common (e.g.,
AngiesList.com). As we documented, client communication dramatically raises the costs of
deception because detection is likely. A dishonest escort may swindle one or two clients, but the
possibility of doing so frequently is unlikely. Informal policing is critical to this market.
The relationship between formal and informal institutions is inherently complex. We can
say little about their interaction since formal institutions play no role here. More empirical
research is needed on the interaction of formal and informal institutions to estimate the degree of
substitutability or complementarity between the two. While our results do not address how much
the premium to signaling would change if there was formal enforcement in this market, we
provide novel evidence that rich information environments alone allow escorts and clients to
overcome the problems of asymmetric information.

- 30 -

References
Aggleton, Peter, ed. (1999) Men who Sell Sex: International Perspectives on Male Prostitution
and HIV/AIDS. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Akerlof, George A. (1970). “The Market for Lemons: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
Mechanism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 84(3): 488-500.
Arunachalam, Raj and Manisha Shah (2008). “Prostitutes and Brides?” American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings 98(2):516-522.
Bajari, Patrick and Lanier Benkard (2005). “Demand Estimation with Heterogeneous Consumers
and Unobserved Product Characteristics: A Hedonic Approach.” Journal of Political
Economy 113(6): 1239-1276.
Bajari, Patrick and Ali Hortacsu (2004). “Economic Insights from Internet Auctions.” Journal of
Economic Literature 42(2):457-486.
Bakos, Yannis (2001). “The Emerging Landscape for Retail E-Commerce.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 15(1): 69-80.
Black, Dan A., Seth G. Sanders and Lowell J. Taylor (2002). “Why do Gay Men Live in San
Francisco?” Journal of Urban Economics 51(1): 54-76.
Black, Dan A., Seth G. Sanders and Lowell J. Taylor (2007). “The Economics of Lesbian and
Gay Families.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 21(2): 53-70.
Boyer, Debra (1989). “Male Prostitution and Homosexual Identity.” Journal of Homosexuality
17(1/2): 151-184.
Brown, Jeffrey and Austan Goolsbee (2002). “Does the Internet Make Markets More
Competitive? Evidence from the Life Insurance Industry.” Journal of Political Economy
110(3): 481-507.
Brown, Jennifer and John Morgan (2006). “Reputation in Online Auctions: The Market for
Trust.” California Management Review 49(1): 61-81.
Browne, Jan and Victor Minichiello (1996). “Research Directions in Male Sex Work” Journal of
Homosexuality 31(4): 29-56.
Cameron, Samuel, Alan Collins, and Niell Thew. (1999). “Prostitution Services: An Exploratory
Empirical Analysis” Applied Economics 31(12): 1523-1529.
Carpenter, Christopher (2003). “Sexual Orientation and Body Weight: Evidence from Multiple
Surveys.” Gender Issues 21(3): 60-74.
Cho, In-Koo and David M. Kreps (1987). “Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 102(2): 179-221.
Dorais, Michel (2005). Rent Boys: The World of Male Sex Workers. London: McGill-Queens
University Press.
Duarte, Jefferson, Stephan Siegel and Lance Young (2009). “Trust and Credit.” Working Paper,
University of Washington.
Edlund, Lena and Evelyn Korn (2002). “A Theory of Prostitution” Journal of Political Economy
110(1): 181-214.
Edlund, Lena, Joseph Engelberg and Christopher Parsons (2009). “The Wages of Sin” Columbia
University Economics Discussion Paper No. 809-16.
Friedman, Mack (2003). Strapped for Cash: A History of American Hustler Culture. Los
Angeles: Alyson.
Gerlter, Paul, Manisha Shah, and Stefano M. Bertozzi (2005). "Risky Business: The Market for
Unprotected Commercial Sex." Journal of Political Economy 113(3): 518-550.

- 31 -

Ginsburg, Kenneth (1967). “The ‘Meat Rack’: A Study of the Male Homosexual Prostitute.”
American Journal of Psychotherapy 21(2): 170-185.
Giusta, Marina Della, Maria Laura Di Tommaso, and Steinar Strom (2008). “Who’s Watching?
The Market for Prostitution Services.” Journal of Population Economics 22(2): 501-516.
Goyal, Aparajita (2008). “Information Technology and Rural Market Performance in Central
India.” Working Paper, World Bank Research Development Group.
Greif, Avner (1993). “Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: The
Maghribi Traders’ Coalition.” American Economic Review 83(3): 525-548.
Halkitis, Perry N. (2004). “Gay and Bisexual Male Escorts who Advertise on the Internet:
Understanding Reasons for and Effects of Involvement in Commercial Sex.”
International Journal of Men’s Health 3(1):11-26.
Halvorsen, Robert and Raymond Palmquist (1980). “The Interpretation of Dummy Variables in
Semilogarithmic Equations.” American Economic Review 70(3):474-475.
Hart, Jack (1998). Gay Sex: A Manual for Men who Love Men. Second Edition. New York:
Alyson.
Hart, Oliver (1995). Firms, Contracts and Financial Structure. London: Oxford.
Hitsch, Gunter, Ali Hortacsu, and Dan Ariely (2006). “Matching and Sorting in Online Dating.”
Forthcoming, American Economic Review.
Hoffman, Martin (1972). “The Male Prostitute.” Sexual Behavior 2: 16-21.
Itiel, Joseph (1998). A Consumer’s Guide to Male Hustlers. New York: Harrington Park Press.
Jin, Ginger Z. and Andrew Kato (2006). “Price, Quality, and Reputation: Evidence from an
Online Field Experiment.” RAND Journal of Economics 37(4): 983-1005.
Jensen, Robert (2007). “The Digital Provide: Information (Technology), Market Performance
and Welfare in the South Indian Fisheries Sector.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
122(3): 879-924.
Jovanovic, Boyan (1982). “Truthful Disclosure of Information.” Bell Journal of Economics
13(1): 36-44.
Kaya, Ayca (2009). “Repeated Signaling Games.” Games and Economic Behavior 66(2):841854.
Kaye, Kerwin (2003). “Male Prostitution in the Twentieth Century: Pseudohomosexuals,
Hoodlums, Homosexuals, and Exploited Teens.” Journal of Homosexuality 46(1/2): 1-77.
Laband, David N. (1986). “Advertising as Information: An Empirical Note.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 68(3): 517-521.
Lambert, Bruce (2007). “As Prostitutes turn to Craigslist, Law Takes Notice.” New York Times,
September 5, 2007.
Lee, Young Han and Ulrike Malmendier (2008). “The Bidders Curse” NBER Working Paper
No. 13699.
Lewis, Gregory (2009). “Asymmetric Information, Adverse Selection and Online Disclosure:
The Case of eBay Motors” Working paper, Harvard University.
Lillard, Lee A. (1998). “The Market for Sex: Street Prostitution in Los Angeles” Paper presented
at the 1999 Population Association of America Annual Meetings.
Logan, Trevon D. (2009). “Personal Characteristics, Sexual Behaviors, and Male Sex Work: An
Empirical Approach.” Working Paper, The Ohio State University.
Luckenbill, David F. (1986). “Deviant Career Mobility: The Case of Male Prostitutes” Social
Problems 33(4): 283-296.

- 32 -

McNamara, Robert (1994). The Times Square Hustler: Male Prostitution in New York City.
Westwood, CT: Praeger.
Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts (1986). “Price and Advertising Signals of Product Quality.”
Journal of Political Economy 94(4): 796-821.
Moffatt, Peter G. and Simon A. Peters (2004). “Pricing Personal Services: An Empirical Study of
Earnings in the UK Prostitution Industry.” Scottish Journal of Political Economy 51(5):
675-690.
Murphy, Alexandra K. and Sudhir Venkatesh (2006). “Vice Careers: The Changing Contours of
Sex Work in New York City.” Qualitative Sociology 29(2): 129-154.
Parsons, Jeffrey T., Juline A. Koken and David S. Bimbi (2004). “The Use of the Internet by
Gay and Bisexual Male Escorts: Sex Workers as Sex Educators.” AIDS Care 16: 10211035.
Parsons, Jeffrey T., Juline A. Koken and David S. Bimbi (2007). “Looking Beyond HIV:
Eliciting Individual and Community Needs of Male Internet Escorts.” Journal of
Homosexuality 53(1/2): 219-240.
Pettiway, Leon E. (1996) Honey, Honey, Miss Thang: Being Black, Gay and on the Streets.
Philadeplphia: Temple University Press.
Pompeo, Joe (2009). “The Hipster Rent Boys of New York” New York Observer January 27.
Pope, Devin G. and Justin R. Sydnor (2008). “What’s in a Picture? Evidence of Discrimination
from Prosper.com” Wharton Operations and Information Management Working paper
No. 2008-7.
Sadownick, Douglas (1996). Sex Between Men: An Intimate History of the Sex Lives of Gay Men
Postwar to Present. New York: Harper Collins.
Salamon, Edna D. (1989). “The Homosexual Escort Agency: Deviance Disavowal” The British
Journal of Sociology 40(1): 1-21.
Schelling, Thomas C. (1960). The Strategy of Conflict. Cambridge, MA: Harvard.
Scott, John (2003). “A Prostitute’s Progress: Male Prostitution in Scientific Discourse,” Social
Semiotics 13(2): 179-199.
Spence, Michael (1973). “Job Market Signaling.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 87(3): 355374.
Spence, Michael (2002). “Signaling in Retrospect and the Informational Structure of Markets.”
American Economic Review 92(3): 434-459.
Steele, Bruce C. and Sean Kennedy (2006). “Hustle and Grow.” The Advocate, April 11, 2006.
Tirole, Jean (1999). “Incomplete Contracts: Where do we Stand?” Econometrica 67(4): 741-781.
Weeks, Jeffrey (1989). Sex, Politics, and Society: The Regulation of Sexuality since 1800. New
York: Longman.
Weitzer, Ronald (2005). “New Directions in Research on Prostitution” Crime, Law & Social
Change 43: 211-235.
West, Donald J. (1993). Male Prostitution. New York: Haworth Press.
Wright, Kai (2008). Drifting Toward Love: Black, Brown, Gay and Coming of Age on the Streets
of New York. New York: Beacon Press.

- 33 -

Services

Example Escort

Escort
Erotic Massage
Non-Erotic Massage
Registered Massage
Therapist

Yes

Modeling
Stripping/Dancer
In Calls $NNN.NN/hr

Yes

Out Calls
$NNN.NN/hr

Yes

US Travel:

Yes

Int'l Travel:

Yes

Contact
(NNN) NNN-NNNN

Cellular:

PREFERS PHONE CONTACT
"PRIVATE CALLER"
PHONE CALLS
MAY NOT BE ACCEPTED

Location
XX – Primary City

Example Escort

XX – City 2

Text of escort advertisement
XX – Primary City

XX – City 3
XX – City 4

Schedule
Age:
Height:
Weight:

NN
NN
NN

Race:
XX
Hair Color: XX
Eye Color: XX

Body Type: XX
Body Hair: XX

Figure I
Diagram of Escort Advertisement

S MTWT F S
7am-11am
11am-3pm
3pm-7pm
7pm-11pm
11pm-3am
3am-7am

Figure II
The Marginal Value of Face Pictures
8.75%

M
a
r
g
i
n
a
l
V
a
l
u
e

7.50%
6.25%
5.00%
3.75%
2.50%
1.25%
0.00%

(

-1.25%

%
)

-2.50%
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Number of Face Pictures
Marginal Value

95% Confidence Interval

9

10

11

12

Table I
Summary Statistics for the Escort Sample

Variable

Obs

Price
Log of Price
Spot Price
Weight
Height
Age
Black
Hispanic
Multiracial
Other Race
White
Asian
Number of Pictures
Body Only Pictures
Face Pictures
Survey Reviews
Text Reviews
Fraction Good Survey
Fraction Good Text

1476
1476
1534
1932
1932
1932
1932
1932
1932
1932
1932
1932
1932
1932
1932
1932
1932
1137
347

Whole Sample
Mean
Std. Dev.
216.88
5.34
217.86
167.11
70.43
28.20
0.22
0.14
0.08
0.01
0.54
0.01
6.14
2.08
2.90
3.18
0.35
0.88
0.88

64.46
0.29
64.49
24.54
2.69
6.93
0.41
0.35
0.28
0.10
0.50
0.12
2.84
2.07
2.96
6.72
1.03
0.27
0.30

Obs
488
488
506
635
635
635
635
635
635
635
635
635
635
635
635
635
635
357
107

No Face Pictures
Mean
Std. Dev.
187.09
5.18
188.52
169.73
70.55
29.54
0.24
0.14
0.09
0.01
0.50
0.03
5.17
3.16
0.00
3.25
0.36
0.86
0.89

64.54
0.31
64.52
24.93
2.56
7.02
0.43
0.35
0.28
0.10
0.50
0.16
2.81
2.39
0.00
7.43
1.16
0.31
0.29

Obs
988
988
1028
1297
1297
1297
1297
1297
1297
1297
1297
1297
1297
1297
1297
1297
1297
780
240

Face Pictures
Mean
Std. Dev.
231.59
5.41
232.30
165.83
70.37
27.54
0.21
0.14
0.08
0.01
0.56
0.01
6.61
1.55
4.32
3.15
0.35
0.89
0.87

59.15
0.25
59.40
24.25
2.75
6.79
0.41
0.35
0.28
0.10
0.50
0.09
2.73
1.66
2.63
6.34
0.96
0.25
0.31

Notes:
Fraction Good Survey and Fraction Good Text are defined over escorts with survey or text reviews, respectively.
Price is the outcall price posted by an escort in his advertisement.
If an escort has both a spot price and a posted price, or no posted price and a spot price, the spot price replaces the posted or missing price.
See the data appendix for variable definitions.

Table II
Information, Reputation and the Price of Male Escort Services

Number of Pictures

(1)

(2)

0.0168***
[0.0024]

0.0165***
[0.0029]

Log of No. of Reviews

0.00352
[0.010]

Log of No. of Text Reviews

(3)

(4)

0.0156*** 0.00777*** 0.00969***
[0.0029]
[0.0021]
[0.0022]
-0.0111
[0.010]

-0.00943
[0.0096]

-0.00762
[0.0098]

0.0881***
[0.014]

0.0925***
[0.012]

0.0918***
[0.012]

0.195***
[0.046]

0.180***
[0.048]

Has Face Pictures?
Has Body Only Pictures?
Additional Controls^
Observations
R-squared

(5)

-0.0632***
[0.014]
X
1475
0.22

X
1475
0.22

X
1475
0.23

X
1475
0.31

X
1475
0.32

Robust standard errors in brackets are clustered at the state level (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1)
Notes:
Each Column is an OLS regression where the dependent variable is the log of the price.
^Each column includes controls for race, age, height, weight, state, top, bottom, versatile, whether
the escort was available all day, body type, body hair, whether the escort advertised
safer sex, eye color, review allowed, and whether the escort preferred phone contact.
See the data appendix for variable definitions.

Table III
Quality of Information and the Price of Male Escort Services
Panel A: Number of Types of Pictures
No. of Face Pictures

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.0317***
[0.0060]

0.0305***
[0.0055]
-0.00468
[0.0039]

0.0293***
[0.0058]
-0.00617
[0.0042]
0.0146
[0.0089]

0.0286***
[0.0057]
-0.0069
[0.0042]
-0.0037
[0.010]
0.103***
[0.018]

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.0139***
[0.0021]
0.241***
[0.050]

0.0140***
[0.0021]
0.191***
[0.057]
-0.0806**
[0.034]

0.0126***
[0.0026]
0.190***
[0.058]
-0.0821**
[0.035]
0.0133
[0.0091]

(5)

0.0283***
[0.0056]
No. of Body Only Pictures
-0.00493
[0.0037]
Log of No. of Reviews
-0.0104
[0.0096]
Log of No. of Text Reviews
0.0913***
[0.014]
Additional Controls^
X
Observations
1475
1475
1475
1475
1475
R-squared
0.22
0.22
0.22
0.24
0.29
Robust standard errors in brackets are clustered at the state level (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1)
Panel B: Composition of Pictures
Number of Pictures

(5)

0.0114*** 0.00987***
[0.0026]
[0.0022]
Fraction Face Pictures
0.194***
0.216***
[0.058]
[0.056]
Fraction Body Only Pictures
-0.0768**
-0.0318
[0.034]
[0.031]
Log of No. of Reviews
-0.00338
-0.0234**
[0.010]
[0.0099]
Log of No. of Text Reviews
0.0961*** 0.0575***
[0.017]
[0.018]
Fraction 4 Star Reviews
0.0396
[0.026]
Fraction Positive Text Reviews
0.0424
[0.030]
Additional Controls^
X
Observations
1475
1475
1475
1475
1475
R-squared
0.24
0.25
0.25
0.26
0.32
Robust standard errors in brackets are clustered at the state level (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1)
Notes: Each Column is an OLS regression where the dependent variable is the log of the price.
Each column includes controls for state. ^Column 5 includes controls for race, age, height, weight, top,
bottom, versatile, whether the escort was available all day, body type, body hair, if the escort advertised
safer sex, eye color, review allowed, and whether the escort preferred phone contact.
See data appendix for variable definitions.

Table IV
Is the Data Consistent with a Beauty Interpretation?
Panel A: Beauty and Face Pictures
No. of Face Pictures

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.0149***
[0.0034]

0.0153***
[0.0034]
0.0089
[0.0063]

0.0132***
[0.0038]
0.007
[0.0063]

0.0153***
[0.0035]

0.0131***
[0.0039]

0.0076
[0.0249]
-0.0155
[0.0253]

Beauty
Above Average Beauty

X
849
0.02

849
0.04

-0.0006
[0.0247]
-0.0195
[0.0251]
X
849
0.14

(2)

(3)

(4)

Below Average Beauty
Additional Controls^
Observations
R-squared

849
0.04

849
0.03

Panel B: The Interaction of Escort Reputation and Information
(1)
No. of Face Pictures * Text Reviews
No. of Face Pictures * Positive Text Reviews
Fraction Face * Text Reviews
Fraction Face * Positive Text Reviews

-0.00922**
[0.0035]
-0.00373**
[0.0015]
-0.0278
[0.031]
-0.0092
[0.013]
X
1475
0.32

Additional Controls^
X
X
X
Observations
1475
1475
1475
R-squared
0.29
0.29
0.32
Robust standard errors in brackets are clustered at the state level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Each Column is an OLS regression where the dependent variable is the log of the price.
Beauty is measured on a 1 to 5 scale with 5 being the most beautiful. Above average beauty is a
beauty measure greater than 3, and below average beauty is a beauty measure less than 3.
In panel A, each colum includes fixed effects for each beauty enumerator.
In panel B, columns 1 and 2 also include the number of face pictures and number of body pictures.
In panel B, columns 3 and 4 also include the number of pictures and fraction of face and body pictures.
^Columns 3, 5 in Panel A and each column of Panel B includes controls for race, age, height, weight,
state, top, bottom, versatile, whether the escort was available all day, body type, body hair, whether
the escort advertised safer sex, eye color, review allowed, whether the escort preferred phone contact,
number of survey reviews, number of text reviews, and the fraction of highly-rated survey and text
reviews, respectively. See the data appendix for variable definitions.

Table V
Enforcement Proxy and the Value of the Signal
Panel A: Summary Statistics by City

Observations
Review Allowed?
Price
No. of Pictures
No. of Face Pictures
Age
Height
Weight

Las Vegas

Chicago

Atlanta

Houston

Dallas

Boston

65

78

76

65

92

54

0.40
(0.49)
227.36
(66.95)
6.44
(2.75)
2.80
(2.81)
28.75
(6.97)
70.88
(2.70)
172.23
(25.02)

0.96
(0.20)
231.79
(57.20)
6.38
(2.57)
2.73
(2.77)
27.48
(6.02)
70.62
(2.95)
166.59
(30.16)

0.93
(0.26)
232.74
(86.38)
6.52
(2.82)
3.43
(3.04)
27.33
(6.19)
70.56
(2.59)
166.46
(21.77)

0.98
(0.12)
209.9
(57.93)
6.18
(2.69)
2.41
(3.09)
26.35
(6.29)
70.06
(2.49)
168.02
(23.48)

0.95
(0.22)
207.12
(62.65)
6.46
(2.77)
2.15
(2.52)
29.31
(6.91)
70.44
(2.67)
169.41
(24.47)

0.96
(0.19)
232.13
(51.74)
6.24
(2.97)
2.79
(3.42)
26.7
(5.88)
69.76
(2.80)
165.43
(31.31)

Panel B: Estimates of the Value of Any Face or Body Pictures in Escort Advertisements

Has Face Pictures?
Has Body Pictures?
R-squared

Las Vegas

Chicago

Atlanta

Houston

Dallas

Boston

-0.086
[0.097]
-0.141
[0.092]

0.257***
[0.056]
-0.114*
[0.060]

0.221**
[0.090]
-0.0706
[0.097]

0.350***
[0.080]
-0.0834
[0.093]

0.347***
[0.049]
-0.0407
[0.069]

0.253**
[0.093]
-0.0314
[0.091]

0.4

0.39

0.16

0.53

0.6

0.35

Panel C: Estimates of the Value of Face and Body Pictures in Escort Advertisements

No. of Face Pictures
No. of Body Only Pictures

Las Vegas

Chicago

Atlanta

Houston

Dallas

Boston

0.00742
[0.017]
0.00208
[0.024]

0.0300***
[0.011]
0.00228
[0.015]

0.0285*
[0.016]
-0.0262
[0.022]

0.0355**
[0.015]
-0.0105
[0.021]

0.0449***
[0.011]
-0.00726
[0.013]

0.0279*
[0.014]
0.00243
[0.021]

R-squared
0.33
0.18
0.19
0.27
0.48
0.22
Standard deviations in parentheses. Robust standard errors in brackets (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
Panels B and C include the following additional variables in the regressions: number of survey reviews,
number of text reviews, fraction of survey and text reviews that are positive, age, height, weight,
and race. Panel B includes the total number of pictures. See data appendix for variable definitions.

Table VI
Robustness Checks for Information Quality and the Price of Male Escort Services
(1)
Number of Pictures
Has Face Pictures?
Has Body Only Pictures?
No. of Face Pictures
No. of Body Only Pictures
Fraction Face Pictures

Spot Prices
(2)

0.00901***
[0.0023]
0.177***
[0.048]
-0.0587***
[0.014]
0.0266***
[0.0054]
-0.00469
[0.0038]

Spot Prices Only
(5)

(3)

(4)

0.00970***
[0.0021]

0.00724
[0.0079]
0.168***
[0.061]
-0.0293
[0.035]

(6)
0.00976
[0.0076]

0.0142*
[0.0074]
-0.0041
[0.013]

Escorts with No Reputation
(7)
(8)
(9)
0.00695
[0.0047]
0.188***
[0.059]
-0.0431**
[0.020]

0.00927*
[0.0046]

0.0318***
[0.0084]
-0.00995
[0.0078]

0.213***
0.089
0.234***
[0.056]
[0.064]
[0.084]
Fraction Body Only Pictures
-0.0272
-0.11
-0.0158
[0.032]
[0.092]
[0.053]
Log of No. of Reviews
-0.00909
-0.0115
-0.0099
-0.0405
-0.0333
-0.0358
[0.0100]
[0.0098]
[0.0098]
[0.025]
[0.031]
[0.031]
Log of No. of Text Reviews
0.0941*** 0.0934*** 0.0917*** 0.0811**
0.0662
0.0614
[0.013]
[0.017]
[0.016]
[0.032]
[0.042]
[0.039]
Additional Controls^
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Observations
1533
1533
1533
243
243
243
610
610
610
R-squared
0.32
0.28
0.31
0.51
0.46
0.48
0.32
0.3
0.32
Robust standard errors in brackets are clustered at the state level (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1)
Notes: Each column is an OLS regression. In columns 1-3 is the log of the spot price. If an escort has both a spot price and a posted price, or no
posted price and a spot price, the spot price replaces the posted or missing price. Dependent xariable in Columns 4-6 is the log of the spot
price only. Dependent variable in Columns 7-9 is the log of the price (for escorts with no reviews only). ^Each column includes controls for race,
age, height, weight, state, top, bottom, versatile, whether the escort was available all day, body type, body hair, whether the escort advertised
safer sex, eye color, review allowed, and whether the escort preferred phone contact. See data appendix for variable definitions.

Table VII
Information and Selection into Posting Escort Prices

Number of Pictures
Has Face Pictures?
Has Body Only Pictures?

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.00245
[0.0036]

0.0024
[0.0034]
0.00112
[0.017]

0.00286
[0.0031]
-0.00181
[0.018]
-0.012
[0.022]

0.00304
[0.0031]
0.00007
[0.019]
-0.0154
[0.021]

No. of Face Pictures
No. of Body Only Pictures
Additional Controls^

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.00448
[0.0030]

0.0058
[0.0038]
0.00473
[0.0054]

0.00634
[0.0040]
0.00372
[0.0054]

X

Observations
1932
1932
1932
1932
1932
1932
Pseudo R-squared
0.0517
0.0517
0.052
0.055
0.0528
0.0535
Robust standard errors in brackets are clustered at the state level (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1)

X
1932
0.0566

Notes:
Each column reports results of a probit regression where the dependent variable is: Does Escort Post Prices?
(Mean of dependent variable = 0.85, Standard Error of dependent variable =0.36)
The coefficients reported are the marginal effects of the probit regressions. For continuous variables
(such as "Number of Pictures") the effect is evaluated at the mean. For dichotomous variables (such "Has
Face Pictures?") the effects calculate the change in probability from moving from 0 to 1.
Each column includes controls for state. ^Columns 4 and 7 include controls for race, age, height, weight,
top, bottom, versatile, whether the escort was available all day, body type, body hair, review allowed,
whether the escort advertised safer sex, eye color, and whether the escort preferred phone contact.
See data appendix for variable definitions.

Appendix 1: Further Results
Appendix Table I replicates the results in our paper using the “incall” price, where a client goes to the
escort. While one may be concerned that the incall results could be different because of the different type
of call (and the fact that the escort must give a client his specific location in order to host an incall), all of
the results are robust to the difference in price type. Appendix Table II presents results for a logarithmic
specification, where the log of pictures is used as the explanatory variable rather than the level. Appendix
Table III shows the specification where the third category of pictures (non-nude, non-face pictures) are
included in the specification. This category of picture cannot be included in the specifications in Table II
or Table III due to colinearity, but their inclusion into specifications such as those in the top panel of
Table III increase the size of the effect of face pictures on escort prices.

Appendix 2: Data Appendix
Our data is the universe of men advertising on our site in the United States at the time of data collection.
Our data is the entire population of escorts—we collected the data by searching through every geographic
listing in the US during the period of data collection (January 2008 to May 2008). Each escort has a page
specific to him that we used to gather the information. The website generates it income from escorts only,
clients do not pay to access any ads and no portion of the site is restricted from the public. By agreement,
the url of the website and its parent company are not listed.
There are other websites available for clients of male sex workers. In Appendix Table IV we compare the
number of escorts on our chosen site to those on its two most prominent competitors. For each city we
list, we also include the Gay Concentration Index developed by Black, Sanders, and Taylor (2007), which
shows the concentration of gay households in the Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) over the national
average. This is done so that readers can gauge the depth of the website by some measure of gay location
patterns, which can differ from those of heterosexuals (Black, et al. 2002).
In Panel A of Appendix Table IV we show total numbers of escorts from a sample of large cities. As the
panel indicates, our online source contains more advertisements than either competitor in all cities. This is
true even though the other sites allow for double counting: escorts can list themselves in multiple cities,
inflating the numbers of escorts in each city. Focusing on the largest cities may obscure important
heterogeneity across regions, so we also look at the geographic dispersion beyond the largest cities. Panel
B shows escort numbers from a random sample of smaller cities. Here we count only the escorts in our
source by their home base, while we count the total number of escorts for the other sites regardless of
their home base. This implies we upwardly bias the number of escorts by city for the two competitors.
Even using this method, our website’s coverage of the male escort market is greater than that of the two
competitors, and this holds for cities with high and low gay concentrations. The last two columns of
Panel B show the number of escorts on our site who we could locate on Competitor 1, the most prominent
competitor, and vice versa. 1 While the majority of the escorts who advertise on competitor sites could
also be located on our site, only a small fraction of the escorts in our source could be identified on the
competitor’s site.
We are able to identify each escort uniquely using the following information (See Figure I for a diagram
of an escort advertisement):
User ID: Each escort account on the site has a unique user ID. This allowed us to check against the
possibility of double counting escorts who may change location over the data collection period.
User Name: Each escort has a username that is displayed next to the ID number at the top of the ad.
1

As of March 15, 2009, Competitor 1 had 1,413 unique escorts in the US, and Competitor 2 had less than 1,000,
while we have more than 1,900 in our data.

The measures we use in the paper are described below:
Services Provided: Under this heading each escort has the option of noting the following services, which
we recorded
Incall: Escort responds “yes” or “no”
Outcall: Escort responds “yes” or “no”
Incall Price: The price (by the hour) that incall services are provided at if incalls provided
Outcall Price: The price (by the hour) that outcall services are provided at if outcalls provided
Contact Information: Under this heading each escort has the option of noting the following
Phone: Phone number with area code (we record if a number is listed y/n)
Cellular: Cellular number with area code (we record if a number is listed y/n)
Pager: Pager number with area code (we record if a number is listed y/n)
Prefers Phone Contact: Listed if escort prefers for clients to contact him by phone (y/n)
Prefers E-mail Contact: Listed if escort prefers for clients to contact him by phone (y/n)
Location: The location listed under the heading is the primary location, the locations with suitcase avatars
next to them are cities the escort is willing to travel to. In some instances, exact dates are listed under
specific travel cities, and this means that an escort is traveling to that city on those dates and will serve
clients in those cities on those dates. We record all of these locations.
Availability: This box records an escort’s weekly availability in a matrix of 6 four hour blocks. Since the
majority of escorts (78.0%) check every box (indicating that they are available at any time) we record
whether or not the entire matrix is filled in as a measure of labor supply (y/n).
Age: Age is recorded in years
Height: Height is reported in feet and inches, we record height in inches
Weight: Weight is listed in 20 pound intervals beginning at 130 pounds and ending at 200 pounds (e.g.
150-170 pounds). We took the midpoint of the range given by an escort. If the escort’s text ad listed a
weight we recorded that exact weight in place of the midpoint range.
Race: White, Black/African-American, Asian, Hispanic, Multiracial, or Other
Hair Color: Black, Blonde, Brown, Grey, and Red
Eye Color: Black, Blue, Brown, Green, Hazel
Body Type: Athletic/Swimmer’s Build, Average, A few extra pounds, muscular/buff, thin/lean
Body Hair: Hairy, Moderately hairy, Shaved, Smooth
For the text of escort ads we record the mention of the following (Note: since the ads were read as
opposed to scripts we do not record the instance of the word but its meaning, which can be implied from
the context)
Top: The escort stated that they are a top (the penetrative partner in anal sex)
Bottom: The escort stated that they are a bottom (the receptive partner in anal sex)
Versatile: The escort indicated that they are versatile (both top and bottom)
No Attitude: The escort noted that they have “no attitude”/are willing to see clients without
regard to race, body type, physical appearance, disability, etc.
Safe: The escort noted that he is disease drug free/ only participates in safer sex
Note: In American gay society, men may not only be tops, bottoms, or versatile, but also “versatile tops”
and “versatile bottoms.” The meaning of such terms is the distinction between one man who would
rarely/never partake in an activity (a “top” would never perform as a “bottom” and vice versa), and a man
who occasionally partakes in an activity (a “versatile top” would occasionally bottom and vice versa).
These terms are well established in gay society (Sadowick 1996).
Pictures: We recorded the number of unique pictures in each ad (e.g., the same picture used twice in an
ad was only recorded in the first instance). The maximum number of pictures allowed per advertisement
is 12. Each picture in an advertisement is a thumbnail that may be enlarged by selecting the picture.

Each picture was individually inspected. Pictures that contained blurry and unrecognizable faces are
noted as pictures but not noted as a type of picture, and are therefore included in the omitted category in
the regressions. The number of pictures in the following categories were recorded.
Number of Pictures: The total number of unique pictures in an escort’s ad
Face Pictures: Pictures that show an escort’s face only and pictures that show an escort’s face
as well as other body parts (nude or non-nude).
Body Only Pictures: Pictures that do not show an escort’s face but do display the frontal genital
area, the buttocks, or a combination thereof.
Review Allowed: If an escort has disabled the option to be reviewed we note it. Note that disabling
reviews does not delete existing reviews of the escort, and only applies to survey reviews. Well over 90%
(93.9%) of escorts allowed themselves to be reviewed.
Reviews: Reviews of both types (text and survey) can only be posted by registered member of the site.
As registration is free, it is possible for anyone to post a review of an escort, and we do not view the
registration requirement as a hindrance for posting a review. We record the following from the reviews
Number of Reviews: The total number of survey reviews
Number of Four-Star Reviews: The number of four-star reviews recorded for that escort
Text Reviews: The total number of text reviews for an escort
Hire Again: The number of text reviews in which the reviewer indicated that they would hire
the escort again.
Spot Prices: For the most recent text review, we record the price and the price type (e.g., incall
or outcall). If the appointment is a weekend or evening price we record it as weekend or
evening prices and do not use these extended appointment prices as spot prices in our paper.

Appendix 3: Narrative Evidence Regarding the Las Vegas Escort Market
We provide examples of the narrative evidence that led us to consider the Las Vegas market below.
Keep in mind that Vegas has a long history of crappy escorts, especially who claim to be jocks.
Be cautious with pros in Vegas, because of the massive tourism turnover they can make fairly
good money without being any good (it’s not like they need repeat business). Old/wrong photos
are your first hint to call it off. So is a request for money up front, as always.
Vegas is a crapshoot (!) The guys there are scammers. They make their money off the strip
tourists, so they don’t worry about providing good service.
Our conjecture is that the Las Vegas market is unique due to its almost exclusive dependence on tourist
clients, whereas other cities have large numbers of resident clients in addition to travelers. The
dependence on tourist clients does not explain why or how Las Vegas escorts choose to disallow reviews
of themselves on the escort website. One argument is that lack of repeat business would lead one not to
care about reputation, but it is still the case that a good reputation would help to attract new clients. It
could also be the case that the increased probability of serving foreign clients creates a disproportionate
number of negative reviews due to cultural misunderstandings. Policing differences in Las Vegas are
another possibility. Given the lack of hard evidence consistent with any of these explanations we resist
the temptation to attach any one explanation to this market, other than exploiting the dearth of client
reviews as we do in the text.

Appendix Table I
Quality of Information and the Price of Male Escort Services (Incall Prices)
Panel A: Number of Types of Pictures
No. of Face Pictures

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.0255***
[0.0045]

0.0242***
[0.0044]
‐0.00487
[0.0048]

0.0217***
[0.0043]
‐0.00803
[0.0051]
0.0318***
[0.0086]

0.0207***
[0.0041]
‐0.00917*
[0.0051]
0.0156
[0.011]
0.101***
[0.021]

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.0117***
[0.0033]
0.195***
[0.037]

0.0118***
[0.0033]
0.158***
[0.042]
‐0.0582
[0.042]

0.00857**
[0.0033]
0.159***
[0.044]
‐0.0622
[0.043]
0.0322***
[0.0091]

0.00709**
[0.0035]
0.159***
[0.044]
‐0.0608
[0.042]
0.0174
[0.011]
0.0967***
[0.021]

(5)

0.0206***
[0.0037]
No. of Body Only Pictures
‐0.0073
[0.0048]
Log of No. of Reviews
0.00609
[0.010]
Log of No. of Text Reviews
0.0909***
[0.022]
Additional Controls^
X
Observations
1125
1125
1125
1125
1125
R‐squared
0.19
0.2
0.2
0.21
0.27
Robust standard errors in brackets are clustered at the state level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Panel B: Composition of Pictures
Number of Pictures

(5)

0.00531
[0.0033]
Fraction Face Pictures
0.179***
[0.048]
Fraction Body Only Pictures
‐0.0192
[0.048]
Log of No. of Reviews
‐0.0137
[0.0097]
Log of No. of Text Reviews
0.0721**
[0.032]
Fraction 4 Star Reviews
0.0623**
[0.029]
Fraction Positive Text Reviews
0.0241
[0.040]
Additional Controls^
X
Observations
1125
1125
1125
1125
1125
R‐squared
0.21
0.21
0.21
0.22
0.28
Robust standard errors in brackets are clustered at the state level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Each Column is an OLS regression where the dependent variable is the log of the incall price (μ=
5.18, s.d. = 0.32) Each column includes controls for state. ^Column 5 includes controls for race, age,
height, weight, top, bottom, versatile, whether the escort was available all day, body type, body hair,
if the escort advertised safer sex, eye color, review allowed, and if the escort preferred phone contact.

Appendix Table II
Logarithmic Specification for Quality of Information and the Price of Male Escort Services
Panel A: Number of Types of Pictures
Log of No. of Face Pictures

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.125***
[0.024]

0.121***
[0.024]
‐0.0112
[0.012]

0.117***
[0.025]
‐0.016
[0.013]
0.0162*
[0.0090]

0.116***
[0.025]
‐0.017
[0.013]
‐0.00268
[0.011]
0.104***
[0.017]

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.0889***
[0.015]
0.241***
[0.050]

0.0901***
[0.015]
0.189***
[0.057]
‐0.0823**
[0.034]

0.0818***
[0.017]
0.189***
[0.058]
‐0.0837**
[0.035]
0.0137
[0.0091]

0.0752***
[0.018]
0.192***
[0.057]
‐0.0783**
[0.033]
‐0.00321
[0.010]
0.0968***
[0.017]

(5)

0.114***
[0.025]
Log of No. of Body Only Pictures
‐0.0124
[0.011]
Log of No. of Reviews
‐0.00915
[0.010]
Log of No. of Text Reviews
0.0920***
[0.013]
Additional Controls^
X
Observations
1475
1475
1475
1475
1475
R‐squared
0.24
0.24
0.24
0.26
0.31
Robust standard errors in brackets are clustered at the state level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Panel B: Composition of Pictures
Log of No. of Pictures

(5)

0.0603***
[0.016]
Fraction Face Pictures
0.216***
[0.056]
Fraction Body Only Pictures
‐0.0333
[0.031]
Log of No. of Reviews
‐0.0221**
[0.0100]
Log of No. of Text Reviews
0.0588***
[0.018]
Fraction 4 Star Reviews
0.0381
[0.026]
Fraction Positive Text Reviews
0.0419
[0.030]
Additional Controls^
X
Observations
1475
1475
1475
1475
1475
R‐squared
0.24
0.25
0.25
0.26
0.32
Robust standard errors in brackets are clustered at the state level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Notes: Each column is an OLS regression where the dependent variable is the log of the price.
Each column includes controls for state. ^Column 5 includes controls for race, age, height, weight, top,
bottom, versatile, whether the escort allowed himself to be reviewed, body type, body hair,
if the escort advertised safer sex, eye color, and whether the escort preferred phone contact.

Appendix Table III
Decomposition of Picture Premium for All Picture Types

No. of Face Pictures

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.0295***
[0.0057]

0.0303***
[0.0056]

0.0288***
[0.0058]

(4)

0.111***
[0.033]
(No. of Face Pictures)^2
‐0.0170***
[0.0059]
(No. of Face Pictures)^3
0.000837***
[0.00029]
No. of Body Only Pictures
‐0.0041
‐0.00382
‐0.00522
‐0.0258*
[0.0034]
[0.0035]
[0.0038]
[0.015]
(No. of Body Only Pictures)^2
0.00658
[0.0049]
(No. of Body Only Pictures)^3
‐0.000433
[0.00038]
No. of Non‐Face, Non‐Nude Pictures
0.00379
0.00161
‐0.0139
[0.0037]
[0.0035]
[0.021]
(No. of Non‐Face, Non‐Nude Pictures)^2
0.00551
[0 0059]
[0.0059]
(No. of Non‐Face, Non‐Nude Pictures)^3
‐0.00027
[0.00037]
Log of No. of Reviews
‐0.01
‐0.0078
[0.010]
[0.0098]
Log of No. of Text Reviews
0.0935*** 0.0946***
[0.014]
[0.014]
Additional Controls^
X
X
X
X
Observations
1475
1475
1475
1475
R‐squared
0.27
0.27
0.28
0.31
Robust standard errors in brackets are clustered at the state level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes:
Each column is an OLS regression where the dependent variable is the log of the price.
^Each column includes controls for race, age, height, weight, state, top, bottom, versatile, whether
the escort allowed himself to be reviewed, body type, body hair, whether the escort advertised
safer sex, eye color, and whether the escort preferred phone contact.

Appendix Table IV
Comparison of Male Escort Websites
Panel A: Large Cities
City
San Francisco, CA
Washington, DC
Los Angeles, CA
Atlanta, GA
Boston, MA
New York City, NY
Miami, FL
Chicago, IL

Gay Concentration:
Rank
Index
1
4.95
2
2.68
6
2.11
7
1.96
9
1.67
13
1.49
14
1.46
18
1.31

Panel B: Sample of Smaller Cities
Gay Concentration:
City
Rank
Index
Austin, TX
3
2.44
Seattle, WA
5
2.21
Sacramento, CA
8
1.71
Minneapolis, MN
10
1.61
Denver, CO
12
1.53
Portland, OR
15
1.45
Indianapolis, IN
19
1.12
Tampa, FL
24
1.05
Kansas City, MO
25
1.04
Columbus, OH
27
0.99
Rochester, NY
29
0.89
Albany, NY
31
0.85
Nashville, TN
32
0.85
Oklahoma City, OK
34
0.83
St. Louis, MO
37
0.69
Detroit, MI
42
0.6
Charlotte, NC
45
0.49
Buffalo, NY
49
0.35
Total

Number of Escorts:
Our Data Comp 1
Comp 2
316
75
78
275
72
29
535
194
119
290
45
68
110
68
35
645
376
173
321
80
60
241
56
59
Number of Escorts:
Our Data Comp 1
Comp 2
26
3
15
33
14
23
17
7
5
33
2
15
41
5
19
15
1
12
19
0
5
47
15
22
9
1
7
30
3
13
4
0
0
5
0
3
14
1
8
3
1
0
18
3
6
73
10
14
19
3
4
5
0
0
411
69
171

Our Data /
Comp 1
2/3
11 / 14
5/7
2/2
5/5
1/1
‐‐‐
11 / 15
0/1
3/3
‐‐‐
‐‐‐
1/1
1/1
2/3
9 / 10
2/3
‐‐‐
55 / 69

Comp 1 /
Our Data
2 / 26
11 / 33
5 / 17
2 / 33
5 / 41
1 / 15
‐‐‐
11 / 47
0/9
3 / 30
‐‐‐
‐‐‐
1 / 14
1/3
2 / 18
9 / 73
2 / 19
‐‐‐
55 / 378

Notes: Comp 1 = Competitor 1, Comp 2 = Competitor 2.
Accessed on 1/25/09. Counts of number of unique escort advertisements (Panel A). Counts of
number of escorts by home base for our data (Panel B). Gay concentration is the fraction of the MSA
identified as same‐sex male partners in the 1990 Census divided by the national average. See Black,
Sanders, and Taylor (2007) for futher details. The last two columns in Panel B show the number of escorts
listed in our data source who could be identified on Competitor 1 and the number of escorts listed
on Competitor 1 who could be identified in our data source, respectively. Cities in the bottom panel were
selected at random from the fifty cities listed in Black, Sanders, and Taylor (2007).

