NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCIAL OPENNESS AND PRODUCTIVITY
Geert Bekaert
Campbell R. Harvey
Christian Lundblad
Working Paper 14843
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14843

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2009

We appreciate the helpful comments of the participants at the Emerging Markets Finance Conference
at City University, London in June 2007. Send correspondence to: Campbell R. Harvey, Fuqua School
of Business, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708. Phone: +1 919.660.7768, E-mail: cam.harvey@duke.edu.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Geert Bekaert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Openness and Productivity
Geert Bekaert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad
NBER Working Paper No. 14843
April 2009
JEL No. F15,F30,F36,F43,G01,G15,G28
ABSTRACT
Financial openness is often associated with higher rates of economic growth. We show that the impact
of openness on factor productivity growth is more important than the effect on capital growth. This
explains why the growth effects of liberalization appear to be largely permanent, not temporary. We
attribute these permanent liberalization effects to the role financial openness plays in stock market
and banking sector development, and to changes in the quality of institutions. We find some indirect
evidence of higher investment efficiency post-liberalization. We also document threshold effects: countries
that are more financially developed or have higher quality of institutions experience larger productivity
growth responses. Finally, we show that the growth boost from openness outweighs the detrimental
loss in growth from global or regional banking crises.

Geert Bekaert
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, 802 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu
Campbell R. Harvey
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
cam.harvey@duke.edu

Christian Lundblad
Department of Finance
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3490
Christian_Lundblad@unc.edu

1

Introduction

Recent evidence strongly suggests a link between financial openness and economic growth.
For example, Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2005) and Quinn and Toyoda (2008) document strong growth effects. It is true that Rodrik (1998) and Edison, Levine, Ricci, and
Slok (2002) find weak effects and a survey paper by Prasad, Rogoff, Wei, and Kose (2004)
calls the collective evidence “mixed.” However, Quinn and Toyoda (2008) convincingly argue that the weak results are largely driven by measurement error in the financial openness
variable. The Gupta and Yuan (2009) study at the industry level and the Mitton (2006)
article at the firm level confirm the positive growth effects of stock market liberalization
and find them to be stronger than in Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2005).
This evidence nevertheless raises many questions. In the standard “neo-classical”
model, a capital market liberalization lowers the cost of capital, thereby inducing additional investment and a temporary growth response. However, the decrease in the cost
of capital appears rather modest (Bekaert and Harvey (2000), Henry (2000)), and the
associated increase in investment is small relative to the large GDP growth increment
(Henry (2003)). Of course, financial openness may also directly affect factor productivity,
for example, by spurring financial development, promoting better corporate governance,
or signaling higher quality governments (Rajan and Zingales (2003)). Gourinchas and
Jeanne (2006) argue that examining the productivity effects of international financial integration is far more important than considering its investment growth effects, as the
latter have little chance of helping developing countries close the development gap. This
is what we set out to do in this article.
Our first task is to decompose the per capita output growth effect into two channels:
changes in factor productivity and investment growth. We find that factor productivity
is the more important channel. The article thereby fills a large gap in the literature
regarding the determinants of factor productivity growth. Much of the extant literature
focuses on the beneficial effects of financial development, but part of that link may really
be due to financial openness (see Bekaert, Harvey, Lundblad and Siegel (2007) for a related
argument).1 Our results also complement the results in Borenstein et al. (1998), which
1

See Jeong and Townsend (2007) who show that total factor productivity growth can come about by

1

document that Foreign Direct Investment improves factor productivity. We also examine
directly what part of the growth response is temporary and what part is permanent. To
shed more light on the sources of the permanent effect, we examine the effects of financial
liberalization on future financial development and the quality of institutions. We find
that financial openness enhances the development and efficiency of the stock market, the
quality of institutions, and macroeconomic policies, but the results are not fully robust
across specifications.
A simple mechanism for financial openness to affect productivity is that it improves
domestic allocative efficiency. For example, in Obstfeld’s (1994) model, openness allows
countries to more efficiently share risk and invest in the higher return, riskier projects.
Again, the existing literature has focused on financial development, see e.g. Fisman and
Love (2004) and Wurgler (2000), but not on financial openness. Galindo, Schianterelli
and Weiss (2007) show that domestic financial liberalization improves the efficiency of
investment allocation. Our results suggest that investment is more sensitive to global
growth opportunities in countries that are open to foreign investors. We are able to
generalize the results in, for instance, Chari and Henry (2008), who show that firm-specific
investment in a sample of five countries is correlated with changes in growth opportunities
after stock market liberalization.
We then go on to conduct an extensive interaction analysis examining what local conditions lead to the largest investment growth and/or factor productivity growth responses.
This evidence provides a new perspective on the existing work on the threshold effects in
the relation between financial integration and growth (see Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad
(2001, 2005), Edwards (2001), Klein (2003), Prasad et al. (2004)). We find that both
financial development and the quality of institutions produce positive interaction effects.
Finally, one often hears the argument that globalization makes countries more susceptible to financial crises.2 We therefore directly examine the interaction between crises and
financial liberalization. Ranciere, Tornell, and Westermann (2008) argue that a banking
financial deepening and an expansion of credit (using data from Thailand); Hsieh and Klenow (2009)
who provide micro evidence on capital mis-allocation in China and India relative to the U.S.; Levine and
Zervos (1998) who show that stock market development improves factor productivity; and Peress (2008)
who proposes a model that links financial development and technological progress.
2
See, for instance, Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999).

2

and currency crisis, such as the Asian crisis in 1997, may be the price to pay for the longerterm benefits of financial openness. We find that financial openness does not significantly
increase the incidence of crises and that the output loss of a crisis is far outweighed by
the output gain of financial liberalization.
The paper is organized as follows. In the second section, we introduce the data and
the econometric methods used in the study. We then present evidence on the link between
financial openness and economic growth, decomposing the growth effect into investment
growth and factor productivity in Section 3. Section 4 investigates threshold effects. Section 5 focuses on the interaction between crises and financial openness. Some concluding
remarks are offered in the final section.

2

Output Growth and Financial Liberalization

2.1

Data

Our data, spanning the 1980-2006 period and 96 countries, are drawn from a number of
sources detailed in the Appendix. While most variables do not require further explanation
here, it is important to account for how we measure capital stock and factor productivity
growth. The growth in the capital stock is equal to aggregate real investment less depreciation in the capital stock divided by the previous year’s capital stock. We build per
capita physical capital stocks using the method described in King and Levine (1993). We
derive an initial estimate of the capital stock for 1960, assuming each country is at its
steady state capital-output ratio at that time. Then, we use the aggregate real investment
series and the perpetual inventory method with a depreciation rate of 7% to compute the
capital stock in later years. Total factor productivity growth is constructed as in Beck,
Levine, and Loayza (2000). Assuming a capital share of 0.3 for all countries, we calculate
productivity growth as the difference between the GDP growth rate and 0.3 times the
capital stock growth rate.
We employ several measures of financial openness. First, our capital market openness
variable uses data from the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangement and Exchange
Restrictions. There are six categories of restrictions. If any restriction is in place, the
standard indicator takes a value of zero suggesting the capital account is closed. Because
3

of its coarseness, this variable has been discredited in the literature, see e.g. Eichengreen
(2001). We instead employ Quinn’s (1997) measure of capital account openness (see also
Quinn and Toyoda (2008)). While relying on the same IMF data, Quinn scores each of
these restrictions, separately for capital payments and receipts, on a scale of 0 to 2 (0.5
increments), and then adds the two. Quinn’s system investigates the need for official
approval, the likelihood it is granted, and the presence of taxes. It therefore measures the
degree to which the capital account is open. The measure is available for 78 of our 96
countries.
Second, to measure equity market openness, we use the official financial openness measure based on Bekaert and Harvey’s (2005) Chronology of Important Economic, Financial
and Political Events in Emerging Markets. The official liberalization measure is an indicator variable that takes the value of one once a country allows foreigners to transact in
the local equity market. The official equity market liberalization variable is available for
all 96 countries.
Last, we consider an additional measure of equity market openness, proposed by
Bekaert (1995) and Edison and Warnock (2003), to explore the robustness of our measured effects to the dating of financial liberalization. The equity market openness measure
is a continuous variable that reflects the ratio of market capitalization available to foreign
investors divided by the total market capitalization of all domestically listed firms. For
this measure, a value of zero means the market is segmented to foreigners and a value of
one means that the entire market capitalization is available to foreign investors.

2.2

Econometric framework

Define yi,t as the log growth rate in per capita real GDP, capital stock, or total factor
productivity for country i. Our dependent variable is growth over five years:
yi,t+5,5 =

5
1X
yi,t+j i = 1, . . . , N
5 j=1

(1)

where N is the number of countries in our sample. Our main panel regression is specified
as:
yi,t+5,t = βQi,start + γ 0 Xi,t + αLibi,t + ²i,t+5,5

4

(2)

where Qi,start represents the logarithm of initial per capita real GDP, reset at 5-year intervals (1980, 1985, etc.). In the standard neo-classical framework, the Xi,t variables control
for steady state per capita GDP levels, which may differ across countries. The Qi,start
variable functions as initial GDP and β is the conditional convergence coefficient which is
expected to be negative. When steady-state GDP is raised (e.g. through policy reforms)
above initial GDP, the country will converge towards the higher per capita GDP level.
To maximize the time-series content in our regression, we use overlapping data. We use
a pooled OLS estimate but the reported standard errors reflect groupwise heteroskedasticity, SUR effects, and a Newey and West (1987) adjustment with four lags for serial
correlation.
There are two neo-classical channels through which liberalization can affect growth.
First, the flow of capital from capital-rich to capital-poor countries lowers the real interest rate in liberalizing countries, increases investment, and spurs growth. Gourinchas and
Jeanne (2006) suggest that many developing countries are not particularly capital scarce
and that this effect only leads to faster convergence to a too low steady-state per capita
GDP. Second, the international finance literature suggests that open equity markets reduce the equity risk premium because of improved risk sharing. This intuition goes back
to Errunza and Losq (1985) and was tested in Bekaert and Harvey (2000) and Henry
(2000). As the cost of capital decreases, more investment projects should have positive
net present value. This should spur investment that is financed either locally or by foreign
capital. The increased investment leads to increased output growth. From the perspective
of the neo-classical model, this improved risk sharing and foreign presence in local capital
markets is bound to raise the steady state level of GDP. If this is the case, accounting
for financial openness should imply that the regression framework should control for the
true steady state GDP and the convergence coefficient should increase, a hypothesis we
test below. Nevertheless, the growth spurt remains temporary within the neo-classical
framework.
One standard critique of a regression framework such as equation (2) is the possibility
of reverse causality: countries liberalize exactly because they are experiencing favorable
growth opportunities. This criticism is largely unfounded. First, it is simply implausible that governments would correctly identify such favorable growth opportunities and
5

perfectly time the liberalization accordingly. Research on the causes of financial liberalization (see e.g. Quinn and Inclan (1997)) mostly find that they are entirely politically
driven.3 Second, Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2005) control for growth opportunities by adding an exogenous growth opportunity measure to the growth regressions. The
measure employs global price earnings ratios to capture the growth opportunities of the
industry mix in which the liberalizing country specializes. Our results, later reported in
Tables 1 and 2, remain robust to the addition of this growth opportunities measure.4

3

Decomposing the growth effect of financial liberalization

3.1

The decomposition

Table 1 presents the impact of both capital account openness and official equity market liberalization on real per capita GDP, capital stock, and total factor productivity
growth. Each regression includes year indicator variables (though these coefficients are
not reported). We include, in addition to initial per capita GDP, four standard control
variables: a human capital measure (secondary school enrollment), the logarithm of life
expectancy (health care), trade openness (exports plus imports divided by GDP), and
private credit to GDP (financial development). Note that our factor productivity growth
measure does not account for human capital accumulation. Including human capital as
an independent variable is therefore particularly important.
We begin with an exploration of the GDP growth effects in the left most column of
each group in Table 1. While we concentrate our discussion on the coefficients associated
with the financial openness variables, the signs on the other coefficients are consistent
with the previous literature (see Barro (1997a,b) and Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995)).
The coefficients on initial GDP are negative and highly significant, which is precisely what
one would expect from a conditional convergence interpretation. The coefficients for all
the other variables have the expected sign and are also statistically significant. Turning
3

These concerns are therefore much more valid when de facto, as opposed to de jure, financial inte-

gration is considered: capital may flow to “productive” countries.
4
We do not report the results to conserve space and because the use of the measure severely restricts
our sample of countries.

6

to financial openness, the coefficients on capital market and equity market openness are
1.50% and 0.98%, respectively. Both coefficients are highly statistically significant. This
result may be surprising to some given the fact that some well-publicized articles, such
as Rodrik (1998), have found no growth effect associated with general capital account
openness. However, as both Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2005) and Quinn and Toyoda
(2008) discuss, Rodrik’s result reflects the use of the IMF indicator, which is too coarse
to be a meaningful gauge of the degree of capital market openness. Table 1 helps resolve
the mixed evidence regarding the growth effects of financial openness reported by survey
articles. These surveys give undue weight to empirical studies which use a problematic
measure of financial openness.
Table 1 also shows the capital stock and factor productivity growth effects in the two
other sets of columns. We find that capital stock growth is significantly associated with
both capital account openness and equity market liberalization, even in the presence of a
banking development variable (private credit divided by GDP). In both sets of regressions,
banking development itself is positively and significantly associated with higher capital
stock growth. These results are inconsistent with the results in Beck, Levine and Loayza
(2000), who fail to find a direct effect of financial development on capital stock growth.
Our results also resolve the critique provided by Henry (2003), who appeals to the
neo-classical growth model to argue that the GDP growth effects of financial openness
are ‘too big.’ To review the argument, consider the Solow (1956) growth model:
∆(Y /L) = ∆A + α∆(K/L)

(3)

where ∆(Y /L) is the change in the output per worker, ∆(K/L) is the growth in the
capital stock per worker, ∆A is the change in total factor productivity and α is the
growth elasticity to capital inputs, reflecting the capital share in output. Using a standard
estimate for α equal to 0.3, the model implies that a capital stock growth effect of 1.2
to 1.7% implies a “neo-classical” growth effect of 35 to 50 basis points across the two
regressions.
Henry (2003) concludes that the growth effects of equity market liberalization reported
in Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2005) are too large and must be due to measurement
error in the liberalization effect. He suggests that the effect is likely due to equity market
7

liberalization being correlated with other reforms, such as trade liberalization. However,
such a conclusion seems premature. First, Table 1 controls for trade openness in the
growth regression. Second, when we consider an alternative regression in which we replace
trade openness with the trade liberalization dates reported in Wacziarg and Welch (2008),
we find similar results.5 Third, and most importantly, it is reasonable to expect that
financial openness raises factor productivity. This would be reflected in ∆A, the change
in total factor productivity. Given that the closing of the development gap requires
significant improvements in factor productivity (see Gourinchas and Jeanne (2006)), it is
important to test the link between factor productivity and liberalization directly. The
remaining columns in Table 1 confirm that the effects of capital account openness and
equity market liberalization on factor productivity growth are indeed both large and
statistically significant. Decomposing the measured GDP growth effect into the capital
stock and total factor productivity growth effects, nearly two-thirds of the overall GDP
growth effect is attributable to total factor productivity for both measures of financial
openness. Our results suggest that factor productivity cannot be ignored when examining
financial openness and growth.
In Table 2, we explore the robustness of the financial openness effects on GDP, capital
stock, and total factor productivity growth. In the first two regressions, we examine
the implications of introducing country-fixed effects (the fixed effects themselves are not
reported to conserve space). Here, we also include a contemporaneous measure of world
GDP growth to control for temporal effects, but do not include other control variables.6 In
both cases, the financial openness effects remain large and statistically significant. Again,
the bulk of the effect is due to factor productivity gains, and indeed the decomposition
provides evidence in favor of a factor productivity channel that is even stronger when
country fixed effects are included. In the last two regressions reported in Table 2, we
5

In the presence of Wacziarg and Welch’s trade liberalization indicator, the capital account and equity

openness effects are somewhat smaller, but are still near 1% per annum and highly statistically significant.
The trade liberalization effect itself is statistically significant and around 50 to 70 basis points per annum
in magnitude for GDP, capital stock, or total factor productivity growth.
6
For our full 96 country sample, the inclusion of both country and time indicators leads to a poorly
behaved variance-covariance matrix given the dimensionality of the system. For this reason, we employ
instead World GDP growth as an alternative control variable for temporal effects.

8

report the results for our alternative measure of equity market openness discussed above.
The first regression repeats the country-fixed effect specification and the second regression
repeats the specification including the standard control variable set employed in Table
1. The results, quite similar to but somewhat weaker than the official equity market
liberalization effects, buttress the argument that there exists an important effect for equity
market liberalization on growth, particularly for total factor productivity. To conserve
space, we do not employ this alternative financial openness variable further.

3.2

Exploring the neo-classical channels

In the neo-classical model, financial integration does not generate a permanent growth
effect. With data extending beyond 2000 and many liberalizations occurring in the late
1980s and early 1990s, we are now able to investigate this implication of the model directly.
Table 3 presents results where we break up the financial liberalization effects into two
pieces: years 1 through 5, and years 6 and beyond. We explore these effects for both
capital account and equity market liberalization. While the equity market liberalization
date is known, the date of capital account liberalization is not. To identify the capital
account liberalization date, we define a liberalization event as an upward increment of 0.2
or larger in Quinn’s openness measure that results in the measure then exceeding 0.5. For
both sets of liberalization dates, fully open countries are associated with the permanent
effect as they are indeed open, by definition, and have been so for some time.7 Closed
countries are associated with neither a temporary nor a permanent effect, and receive a
zero.
We report the temporary and permanent effects with both standard controls as employed in Table 1 and an alternative specification that includes country fixed effects as in
Table 2. Across all four specifications, the GDP growth results suggest that the financial
7

We also consider an alternative specification that includes only liberalizing countries. That is, coun-

tries that undergo the liberalization described above in our sample. The magnitudes and significance
levels of the temporary effects are similar to that reported in Table 3. While the magnitudes of the
permanent effects are similar to that reported in Table 3, the significance levels are somewhat less pronounced. This is perhaps not surprising since the inclusion of the fully open markets provides additional
information about the magnitude of the long-run effect.

9

liberalization effect, either the general capital account or the specific equity market, is
not a purely temporary phenomenon. The coefficients on the variable representing years
6 and beyond, denoted the permanent effect, is always positive and significantly different
from zero. The effects for capital stock growth are not uniformly significant across every
specification. Somewhat surprisingly, the temporary capital stock growth effect is not
uniformly stronger than the permanent effect, but it is for equity market liberalization
where identifying permanent and temporary liberalization effects is easier. The permanent factor productivity growth effect is statistically significant in every case, ranging
between 49 and 147 basis points per annum.
Another implication of the neo-classical model is that controlling for liberalization
should entail a larger conditional convergence coefficient (in absolute terms). That is, once
we control for the effect of financial openness on steady-state per capita GDP, we should
observe stronger conditional convergence (the coefficient on the initial GDP level). This
is indeed what we find. To provide a sense of the evidence, the convergence coefficient is
-0.0107 for a specification without capital account liberalization that is otherwise identical
to one we report in Table 1. The conditional convergence coefficient reported in Table 1
is -0.0136, substantially larger in absolute magnitude. The difference is significant at the
5% level, suggesting the inclusion of the capital account openness measure is associated
with stronger conditional convergence everything else equal. We observe similar effects
for our equity market openness variables.

3.3

Sources of improved factor productivity

In this section, we examine a number of different channels through which financial openness may affect factor productivity. We focus primarily on two generally accepted sources
of long-term growth: financial development (Beck, Levine, and Loayza (2000)) and institutional quality (Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001)). We also investigate some
proxies for the quality of macro-economic policies, but these may be correlated with institutional quality.
First, the presence of foreign investors may directly spur financial development. For
instance, foreign investor access can improve equity market liquidity and price efficiency.
To explore this, we investigate the financial openness effects on two standard measures
10

of stock market liquidity/development, namely the liquidity measure based on zero daily
returns used in Lesmond (2005) and Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2007) and equity
market turnover. For general stock market development, we also consider the ratio of
market capitalization to GDP. Finally, we use the average R2 of a domestic market model
over individual stocks within each stock market, which Morck, Yeung and Yu (2000)
(MYY) claim is inversely associated with price efficiency (the higher the R2 , the less
efficient the market is as it incorporates less firm-specific information). Financial openness
may also effect banking sector development. For example, openness may go hand in hand
with increased foreign ownership of domestic banks, which can entail increased access
to international financial markets, technological spillovers, increased competition, and
improved regulatory oversight. Our measure for banking development is the standard
ratio of private credit to GDP.
Foreign investors may also directly demand better corporate governance, and have
associated disciplining effect on governments. The cost of bad government actions may
be more severe when foreign investors are likely to leave following policy actions that
hamper investments and growth. Conversely, capital controls can provide a screen behind which the government can channel resources to “favored” firms and hence, distort
resource allocation. Johnson and Mitton (2003) show how the imposition of capital controls in 1998 increased cronyism in Malaysia. To investigate whether financial openness
improves the quality of institutions, we rely primarily on data from the International
Country Risk Guide (see Appendix), a country risk-rating agency. We investigate three
measures. First, “investment profile” measures the general attractiveness of a country for
foreign investment and FDI by scoring contract viability, payment delays, and ability to
repatriate capital. It is one sub-category from the ICRG’s composite political risk rating.
Second, we also use the ICRG’s “law and order” rating, which is perhaps most directly
related to corporate governance. We also merge three components of the political risk
rating, “law and order”, “bureaucratic quality,” and “corruption” into one “quality of
institutions” measure. Finally, we consider the economic rating from ICRG, as a measure of the quality of macroeconomic policies. The measure is outcome-based, combining
statistics on economic levels and growth, inflation, and fiscal and trade balances. To
check robustness, we also use Institutional Investor’s country credit ratings. For all these
11

measures, substantial panel data are available.
The regressions we run are predictive; that is, for the independent variable (a development indicator), we use five-year averages between t and t+5. The potential determinants,
including liberalization, are measured at time t. These regressions face a number of challenges. First, the independent variables are very persistent, so we include the lagged
dependent variable in each specification. Second, we include time effects to potentially
control for a general trend towards financial and institutional development. For some of
the variables, we lose a number of countries so that time effects do exhaust many degrees
of freedom. We therefore also comment on an alternative specification replacing time effects by one control variable, world GDP growth. The first specification, including these
two sets of controls, is reported in the left-hand side of Table 4.
The specification reported on the right adds a control variable that should assuage
concerns about reverse casuality and simultaneity. Liberalization may happen in countries
with better developed financial systems and institutions or coincide with reforms directly
targeting domestic financial development and institutions. Given that we do not have
detailed information on reforms, we employ a panel probit on the openness variables,
linking them contemporaneously to private credit to GDP, trade to GDP, ICRG’s political
risk index, and the log of the country credit rating. The official equity market liberalization
is a 0/1 variable already, and we also use the 0/1 capital account liberalization variable
constructed above from Quinn’s measure. In both versions of the probit specification, we
find positive significant coefficients for all four variables, suggesting that the probability of
financial openness is indeed directly related to other reforms. We then use the estimated
probit to compute a “probability of liberalization” for each country at each point in time,
and use that as an additional control variable. Hence, the coefficient on liberalization in
the right-hand side of Table 4 can now be interpreted as the effect of the “exogenous”
component of liberalization, not linked to pure cross-sectional differences in current levels
of development or institutional quality.
In addition, we have run (but do not report) regressions including a measure of exogenous growth opportunities available to each country constructed in Bekaert, Harvey,
Lundblad, and Siegel (2007). This control variable under-cuts the critique of the liberalization being timed to take advantage of unusually favorable growth opportunities (see
12

Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2005) for a lengthy discussion). The latter specification
employs a smaller set of countries given limitations on the growth opportunities variable,
but yields qualitatively similar results to the specifications reported in Table 4.
We now discuss the results in Table 4. The asterisks on the coefficients in Table 4
indicate that the variable in question is significant at the 5% level in a more parsimonious
specification where the time effects are replaced by world GDP growth. First, financial
openness improves stock market liquidity, as measured by the drop in average zero daily
returns. The coefficients across all specifications are negative but lack strong statistical
significance. However, they become highly significant when world GDP growth replaces
time effects. This is true for almost all the stock market development measures. Given it
is conceivable that there is a general trend towards better developed markets, not necessarily associated with liberalization, we should be cautious in interpreting these results.
The financial openness effect on turnover is positive as expected, but loses statistical significance once we focus on the exogenous component of the liberalization. The size of
the stock market (measured as the stock market capitalization to GDP ratio) also increases but not significantly, and once “endogenous” liberalization is controlled for, the
effect weakens further. The MYY efficiency measure deteriorates after financial openness.
While the MYY measure should be inversely related to market efficiency, Griffin, Kelly,
and Nardari (2007) discuss how time-variation in the MYY measure is sometimes difficult
to interpret. For example, it is conceivable that the increased common exposure to world
markets, which increases firm betas with respect to the world market (see Bekaert and
Harvey (2000) for concrete evidence), may lead to a higher R2 for firms with respect to
their own market. These results are also inconsistent with the results in Bailey, Bae,
and Mao (2006) who show concretely that financial openness improves the information
environment. For instance, analyst coverage and value-added by analysts increase with
openness, partly due to the increased presence and activity of foreign analysts.
Turning to banking sector development, financial openness has a positive and significant effect on private credit to GDP. The results here confirm some disparate results
in the literature. Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2001) also found a significant relationship between stock market liberalization and financial development (both banking
and stock market development), and did not find evidence for the reverse link (that is,
13

financial development did not necessarily predict liberalization). Chinn and Ito (2006)
find a link between broad capital market openness and measures of financial development
in a regression framework that is similar to our first specification with some additional
controls.
We now turn to our proposed institutional quality measures. Financial openness does
not have a robust effect on our measures of either law and order or the quality of institutions when the world growth variable is used as a control. However, when we use
time effects, the coefficients are statistically significant and mostly survive controlling for
“endogenous” liberalization decisions. While not definitive, this does suggest that the
mere presence of foreign investors may have wider beneficial effects on the institutions
of a country.8 Financial openness also appears to significantly predict improvements in
the investment profile, which is narrowly associated with law and regulations benefitting
FDI. The effect disappears for ‘exogenous’ equity liberalization. Finally, financial openness is robustly and significantly associated with improved macro-policies using both of
our measures, perhaps reflecting a disciplining effect of foreign investment. The one exception again is that the effect disappears for ‘exogenous’ equity liberalization for the first
“macro-economic environment” measure.
One interesting hypothesis to help interpret the significant factor productivity growth
effects associated with financial openness is that financial openness may be part of a
Great Reversal (Rajan and Zingales, 2003) within countries, leading to generally better
policies and institutions. Our results appear consistent with this hypothesis. We not only
find direct, ‘exogenous’ positive effects of financial openness, but the coefficients on the
probability of liberalization are typically also significant, and that variable may indirectly
proxy for simultaneous reforms.
As an additional test, we examine whether factor productivity growth increases through
an improved efficiency of capital allocation. In the debate about how financial develop8

For example, Desai and Moel (2008) discuss a particular case where the government of the Czech

Republic compensated a foreign investment unit following significant losses associated with poor corporate
governance. More generally, Leuz, Lins, and Warnock (2009) find that foreigners invest less in firms that
reside in countries with poor outsider protection, disclosure, and governance. Choi, Lee, and Park (2007)
provide a specific example of a foreign-financed activist fund that directly pushes corporate governance
reforms in Korea.

14

ment contributes to economic growth, Wurgler (2000) and Fisman and Love (2004)’s
work strongly suggest that financial development may improve capital allocation. Beck,
Levine and Loayza (2000) demonstrate that factor productivity is positively related to
the exogenous component of financial development. However, Bekaert, Harvey, Lundblad
and Siegel (2007) show that financial openness helps align exogenously available growth
opportunities (GO) with actual growth, and that financial openness is more important
than either financial development or the absence of financing constraints, stressed by
Rajan and Zingales (1998). The Bekaert, Harvey, Lundblad and Siegel (2007) measure
of exogenous growth opportunities essentially uses global price to earnings ratios for the
industries in which a country specializes, and strongly predicts actual GDP growth. We
add depth to their framework to test whether the response of (aggregate) investment
(from t to t + 5) to growth opportunities (measured at time t) is different in financially
open economies. Hence, we are testing an interaction effect: improved domestic allocative efficiency would imply that investment growth responds more strongly to growth
opportunities post-liberalization.
Table 5 reports the results. We consider three specifications each for capital account
openness (top panel) and equity liberalization (bottom panel). The specification on the
left is parsimonious. Our regressors include the GO measure, the financial openness
measure, and their interaction, in addition to time effects. In this regression, we find
that there is no independent financial openness effect on capital stock growth. Financial
openness primarily serves to make countries respond better to growth opportunities: the
interaction coefficients are positive and statistically significant. In the second specification,
we also control for country fixed effects. The interaction effects remain significant, but
there is now also an independent effect of capital market openness on growth. In the
third specification, we replace the country fixed effects by the same initial GDP per
capita measure used in Table 1, and the effects remain robust, with now equity openness
also generating independent effects. Adding more control variables does not change these
conclusions. Not surprisingly, in all specifications, investment growth in closed countries
fails to respond to the global growth opportunities available to their industries.
As a final “efficiency test,” we examine whether a particular investment to GDP level
generates more growth in financially open countries. To do so, we regress five-year future
15

growth on initial GDP per capita, year effects, financial openness and the investment to
GDP ratio, where the latter effect is split over “open“ and “closed” countries.9 For capital
account openness, we find that each percent of investment to GDP leads to a significantly
larger growth response in open countries. The increase in investment efficiency is about
the same for equity market openness (on the order of 45 to 50 basis points of growth for
a 20% investment to GDP ratio), but no longer statistically significant. Detailed results
are available upon request.

4

Threshold effects

Liberalization is associated with both capital stock and factor productivity growth. However, we only measure an average effect. It is important to examine the heterogeneity
of the effect across different countries. Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2005) document
strong threshold effects in the overall GDP growth response to equity market liberalization. Here we look at the potential for heterogeneity in the effects associated with the
individual growth channels. Table 6 presents the analysis of the liberalization effects on
capital stock growth and total factor productivity growth separated by country characteristics. Panel A focuses on the capital account openness measure and Panel B on the
official equity market liberalization.
We measure the heterogeneity across countries in the financial openness effect by
breaking up the indicator variable into two pieces:
High
yi,t+5,t = βQi,start + γ 0 Xi,t + αL LibLow
+ δChari,t + ²i,t+5,5 ,
i,t + αH Libi,t

(4)

where yi,t+5,t represents either the five-year capital stock or total factor productivity
growth, LibLow
denotes the openness variable for countries that falls below the median
i,t
value for certain country characteristics, and LibHigh
is the analogous definition for couni,t
tries that fall above the median value. The regression also includes the “own-effect” of
the characteristic, which is denoted by Chari,t . We report the coefficients on the high
and low characteristic indicators as well as a Wald test of the null hypothesis that the
9

Because investment to GDP ratios and financial openness are highly correlated, an interaction analysis

may yield anomalous results.

16

coefficients are not significantly different from one another. We also report the coefficient
on the own effect.
We consider two categories of interaction variables: financial sector variables (private credit/GDP, equity market turnover, equity market capitalization/GDP, antidirector
rights, and the MYY measure) and quality of institutions variables (the ICRG quality of
institutions measure, the investment profile, law and order, and the country credit rating).
All of these variables are detailed in the appendix.
We focus the discussion on the capital account openness measure. The regressions
suggest significant heterogeneity in the capital growth regressions with respect to seven
of the eight variables considered. The countries with a ‘high’ level of the characteristic
(better than average financial development and better quality institutions) have a significantly higher capital growth response to liberalization than the countries with a ‘low’
level of the characteristic. For example, the quality of institutions is important for capital stock growth in both ‘low’ and ‘high’ Quality of Institutions countries. However, the
coefficient is six times larger for countries that have high quality institutions. While this
is perhaps not surprising, it is definitely conceivable that countries with poor institutions
and financial development may experience the largest drop in the cost of capital and generate large investment responses. In six out of eight cases, the direct effect is positive and
statistically significant.
The total factor productivity regressions are also suggestive of heterogeneity; however,
the evidence is somewhat weaker. Similar to the results for capital stock growth, the
coefficients on the ‘high’ level of the variable are generally greater than the coefficients
on the ‘low’ level of the variable, and the high-level coefficients are always statistically
significant. However, the difference between the two coefficients is now only significant
in six cases and significant at the 1% level in only three cases. For example, for Quality
of Institutions, the coefficient in the ‘low’ countries is not significantly different from
zero. The coefficient for the ‘high’ countries is significant and 11 times greater than the
point estimate for the low countries, but the difference is only significant at the 10%
level. The results in Panel B for equity market liberalization are qualitatively similar, but
statistically slightly weaker.
Our analysis shows that the particular characteristics of a country often determine the
17

capital stock and factor productivity response to financial liberalization. Much more work
is needed to disentangle how such interaction effects really arise. Gupta and Yuan (2009)
provide some perspective on the positive interaction effect with financial development for
equity market liberalization using industry data. They find that liberalization relaxes
financing constraints and stimulates the creation of new firms only in countries that
are relatively well financially developed. They also provide some direct evidence that
regulatory barriers and institutional frictions prevent certain firms (industries) to take
full advantage of liberalization.

5

Liberalization and Crises

An often-heard critique of financial liberalization is that it increases the macro-economic
vulnerability of countries and the probability of a financial crisis (see Stiglitz (2000)). An
extensive literature on the effects of liberalization on risk sharing and macro-volatility finds
mixed results (see Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2006), Fratzscher and Imbs (2009),
Kose, Prasad and Terrones (2003)), although the bulk of the evidence does not support
a strong increase in real volatility post liberalization. Here, we focus on the interaction
between liberalization and banking sector crises. While such crises may not necessarily
lead to a permanent output loss (see Ranciere, Tornell and Westermann (2008) for an
interesting discussion on the effect of crises on long-term growth), they often lead to a
dramatic temporary output loss. The crisis measure we use is derived from the dates for
banking crises provided by Caprio and Klingebiel (2005). Our results are summarized in
Table 7.
The first exercise we conduct is to simply include the crisis dummy contemporaneously
with the dependent variable in our standard growth regression from Table 1. In Panel A,
the crisis coefficient indicates the average annual loss in GDP growth during a crisis year.
The estimates are around 1% of GDP per year. The inclusion of this variable does not
significantly affect the coefficients associated with financial openness. This is inconsistent
with the critique that financial liberalizations may take place after a crisis and hence that
the growth effect is biased because of the crisis years occurring just before the reforms.
However, it is still possible that financial openness interacts with crises in other ways.

18

The second set of results also includes an interaction effect between crises and openness.
Interestingly, the results suggest that the output cost of a crisis is larger in open countries.
The effect is largest for capital market openness (estimated to be around 1.5%) but
only borderline significant. For equity market liberalization, the effect is not significant.
Nevertheless, it does appear that there may be a cost to liberalizations in the form of
larger crises. However, it is important to realize that the temporary output loss due to
crises is outweighed in our sample by the positive growth effects of liberalization. A crisis
lasts on average 3.5 years, so the estimate of the total output loss of a crisis in a financially
open country varies between 6.50% (capital account openness) and 5.88% (equity market
openness). However, the output gain of liberalization is to a certain extent permanent. A
temporary growth spurt after liberalization of about five years with the per annum effects
reported in Table 7 would suffice to offset the output loss induced by a crisis.
These results already suggest that many crises happened post-liberalization. A case
in point is the South-East Asian crisis that happened 5 to 6 years after liberalization
in a number of countries. This raises the possibility that liberalizations cause or help
cause crises. In Panel B, we report the results of a panel probit analysis. The left hand
side variable is a dummy variable that takes on the value of one if there is a crisis over
the next five years. The independent variables are measured at the beginning of the
5-year period. We only include closed or liberalizing countries in this sample, and the
independent variables are the ones employed in the regressions reported in Table 1 plus
the ICRG political risk index.
We find a number of significant predictors of a banking sector crisis. First, larger levels
of initial per capita GDP, secondary school enrollment, and life expectancy are all strongly
associated with a reduced probability of a crisis in the capital account specification, but
in the equity market specification only initial GDP remains significant among these variables. Second, larger scores for ICRG’s political risk index (where larger numbers denote
higher levels of safety) are also significantly associated with reduced crisis probabilities.
The second column provides an interpretation of the economic significance of the effects
by reporting two specific predicted crisis probabilities. In particular, we evaluate all the
variables at their medians except the variable in question, which is evaluated at, respectively, the 25% and 75% percentiles in its overall distribution. Clearly, of the explanatory
19

variables discussed so far, economic development, measured using initial GDP per capita,
generates the largest spread in crisis probabilities.
There are two sets of surprising results that are of considerable interest. First, there
is no reliably significant relationship between financial openness and the probability of a
banking sector crisis. The point estimates for both measures are negative. For capital
account openness, the coefficient is more than one standard error below zero. An alternative way to state the result is that capital controls do not help avert crises. This result is
consistent with Glick and Hutchinson’s (2005) analysis of the effect of capital controls on
exchange rate stability, finding that, if anything, they appear to increase the vulnerability
of economies to speculative attacks.
Second, there is a significantly positive relationship between the private credit to GDP
ratio and the probability of a banking sector crisis, which is economically very important
as well.10 In unreported results, we further explore this positive relation. We split up
the private credit to GDP observations into three bins using the full cross-sectional and
time-series distribution: observations below the 25th percentile, between the 25th and
75th percentiles, and observations greater than the 75th percentile. In the lowest private
credit to GDP group, the sign is negative but not significant. It makes sense that countries
with little or no banking are unlikely to experience a banking crisis. Both the middle
and highest private credit to GDP variables have positive and significant coefficients.
Interestingly, the coefficient on the highest banking intensity is double that of the medium
intensity. This suggests a strong non-linear effect. Excessive credit growth may lead to
an increased probability of a crisis.
The current upheaval of global financial markets and world-wide recession beckons the
blame game and at the top of the list is globalization. Our results provide an alternative
perspective. Financial openness alone is not an important predictor in our crisis probability model. However, our evidence points to a non-linear role for the size of private
credit. When we re-estimate our model in Table 4 with a quadratic term on private credit
to GDP, it is strongly significant. As an example, by the end of 2006 Iceland’s ratio of
private credit to GDP exceeded 300%, yielding a near 100% probability of crisis in the
10

Bonfiglioli (2008) also finds a positive link between private credit to GDP and crises; she also finds

a limited role for financial liberalization in explaining crises in developed countries.

20

next year according to our probit model. Hence, our evidence points to excessive leverage
as the culprit rather than openness. While openness may make it possible to take extreme
bets by financial institutions employing leverage, policy makers and financial institutions
can choose more conservative capital structures in a financially open economy.

6

Conclusions

Our work fits into a growing research area that investigates the link between financial
openness (both capital account and equity market) and productivity. We dissect growth
into two channels: capital stock growth and total factor productivity growth. In contrast
to the work of Bonfiglioli (2008), we find that financial openness positively impacts both of
these channels, but has a greater impact on factor productivity than investment. Hence,
we are able to reconcile the relatively large GDP growth response to financial openness
and the relatively modest increase in investment. In recent work, Kose et al. (2008) also
find a positive effect on productivity. Bonfiglioli (2008) and Kose et al. (2008) also find
productivity effects despite using a coarse measure of capital account openness. We push
the story further, offering three additional insights.
First, we investigate whether the growth effects are permanent or temporary. The neoclassical model of growth suggests a temporary effect. Our results show both temporary
and permanent effects both in the growth of the capital stock and total factor productivity. We provide some insights into the channels of these permanent effects, showing
that financial openness is associated with future improvements in financial development,
institutional quality, and macro-economic policies. These results are mostly, but not always, robust to controlling for simultaneous reforms, but are somewhat sensitive to how
we control for time effects. This insight seems particularly germane to policy makers
considering regulatory reforms.
Second, we show that both capital stock and productivity growth display heterogeneous effects. Intuitively, it does not make sense that all countries respond in the same
fashion to a financial liberalization – whether in the capital account or the equity market.
Our analysis shows that the initial country-specific characteristics of the financial sector
and the quality of institutions significantly drive the size of the growth response in both

21

capital stock and factor productivity. The pre-existing environment into which reforms
are introduced is critical.
Finally, we address the currently relevant question of whether financial liberalization
is worth it if it renders a country more sensitive to banking crises. When we control for
banking crises, the financial openness effect in our growth regression remains robust. This
establishes that recovery from banking crises is not somehow inducing a spurious relation
between openness and growth. More importantly, a panel probit analysis shows that
financial openness does not significantly influence the probability of a banking crisis (and
the point estimates are, in fact, negative). Indeed, our probability of crisis model points
to the leverage that the banking sector employs as a critical determinant of banking
crises. We find a strong non-linear relation between crisis and the size of the banking
sector. When the level of private credit becomes exceptionally large as compared to GDP
(presumably via leverage), this greatly increases the probability of a crisis. Though our
data only go through December 2006, the probit specification forecasts a crisis in 2007 in
a number of countries. The model assigns a 100% probability to a crisis in Iceland. The
estimated probabilities in many countries, such as the U.S. and U.K., are also substantially
heightened.
Our work, together with the mounting micro-oriented evidence as in Chari and Henry
(2008), Gupta and Yuan (2009) and Mitton (2006), is consistent with the notion that
financial openness has indeed improved growth prospects for most countries. Ultimately,
firm-specific evidence should yield more powerful tests and finer detail on how productivity
is enhanced through openness.
We want to end with an additional “big picture” empirical result. The main reason to
focus on factor productivity growth is Gourinchas and Jeanne (2006)’s observation that
to close the development gap, financial openness would have to raise factor productivity.
But, what happened to the development gap during our sample period? In Figure 1, we
provide a tantalizing, but depressing answer. We examine the average GDP per capita
(in logs) of four country groups: countries that never opened, liberalizing countries with
a relatively high GDP per capita in 1980, liberalizing countries with a relatively low
GDP per capita, and countries that were already financially open in 1980. We show the
evolution over time of the ratio of per capita GDP of the always open countries to the
22

per capita GDP of the first three groups. We stratify the liberalizing economies in terms
of initial GDP because, as a group, their development level was higher than that of the
always closed countries.
Figure 1 shows that the income of the low income liberalizing countries is actually lower
than that of the always closed countries. Liberalizing countries as a group have closed
a bit of the gap. On average, the ratio went from 1.51 in 1980 to 1.46 in 2005, where
most of the convergence is actually coming from the lower income countries. However,
the closed countries have diverged: while the open countries were 1.42 times richer in
1980, they are now 1.52 times richer. This evolution also means that liberalization has
in fact contributed to increased cross-sectional dispersion of per capita GDPs, with the
main contributor being the growing divergence between poor, closed countries and open
countries.
We examine the cross-sectional dispersion by estimating the following regression:
Dispt = α0 + α10 Xt + ηt

(5)

where Dispt is the cross-sectional variance of log GDP per capita across all countries for
each year. Xt is a vector of explanatory variables including: the time-series variance of
world GDP growth (taken as a rolling five-year standard deviation of world GDP growth),
the percentage of countries undergoing a banking crisis in that year, the average level of the
trade to GDP ratio, and the spread between the log per capita GDP levels for countries
that are either fully open or fully closed throughout our sample. Finally, to examine
the role for financial openness, we include the percentage of countries with either an open
capital account or equity market. Of these potential explanatory variables, only the spread
between GDP per capita for open and closed countries and the level of financial openness,
using either measure, are statistically significant. Both effects are positive, suggesting
that financial openness has indeed contributed to higher cross-sectional income dispersion
over time. In sum, in the parlance of the neo-classical growth theory, the globalization
process has led to some level convergence but also to sigma divergence.
In conclusion, our results on the growth effects are not uniformly positive. We find
a near-permanent effect of financial openness on factor productivity, but, so far, income
levels in liberalizing countries are still far removed from industrialized country levels.
23

Moreover, the alarming income divergence for the poorest countries poses a huge challenge
for development economics that globalization by itself cannot resolve, especially since we
also document strong threshold effects in Section 4.

24

7

Bibliography

Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., Robinson, J., 2001. The colonial origins of comparative development: An empirical investigation. American Economic Review 91, 1369–1401.
Bailey, W., Bae, K-H., and C. X. Mao, 2006. Stock Market Liberalization and the Information Environment. Journal of International Money and Finance 25, 404-428.
Barro, R. J., 1997a. Determinants of Economic Growth. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Barro, R. J., 1997b. Determinants of economic growth: a cross-country empirical study.
Discussion paper 579. Harvard Institute for International Development.
Barro, R. Sala-i-Martin, X., 1995. Economic Growth. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Beck, T., Levine, R., Loayza, N., 2000. Finance and sources of growth. Journal of Financial
Economics 58, 261–300.
Bekaert, G., 1995. Market integration and investment barriers in emerging equity markets.
World Bank Economic Review 9, 75–107.
Bekaert, G., Harvey, C. R., 2000. Foreign speculators and emerging equity markets. Journal
of Finance 55, 565–614.
Bekaert, G., Harvey, C. R., 2005. Chronology of important financial, economic and political
events in emerging markets. http://www.duke.edu/∼charvey/chronology.htm.
Bekaert, G., C. R. Harvey and C. Lundblad, 2001. Does financial liberalization spur growth?.
NBER working paper #8245.
Bekaert, G., C. R. Harvey and C. Lundblad, 2005. Does financial liberalization spur growth?.
Journal of Financial Economics 77, 3-56.
Bekaert, G., Harvey, C. R., Lundblad, C., 2006. Growth volatility and financial liberalization. Journal of International Money and Finance 25, 370-403.
Bekaert, G., Harvey, C. R., Lundblad, C., 2007. Liquidity and Expected Returns: Lessons
from Emerging Markets. Review of Financial Studies 20, 1783-1831.
Bekaert, G., Harvey, C. R., Lundblad, C., Siegel, S., 2007. Growth opportunities and market
integration. Journal of Finance 62, 1081-1137.
Bonfiglioli, A., 2008. Financial Integration, Productivity and Capital Accumulation. Journal
of International Economics 76, 337-355.
Borensztein E, De Gregorio J, Lee JW, 1998. How does foreign investment affect growth?
Journal of International Economics 45, 115-135.
Caprio Jr., G., Klingebiel, D., 2005. Bank insolvencies: cross-country experience. Unpublished working paper 1620. World Bank, Washington, D.C.
Chari, A., Henry, P. B., 2004. Risk sharing and asset prices: evidence from a natural
experiment. Journal of Finance 59, 1295-1324.
Chari, A., Henry, P. B., 2008. Firm-specific information and the efficiency of investment.
Journal of Financial Economics 87, 636-655.
Chinn, M, Ito, H., 2006. What matters for financial development? Capital controls, institu25

tions, and interactions. Journal of Development Economics 61, 163-192.
Choi, J., Lee, D.K., Park, K.S., 2007. Corporate Governance and Firm Value: EndogeneityFree Evidence from Korea. Working Paper.
Desai, M., Moel, A., 2008. Czech Mate: Expropriation and Investor Protection in a Converging World. Review of Finance 12, 221-251.
Edison, H., Levine, R., Ricci, L.A., Slok, T.M., 2002. International financial integration and
economic growth. Journal of International Money and Finance 21, 749–776.
Edison, H., Warnock, F., 2003. A simple measure of the intensity of capital controls. Journal
of Empirical Finance 10, 81–104.
Edwards, S., 2001. Capital mobility and economic performance: are emerging economies
different. In: Siebert, H. (Ed.), The Worlds New Financial Landscape: Challenges for
Economic Policy, Springer, pp. 219–244.
Eichengreen, B., 2001. Capital account liberalization: what do the cross-country studies tell
us? World Bank Economic Review 15, 341–366.
Errunza. V., E. Losq, 1985, International Asset Pricing Under Mild Segmentation: Theory
and Test. Journal of Finance 105-124.
Fisman, R., and I. Love, 2004. Financial development and Intersector Allocation: A New
Approach. Journal of Finance 59, 2785-2807.
Fratzscher, M., Imbs J., 2009, Risk sharing, finance and institutions in international portfolios. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Glick, R., Hutchison, M., 2005. Capital Controls and Exchange Rate Instability in Developing Countries. Journal of International Money and Finance 24, 387-412.
Gourinchas, P., Jeanne, O., 2006. The elusive gains from international financial integration.
Review of Economic Studies 73, 715-741.
Griffin, J., Kelly, P, Nardari, F, 2007. Measuring Short-Term International Stock Market
Efficiency. Working paper.
Gupta, N., Yuan, K., 2009. Financial dependence and growth: evidence from stock market
liberalizations. Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Henry, P. B., 2000. Stock market liberalization, economic reform, and emerging market
equity prices. Journal of Finance 55, 529–564
Henry, P. B., 2003. Capital Account Liberalization, The Cost of Capital, and Economic
Growth. American Economic Review 93,
Hsieh, C., Klenow, P., 2009. Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Jeong, H., Townsend, R., 2007. Sources of TFP growth: occupational choice and financial
deepening. Economic Theory 32, 179-221.
Johnson, S., Mitton, T., 2003. Cronyism and capital controls: evidence from Malaysia.
Journal of Financial Economics 67, 351-382.
Kaminsky, G. L., Reinhart, C., 1999. The twin crises: the causes of banking and balance of
payments problems. American Economic Review 89, 473–500.
King, R., Levine, R., 1993. Finance, entrepreneurship, and growth. Journal of Monetary
26

Economics 32, 513-542.
King, R., Levine R., 1993, Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 108, 717-738.
Klein, M. W., 2003. Capital account openness and the varieties of growth experience. Unpublished working paper 9500. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Klein, M. W., Olivei, G., 2008. Capital account liberalization, financial depth and economic
growth. Journal of International Money and Finance, 27, 861-875.
Kose, M., Prasad, E., Terrones, M., 2003. Financial Integration and Macroeconomic Volatility. IMF Staff Papers 50, 119142.
Kose, M., Prasad, E., Terrones, M., 2008. Does openness to international flows contribute
to productivity growth? Journal of International Money and Finance, forthcoming.
Lesmond, D. A., 2005. The Costs of Equity Trading in Emerging Markets. Journal of
Financial Economics 77, 411-452.
Leuz, C., Lins, K., Warnock, F., 2009, Do Foreigners Invest Less in Poorly Governed Firms?,
Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Levine, R., Zervos, S., 1998. Stock markets, banks, and economic growth. American Economic Review 88, 537–558.
Mitton, T., 2006. Stock market liberalization and operating performance at the firm level.
Journal of Financial Economics 81, 625-647.
Morck, R., Yeung B., and W. Yu, 2000, The information content of stock markets: Why
do emerging markets Have synchronous stock price movements? Journal of Financial
Economics 58, 215-260.
Newey, W., and K. West, 1987. A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity and
Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix. Econometrica 55, 703-708.
Peress, J., 2008. Learning About Technologies and Technological Progress. Working paper,
INSEAD.
Prasad, E., Rogoff, K., Wei, S., Kose, M., 2004. Financial Globalization, Growth and
Volatility in Developing Countries. NBER Working Paper No. W10942.
Quinn, D., 1997. The correlates of changes in international financial regulation. American
Political Science Review 91, 531–551.
Quinn, D., Inclan, C., 1997. The origins of financial openness: A study of current and capital
account liberalization. American Journal of Political Science 41, 771-813.
Quinn, D., Toyoda, A. M., 2008. Does capital account liberalization lead to economic
growth? an empirical investigation. Review of Financial Studies 21, 1403-1449.
Rajan, R. G., Zingales, L., 1998. Financial dependence and growth. American Economic
Review 88, 559–586.
Rajan, R. G., Zingales, L., 2003. The great reversals: the politics of financial development
in the 20th century. Journal of Financial Economics 69, 5–50.
Ranciere, R., Tornell, A., Westermann, F., 2008. Systemic Crises and Growth. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 123, 359406.

27

Rodrik, D., 1998. Who needs capital account convertibility? Princeton Essays in International Finance 207, 1-10.
Sachs, J. D., Warner, A.M., 1995. Economic reform and the process of global integration.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1–118.
Solow, R., 1956. A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 70, 65-94.
Stiglitz, J. E., 2000. Capital market liberalization, economic growth, and instability. World
Development 25, 1075–1086.
Wacziarg, R. and K. Welch, 2008. Trade Liberalization and Growth: New Evidence. World
Bank Economic Review 22, 187-231.
Wurgler, J., 2000. Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital. Journal of Financial
Economics 58, 187-214.

28

Table 1

Financial Openness and Growth Components
Capital Account Openness

Official Equity Market Liberalization

GDP growth

Capital Stock
Growth

Total Factor
Productivity

GDP growth

Capital Stock
Growth

Total Factor
Productivity

Constant

-0.2075
(0.0436)

-0.1766
(0.0255)

-0.1544
(0.0378)

-0.2527
(0.0395)

-0.2650
(0.0254)

-0.1731
(0.0335)

Initial GDP

-0.0136
(0.0009)

-0.0149
(0.0011)

-0.0091
(0.0007)

-0.0111
(0.0008)

-0.0132
(0.0010)

-0.0071
(0.0006)

Secondary School

(0.0316)
(0.0041)

(0.0185)
(0.0021)

(0.0260)
(0.0040)

(0.0170)
(0.0030)

(0.0055)
(0.0020)

(0.0154)
(0.0030)

Log(Life)

0.0700
(0.0116)

0.0663
(0.0076)

0.0501
(0.0098)

0.0796
(0.0109)

0.0875
(0.0076)

0.0533
(0.0090)

Trade/GDP

0.0073
(0.0008)

0.0075
(0.0011)

0.0051
(0.0007)

0.0071
(0.0010)

0.0083
(0.0011)

0.0046
(0.0009)

Private credit/GDP

0.0081
(0.0022)

0.0122
(0.0027)

0.0045
(0.0018)

0.0045
(0.0018)

0.0070
(0.0025)

0.0024
(0.0014)

Financial Openness

0.0150
(0.0031)

0.0167
(0.0026)

0.0099
(0.0027)

0.0098
(0.0024)

0.0118
(0.0021)

0.0063
(0.0020)

33.5%

66.4%

36.2%

63.8%

Contribution to Growth

The dependent variables are the overlapping five-year average growth rate of real per capita gross domestic product (GDP), the growth rate of the real capital
stock, and total factor productivity growth. In addition to a set of standard control variables and year effects , we report the coeffic ient on financial openness
defined as (1) Quinn’s capital account openness indicator that takes a value between zero and one depending upon the intensity of the reported capital account
openness and (2) the officia l libera lizat ion indicator that takes a value of one when the equity market is libera lized, and zero otherwise. Given data limitat ions,
the capital account openness regressions include 78 countries and the official equity ma rket libera lizat ion regressions in clude 96 countries. The regressions
cover 1980-2006. We report coefficient estimates fro m pooled OLS regressions. All standard errors (in parentheses) provide a correction for cross -sectional
heteroskedasticity and account for the overlapping nature of the data. Finally, we inc lude a percentage decomposition of the financial openness effect on GDP
growth into capital stock accumulation and total factor productivity (it does not sum to 100% due to rounding). The capital stock component is calculated as
0.3, the assumed capital share, multip lied by the reported financial openness effect for capital stock growth. The total factor productivity component is the
reported financial openness effect in the factor productivity regression.

Table 2

Financial Openness and Growth Components: Robustness

Capital Account Openness
(Fixed Effects)

GDP growth

Capital Stock Growth

Total Factor
Productivity

0.0227
(0.0037)

0.0123
(0.0023)
16.3%

0.0190
(0.0038)
83.7%

0.0131
(0.0021)

0.0033
(0.0011)
7.5%

0.0122
(0.0020)
92.5%

0.0136
(0.0029)

-0.0006
(0.0016)

0.0138
(0.0028)

-1.3%

101.3%

0.0084
(0.0018)
29.5%

0.0060
(0.0019)
70.5%

Contribution to Growth
Official Equity Market Liberalization
(Fixed Effects)
Contribution to Growth
Equity Market Openness
(Fixed Effects)
Contribution to Growth
Equity Market Openness
(Standard Controls)
Contribution to Growth

0.0085
(0.0021)

The dependent variables are the overlapping five-year average growth rate of real per capita gross domestic product (GDP), the growth rate
of the real capital stock, and total factor productivity growth. We report the coeffic ient on financial openness defined as (1) Quinn’s capital
account openness indicator that takes a value between zero and one depending upon the intensity of the reported capital account openness;
(2) the offic ial libera lizat ion indicator that takes a value o f one when the equity ma rket is libera lized, and ze ro otherwise; and (3) an
alternative measure of the degree of equity market openness (investability). In this table, we consider robustness of the effects reported in
Table 1 to specifications that instead include country fixed effe cts and contemporaneous world GDP growth. To e xp lore robustness to
alternative measures of financia l openness, we also consider the identical specifications employed in Table 1 for equity mark et openness.
Given data limitations, the capital account openn ess regressions include 78 countries and the offic ial equity market liberalization and equity
ma rket openness regressions include 96 countries. The regressions cover 1980-2006. We report coefficient estimates fro m pooled OLS
regressions. All standard errors (in parentheses) provide a correction for cross -sectional heteroskedasticity and account for the overlapping
nature of the data. Finally, we inc lude a percentage decomposition of the financial openness effect on GDP gro wth into capital stock
accumulat ion and total factor productivity. The capital stock component is calculated as 0.3, the assume capital share, multiplied by the
reported financial openness effect for capital stock growth. The total factor productivity component is the repo rted financial openness effect
in the factor productivity regression.

Table 3

Financial Openness and Growth Components: Temporary versus Permanent Effects
GDP growth

Capital Stock Growth

Total Factor
Productivity

Temporary Effect

0.0045
(0.0032)

-0.0025
(0.0028)

0.0052
(0.0026)

Permanent Effect

0.0125
(0.0021)

0.0107
(0.0017)

0.0092
(0.0018)

Temporary Effect

0.0160
(0.0023)

0.0040
(0.0015)

0.0149
(0.0024)

Permanent Effect

0.0167
(0.0027)

0.0065
(0.0016)

0.0147
(0.0029)

Temporary Effect

0.0139
(0.0021)

0.0125
(0.0020)

0.0101
(0.0017)

Permanent Effect

0.0079
(0.0022)

0.0100
(0.0019)

0.0049
(0.0020)

Temporary Effect

0.0158
(0.0022)

0.0059
(0.0012)

0.0140
(0.0021)

Permanent Effect

0.0148
(0.0024)

0.0019
(0.0013)

0.0142
(0.0022)

Capital Account Openness
(Standard Controls)

Capital Account Openness
(Fixed Effects)

Official Equity Market Liberalziation
(Standard Controls)

Official Equity Market Liberalization
(Fixed Effects)

The dependent variables are the overlapping five-year average growth rate of real per capita gross domestic product (GDP), the growth rate
of the real capital stock, and total factor productivity growth. We report temporary and permanent effects from financia l openness defined
as the first five years after a libera lization event and the six plus years beyond, respectively. Fully open countries are asso ciated with the
permanent effect, and closed countries are associated with neither. For capital account openness, we define a liberalization event as an
upward incre ment of 0.2 or larger in Quinn’s openness measure that results in the measure exceeding 0.5. For the official liberalization
indicator, the date of liberalization is directly emp loyed. Given data limitations, the capital account openness regressions include 78
countries and the officia l equity market libera lizat ion regressions include 96 countries. The regressions cover 1980-2006. We report the
effects with (1) standard controls and time effects and (2) country fixed effects and the contemporaneous world GDP gro wth rate. We
report coefficient estimates from pooled OLS regressions. All standard errors (in parentheses) provide a correction for cross -sectional
heteroskedasticity and account for the overlapping nature of the data.

Table 4

The effect of financial openness on financial development,
institutions, and macro-economic policies

Stock Market Development:
Market Illiquidity
(Log Zero Returns)

Turnover

MCAP/GDP

Market R2 (MYY)

Banking Development:
Private Credit

Institutions / Corporate Governance:
Investment Profile

Quality of Institutions

Law and Order

Macro-economic Environment

Log Country Credit Rating

Capital Account
Openness

Official Equity
Market
Liberalization

-0.0573*
(0.0544)

-0.0476*
(0.0353)

[45]

[47]

0.0762*
(0.0416)

0.0702*
(0.0295)

[56]

[60]

0.0925*
(0.0592)

0.0380*
(0.0301)

[65]

[72]

0.0900*
(0.0130)

0.0455*
(0.0092)

[44]

[46]

0.0951*
(0.0172)

0.0535*
(0.0107)

[78]

[96]

0.1164*
(0.0201)

0.0340*
(0.0113)

[73]

[86]

0.0309
(0.0078)

0.0187
(0.0066)

[73]

[86]

0.0267
(0.0133)

0.0267
(0.0098)

[73]

[86]

0.0294*
(0.0092)

0.0143*
(0.0048)

[73]

[86]

0.1210*
(0.0275)

0.0511*
(0.0146)

[74]

[86]

Capital Account
Openness

Official Equity
Market
Liberalization

-0.0769*
(0.0564)
0.0392
(0.0453)
[45]

-0.0463*
(0.0360)
-0.0046
(0.0352)
[47]

0.0558*
(0.0423)
0.0428
(0.0317)
[55]

0.0424*
(0.0294)
0.0627
(0.0229)
[59]

0.0631*
(0.0582)
0.1190
(0.0272)
[61]

-0.0098
(0.0270)
0.1704
(0.0282)
[67]

0.0936*
(0.0138)
-0.0067
(0.0146)
[44]

0.0433*
(0.0092)
0.0067
(0.0074)
[46]

0.0748
(0.0152)
0.0813
(0.0155)
[71]

0.0264
(0.0097)
0.1276
(0.0203)
[81]

0.0947*
(0.0161)
0.0798
(0.0201)
[71]

-0.0082*
(0.0080)
0.1154
(0.0183)
[81]

0.0316
(0.0081)
0.0039
(0.0097)
[71]

0.0130
(0.0053)
0.0363
(0.0085)
[81]

0.0295
(0.0130)
0.0470
(0.0138)
[71]

0.0130
(0.0084)
0.0710
(0.0153)
[81]

0.0247*
(0.0086)
0.0371
(0.0074)
[71]

0.0001*
(0.0039)
0.0499
(0.0086)
[81]

0.1298*
(0.0273)
0.0635
(0.0190)
[71]

0.0440*
(0.0136)
0.1235
(0.0207)
[81]

The dependent variable is each regression is provided in the left-most colu mn. The variables of interest are separated into measures of stock ma rket develop ment,
banking development, and institutions / corporate governance. W e report the coefficient on financial openness defined as (1) Quinn’s capital account openness
indicator that takes a value between ze ro and one depending upon the intensity of the reported capital account openness and (2) the offic ia l libera lization indicator that
takes a value of one when the equity market is libe ralized, and zero otherwise. As controls, we emp loy the lagged dependent variable, year effects, and in the rightmost columns the predicted probability of capital account or equity liberalization based on panel probit regr essions of the relevant financial openness variables onto
the contemporaneous trade/GDP, private credit/ GDP, log country credit ratings, and the quality of institutions variables. For this second set of regressions, we also
report, for comparison, the coefficient and standard error on this predicted probability of financial libera lization. The regressions cover 1980-2006. All standard
errors (in parentheses) provide a correction for cross -sectional heteroskedasticity and account for the overlapping nature of the data. Given data limitations, the
number of countries employed diffe rs and is reported below each estimate (in brackets). An asterisk (*) indicates that the coefficient is statistically significant in the
alternative regression where time effects are replaced by contemporaneous world GDP gro wth.

Table 5

Financial Openness and Allocative Efficiency

year effect

year and
country
effects

year and
intial GDP

-0.0233
(0.0147)

-0.0106
(0.0086)

-0.0137
(0.0138)

0.0302
(0.0111)

0.0177
(0.0091)

0.0277
(0.0107)

Capital Account Openness

-0.0007
(0.0026)

0.0161
(0.0041)

0.0207
(0.0044)

Global Growth Opportunities

-0.0153
(0.0112)

-0.0072
(0.0061)

-0.0061
(0.0108)

0.0161
(0.0077)

0.0135
(0.0054)

0.0175
(0.0086)

0.0012
(0.0021)

-0.0016
(0.0019)

0.0076
(0.0029)

Global Growth Opportunities

Global Growth Opportunities *
Capital Account Openness

Global Growth Opportunities *
Official Equity Market Liberalization

Official Equity Market Liberalization

The dependent variable is the overlapping five-year average gro wth rate of real per capita capita l stock
growth. We report the coefficients on exogenous growth opportunities available to each country,
financia l openness, and their interaction. In column (1), unreported year effects are also included. In
column (2), unreported year and country fixed e ffects are also included. Finally, in colu mn (3)
unreported year effects and the initia l level of GDP are a lso included. Financia l openness is defined as
(1) Qu inn’s capital account openness indicator that takes a value between zero and one depending
upon the intensity of the reported capital account openness and (2) the offic ia l libera lizat ion indicator
that takes a value of one when the equity market is libera lized, and zero otherwise. Given data
limitat ions on the exogenous growth opportunities measure, the capital account openness regressions
include 48 countries and the officia l equity market liberalization regressions include 50 countries. The
regressions cover 1980-2006. We report coeffic ient estimates fro m pooled OLS regressions. All
standard errors (in parentheses) provide a correction for cross -sectional heteroskedasticity and account
for the overlapping nature of the data.

Table 6

Heterogeneity of the capital stock and total factor productivity growth effects
Panel A: Capital Account Openness
Capital Stock Growth

Total Factor Productivity

from low level

from high level

Direct effect

from low level

from high level

Direct effect

0.0141
(0.0024)

0.0188
(0.0030)

0.0108
(0.0028)

**

0.0058
(0.0026)

0.0135
(0.0028)

0.0021
(0.0018)

***

78

Turnover

-0.0010
(0.0035)

0.0237
(0.0039)

0.0089
(0.0022)

***

0.0048
(0.0037)

0.0160
(0.0038)

0.0033
(0.0017)

***

66

MCAP/GDP

0.0143
(0.0035)

0.0118
(0.0041)

0.0007
(0.0026)

0.0090
(0.0031)

0.0092
(0.0038)

-0.0051
(0.0019)

65

Antidirector rights

-0.0031
(0.0042)

0.0102
(0.0049)

-0.0104
(0.0035)

***

0.0084
(0.0038)

0.0091
(0.0035)

0.0118
(0.0037)

46

Market R2 (MYY)

0.0028
(0.0050)

-0.0098
(0.0053)

-0.0023
(0.0058)

***

0.0090
(0.0036)

0.0036
(0.0034)

0.0092
(0.0043)

*

46

Quality of Institutions

0.0039
(0.0023)

0.0232
(0.0035)

0.0090
(0.0040)

***

0.0010
(0.0031)

0.0112
(0.0042)

0.0193
(0.0045)

**

73

Investment profile

-0.0007
(0.0022)

0.0142
(0.0027)

0.0356
(0.0039)

***

-0.0008
(0.0027)

0.0105
(0.0033)

0.0134
(0.0057)

**

73

Law and Order

0.0059
(0.0024)

0.0148
(0.0038)

0.0177
(0.0033)

***

0.0011
(0.0032)

0.0087
(0.0041)

0.0161
(0.0030)

*

73

Log Country Credit Rating

-0.0044
(0.0018)

0.0181
(0.0026)

0.0169
(0.0019)

***

0.0010
(0.0027)

0.0183
(0.0033)

0.0025
(0.0023)

***

74

Financial Sector
Private Credit/GDP

# of countries

Quality of Institutions

For each interaction variable, we separately conduct regressions that have the five -year average growth rate of the real capital stock and total factor productivity growth as the dependent
variables. We include in the regressions the same control variables presen ted in Table 1. We estimate interaction effects between financial openness and the financial sector and quality of
institutions variables. We report the associated impact of growth fro m openness for a country with a low level (belo w the med ian of the associated interaction variable) and with a high
level (above the median of the associated interaction variable). We also allow for a direct effect on growth associated with the interaction variable. In Panel A, we report the effect where
financia l openness is defined as Quinn’s capital account openness indicator that takes a value between zero and one depending upon the intensity of the reported capital account openness.
In Panel B, financial openness is defined as the officia l libera lizat ion indicator that takes a value of one when the equity market is liberalized, and zero otherwise. Given data limitations,
the regressions employ varied numbers of countries which are provided in the right -most column. We report coefficient estimates fro m pooled OLS regres sions. The regressions cover
1980-2006. All standard errors (in parentheses) provide a correction for cross -sectional heteroskedasticity and account for the overlapping nature of the data. Last, we provide the
significance of a Wald test, for which the null hypothesis is that the high -low effects are equivalent; statistical significance is denoted by a * for 10%, ** for 5%, and *** for 1% significance
levels.

Table 6 (continued)
Panel B: Official Equity Market Liberalization
Capital Stock Growth

Total Factor Productivity

from low level

from high level

Direct effect

from low level

from high level

Direct effect

0.0100
(0.0021)

0.0131
(0.0023)

0.0061
(0.0028)

*

0.0011
(0.0022)

0.0100
(0.0021)

-0.0003
(0.0016)

***

96

Turnover

0.0006
(0.0021)

0.0119
(0.0021)

0.0113
(0.0022)

***

0.0025
(0.0021)

0.0078
(0.0019)

0.0041
(0.0017)

***

73

MCAP/GDP

0.0099
(0.0018)

0.0085
(0.0020)

0.0005
(0.0025)

0.0065
(0.0014)

0.0055
(0.0018)

-0.0046
(0.0018)

73

Antidirector rights

0.0027
(0.0025)

0.0115
(0.0021)

-0.0050
(0.0021)

***

0.0071
(0.0021)

0.0086
(0.0021)

0.0098
(0.0023)

47

Market R2 (MYY)

0.0082
(0.0030)

-0.0021
(0.0027)

-0.0007
(0.0055)

***

0.0049
(0.0024)

0.0023
(0.0023)

0.0077
(0.0043)

Quality of Institutions

0.0083
(0.0026)

0.0138
(0.0023)

0.0083
(0.0041)

**

0.0018
(0.0025)

0.0064
(0.0024)

0.0164
(0.0044)

Investment profile

0.0010
(0.0011)

0.0149
(0.0031)

0.0327
(0.0043)

***

-0.0013
(0.0018)

0.0086
(0.0025)

0.0155
(0.0053)

Law and Order

0.0094
(0.0029)

0.0115
(0.0017)

0.0134
(0.0033)

0.0030
(0.0023)

0.0062
(0.0027)

0.0136
(0.0033)

Log Country Credit Rating

-0.0042
(0.0018)

0.0113
(0.0022)

0.0213
(0.0014)

-0.0027
(0.0014)

0.0094
(0.0020)

0.0056
(0.0018)

Financial Sector
Private Credit/GDP

# of countries

*

46

Quality of Institutions

***

86

***

86

86

***

73

Table 7

Financial Openness and Crises
Capital Account
Openness

Official Equity
Market
Liberalization

78

96

Banking Crisis

-0.0139
(0.0020)

-0.0144
(0.0020)

Financial Openness

0.0143
(0.0029)

0.0098
(0.0024)

Banking Crisis

-0.0072
(0.0058)

-0.0133
(0.0025)

Financial Openness

0.0157
(0.0028)

0.0103
(0.0022)

Interaction

-0.0125
(0.0086)

-0.0035
(0.0046)

Panel A: Growth Effects of a Crisis
(5-year GDP growth)

Panel B: Does Financial Openness
Cause Crises? (Panel Probit on 5-year
Banking Crisis Indicator)

Capital Account Openness

Official Equity Market
Liberalization

73

86

Coefficients

25th / 75th
Percentiles

Coefficients

25th / 75th
Percentiles

Constant

-11.9169
(5.3138)

0.4334
(3.5361)

Initial GDP

-0.5558
(0.2025)

0.0804
0.0022

-0.5049
(0.1721)

0.0947
0.0034

Secondary School

-1.6592
(0.5434)

0.0620
0.0075

-0.6412
(0.4544)

0.0400
0.0177

Log(Life)

3.7308
(1.3894)

0.0086
0.0507

0.5513
(0.9493)

0.0217
0.0322

Trade/GDP

0.1698
(0.3087)

0.0247
0.0289

-0.0355
(0.2756)

0.0289
0.0279

Private credit/GDP

2.7581
(0.3837)

0.0087
0.1874

2.7493
(0.3567)

0.0107
0.1763

ICRG Political Risk Index

-2.0385
(0.7151)

0.0434
0.0131

-2.1009
(0.5766)

0.0451
0.0147

Financial Openness

-0.3546
(0.3010)

0.0323
0.0214

-0.0496
(0.1287)

0.0285
0.0254

In Panel A, the dependent variable is the overlapping five-year average growth rate of real per capita gross domestic product
(GDP. The regressions include the set of standard control variables e mployed in Table 1. We report the coefficient on financial
openness defined as (1) Quinn’s capital account openness indicator that takes a value between zero and one depending upon the
intensity of the reported capital account openness and (2) the offic ia l libera lizat ion indicator that takes a value o f one when the
equity market is libera lized, and zero otherwise. We report the GDP growth effect associated with a contemporaneous banking
sector crisis as identified by Caprio and Klingebiel, as we ll as an interaction effect between financial openness and banking
sector crises. Given data limitations, the capital account openness regressions include 78 countries and the official equit y
ma rket liberalization regressions include 96 countries. We report coeffic ient estimates fro m pooled OLS regressions. The
regression covers 1980-2006. A ll standard errors (in parentheses) provide a correction for cross -sectional heteroskedasticity and
account for the overlapping nature of the data. In Panel B, the dependent variable in a panel probit estimation is a 0/1 indicator
measuring the inc idence of a banking sector crisis over the subsequent five -years. We include the standard control variables, the
ICRG’s measure of political risk, and our two measures of financial openness. We report both the coefficient estimates and, in
the second column, a measure of the economic significance of the e ffects . In particula r, we p rovide two specific pred icted crisis
probabilit ies where we evaluate all the variab les at their medians e xcept the variable in question, which is evaluated at,
respectively, the 25% and 75% percentiles in its overall distribution.

1.6

Figure 1

Log Per Capita GDP Ratios
1.5

1.4

1.3

1.2

1.1

1.0

Fully Open / Fully Closed

Fully Open / Low Income Liberalizing

Fully Open / High Income Liberalizing

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

0.9

Appendix Table
Description of the Variables
All data are employed at the annual frequency.
Variable
Gross domestic product (GDP) and its
subcomponents
Capital Stock and Total Factor Productivity (TFP)

Description
Real per capita gross domestic product. Available for all countries from 1980 through 2006. Source: World
Bank Development Indicators .
We build per capita physical capital stocks over the 1980–2006 period using the method in King and Levine
(1994). We derive an initial estimate of the capital stock, assuming each country is at its steady state capitaloutput ratio at that time. Then, we use the aggregate real investment series and the perpetual inventory
method with a depreciation rate of 7% to compute the capital stock in later years. TFP is calculated as the
difference between the GDP growth rate and 0.3 times the capital stock growth rate, assuming a capital
share of 0.3.
Measures of Financial Openness

Quinn Capital account liberalization indicator

Quinn’s capital account openness measure is also created from the text of the annual volume published by
the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions. Rather than
the indicator constructed by the IMF that takes a 1 if any restriction is in place, Quinn’s openness measure is
scored 0-4, in half integer units, with 4 representing a fully open economy. The measure hence facilitates a
more nuanced view of capital account openness, and is available for 48 countries in our study. We
transform the measure into a 0 to 1 scale.

Official equity market liberalization indicator

Corresponding to a date of formal regulatory change after which foreign investors officially have the
opportunity to invest in domestic equity securities. Official Liberalization dates are based on Bekaert and
Harvey (2002) A Chronology of Important Financial, Economic and Political Events in Emerging Markets,
http://www.duke.edu/~charvey/chronology.htm. This chronology is based on over 50 different source
materials. A condensed version of the chronology, along with the selection of dates for a number of countries
appears in Bekaert and Harvey (2000). We have extended their official liberalization dates to include Japan,
New Zealand, and Spain. For the liberalizing countries, the associated official liberalization indicator takes a
value of one when the equity market is officially liberalized and thereafter, and zero otherwise. For the
remaining countries, fully segmented countries are assumed to have an indicator value of zero, and fully
liberalized countries are assumed to have an indicator value of one.

Intensity equity market liberalization indicator

Following Bekaert (1995) and Edison and Warnock (2003), the intensity measure is based on the ratio of the
market capitalization of the constituent firms comprising the IFC Investable index to those that comprise the
IFC Global index for each country. The IFC Global index, subject to some exclusion restrictions, is designed
to represent the overall market portfolio for each country, whereas the IFC Investable index is designed to
represent a portfolio of domestic equities that are available to foreign investors. A ratio of one means that all
of the stocks are available to foreign investors. Fully segmented countries have an intensity measure of zero,
and fully liberalized countries have an intensity measure of one.

Macroeconomic and demographic measures
Initial GDP

Logarithm of real per capita gross domestic product in 1980, 1985, 1990, 1995, or 2000 for the subsequent
five years. Available for all countries. Source: World Bank Development Indicators.

Secondary School Enrollment

Secondary school enrollment ratio is the ratio of total enrollment, regardless of age, to the population of the
age group that officially corresponds to the secondary level of education. Accordingly, the reported value can
exceed (or average) more than 100%. Available for all countries. Source: World Bank Development
Indicators.

Log life expectancy

Life expectancy at birth indicates the number of years a newborn infant would live if prevailing patterns of
mortality at the time of its birth were to stay the same throughout its life. Available for all countries. Source:
World Bank Development Indicators.

Trade/GDP

The trade dependency ratio is the sum of exports and imports of goods and services measured as a share of
gross domestic product. Available for all countries. Source: World Bank Development Indicators.

Private credit/GDP

Private credit divided by gross domestic product. Credit to private sector refers to financial resources
provided to the private sector, such as through loans, purchases of non-equity securities, and trade credits
and other accounts receivable that establish a claim for repayment. Available for all countries. Source:
World Bank Development Indicators.

Appendix Table
(Continued)
Variable
Illiquidity

Description
Following Lesmond, Ogden, and Trzcinka (1999), Lesmond (2005), and Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad
(2007), we construct the illiquidity measure as the proportion of zero daily returns observed over the
relevant year for each equity market. We obtain daily returns data in local currency at the firm level from
the Datastream research files. For each country, we observe daily returns (using closing prices) for a large
collection of firms. The total number of firms available from the Datastream research files accounts for about
90%, on average, of the number of domestically listed firms reported by the World Bank's World
Development Indicators. For each country, we calculate the capitalization-weighted proportion of zero daily
returns across all firms, and average this proportion over the year. Available for 46 countries.

Equity market turnover

The ratio of equity market value traded to the market capitalization. The data are available for 51 countries.
Source: Standard and Poor's/International Finance Corporation's Emerging Stock Markets Factbook.

MCAP/GDP

The ratio of equity market capitalization to gross domestic product. The data are available for 51 countries.
Source: Standard and Poor's/International Finance Corporation's Emerging Stock Markets Factbook.

MYY R 2 synchronicity

Equity market synchronicity as developed in Morck, Yeung, and Yu (2000). The measure is an annual valueweighted local market model R 2 obtained from each firm's returns regressed on the local market portfolio
return for that year. Available for 47 countries.

Investment Profile

ICRG political risk sub-component. This is a measure of the government’s attitude to inward investment.
The investment profile is determined by PRS's assessment of three sub-components: (i) risk of expropriation
or contract viability; (ii) payment delays; and (iii) repatriation of profits. Each sub-component is scored on a
scale from zero (very high risk) to four (very low risk). Source: Various issues of the International
Country Risk Guide.

Quality of Institutions

The sum of the International Country Risk Guide (ICRG) Political Risk subcomponents: Corruption, Law
and Order, and Bureaucratic Quality. Source: Various issues of the International Country Risk Guide.

Law and Order

ICRG political risk sub-component. ICRG assesses Law and Order separately, with each sub-component
comprising zero to three points. The Law sub-component is an assessment of the strength and impartiality
of the legal system, while the Order sub-component is an assessment of popular observance of the law.
Thus, a country can enjoy a high rating (3.0) in terms of its judicial system, but a low rating (1.0) if the law
is ignored for a political aim. Source: Various issues of the International Country Risk Guide

Macro-economic Environment

The value of the the International Country Risk Guide (ICRG) economic risk indicator (which ranges
between 0 and 50). The risk rating is a combination of 5 subcomponents: GDP levels and growth,
respectively, inflation, balanced budgets, and the current account. The minimum number of points for each
component is zero, while the maximum number of points depends on the fixed weight that component is
given in the overall economics risk assessment. Source: Various issues of the International Country Risk
Guide .

Growth Opportunities

Growth opportunities are global measures of country-specific growth opportunities. Growth Opportunities
are measured as the log of the inner product of the vector of global industry PE ratios and the vector of
country-specific industry weights. Country-specific industry weights are determined by relative equity
market capitalization. Then, a 60-month moving average is removed. Available for 51 countries. Source:
Bekaert, Harvey, Lundblad, and Siegel (2007)

Political risk rating

The political risk rating indicator which ranges between 0 (high risk) and 100 (low risk). The risk rating is a
combination of 12 subcomponents. Source: Various issues of the International Country Risk Guide.

