                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE RIDDLE OF THE GREAT PYRAMIDS

                                           Randall Morck

                                        Working Paper 14858
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14858


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2009




I am grateful for numerous helpful suggestions from participants at the “Evolutionary Dynamics of
Business Groups in Emerging Economies” conference hosted by Kyoto University and Doshisha University
in Japan. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Randall Morck. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Riddle of the Great Pyramids
Randall Morck
NBER Working Paper No. 14858
April 2009
JEL No. G3,P1,P5,Z13

                                             ABSTRACT

Large pyramidal family controlled business groups are the predominant form of business organization
outside America, Britain, Germany, and Japan. Large pyramidal groups comprising dozens, even hundreds,
or listed and unlisted firms place the governance of large swathes of many countries’ big business
sectors in the hands of a few of their wealthiest families. These structures plausibly substitute for weak
market institutions in economies undergoing rapid early-stage industrialization. They may also substitute
for weak governments in coordinating Big Push growth programs to establish numerous interdependent
simultaneously. However, no such role is evident in developed or in slowly growing developing economies,
where such structures appear prone to agency problems and political rent-seeking. If sufficiently large,
they may also add to economy volatility by rendering the risk of misgovernance systematic, rather
than firm-specific.


Randall Morck
Faculty of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton, CANADA T6G 2R6
and NBER
randall.morck@ualberta.ca
1.        A Riddle
Business groups inspire much confusion. One of my fondest academic recollections is a
conference of distinguished economists discussing capitalism. To the Americans and British,
capitalism forced brisk competition – maximizing efficiency or tearing away civility, depending
on the political leanings of the speaker. To everyone else, capitalism turned the economy over to
a handful of old moneyed families. Neither side accorded the other much leeway: the Americans
and Brits marveled at the conspiracy theories circulating in less enlightened parts of the world;
the others marveled at the naivety of the Anglo-Saxons.
         Only recently has either side taken the other seriously. It turns out both are right, and
capitalism is different in different countries. Remarkably, this stems largely – primarily, I argue
– from differences in corporate governance regarding pyramidal groups.
         Economics assumes the business sector consists of corporations. The corporate
governance literature assumes these are controlled by officers and directors. The management
and business strategy literatures analyze how these top decision makers guide their corporations
through different economic conditions.
         For large listed firms in America and Britian, this roughly reflects reality (Morck et al.
1988; Franks et al. 2005; Villalonga & Amit 2008). But elsewhere in the world these
assumptions are implausible. In most countries, large businesses come in groups (Granovetter
1994; La Porta et al. 1999; Bebchuk et al. 2000; Morck et al. 2000). Since the term “business
group” is used in different ways by different authors (Khanna & Yafeh 2007), we must pause to
clarify this.
         Countries in which business groups are important often have articulated bodies of
Business Group Law (Bermann & Pistor 2004), which law students learn alongside other
subjects. These precisely define business group, group firms’ officers’ and directors’ duties to
the group versus their firms, one group firm’s duties to another, controlling shareholders’ duties
to public shareholders, and so on.
         Problems arise because these definitions, duties, and so on differ across countries. For
example, Canadian governments define a group as two or more listed firms with a common
controlling shareholder holding at least a 20% voting block, or exercising control via dedicated
board positions and the like.1 A threshold below 51% makes sense because most small
shareholders seldom vote and most institutions vote routinely as management recommends.
Korean law uses a similar definition, as do the legal systems of many European countries (Barca
& Becht 2001). In contrast, China defines a business group as any set of legally distinct
corporations, listed or not, under common control (Lee & Kang, chapter 9, this volume).
Japanese bureaucrats, scholars, and businesses use conflicting and inconsistent definitions,
causing some to despair that the term has no real meaning (Miwa and Ramaseyer, 2006). This
permits a lively debate as to what constitutes a group, where group boundaries lie, and even
whether definite boundaries exist (Khanna & Yafeh 2007). These issues of taxonomy lie beyond
the scope of this study.
         Further confusion arises because many countries lack formal Business Group Law
altogether, leaving definitions to the definer. Since firms in many large business groups populate
many different industries, some British and American authors mislabel business groups as
conglomerates.


1
    See Statistics Canada’s Directory of Intercorporate Ownership (various years).

                                                          1
        Following most of the finance literature (La Porta et al. 1999), we define a group as two
or more listed firms under a common controlling shareholder, and presume to be the largest
blockholder voting at least 20% or, alternatively, 10%.
        Such a bright line rule, despite obvious costs, permits broader comparisons that reveal a
startling importance of a remarkably few very large business groups in many countries. also It
also neatly distinguishes business groups from conglomerates – single corporations with
divisions in multiple industries – and from holding companies – parent corporations with
subsidiaries. Thus, Singer, a conglomerate with renowned sewing machine and missile guidance
systems divisions, is not a business group because it is a single listed corporation. Likewise,
American apartment building businesses, often structured as a holding company fully owning
separately incorporated properties, are not business groups because their subsidiaries are
unlisted. For our purposes, more nebulous groupings of businesses tied together by product
chains, common directors, or historical ties are also not business groups. Other definitions are
better for other purposes; and no exclusive right is claimed.

2.     Great Pyramids
At first glance, American and British economists are apt to think of a business group as an odd,
but innocuous structure. What, after all, is especially interesting about two firms or more listed
firms being controlled by a single person? This misapprehends the actual scope of business
groups where they are most important.
        The sheer scale of these groups often startles Anglo-American observers. The largest
single business group in Sweden, controlled by the Wallenberg family, comprises dozens of
large firms organized into tiers of listed firms controlled by other listed firms controlled by yet
other listed firms, but ultimately controlled by the Wallenberg family firm, a closed-end fund
called Investor. Remarkably, the market capitalizations of this group’s member firms sum to
over half the total value of the country’s entire stock market (Högfeldt, 2005).
        Sweden is extreme – usually it takes three, four, or even a dozen business groups to
account for the bulk of a country’s large business sector. But it is hardly unique. The Hees-Edper
Group, controlled by a branch of the Bronfman family, was Canada’s largest business group in
the 1990s. It comprised several hundred firms, some listed and some unlisted, organized into
sixteen tiers of firms with control blocks in other firms (Morck et al. 2000). Twelve such
business groups included about 40% of the assets of the country’s top 100 private-sector
domestically controlled corporations at the time (Morck et al. 2005). An even more extreme
example is the business group of the Naboa family, whose member firms roughly correspond to
Ecuador’s big business sector and provided the incomes of about 3 in 11 Ecuadorians in the
1990s (De Cordoba 1995). The Hong Kong billionaire Li Kashing sits atop a huge group
spanning virtually every sector of the region’s economy. Handfuls of wealth families dominate
the economies of India (Sarkar, chapter 10, this volume), Korea (Hwang & Seo 2000; Bae et al.
2002; Kim, chapter 7, this volume), Spain (Sacristán-Navarro & Gómez-Ansón 2007), Turkey
(Orbay & Yurtoglu 2006; Colpan, chapter 18, this volume), aother major European economies
(Faccio & Lang 2002), and elsewhere. One, twelve, or twenty wealthy families, each controlling
an empire of dozens – sometimes hundreds – of listed and unlisted corporations, is still
remarkably askew the Anglo-American vision of capitalism.




                                                2
Figure 1. Great Pyramids of the World
The importance of family pyramidal business groups in various Countries

           Austria                                    Market capitalization of largest ten
          Belgium
                                                      family controlled groups as fraction
         Finaland
                                                      of total market capitalization
           France
                                                      Assets of largest fifteen family
         Germany
                                                      controlled groups as fraction of
           Ireland
                                                      GDP
              Italy
           Norway
          Portugal
             Spain
          Sweden
      Switzerland
 United Kingdom
      Switzerland
          Canada
    United States
      Hong Kong
        Indonesia
            Korea
         Malaysia
       Philippines
       Singapore
         Thailand

                      0   10    20      30     40      50       60       70       80         90


        Figure 1 compares the assets or market capitalizations of the largest business one, ten, or
fifteen businesses or business groups in each country to the size of the country’s economy. Since
the data come from various studies, all three figures are not available for all countries. Despite
this incompleteness, the Figure should give pause to American or British economists attributing
the views of people in other countries to conspiracy theories. Appreciable chunks of many
countries’ large business sectors really are controlled by tiny handfuls of wealthy families.

3.      Pyramid Power
This proximate cause of this remarkable difference in the meaning of capitalism across countries
is differences in corporate governance.
In the United States and United Kingdom, a corporation is a singular thing, as illustrated in
Figure 2. Large corporations in those countries are almost always freestanding – that is, they
neither control, nor are controlled by, other listed corporations. If they have subsidiaries, these
are virtually always unlisted and, except for joint ventures, fully owned. Large corporations in
these countries are also usually widely held – that is, they have no controlling shareholders, and
are owned almost entirely by “widows and orphans” - public shareholders who bought their
shares on the open stock market, either in their own investment accounts or via mutual funds,
pension funds, and the like. These freestanding widely held companies are also usually
professionally managed – key decisions are in the hands of a CEO and top executives, selected
for their expertise and talent in a competitive job market.




                                                3
Figure 2. A Stylized Anglo-American Corporation
Large listed corporations in America and Britain are almost always freestanding (they
neither control, nor are controlled by, other listed corporations) and are usually widely
held (they have no controlling shareholders, and are owned almost entirely by small
investors, called “widows and orphans” by investment managers. This ownership can be
either direct or indirect, via mutual funds, pension funds, and the like. Subsidiaries are
virtually always unlisted and are usually fully owned.


                            Large Listed Anglo‐American Corporation
                                     (run by professional managers)

           • Subsidiaries are usually fully owned   • Officers, directors, & founding family stakes are
           • Subsidiaries are virtually always        negligible
             unlisted                               • Public shareholders own virtually all the shares
                                                    • The largest shareholder might be a pension fund or
      Domestic                                        other institutional investor with a 3% or 5% stake
     Subsidiaries
                                        WIDOWS AND ORPHANS
                                         (public shareholders)


         Elsewhere, this governance model is displaced to varying extents by another, the
pyramidal group depicted in Figure 3. A business family’s family firm controls a first tier of
listed firms, each of which controls yet more listed firms, each of which controls still other listed
firms – in a broadening cascade of control. In each case, one firm controls the other with a large
block of shares, and the controlled firm’s remaining shares are sold to public shareholders.
Obviously, a 51% block bestows control, but in practice small shareholders often do not vote, so
much smaller blocks – twenty, ten, or even five percent, suffice to let the executives of the upper
tier firm appoint the directors and officers of the lower tier firm.
         The most immediate importance of pyramidal .business groups is their remarkable power
to magnify merely large family fortunes into control over corporate assets worth vastly more,
and in some cases adding up to substantial fractions of a national economy. To see how this
works, assume the family firm in Figure 3 is worth one billion dollars, and that this firm is all the
family owns. Though a billion dollars constitutes a substantial fortune, it is miniscule compared
to the total gross domestic products of even relatively small nations. However, pyramiding can
magnify this paltry billion into control over a noticeable swathe of a national economy. Suppose
the family firm controls B1 and B2, also worth firms a billion dollars each, by owning a fifty
percent block plus one share in each. This puts two billion dollars worth of corporate assets to
the family’s control. The next tier multiplies control over these two corporations into control
over four billion dollar corporations, and the next tiers multiply this into control over eight, then
sixteen, and then thirty-two billion dollar corporations. By adding addition tiers, the family can
lever its billion dollar fortune into control over the assets of an arbitrarily large group of
operating companies in the lowest tier.




                                                      4
Figure 3. A Stylized Pyramidal Business Group
Large listed corporations in many countries are organized into pyramidal groups.
In these structures, a family firm controls a first tier of listed firms (here, firms A1
and A2), each of which controls other listed firms (for example, A1 controls A1
and B2). Each of these controls yet more listed firms, and so on. A control block
of every firm’s shares is held by the firm above it, with remaining shares sold to
public investors. At the apex, the family controls the family firm, and hence all the
firms spreading out beneath it.




        Structures like Figure 3 – sometime augmented by supervoting shares, special director
appointment rights, and cross holdings – let one family control half the Swedish economy by
market capitalization (Hogfeldt, 2005); let two families control close to half of Indian big
businesses by assets (Sarkar, chapter 10, this volume); and so on.
        Pyramidal business groups like these let mere handfuls of wealthy families control
national economies. They are why capitalism looks so different in different countries. Capitalism
truly does entrust the governance of large swathes of a nation’s economy to handfuls of elite
families in many countries. And it truly does induce fierce competition between rival
corporations in others. It all depends on whether corporations are freestanding and run by profit-
motivated professionals, or family-controlled pyramidal groups.
        The latter bring leave undiversified the risk of corporate misgovernance. The intelligence
to run a great business group is probably no more hereditary than general intelligence (Herrnstein
& Murray 1994; Kincheloe et al. 1996), motivating the American tycoon, Warren Buffet, to
remark (Whyte 2007)

       “if we were to pick our United States Olympic team based on the eldest son and
       the eldest daughter of those who represented us in all the events 24 years ago, we
       would think that was asinine; but to hand the resources of society, and the
       resources to command the labour of society and the materials of society, to a
       bunch of people simply because they happen to have the right last name strikes
       me as just as foolish.”

        The American robber baron Andrew Carnegie famously argued it was worse than foolish,
positing that growing up rich virtually disqualifies one as an effective CEO (Carnegie 1891) This

                                                5
so-called Carnegie Conjecture (p. 56) is that:

       “the parent who leaves his son enormous wealth generally deadens the talents
       and energies of the son, and tempts him to lead a less useful and less worthy life
       than he otherwise would”

This has support in studies of estate taxes and subsequent careers (Holtz-Eakin et al. 1993).
       Even with a competent heir, family feuds can seriously undermine a business (Bertrand et
al. 2008). If such disputes destabilize one firm, this is no great matter. But if they destabilize the
governance of a huge group of firms constituting an appreciable portion of a country’s economy,
such disputes can attain macroeconomic importance (Morck et al. 2005c).
       All of this is consistent with findings that inherited corporate control bodes ill for firm
performance in America (Villalonga & Amit 2006), Canada (Morck et al. 2000; Smith &
Amoako-Adu 2005), Denmark (Bennedsen et al. 2007), and other developed economies (Morck
& Yeung 2004; Bertrand & Schoar 2006).

4.     A Balm for All Ills
Large pyramidal business groups are not clearly bad for a developing nation’s economy, though.
Numerous studies, many on specific developing countries like India or Chile, others across many
developing economies, find business group member firms outperforming freestanding firms
(Khanna 2000; Khanna & Palepu 2000b, a, c; Khanna & Rivkin 2001; Khanna et al. 2005;
Khanna & Yafeh 2005, 2007).
       This literature, as a whole, suggests business group firms have an advantage in emerging
economies, which they lose in developed countries. The precise economics underlying these
findings are unclear. However, most of these studies postulate business groups circumventing
market failures.
       Certainly, many developing economies’ capital, labor, and product markets malfunction.
Corrupt or sclerotic courts that render arm’s-length contracts unenforceable magnify costs of
doing business by, for example, rendering loans or bills effectively uncollectable. Corruption in
schools and universities can render well-trained graduates effectively indistinguishable from
those who bribe or intimidate their way to certification.
       Business groups can sidestep these problems. If one group firm owes money to another,
the family controlling both simply tells the debtor to pay. A family-controlled firm gains little
cheating another run by the same family. This nicely bypasses clogged or unreliable courts. In a
country with inadequate business schools, the best training may be apprenticeship. Business
groups let talented people rise and move from firm to firm without relying on an arm’s-length
job market rife with fraudulent certifications. The best business school in such a country might
well be the dinner table of a powerful business family.
       These considerations help explain some of the features of business groups.
       First, business groups are usually highly diversified: containing firms from numerous
seemingly unrelated industries. This is observed in India (Sarkar, chapter 10, this volume),
Mexico (Hoshino, chapter 16, this volume), Taiwan (Chung & Mahmood, chapter 8, this
volume), Thailand (Suehiro & Wailerdsak, chapter 12, this volume) and other developing
economies (Khanna & Yafeh 2005, 2007). Wide diversification makes sense if a group must
contain most firms that might need to do business with each other, borrow or lend to each other,


                                                  6
or hire each other’s employees. A broader spectrum of firms permits a fuller intragroup
simulation of developed economies’ arm’s-length markets.
        In borrowing and lending especially, default is important. If each group firms lends to
other group firms in a wider range of industries, its overall default risk is better diversified and
therefore mitigated (Heaney & Holmen 2008). Firms with excess retained earnings can also
subsidize firms encountering bad luck, or capitalize new controlled subsidiaries (Almeida &
Wolfenzon 2006a) adding additional layers to the pyramid. Of course, the highest value use of
those retained earnings might well be investments outside the group, so this is clearly a second
best capital allocation (Almeida & Wolfenzon 2006b). Nonetheless, it might dominate in
countries with deeply dysfunctional arm’s-length markets.
        This default risk mitigation might endow group firms with higher debt capacities than
otherwise similar freestanding peers – a substantial tax advantage in some countries. Group
firms’ leverage is elevated in Canada (Daniels et al. 1995), Italy (Bianco & Nicodano 2006), and
perhaps elsewhere. However, evidence that risk spreading across business groups mitigates the
damages of recessions. Such an effect is disputed in Japan (Hoshi et al. 1990, 1991; Hayashi
2000), not evident in Thailand (Chutatong et al. 2006), and goes the wrong way in Korea and
other East Asian economies, where low tier pyramidal group firms fare worst around the 1997
crisis (Lemmon & Lins 2003; Baek et al. 2004).
        Second, business groups are usually pyramids of listed firms under a family-controlled
apex firm. Perhaps amid ambient corruption and mistrust, the controlling family ensures good
behavior, making sure all group firms honor contracts, debts and bills; and treat employees,
managers, customers, and suppliers fairly (Khanna & Palepu 2000b, a; Khanna & Rivkin 2001;
Khanna & Yafeh 2005, 2007). A pyramidal structure lets the family wield control over all the
firms in the group – a necessary condition for enforcing such norms.
        Third, business group member firms are relatively strong performers in developing
economies – Chile (Khanna and Palepu, 2000a), India (Khanna & Palepu 2000b), Russia (Guriev
& Rachinsky 2005), and others – but mediocre-to-weak performers in developed economies like
Canada (Morck et al. 2000), Israel (Kosenko & Yafeh, chapter 17, this volume), and Sweden
(Högfeldt 2005). This pattern, also evident in cross country studies (Khanna & Rivkin 2001), too
makes sense, for if pyramidal groups’ primary advantage lies in circumventing weak institutions,
that advantage should evaporate in economies with sound institutions that enforce contracts,
educate employees, and provide capital. Thus, (Sarkar, chapter 10, this volume) finds that the
superior performance of Indian group member firms, reported in earlier studies (Khanna &
Palepu 1999, 2000c, b), fades as liberalization strengthened market institutions.

5.     May Pharaoh Rest in Peace
Developing economies often have both weak markets and weak governments. Another
possibility is that large family pyramidal groups might also substitute for dysfunctional
governments. This thesis unites into one theory all the various ways business groups substitute
for dysfunctional markets and institutions, discussed above. This is thus a synthesis of these
other proposals, not an alternative hypothesis.
        In the mid-twentieth century, state-led development became fashionable. Its strongest
proponents was perhaps Paul Rosenstein-Rodan (1943), who describes how every firm in a
developed economy depends critically on scores of other firms for inputs and complementary
outputs; for building, maintaining and operating transportation and communications systems; for
employing the firm’s consumers; and for innumerable other services that fit together like a

                                                 7
jigsaw puzzle. A steel mill in a primeval jungle – without suppliers, customers, transportation, or
communications – is essentially valueless. Each firm needs not just one firm filling each such
niche, it needs many competing firms. A steelmaker dependant on one mine for ore, or one
railroad for market access can be “held up” . The mine could hike its ore price, or the railroad its
freight rates, to bleed the steelmaker – keeping it barely alive, as any rational parasite treats its
host. Or the mine might provide low grade ores and the railroad shoddy service, each knowing
the steelmaker had no alternative.
        By merely existing, competing mines, railroads, phone companies, and shipping firms
make the steelmaker financially viable. If enough pieces of this jigsaw puzzle are missing, the
steel mill is unviable and is not built. Entrepreneurs founding mines, railroads, phone companies
and shipping firms confront similar problems; for each relies on the existence of countless other
firms scattered throughout the economy. Rosenstein-Rodan saw this logjam blocking initial
development: no rational entrepreneur dares build and then wait for the rest of the economy to
form in its own good time, paying exorbitant prices to monopolistic suppliers until competition
develops.
        Rosenstein-Rodan therefore prescribed centrally planned development, a Big Push, to
break this logjam. State planners, financed with foreign aid, could coordinate the development of
firms across sectors, so that steelmakers, mines, phone companies, and railroads all appeared and
grew as needed. State control would prevent hold-ups and ensure all provided quality goods and
services. The state could use one firm’s profits to finance another’s expansion, train workers or
managers for other firms, or build infrastructure for all – hospitals, roads, bridges, telecom
systems, and even schools and universities.
        Rosenstein-Rodan saw a state-directed Big Push as the only option because economics
describes stock markets and private-sector banks as financing individual firms, not the
industrializations of whole countries. Financing tailored to individual firms was, he rightly
concluded, unable to account for externalities and unable to provide the needed coordination.
Thus, he concludes “There has never been a [private sector] scheme of planned industrialisation
comprising a simultaneous planning of several complementary industries.”
        He was right about the problem, but wrong about the solution. Many countries mounted
massively expensive aid-financed state-run Big Push programs, and none brought successful
development.
        Meiji Japan is illustrative (Morck & Nakamura 2007). The country established state-
owned enterprises in every modern sector in the 1870s, seeking to replicate the whole ensemble
of a state-of-the-art industrial economy. Lacking hard budget constraints, the SOEs hemorrhaged
money; lacking competitors, they produced expensive shoddy products; and run by political
appointees, they were ill-managed. A decade later, the government was mired in foreign and
domestic debt, the currency was evaporating in an accelerating near-hyperinflation, and the
economy had grown little. In the 1880s, a liberal government organized the world’s first mass
privatization, auctioning off scores of SOEs to private buyers. Most SOEs ended up in coalescing
pyramidal groups resembling Figure 3. These groups, called zaibatsu, each spanned all major
sectors. Each was run by either a great business family – Mitsui, Sumitomo, Suzuki, Iwasaki
(Mitsubishi) – or a tycoon like Nissan’s Yoshisuke Ayukawa. By the 1920s, Japan was pulling
abreast continental Europe in both industrial composition and per capita gross national product.
        Postwar South Korea is another striking example (Lim and Morck, 2009). After the
Korean War, the dictator Syngman Rhee used American foreign aid to establish a constellation
of SOEs. Learning from Rosenstein-Rodan, rather than Japanese history, Rhee entrusted these to

                                                 8
political appointees and charged government planners with coordinating their expansion. The
result was a lost decade. After Rhee’s demise, a mass privatization, and a government fiscal
crisis, President Park Chunghee increasingly distanced government from business, though he
continued subsidizing exporters. Under Park, and especially after him when Korea attained
democracy, huge family-controlled pyramidal groups (chaebol) arose, acquiring failed SOEs and
establishing scores of new businesses across all major sectors.
        In both Korea and Japan, rapid development occurs after governments abandoned state-
run Big Push plans. Rapid development corresponds to business groups expanding across
industries, with profitable firms tunneling money to nascent firms or to individually unprofitable
firms necessary to the group’s prosperity.
        These historical narratives prove Rosenstein-Rodan right about the need for a Big Push,
but wrong about the need for state control. A large pyramidal business groups is precisely a
private sector “scheme of planned industrialisation comprising a simultaneous planning of
several complementary industries.”
        That such groups privatized Big Push coordination is evident in biographies and zaibatsu
archives (Morck & Nakamura 2007). Even more direct evidence comes in the recollection of
Koo Cha-kyung, Chair of Korea’s LG chaebol (Kim and Lee, 2007):

       “My father and I started a cosmetic cream factory in the late 1940s. At the time,
       not company could supply us with plastic cups of adequate quality for cream jars,
       so we had to start a plastics business, Plastic caps alone were not sufficient to run
       the plastic molding plant, so we added combs, toothbrushes, and soap boxes. This
       plastic business also led us to manufacture electric fan blades and telephone
       cases, which in turn led us to manufacture electrical and electronic products and
       telecommunications equipment. The plastics business also took us into oil
       refining, which needed a tanker shipping company. The oil refining company
       alone was paying an insurance premium amounting to more than half the total
       revenue of the largest insurance company in Korea. Thus, an insurance company
       was started. This natural step-by-step evolution through related businesses
       resulted in the Lucky-Goldstar (LG) group as we see it today.”

Further work to see if family business groups ran Big Push efforts in other countries, now and
historically, is needed. The thesis is plausible for several reasons:
        First, although group firms might subsidize each other, the group as a whole has a hard
budget constraint. Mismanagement cannot be tolerated long by a profit maximizing business
family. In contrast, SOEs abide remarkable mismanagement (Shleifer & Vishny 1992; Shleifer &
Vishny 1994; Boycko et al. 1996; Dyck 1997; Lopez-de-Silanes et al. 1997; Shleifer 1998;
Claessens & Djankov 1999; Morten 2000; Claessens & Djankov 2002; Cragg & Dyck 2003).
        Second, both Meiji Japan and postwar Korea hosted numerous business groups, each
spanning most sectors. These, in theory at least, competed to develop new ventures faster and
more efficiently than each other -= and thus than a monopoly group or central planner would
have. For example, had LG not found additional profitable uses for its plastic, other business
groups that achieved optimal economies of scale faster would have outpaced it. In contrast, state-
led Big Push efforts typically capitalize one SOE per sector, as in 1870s Japan and Syngman
Rhee’s Korea, with competition between SOEs dismissed as wasteful duplication. (Krueger
1978; Ranis 1995; Krueger 1998).

                                                9
        Third, Meiji Japan and, to a lesser extent, postwar Korea were open economies with
economically liberal governments, their guiding hands badly burned by fiscal crises. Openness
let imports replace missing jigsaw pieces, at least for easily transported goods. Trade openness
let firms with excess capacity, like LG’s plastics factory, achieve economies of scale exporting.
Their earlier state-led Big Push efforts, and analogs elsewhere, entailed massive state subsidy
and import substitution programs (Prebisch 1979). Soft SEO budget constraints undermined
competition and tariffs left gaps in industrial jigsaw puzzles gaping. Trade barriers may be
inevitable in state-led Big Push programs because they reduce performance pressure on the
bureaucrats running the SOEs.
        A notable exception is Singapore, whose initial state-led Big Push was successful (Tsui-
Auch & Yoshikawa, chapter 11, this volume). Perhaps openness to global competition and
multiple business groups competing can neutralize the downside of state involvement. Or
perhaps Singapore had uniquely sound public sector governance, a lucky chance other countries
cannot hope to replicate. The extent to which state firms accelerated Singapore’s Big Push
remains disputed, and its government foresees withdraw from the economy as its Big Push
growth phase ends (Tsui-Auch & Yoshikawa, chapter 11, this volume).

6.     Diverging Tunnels
Section 23.5 explains large pyramidal business groups in developing economies, and section
23.6 explain how they might even substitute for governments coordinating Big Push growth. But
large pyramidal groups persist in highly developed economies, such as Canada, continental
Europe, and parts of East Asia. Why do they not die out as economies develop?
        One possibility, called tunneling in the finance literature (Johnson & et al. 2000) occurs
when the controlling family, instead of acting impartially, favors one group firm over another.
Orchestrating a Big Push necessarily involves tunneling resources between group firms, so
profitable firms can subsidize individually unprofitable firms whose existence is nonetheless
necessary to the group as a whole. Sidestepping weak markets can also involve transferring
resources between group firms that buy, sell, finance, or hire from each other.
        However, tunneling can also enrich the controlling shareholder. To see this, recall Figure
3, where each firm is controlled by the firm above it via an equity stake of 50% plus one share.
Suppose firm D1 pays out a million dollars in dividends. Half of this, or $500,000, goes to firm
C1 and the rest goes to widows and orphans. Suppose C1 passes its receipts along to its
shareholders: half of $500,000, or $250,000, goes to B1 and the rest goes to widows and
orphans. If B1 forwards half of its receipts to its shareholders, A1 gets $125,000 and the family
firm gets $62,500. Of the one million dollars paid out by D1, a paltry $62,500 goes to the
controlling family; while $937,500 goes to the widows and orphans who own stock in the chain
of firms leading upwards through the pyramid from D1 to the family firm.
        The family only gets 6.25% of firm D1’s cash flows, despite wielding over 50% of the
votes in its shareholders meetings. Early writers on corporate governance understood how
pyramiding induces extreme separations of ownership from control (Berle & Means 1932;
Bonbright & Means 1932). To illustrate, consider a chain of control through the Bronfman
family’s Hees-Edper pyramid in the mid 1990s. The family owned Broncorp Inc., which
controlled HIL Corporation with a 19.6% equity stake. HIL owned 97% of Edper Resources,
which owned 60% of Brascan Holdings, which owned 5.1% of Brascan, which owned 49.9% of
Braspower Holdings, which owned 49.3%t of Great Lakes Power Inc, which owned 100% of
First Toronto Investments, which owned 25% of Trilon Holdings, which owned 64.5% of Trilon

                                               10
Financial, which owned 41.4% of Gentra, which owned 31.9% of Imperial Windsor Group
(Directory of Intercorporate Ownership, 1998). Multiplying these out reveals the family’s
ownership of Imperial Windsor’s cash flows to be 0.03%. That is, a million dollars of extra
dividends paid by Imperial Windsor increases the family’s wealth by $300. Despite this
miniscule ownership, the family held full control of Imperial Windsor by controlling the firms
above it in a chain leading to the pyramid’s apex – either through equity blocks or more subtle
mechanisms like super-voting shares or special rules for appointing directors.
This separation of ownership from control is extreme in the business groups of some countries –
as in Canada (MSY) and Sweden (Högfeldt) where intercorporate control blocks can be twenty
percent or less, though often fortified with supervoting shares – and relatively minor elsewhere –
as in Argentina (Fracchia et al., chapter 13, this volume) and Russia (Guriev, chapter 19, this
volume), where control blocks are typically two thirds or more and many group firms are
unlisted.
         Where the separation of ownership from control is large, a controlling family might be
tempted to organize a business transaction between the family firm and, say, firm D1 in which
the latter would lose one million dollars. That way, the whole amount goes to the family, with
widows and orphans hopefully unaware the money ever existed. This can be done by instructing
D1 not to collect on debts or bills owed it by the family firm. More likely, D1 and the family
firm can contract to transfer goods or services from one to the other at artificial transfer prices,
set to leave D1 a million dollars poorer and the family firm a million dollars wealthier.
Transfer pricing by multinational firms is well-known, where it transfers taxable income out of
high tax countries and into low tax countries, lowering the multinational’s overall taxes (Hines
1996; Desai et al. 2001). Objectionable transfer pricing in multinationals hides money from tax
authorities; in pyramidal groups it hides money from widows and orphans. This aside, the two
are identical. 2
         Tunneling is denounced by corporate governance advocates as “expropriation” of public
shareholders’ wealth. But where tunneling is commonplace, shareholders rationally anticipate it
and pay lower prices for affected stocks – both at initial public offerings (IPOs) and
subsequently. If widows and orphans pay depressed prices, dividends depressed by tunneling are
a fair return. Nothing is expropriated.
         However, even absent expropriation, tunneling can retard an economy’s growth. This is
because, ceteris paribus, expected tunneling cuts entrepreneurs’ proceeds from share issues. Even
if the company is impeccably governed at its IPO, shareholders rightly worry it might someday
end up low in a pyramidal group and its shares fetch a depressed price. Possible tunneling thus
makes capital costlier to start-ups, curbing competition and leaving existing businesses in sedate
peace. This perhaps explains why thoughtful observers in many countries find scant connection
between local versions of capitalism and intense competition.
         Might pyramidal groups persist in developed because the controlling families value the
fruits of tunneling too much to dismantle their pyramidal groups, even after their economic
justification is passed? The empirical evidence is oddly inconsistent with this. Tunneling is most
evident in developing economies (Johnson & et al. 2000; Bae et al. 2002; Bertrand et al. 2002;
Friedman et al. 2003; Joh 2003; Lang 2005; Baek et al. 2006; Cheung et al. 2006; Claessens &
Laeven 2006; Bertrand et al. 2008). Although specific cases of tunneling occasionally make in
developed economies (Johnson & et al. 2000), evidence on systematic tunneling is mixed. For

2
    As noted above, ttunneling need not be socially undesirable if it shifts risk (Lincoln and Gerlach, 2004) or
    coordinates Big Push development (Morck and Nakamura, 2006)

                                                           11
example, some studies find tunneling in Canada (Gadhoum 2006; Bozec & Laurin 2008), but
others dissent (Tian 2006; Walid & Paul 2006). Tunneling seems limited in Sweden (Holmen &
Knopf 2004), and other developed European economies (Faccio et al. 2001).

23.7. Eternal Life
Why do business groups persist in developed economies absent profitable tunneling? Two
answers suggest themselves.
         First, the tunneling the above empirical studies examine is the siphoning of money from
lower tier firms to the apex or firms near it. But tunnelling need not involve money. Business
families might gain important nonpecuniary benefits from controlling a vast business group –
political influence, social status, power, or even a degree of impunity from the rule of law. These
are benefits rational individuals might value, but which standard economic theories have
difficulty incorporating. Algebraic intractability is, of course, no excuse, and the literature might
benefit greatly from work along these lines.
        Second, business groups might persist because tunneling is not the only pecuniary benefit
their controlling shareholders glean. The most powerful politicians in many countries tend to
come from their greatest business families – especially where corruption is worse (Faccio 2006).
Instances of political connections delivering business families major pecuniary benefits are
documented in Argentina (Masami 2006), Indonesia (Fisman 2001), Israel (Kosenko & Yafeh,
chapter 17, this volume), Malaysia (Johnson & Mitton 2003), Mexico (Hoshino, chapter 16, this
volume), Russia (Guriev, chapter 19, this volume), Taiwan (Chung & Mahmood, chapter 8, this
volume), Thailand (Suehiro & Wailerdsak, chapter 12, this volume).
        These benefits include subsidies, tax favors, cheap foreign exchange, preference
acquiring privatized SOEs, and the like. These are often the work of nationalist politicians, who
see large business groups as national monuments and national-building tools. This may reflect
genuine respect, or camouflage lucrative political rent-seeking (Morck et al. 2005b).
        Such ties matter: more politically-connected firms get more generous state bailouts
during crises (Faccio et al. 2006). Perhaps ruling a pyramidal business group matters because it
gives a business family political influence far greater than its wealth alone would merit (Krueger
2002; Morck & Yeung 2004; Fogel 2006). Little debate exists about the high returns businesses
can earn from capturing and manipulating governments (Krueger 1974). Recall how pyramiding
can magnify modest family fortunes into control over corporate assets worth orders of magnitude
more. It seems plausible that an analogous magnification of political influence arises (Morck &
Yeung 2004). And nonpecuniary benefits from political influence might be more important than
pecuniary benefits. High social status, especially elevation above the rule of law, might matter
more than even state bailouts in financial crises.
        Despite not knowing precisely what these benefits are, financial economists dub them
private benefits of control and measure them from the difference between ordinary investors’
valuations of shares and controlling shareholder’s valuations. Ordinary investors buy shares to
receive future dividends, takeover bids, and other pecuniary returns. Controlling shareholders get
these plus pecuniary and nonpecuniary benefits of tunneling or influencing governments. When
one controlling shareholder sells a control block to another controlling shareholder, the price
paid often far exceeds the price ordinary shareholders pay to for shares at the same time.
However, this control premium is again large for developing economies, but very small in most
developed economies – with certain exceptions, like Italy (Dyck & Zingales 2004). Similar
findings ensue from firms with multiple classes of stock with different voting rights (Nenova

                                                 12
2003). The persistence of large family controlled pyramidal business groups thus remains
something of a mystery.

8.        The Undead
The large pyramidal business groups that persist in developed economies tend to be very old.
Canada’s Bronfmans grew wealthy exporting beverages to America in the 1920s (Morck et al.
2005a). Italy’s Agnelli family’s group remained prominent throughout the 20th century (Aganin
& Volpin 2005). Wallenberg empire arose in the 1930s, and no major listed Swedish firm is less
than thirty years old (Högfeldt 2005). East Asia’s great families retain their business groups,
despite impressive growth rates (Claessens et al. 2000).
        Long-lived family controlled pyramidal groups are efficient if they optimally allocate
capital, labor, and other resources. But entrusting large swathes of an economy to a few powerful
families induces great inequality. Economics entails tradeoffs between efficiency and equality
(Okun 1975), but this may not apply here. Such tradeoffs are evident in countries whose
wealthiest citizens are self-made, but not where they inherited their wealth (Morck et al. 2000).
Greater inequality associated with inherited wealth actually correlates with worse inefficiency,
not greater efficiency. Moreover, countries whose great businesses and business groups more
quickly die, making way for new giants, grow faster.
        Thus, whether we seek efficiency or equality, old-moneyed wealth can be too great and
old businesses and business groups can live too long. Recall the above arguments: Inherited
corporate control restricts top management positions to a suboptimally small pool of candidates.
Pyramidal business groups can induce extreme separation of ownership from control, permit
tunneling, and entrench insiders. Very large pyramidal groups tightly concentrate economic
power, which cannot but have undemocratic political effects. Pyramidal business groups large
enough to constitute an important slice of a national economy, but entrusting corporate
governance to few people, render the risk of misgovernance systematic, rather than firm-specific,
and so contribute to macroeconomic instability.
        These findings and arguments suggest a final explanation for the persistence of business
groups: they are undesirable for the economy as a whole, but persist because the families
controlling them have disproportionate political influence, which they use to lock in a status quo
advantageous to them.3 Substantial economic evidence is also consistent with this hypothesis
(Morck et al. 2005c). However, some suggest family controlled business groups are important to
social solidarity in parts of Europe (Högfeldt, 2005).
        Such elite entrenchment may not be solely, or even primarily, a problem in developed
economies; and might explain the persistence of family controlled pyramidal groups in
developing countries that have been developing the longest. Mexico, Argentina, and many other
Latin American countries seemed poised for industrialization a century ago, and still do (Haber
1989, 1997; Bortz & Haber 2002; Haber et al. 2003; Haber et al. 2008). None of Argentina’s
largest business groups are controlled by founders; but founders’ children, grandchildren, and
great grandchildren control about a third each (Fracchia et al., this volume). Mexico’s greatest
business groups are over a century old (Hoshino, chapter 16, this volume). Although India’s
lesser groups rise and fall, its greatest ones persisted since the mid 19th century (Khanna et al.
2005; Sarkar, chapter 10, this volume).

3
    Here the sociology literature is instructive – see Schneider(this volume); Guillen and Hamilton, and
    Biggart.(1998), and others.

                                                          13
Do these countries’ business elites fear for their privileged positions should their countries
development succeed? Developing economies need great business families for all the reasons
enumerated above; developed economies do not. Might perpetually unsuccessful development be
a symptom of excessively powerful, old, entrenched elites (Rajan & Zingales 2003; Rajan 2004;
Rajan & Zingales 2004)? If so, can such powerful and deeply entrenched special interests be
weakened, and economic development brought to completion, by dismantling their pyramids?

9.     Iconoclasts
Large pyramidal groups are virtually unknown in America and Britain; and large business groups
do not involve business families in Japan and Germany. That these are also the largest developed
economies is at least an interesting coincidence.
         Pyramidal business groups existed in America until the 1930s, when President
Roosevelt’s New Deal took deliberate aim at them. The Internal Revenue Service worried about
tax evasion via transfer pricing between group firms subject to different tax rules. The Federal
trade Commission worried about hidden monopolies, with apparently competing firms controlled
by a single family or tycoon. Progressive reformers, like Adolph Berle and Gardiner Means,
sought to democratize corporate America by remaking businesses as democratic republics
governed by shareholder democracy, and had little use for pyramidal groups run by “robber
barons” or their progeny. Though Roosevelt’s populist credentials seem genuine, voters’ fury at
big business after the Crash of 1929 and Great Depression no doubt made the pyramidal groups’
controlling shareholders tempting targets for his political strategists.
         The New Dealers launched a multipronged attack on pyramiding in the mid 1930s
(Morck 2005). New tax laws subjected intercorporate dividends to double taxation. Returning to
Figure 3, Firm D1’s income is taxed, as are dividends it pays to C1, and dividends C1 pays to
B1, and so on. A dividend by Imperial Windsor, the bottom-tier firm in the Hees-Edper pyramid
described above, would thus be taxed seventeen times as it percolated up to the controlling
family. Intercorporate dividends in America are still taxed at 7% in the recipient’s corporate
income taxes unless the recipient owns over 80% of the paying firm. In Canada, intercorporate
dividends are entirely exempt if the recipient owns 20% or more of the paying firm. The
Canadian approach is near universal: only Korea applies a minimal intercorporate dividend tax;
and French and Belgian attempts at such taxes were terminated by the European Commission’s
Parent-Subsidiary Directive, forbidding any taxation of intercorporate dividends.
         Augmenting this tax penalty, America established capital gains tax holidays for divesting
or taking private listed subsidiaries. This mix of carrots and sticks created tremendous pressure
of pyramidal groups to restructure into one or more freestanding companies.
         Further augmenting these tax penalties and incentives, America adopted a Public Utilities
holding Companies Act, banning pyramids over two tiers high in industries designated public
utilities. The logic here was that pyramids might tunnel money from public utilities, whose
regulated rates of return and cost-plus bases render them plump cash cows, to unfairly subsidize
group firms in competitive industries.
         These reforms apparently triggered a massive restructuring of American industry into
large freestanding firms, most of which were widely held. By 1937, big American businesses
were roughly as widely held and freestanding as now (Holderness et al. 1999). Repeal of the
intercorporate tax was considered by the George W. Bush administration on the ground that it
collects no revenue; but ultimately rejected. Obviously, if the tax were perfectly successful in
preventing pyramiding, it would generate zero revenue.

                                               14
         British business groups persisted until the 1970s. Their demise seems due to the London
Stock Exchange’s 1968 Takeover Rule requiring anyone acquiring 30% of a listed firm to buy
100%. This meant that a raider could readily force a pyramidal group’s controlling shareholder
to either accede to a takeover or take the target private. Pyramidal groups apparently disappeared
quickly under this onslaught (Franks et al. 2005).
Several other countries enacted analogous mandatory takeover laws, but they are largely dead
letters absent intense hostile takeover activity, and so should have no appreciable impact in most
countries.
         A postwar American military government, staffed by New Dealers charged with
remaking Japan as a democracy, ruled from 1945 to 1952. To this end, it dismantled Japan’s
largest pyramidal groups, or zaibatsu, (Morck & Nakamura 2005), seizing the families’ apex
firms and the intercorporate control blocks connecting the lower tiers, and either bestowing these
on employees or selling them into the stock market. By 1952, Japanese big businesses were
largely widely held and freestanding, as in post-New Deal America. Hostile takeovers,
greenmail, and other aspects of Anglo-American capitalism distressed Japanese managers in the
1950s and 1960s, until an effective antitakeover defense was devised. This entailed forming new
business groups called kigyo shudan or horizontal keiretsu, whose members each bought very
small equity stakes in many other member firms. A typical member firm’s stock might thus be
two-thirds owned by several dozen other member firms, each holding only one or two percent.
This terminated takeovers for several decades. These structures appear to be fading as financially
strained firms occasionally sell their intercorporate blocks (Lincoln & Shimotani, chapter 6, this
volume) . This again raises the specter of takeovers, and Japanese firms are now adopting poison
pills (Andrew & Sebastian 2008).
         Pyramidal groups never disappeared entirely from Japan. Some smaller zaibatsu eluded
the New Dealers; and after the Americans’ departed, new pyramidal groups formed, though these
were called vertical keiretsu, rather than zaibatsu, perhaps because they were smaller –
containing relatively few listed firms and spanning relatively few sectors.
         Family-run pyramidal groups are less prominent in Germany than in most other
continental European economies, but never disappeared entirely (Franks & Mayer 2001). Major
National Socialist reforms during the Great Depression permanently changed the country’s big
business sector (Fohlin 2005). Adolf Hitler sought Party control over the entire economy, but
balked at socialist policies like mass nationalizations. Instead, the government transferred small
shareholders’ voting rights to their depository banks. Thus, putting Nazis in charge of the big
banks gave the Party dominant voting blocks in most listed firms. Essentially, the National
Socialist Party appropriated all widows’ and orphans’ voting rights in Figure 3.
         Augmenting this, corporate directors’ duties were reformed. Rather than acting narrowly
for shareholders or employees, directors would act for all stakeholders – most importantly, for
their Reich and Führer. A further reform, the Führerprinzip, gave Party representatives on
corporate boards absolute power over their companies and an absolute duty to Hitler (Fohlin
2005).
         Remarkably, these laws remained until recently. German supervisory board directors still
have a divided loyalty to shareholders and German workers, and the default remains that banks,
rather than public shareholders, vote public shareholders’ shares. The result is large diffuse
business groups loosely controlled by major banks voting small investors shares. Thus, Germany
– like America, Britain, and Japan – entrusts big businesses to professional managers (Franks &



                                               15
Mayer 2001). However, family controlled groups persist in the background, especially for a so-
called Mittlestand of medium-sized firms (Fohlin 2005).
        All of these systems evolve continually. For example, recent reforms show signs of
changing the German landscape. One reform requires banks to advise shareholders annually that
they may vote their shares if they wish. Another proposal would let non-German employees vote
for labour representatives on supervisory boards (von Rosen, 2007). Yet another change is
nascent institutional investors.
        That family controlled pyramidal business groups faded from all four of these major
capitalist economies perhaps explains the commonplace association of industrialization with the
rise of professional managers and the eclipse of family control (Chandler 1977; Chandler &
Hikino 1990). This generalization is unjustified, for family controlled pyramidal business groups
remain predominant virtually everywhere else (Morck & Steier 2005).

10. Daring the Gods
The empirical evidence is generally consistent with large family controlled pyramidal groups
aiding early stage industrialization by substituting for weak market institutions in a largely free
market economy, and for central planners during Big Push growth. This study does not presume
to dictate such policies to governments. Rather, it highlights pros and cons of permitting large
pyramidal groups to predominate under various circumstances, and outlines how such groups
have been dismantled in the past by governments choosing that option.
        These advantages are offset by a set of burdens such groups can impose. One plausible
cost is dear capital for the upstart innovative firms critical to sustained growth. While individual
cases of family pyramids bankrolling upstarts exist (Khanna et al. 2005), it seems plausible that
self-interest would preclude families whose wealth rests on existing business empires from
financing disruptive technologies that might undermine those empires (Morck et al. 2000; Rajan
& Zingales 2003, 2004; Morck et al. 2005c).
        Even new entrepreneurial firms, not initially belonging to pyramidal groups, are likely to
be valued as if tunnelling were possible, for little in most countries prevents them from coming
under the control of a pyramidal group subsequently. Thus, firm-level governance provisions –
commitments to certain board structures, etc. – appear markedly less important empirically than
the institutional protections offered by law and regulation (Durnev & Kim 2005; Krishnamurti et
al. 2005). Strategies such as high leverage, which might lock in commitments to disgorge profits
and discourage takeovers by group member firms, may be somewhat more effective (Harvey et
al. 2004).
        Standard Anglo-American approaches to improving corporate governance – independent
directors, chairs, or board committees and the like – are unlikely to be effective in family
controlled pyramidal groups. It would take a very brave independent director indeed to oppose a
family that controlled not just the firm on whose board she sits, but a major fraction of her
country’s economy, and perhaps its government too. The most critical corporate governance laws
and regulations in most countries are thus not about board structures, but about the rights public
shareholders have against controlling shareholders (Djankov et al. 2008).
        Citing the lack of evidence of shareholder wealth expropriation in many continental
European countries, (Holmen & Knopf 2004), some European policy advocates argue that
pyramiding is innocuous if legal institutions are strong (Belcredi & Caprio 2004). However, this
logic is not entirely clear because expropriation of shareholders’ wealth is not really the issue. If
shareholders rationally expect controlling shareholders to divert firms’ cash flows to fund private

                                                 16
benefits, the firms’ share prices should be discounted at the IPO and subsequently (Jensen &
Meckling 1976). The real public policy issue is whether or not extensive pyramiding and private
benefits accruing to controlling shareholders raises the cost of capital in general, and especially
for innovative new firms. While some work begins to address this issue (Orbay & Yurtoglu
2006), much more remains undone.
        Though economists are uncomfortable speaking of power, such a discussion is
unavoidable here. Pyramiding greatly concentrates economic power, and to an extent which may
not be clear to even the sharpest outside observers. For example, large pyramidal groups are rife
in Russia, but the ultimate controlling shareholders are shadowy anonymous entities that likely
hide powerful political leaders and their associates (Chernykh 2008). That precisely such hidden
pyramidal control can disguise market power, frustrate tax authorities, and manipulate
government clearly motivated the New Dealer’s Depression Era attach on American pyramidal
groups (Morck 2005).
        Of course, influence can also run the other way. Mussolini‘s Fascists, and subsequent
Italian governments, used large pyramidal groups of listed firms with SOEs, rather than family
firms, at their apexes to lock in de facto state control over what superficially seemed a free
market economy (Mussolini 1933; Amatori 1997; Aganin & Volpin 2005); and this may be the
Russian government’ objective too. Pyramidal business groups also appear to be forming in
China (Lu & Yao 2006) – perhaps to the same end. Large pyramidal business groups controlled
by State or Party organs might give pause to liberal democratic reformers, for these are tried and
true methods of projecting state power through an economy painted superficially with liberal free
market colors. These considerations make developing an economic theory of power all the more
urgent.

References
Aganin, Alexander; Volpin, Paolo. 2005. The History of Corporate Ownership in Italy. In: Morck Randall, ed. A
        History of Corporate Governance around the World. University of Chicago Press 325-61.
Almeida, Heitor; Wolfenzon, Daniel. 2006a. A Theory of Pyramidal Ownership and Family Business Groups.
        Journal of Finance 61, 2637
Almeida, Heitor; Wolfenzon, Daniel. 2006b. Should Business Groups Be Dismantled? The Equilibrium Costs of
        Efficient Internal Capital Markets. Journal of Financial Economics 79 1, 99-144
Amatori, Franco. 1997. Growth Via Politics: Business Groups Italian Style. In: Shiba Takao & Shimotani Masahiro
        eds. Beyond the Firm: Business Groups in International and Historical Perspective. Oxford University
        Press.
Bae, Kee-Hong; Kang, Jun-Koo, Kim; Jin-Mo. 2002. Tunneling or Value Added? Evidence from Mergers by
        Korean Business Groups. Journal of Finance 57 6, 2695-2740
Baek, Jae-Seung; Kang, Jun-Koo; Lee, Inmoo. 2006. Business Groups and Tunneling: Evidence from Private
        Securities Offerings by Korean Chaebols. Journal of Finance 61 5, 2415-49
Baek, Jae-Seung; Kang, Jun-Koo; Park, Kyung Suh. 2004. Corporate Governance and Firm Value: Evidence from
        the Korean Financial Crisis. Journal of Financial Economics 71 2, 265-313
Barca, Fabrizio;, Becht, Marco. 2001. The Control of Corporate Europe. Oxford University Press.
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye; Kraakman, Reinier; Triantis, George. 2000. Stock Pyramids, Cross-Ownership, and Dual
        Class Equity: The Mechanisms and Agency Costs of Separating Control from Cash-Flow Rights. In Morck,
        Randall, ed. Concentrated Corporate Ownership. University of Chicago Press 295-315.
Bennedsen, Morten; Nielsen, Kasper; Pérez-González, Francisco; Wolfenzon, Daniel. 2007. Inside the Family Firm.
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, 647.
Berle, Adolf; Means, Gardiner. 1932. Modern Corporation and Private Property. Commerce Clearing House: New
        York.
Bermann, George; Pistor, Katharina. 2004. Law and Governance in an Enlarged European Union. Hart.
Bertrand, Marianne; Schoar, Antoinette. 2006. The Role of Family in Family Firms. Journal of Economic
        Perspectives 20

                                                      17
Bertrand, Marianne; Johnson, Simon,; Samphantharak, Krislert; Schoar, Antoinette. 2008. Mixing Family with
         Business: A Study of Thai Business Groups and the Families behind Them. Journal of Financial Economics
         88, 466
Bertrand, Marianne; Mehto, Paras; Mullainathan, Sendhil. 2002. Ferreting out Tunneling: An Application to Indian
         Business Groups. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 1, 121-48
Bianco, Magda; Nicodano, Giovanna. 2006. Pyramidal Groups and Debt. European Economic Review 50, 937
Bonbright, James; Means, Gardiner. 1932. The Holding Company: Its Public Significance and Its Regulation.
         McGraw-Hill: New York.
Bortz, Jeff; Haber, Stephen. 2002. The Mexican Economy, 1870-1930. Stanford University Press: Stanford.
Boycko, Maxim; Shleifer, Andrei,; Vishny, Robert. 1996. A Theory of Privatisation. Economic Journal 106 435,
         309-19
Bozec, Yves; Laurin, Claude. 2008. Large Shareholder Entrenchment and Performance: Empirical Evidence from
         Canada. Journal of Business Finance & Accounting 35, 25
Carnegie, Andrew. 1891. The Advantages of Poverty. In Kirkland Edward ed. The Gospel of Wealth and Other
         Timely Essays. Harvard University Press.
Chandler, Alfred. 1977. The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business. Belknap.
Chandler, Alfred; Hikino, Takashi. 1990. Scale and Scope: The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism. Belknap.
Chernykh, Lucy. 2008. Ultimate Ownership and Control in Russia. Journal of Financial Economics 88, 169
Cheung, Yan-Leung; Rau, Raghavendra,; Stouraitis, Aris. 2006. Tunneling, Propping, and Expropriation: Evidence
         from Connected Party Transactions in Hong Kong. Journal of Financial Economics 82 2, 343-86
Chung, Chi-Nien, Mahmood, Ishtiaq P. 2009. Taiwanese Business Groups in the Past Three Decades. In: Colpan
         Aslı & Hikino Takashi eds. Oxford Handbook of Business Groups. Oxford University Press.
Chutatong, Charumilind; Raja, Kali; Wiwattanakantang, Yupana. 2006. Connected Lending: Thailand before the
         Financial Crisis. Journal of Business 79, 181
Claessens, Stijn; Djankov, Simeon. 1999. Politicians & Firms in Seven Central & Eastern European Countries.
         World Bank working paper.
Claessens, Stijn; Djankov, Simeon. 2002. Privatization Benefits in Eastern Europe. Journal of Public Economics 83
         3, 307-24
Claessens, Stijn; Djankov, Simeon; Lang, Larry. 2000. The Separation of Ownership and Control in East Asian
         Corporations. Journal of Financial Economics 58, 81
Claessens, Stijn, Laeven, Luc, eds. 2006. A Reader in International Corporate Finance. World Bank: Washington.
Cragg, Michael; Dyck, Alexander. 2003. Privatization and Management Incentives: Evidence from the UK. Journal
         of Law, Economics & Organization 19 1, 176-217
Daniels, Ronald; Morck, Randall; Stangeland, David. 1995. In High Gear: A Case Study of the Hees-Edper
         Corporate Group. In Daniels, Ronald; Morck, Randall, eds. Corporate Decision-Making in Canada.
         University of Calgary Press 223-40.
Desai, Mihir; Foley, Fritz; Hines, James. 2001. Repatriation Taxes and Dividend Distortions. National Tax Journal
         54, 829
Djankov, Simeon; La Porta, Rafael; Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio; Shleifer, Andrei. 2008. The Law and Economics
         of Self-Dealing. Journal of Financial Economics 88, 430
Durnev, Art; Kim, E. Han. 2005. To Steal or Not to Steal: Firm Attributes, Legal Environment, and Valuation.
         Journal of Finance 60 3, 1461-93
Dyck, Alexander; Zingales, Luigi. 2004. Private Benefits of Control: An International Comparison. Journal of
         Finance 59 2, 537-600
Dyck, Alexander. 1997. Privatization in Eastern Germany: Management Selection and Economic Transition.
         American Economic Review 87 4, 565-97
Faccio, Mara; Lang, Larry; Young, Leslie. 2001. Dividends and Expropriation. American Economic Review 91 1,
         54-78
Fisman, Raymond. 2001. Estimating the Value of Political Connections. American Economic Review 91, 1095
Fohlin, Caroline. 2005. The History of Corporate Ownership and Control in Germany. In: Morck Randall, ed. A
         History of Corporate Governance around the World. University of Chicago Press 223-277.
Fracchia, Eduardo; Mesquita, Luiz; Quiroga, Juan. 2009. Business Groups in Argentina. In: Colpan Aslı & Hikino
         Takashi eds. Oxford Handbook of Business Groups. Oxford University Press.
Franks, Julian; Mayer, Colin. 2001. Ownership and Control of German Corporations. Review of Financial Studies
         14, 943


                                                       18
Franks, Julian; Mayer, Colin; Rossi, Stefano. 2005. Spending Less Time with the Family: The Decline of Family
         Ownership in the United Kingdom. In Morck, Randall, ed. A History of Corporate Governance around the
         World. University of Chicago Press 581-607.
Friedman, Eric; Johnson, Simon; Mitton, Todd. 2003. Propping and Tunneling. Journal of Comparative Economics
         31 4, 732-50
Gadhoum, Yoser. 2006. Power of Ultimate Controlling Owners: A Survey of Canadian Landscape. Journal of
         Management & Governance 10, 179.
Granovetter, Mark. 1994. Business Groups. In: Smelser Neil; Swedberg Richard, eds. Handbook of Economic
         Sociology. Princeton University Press.
Guriev, Sergei. 2009. Business Groups in Russia. In: Colpan Aslı & Hikino Takashi eds. Oxford Handbook of
         Business Groups. Oxford University Press.
Guriev, Sergei; Rachinsky, Andrei. 2005. The Role of Oligarchs in Russian Capitalism. Journal of Economic
         Perspectives 19
Haber, Stephen. 1989. Industry and Underdevelopment : The Industrialization of Mexico, 1890-1940. Stanford
         University Press
Haber, Stephen. 1997. How Latin America Fell Behind: Essays on the Economic Histories of Brazil and Mexico,
         1800-1914. Stanford University Press.
Haber, Stephen; Maurer, Noel; Razo, Armando. 2003. The Politics of Property Rights : Political Instability, Credible
         Commitments, and Economic Growth in Mexico, 1876-1929. Cambridge University Press.
Haber, Stephen; North, Douglass; Weingast, Barry. 2008. Political Institutions and Financial Development. Stanford
         University Press.
Hayashi, Fumio. 2000. The Main Bank System and Corporate Investment: An Empirical Reassessment. In Aoki
         Masahiko, Saxonhouse Gary, eds. Finance, Governance, and Competitiveness in Japan. Oxford University
         Press 81-97.
Heaney, Richard; Holmen, Martin. 2008. Family Ownership and the Cost of under-Diversification. Applied
         Financial Economics 18, 1721
Herrnstein, Richard; Murray, Charles. 1994. The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life.
         Free Press.
Hines, James. 1996. Altered States: Taxes and the Location of Foreign Direct Investment in America. American
         Economic Review 86, 1076
Högfeldt, Peter. 2005. The History and Politics of Corporate Ownership in Sweden. In Morck Randall, ed. A History
         of Corporate Governance around the World. University of Chicago Press 62.
Holderness, Clifford; Kroszner, Randall; Sheehan, Dennis. 1999. Were the Good Old Days That Good? Changes in
         Managerial Stock Ownership since the Great Depression. Journal of Finance 54 2, 435-69
Holmen, Martin; Knopf, John. 2004. Minority Shareholder Protections and the Private Benefits of Control for
         Swedish Mergers. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39, 167
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas; Joulfaian, David; Rosen, Harvey S. 1993. The Carnegie Conjecture: Some Empirical
         Evidence. Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 413
Hoshi, Takeo; Kashyap, Anil; Scharfstein, David. 1990. The Role of Banks in Reducing the Costs of Financial
         Distress in Japan. Journal of Financial Economics 27, 67
Hoshi, Takeo; Kashyap, Anil; Scharfstein, David. 1991. Corporate Structure, Liquidity, and Investment: Evidence
         from Japanese Industrial Groups. Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 33
Hoshino, Taeko. 2009. Business Groups in Mexico. In: Colpan Aslı & Hikino Takashi eds. Oxford Handbook of
         Business Groups. Oxford University Press.
Jensen, Michael; Meckling, William. 1976. Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership
         Structure. Journal of Financial Economics 3 4, 305-60
Joh, Sung-Wook. 2003. Corporate Governance and Firm Profitability: Evidence from Korea before the Economic
         Crisis. Journal of Financial Economics 68 2, 287-322
Johnson, Simon; La Porta, Rafael; Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio; Shleifer, Andrei. 2000. Tunneling. American
         Economic Review 90 2, 22-27
Johnson, Simon; Mitton, Todd. 2003. Cronyism and Capital Controls: Evidence from Malaysia. Journal of Financial
         Economics 67 2, 351-82
Khanna, Naveen; Rivkin, Jan. 2001. Estimating the Performance Effects of Business Groups in Emerging Markets.
         Strategic Management Journal 22, 45
Khanna, Tarun. 2000. Business Groups and Social Welfare in Emerging Markets: Existing Evidence and
         Unanswered Questions. European Economic Review 44 4-6, 748-61

                                                        19
Khanna, Tarun;, Palepu, Krishna. 1999. The Right Way to Restructure Conglomerates in Emerging Markets.
         Harvard Business Review 77, 125
Khanna, Tarun; Palepu, Krishna. 2000a. Emerging Market Business Groups, Foreign Intermediaries, and Corporate
         Governance. In: Morck Randall, ed. Concentrated Corporate Ownership. University of Chicago Press 265-
         92.
Khanna, Tarun, Palepu, Krishna. 2000b. Is Group Affiliation Profitable in Emerging Markets? An Analysis of
         Diversified Indian Business Groups. Journal of Finance 55 2, 867-91
Khanna, Tarun, Palepu, Krishna. 2000c. Why Focused Strategies May Be Wrong for Emerging Markets. In: Garten
         Jeffrey ed. World View: Global Strategies for the New Economy. Harvard Business School Press 21-36.
Khanna, Tarun, Palepu, Krishna. 2005. The Evolution of Concentrated Ownership in India: Broad Patterns and a
         History of the Indian Software Industry. In Morck, Randall, ed. A History of Corporate Governance around
         the World. University of Chicago Press 283-320.
Khanna, Tarun, Yafeh, Yishay. 2005. Business Groups and Risk Sharing around the World. Journal of Business 78
         1, 301-40
Khanna, Tarun, Yafeh, Yishay. 2007. Business Groups in Emerging Markets: Paragons or Parasites? Journal of
         Economic Literature 45 2, 331-72
Kincheloe, Joe, Steinberg, Shirley, Gresson, Aaron. 1996. Measured Lies: The Bell Curve Examined. St. Martin's
         Press.
Kosenko, Konstantin, Yafeh, Yishay. 2009. Business Groups in Israel. In: Colpan Aslı & Hikino Takashi eds.
         Oxford Handbook of Business Groups. Oxford University Press.
Krishnamurti, Chandrasekhar, Sevic, Aleksandar, Sevic, Zeljo. 2005. Legal Environment, Firm-Level Corporate
         Governance and Expropriation of Minority Shareholders in Asia. Economics of Planning 38, 85
Krueger, Anne. 1978. Alternative Trade Strategies and Employment in LDCs. American Economic Review 68, 270
Krueger, Anne. 1998. Why Trade Liberalisation Is Good for Growth. Economic Journal 108, 1513
La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, Shleifer, Andrei. 1999. Corporate Ownership around the World.
         Journal of Finance 54 2, 471-517
Lang, Larry, ed. 2005. Governance and Expropriation. Corporate Governance in the New Global Economy. Elgar:
         Cheltenham.
Lee, Keun , Kang, Young-Sam 2009. Business Groups in Korea. In: Colpan Aslı & Hikino Takashi eds. Oxford
         Handbook of Business Groups. Oxford University Press.
Lemmon, Michael L., Lins, Karl. 2003. Ownership Structure, Corporate Governance, and Firm Value: Evidence
         from the East Asian Financial Crisis. Journal of Finance 58 4, 1445-68
Lincoln, James, Shimotani, Masahiro 2009. Whither the Keiretsu, Japan’s Business Networks? How Were They
         Structured? What Did They Do? Why Are They Gone? In: Colpan Aslı & Hikino Takashi eds. Oxford
         Handbook of Business Groups. Oxford University Press.
Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, Shleifer, Andrei, Vishny, Robert. 1997. Privatization in the United States. RAND
         Journal of Economics 28 3, 447-71
Lu, Yuan, Yao, Jun. 2006. Impact of State Ownership and Control Mechanisms on the Performance of Group
         Affiliated Companies in China. Asia Pacific Journal of Management 23, 485
Masami, Imai. 2006. Mixing Family Business with Politics in Thailand. Asian Economic Journal 20, 241
Miwa, Yoshiro; Ramseyer, Mark. 2006. The Fable of the Keiretsu. University of Chicago Press.
Morck, Randall. 2005. How to Eliminate Pyramidal Business Groups: The Double Taxation of Intercorporate
         Dividends and Other Incisive Uses of Tax Policy. Tax Policy and the Economy 19 135-79.
Morck, Randall; Nakamura, Masao. 2005. A Frog in a Well Knows Nothing of the Ocean: A History of Corporate
         Ownership in Japan. In Morck, Randall, ed. A History of Corporate Governance around the World.
         University of Chicago Press 367-459.
Morck, Randall; Percy, Michael; Tian, Gloria; Yeung, Bernard. 2005a. The Rise and Fall of the Widely Held Firm:
         A History of Corporate Ownership in Canada. In Morck, Randall, ed. A History of Corporate Governance
         around the World. University of Chicago Press 65-140.
Morck, Randall; Stangeland, David; Yeung, Bernard. 2000. Inherited Wealth, Corporate Control, and Economic
         Growth: The Canadian Disease? In Morck, Randall, ed. Concentrated Corporate Ownership. University of
         Chicago Press 319-69.
Morck, Randall; Steier, Lloyd. 2005. The Global History of Corporate Governance: An Introduction. In Morck,
         Randall, ed. A History of Corporate Governance around the World. University of Chicago Press 1-64.
Morck, Randall; Nakamura, Masao. 2007. Business Groups and the Big Push: Meiji Japan's Mass Privatization and
         Subsequent Growth. Enterprise and Society 8 3, 543-601

                                                       20
Morck, Randall; Shleifer, Andrei; Vishny, Robert. 1988. Management Ownership and Market Valuation: An
          Empirical Analysis. Journal of Financial Economics 20 1/2, 293-315
Morck, Randall; Tian, Gloria; Yeung, Bernard. 2005b. Who Owns Whom? Economic Nationalism and Family
          Controlled Pyramidal Groups in Canada. In Eden, Lorraine, Dobson, Wendy, eds. Governance,
          Multinationals and Growth. Elgar, 44-67.
Morck, Randall; Wolfenzon, Daniel; Yeung, Bernard. 2005c. Corporate Governance, Economic Entrenchment, and
          Growth. Journal of Economic Literature 43 3, 655-720
Morck, Randall; Yeung, Bernard 2004. Family Control and the Rent-Seeking Society. Entrepreneurship: Theory and
          Practice 28, 18
Morten, Bennedsen. 2000. Political Ownership. Journal of Public Economics 76, 559
Mussolini, Benito. 1933. Political and Social Doctrine of Fascism. Hogarth Press.
Nenova, Tatiana. 2003. The Value of Corporate Voting Rights and Control: A Cross-Country Analysis. Journal of
          Financial Economics 68 3, 325-51
Okun, Arthur. 1975. Equality and Efficiency: the Big Tradeoff. Brookings Institution, Washington.
Orbay, Hakan; Yurtoglu, Burcin. 2006. The Impact of Corporate Governance Structures on the Corporate
          Investment Performance in Turkey. Corporate Governance : An International Review 14, 349
Prebisch, Raul. 1979. Introduccion Al Estudio de la Crisis del Capitalismo Periferico. El Trimestre Economico 46
          183, 547-67
Rajan, Raghuram. 2004. Why Are Structural Reforms So Difficult? The Benefits of Structural Reforms Aren't
          Always as Obvious as the Smaller, Short-Term Costs. Finance and Development 41 2, 56-57
Rajan, Raghuram; Zingales, Luigi. 2003. The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial Development in the
          Twentieth Century. Journal of Financial Economics 69 1, 5-50
Rajan, Raghuram; Zingales, Luigi. 2004. Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists: Unleashing the Power of Financial
          Markets to Create Wealth and Spread Opportunity. Princeton University Press.
Ranis, Gustav. 1995. Another Look at the East Asian Miracle. World Bank Economic Review 9 3, 509-34
Rosenstein-Rodan, Paul. 1943. Problems of Industrialisation of Eastern and South-Eastern Europe. Economic
          Journal 53, 202-11
Sarkar, Jayati. 2009. Business Groups in India. In: Colpan Aslı & Hikino Takashi eds. Oxford Handbook of
          Business Groups. Oxford University Press.
Shleifer, Andrei. 1998. State Versus Private Ownership. Journal of Economic Perspectives 12 4, 133-50
Shleifer, Andrei; Vishny, Robert. 1992. Pervasive Shortages under Socialism. RAND Journal of Economics 23 2,
          237-46
Shleifer, Andrei; Vishny, Robert. 1994. Politicians and Firms. Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 4, 995-1025
Smith, Brian; Amoako-Adu, Ben. 2005. Management Succession and Financial Performance in Family Controlled
          Firms. In: Governance and Ownership. Elgar, Cheltenham, p. 27.
Suehiro, Akira; Wailerdsak, Natenapha. 2009. Business Groups in Thailand. In: Colpan Aslı & Hikino Takashi eds.
          Oxford Handbook of Business Groups. Oxford University Press.
Tian, Gloria. 2006. Pyramidal Groups and Firm Performance: Empirical Evidence from Canadian Corporations.
          University of New South Wales, Sydney
Tsui-Auch, Lai Si; Toru, Yoshikawa. 2009. Business Groups in Singapore. In: Colpan Aslı & Hikino Takashi eds.
          Oxford Handbook of Business Groups. Oxford University Press.
Villalonga, Belen; Amit, Raphael. 2006. How Do Family Ownership, Control and Management Affect Firm Value?
          Journal of Financial Economics 80 2, 385-417
Villalonga, Belen; Amit, Raphael. 2008. How Are U.S. Family Firms Controlled? Review of Financial Studies
          (forthcoming)
Walid, Ben-Amar; Paul, Andre. 2006. Separation of Ownership from Control and Acquiring Firm Performance: The
          Case of Family Ownership in Canada. Journal of Business Finance & Accounting 33, 517




                                                       21
