                    NIBER WORKING PAPER SERISS




                    THE INCIDENCE OF THE LOCAL
                  PROPERTY TAX;  A REEVALUATION


                       Peter M. Mieszkowski


                      Working Paper No. 185




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October i98L




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation and project in Government Budget. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                             NBER Working Paper #1485
                                                             October, 1984


          The   Incidence   of the Local Property Tax: A Re—evaluation


                                      ABSTRACT

        The article identifies the key assumptions that underlie competing
theories of the incidence of the local property tax. We conclude that the
"benefit view" which maintains that the property tax system is equivalent to
a set of non—distortionary user changes is correct only under very
restrictive assumptions. Only when communities adopt a set of exact, binding
zoning requirements will a distortionary tax be transformed into a lump—sum
tax.

        We argue that within jurisdiction heterogeneity of house and firm type
is very unlikely and that the burden of a property tax that is distortionary
at the margin falls on the owners of capital.




                                                      Peter Mieszkowski
                                                      Rice University
                                                      P.O. Box 1892
                                                      Houston, fl 77251
                                                      713—527—4875
                                                                    September 1984




           The Incidence of the Local Property Tax: A Re—evaluation


                     Peter Mieszkowskj and George R. Zodrow*


                                  Rice University


I. Introduction


        The objective of this article is to identify the key assumptions
that form the basis of two competing theories of the incidence of the local
property tax. These theories are (1) the "benefit view" which maintains
that the property tax system is equivalent to a set of non—distortionary
user charges that fall on the households and firms who benefit from local
public goods; and (2) the "new view" of the property tax which concludes
that the principal effect of the property tax system is to decrease the
rturn to capital as the burden of a simultaneous increase in property taxes
by all local governments falls on capital owners.
        Our   main conclusion is that the benefit or non—distortionary view
of the property tax is correct only under very restrictive assumptions.
Only homogeneous perfectly stratified communities can adopt a set of exact
zoning requirements that transforms a distortionary property tax into a
lump—sum tax. Indeed, we prove that homogeneous, utility maximizing
communities will adopt a non—distortionary tax system. Consequently the
accuracy of the benefit view is determined by the proportion of households
and firms which are actually constrained by zoning requirements.
        Note that the existence of zoning does not imply that most
households located in the community are bound by the requirements. For
example, a community might restrict housing to single family houses no
smaller than 2000 square feet in size. But if most houses in the community
are larger than the minimum, most residents are not strictly bound by the
minimum floor space requirement and the imposition of a property tax will
distort housing consumption —--   to   reduce their tax burdens, households will
build smaller houses.

        Once within—jurisdiction heterogeneity of house and firm type is



                                           1
allowed, the strong form of the benefit view is vitiated. We shall argue
heterogeneity makes exact zoning very unlikely, and that the burden of a
property tax that is distortionary at the margin falls on the owners of
capital.
           This conclusion holds even at the level of a small community that
raises its property tax in order to increase public spending. The
community making the expenditure change will pay the tax as its cost of
capital is increased by the amount of the tax. But the decrease in the
demand for capital in the community incrementally increasing its tax will
depress the return to caital throughout the economy by an amount
approximately equal to the additional tax proceeds as the reallocation of
capital in the econmy following the imposition of a distorting tax on
mobile capital depresses the return to caital. Also, the capitalization
into land values of a distortionary property tax is relative, not absolute.
Land values fall in the taxing community, but increase by an equal amount
in the non—taxing communities.
           This result is an example of a proposition which dates back to
Harry Gunison Brown (1924). Brown stressed that a distorting tax on
capital in a small industry or region has a general equilibrium impact that
should not be ignored however small the taxing sector, and that the general
equilibrium incidence of a tax on a mobile factor was on that factor. This
idea is fundamental in analyzing the effects of taxes on capital in a
local public good economy and is developed in some detail in the fourth
section of the paper. In the next section we analyze the benefit view of
the property tax, and we do a benefit—related incidence analysis in Section
III.


II. The Property Tax as a Perfect Benefit Tax


           The benefit view for the case of homogeneous communities is
summarized by the following proposition: If there exists a sufficiently
large number of communities, public goods are publicly—provided private
goods which are property tax financed, communities are perfectly homogeneous
in that only one type of household and/or firm is located in a given
community, and each community is precisely zoned in that the amount of
housing capital per household or the amount of industrial capital per firm
is predetermined and is independent of the property tax rate, then the



                                          2
property tax system is non—distortionary and is equivalent to a set of
lump—sum taxes or user changes. There is no intra—community reditribution
of fiscal benefits and theproperty tax is a perfect benefit tax. This
proposition was first developed for a model of residential housing by Bruce
Hamilton (1975), and was extended to include industrial capital by William
Fischel (1975) and Michelle White (1975).
        The two key assumptions in the residential housing case are perfect
zoning and the existance of a large number of communities. The latter
assumption ensures that households can choose from a sufficiently large
number of combinations of housing and public service levels so that all
tastes are satisfied. The exact zoning assumption insures that the
consumption of housing is precisely determined in every community so that
housing consumption is not distorted by the property tax and there is no
free rider problem. Together, these two assumptions ensure homogeneous
communities.

        As each community is homogeneous and housing consumption in each is
predetermined by zoning, the property tax is converted to a user fee or a
lump—sum tax. A one percent property tax on a 1OO,OOO house is equivalent
to a lOOO household tax. Also, as houses and lots are identical, a tax
on house structure is equivalent to a tax on land values.
        The generalization of this result to the inclusion of industrial
capital is accomplished by adding the following assumptions: (1) The
public services provided to industry are distinct from those provided to
households, e.g., firms receive publicly provided water or police
protection and households receive educational services. As for household
consumption, it is assumed that each firm receives a given amount of
essentially private goods, as public servIces, in the form of an
intermediate producer's good, in exchange for the taxes that it pays; and
(2) Competition between communities insures that in long term equilibrium
each firm will receive public services equal in value to taxes paid. To
avoid intra—jurisdictional redistribution firms will stratify themselves
into "honiogenous communities" and firms in a given community will receive
the same amount of public services per unit of capital.
       As in the analysis of household capital, the distortionary effect
of the industrial property is eliminated by the assumption of perfect
zoning. The amount of capital a firm must use in predetermined by zoning.
So if a firm is to locate in a community it will know the tax rate t, its



                                      3
capital K, and the level of public services. These three variables are
simultaneously determined. As There exist an indefinitely large number of
communities with varying zoning requirements, different K's, and different
tax rates, the firm in making its location decision shops around and
chooses the optimal (cost—minimizing) levels of labor, capital, and public
services. In effect, the firm is free to buy public services at a fixed

per—unit price.
        Hamilton (1976) has attempted to generalize the benefit tax model
by allowing for hetrogeneous residential communities whose houses vary
according to value. But two essential features of the original model
remain unchanged in this version of his work. First, households which
reside in hetrogeneous communities and pay varying amounts of tax according
to the house they live in are identical in terms of their demand for
publicly provided goods and services. This implies that if the public
goods could be purchased directly as a private good at a given unit price,
the households that live in a particular assumption eliminates public
choice problems and properties in a hetrogenous community are valued
differently than identical properties in homogeneous communities solely
because of taxes paid.
        The other assumption which Hamilton in effect retains is that of
exact, binding zoning. This is implied by his assumption that
heterogeneous communities are fully developed ——   since   the house size on
each lot is specified, this is equivalent to "heterogeneous zoning" where
houses are no longer required to be identical, but it is impossible for
households to change their housing consumption.
        To see this, suppose that there is oniy residential capital, and
that lots in all communities are identical and cost a given amount to
transform from raw agricultural land, say *20,000 a lot. Also assume two
income classes and two types of housing, H, valued at *100,000 a unit and L
with a structure value of *50,000. Assume that the desired level of public
services is *1000 per household and is the same across all communities.
When communities are perfectly homogeneous and expenditures are constant
across communities, the tax rate is 1 percent in community H and 2 percent
in community L. An H house plus lot sells for *120,000 and a housing unit
in L sells for *70,000.
        Suppose that an existing heterogeneous community is "zoned" so that
half the houses are H houses and half are L houses. In this case, Hamilton



                                       4
was able to show that the property tax is not distortionary and also was
able to derive the strong capitalization result that the total value of
the lots in the heterogeneous community is exactly equal to the total value
of the lots in homogeneous (stratified) communities the total value of the
community is independent of its composition in terms of H and L housing.
        The result can be demonstrated as follows. Assume there are two
lots in the heterogeneous community. By assumption these two lots would
sell for 4O,OOO in a homogeneous H or L community. The tax on H housing
will be twice as large as the tax on L housing. In this community the tax
on H housing is l334 and 666 on L housing as expenditures are lOOO per
households. As taxes per household in a perfectly homogeneous is lOOO,
the tax disadvantange (advantage) for H (L) housing of being lcoated in
the heterogeneous community is 344 (334) per year. The H (L) lot will
sell at a discount (premium) in the heterogeneous community relative to the
same lot in a homogeneous community.
        But as the tax disadvantage to H housing is exactly equal to the
tax advantage in the L housing, the capitalization effects will cancel. For
example, if the discount rate is ten percent the H lot in the heterogeneous
community will sell at a discount of t3340, or l6,66O and the L lot in
this community will sell for 23,34O. The two lots together are worth
4O,OOO. This example verifies Hamilton's argument that heterogeneity in
housing and tax liabilities combined with homogeneity of rates and zoning
does not destroy the conclusion of perfect benefit taxation and the
essential message of this theory —— you pay for what you get.
        These are strong results and it appears that attempts to discredit
the benefit theory of local taxes by questioning the assumptions of
homogeneity of preferences, or perfect zoning is to quibble with a central
tendency that is very powerful. To upset the theory one has to show that
relaxation of the simplifying assumptions of the benefit theory yields
results which are significantly different. This is what we shall do in the
remaining sections of the paper.
        It has been suggested by II. Aaron (1975) that the benefit theory of
the property tax is more representative of a system of suburban communities
than as a description of central cities which are quite heterogeneous.
Aaron is correct in arguing that within community heterogeneity of housing
and industrial taxpayers is the essential reason why the benefit theory of
property tax is a partial theory at best. Heterogeneity does not preclude



                                       5
the use of zoning as a means of separating various forms of economic
activities within communities and in partially stratifying communities
according to income level and house type. But, except in extreme cases,
zoning will rarely be binding for a significant portion of households or
firms. For example, consider a relatively homogeneous single—family
community developed under zoning restrictions that limit construction to
those homes no smaller than 2000 square feet, but where most houses
actually constructed are substantially larger than the minimum level.
Similarly, industrial zoning is not usually written so that the
distortionary effects of the property tax are eliminated.
       A property tax will be distortionary, except with exact zoning, as
taxpayers will attempt to lower their tax burden by decreasing their demand
for housing or industrial capital. For an individual household or firm,
the perceived public services received in a given community will be taken
to be independent of the capital put in place. This does not mean that
communities do not use zoning to exclude low income residents or that
residents will not locate in high tax rate jurisdictions so as to enjoy the
benefits of superior education. The assumption we shall make in subsequent
analysis is that zoning is insufficiently exact so that the property tax is
distortionary. Households and firms in a given community will take the
after tax rate of return on capital as predetermined, and as the property
tax is increased will assume that their cost of capital is increased by the
amount of the tax.   This increase in capital cost will distort the use of
capital in the community and will lead to a decrease in the demand for
capital. This change will decrease the return to capital. A distortionary
property tax is not a perfect benefit tax. Moreover, the capitalization
effects associated with such a tax are relative, not absolute, where
relative capitalization occurs when the decrease in land values in the
community imposing the tax is offset (perhaps exactly) by an increase in
land value in the communities that do not impose or increase the tax.


III. The Incidence of a Distorting Property Tax in a Tiebout Type Model


       The weak or nonexistent specification of the benefit side in the
work of Thompson (1965) Mieszkowski (1972) and Aaron (1975) on the
incidence of the property tax has made their conclusion that the property
tax is a tax on capital suspect and difficult to reconcile with the



                                       6
opposing result that local property taxes are payments for benefits
received. We shall demonstrate that the property tax is a tax on capital
when the tax is distortionary at the margin and that this result does not
depend on an explicit specification of the demand side of the model.
          We retain the assumptio of a fixed number of communities, take the
internal composition of communities as predetermined, and in   the   first
instance, take the communities to be identical. These assumptions simplify
the analysis without affecting the basic results. By taking the number of
communities as fixed, we develop a model where a fixed national capital
stock is combined with land to produce housing and a general purpose
commodity. Land, the fixed factor, earns positive rents, In this sample
formulation, we avoid the complications of introducing a third factor,

labor.1
          In the conventional approach to tax incidence, the determination of
the level of expenditures is not explained. In this section we allow
public expenditures to vary with respect to two tax regimes. In one
regime, each homogeneous community is free to adopt a non—distorting head
tax, which corresponds to a property tax with exact zoning. In the second
regime, we adopt a methodology introduced by Atkinson and Stern (1974)
which varies exongenously the level of non—distorting head taxes. A
community restricted in its use of non—distorting head taxes must adopt a
distorting property tax to raise additional tax revenues, The level of
expenditures and the property tax rate are determined endogenously, The
basic objective of the analysis is to study the incidence of a
distortionary property tax.
          The model which is described in detail in Zodrow and Mieszkowski
(1984(a)) is quite simple. The economy consists of N identical
jurisdictions. Each jurisdiction has an identical supply of land which is
fixed. The national capital stock (K) is fixed and capital is perfectly
mobile across jurisdictions. An identical general purpose good is produced
and housing is not explicitly introduced.
          Each community has a fixed number of identical residents. Each
resident owns an equal share of jurisdiction's land and an equal share of
the national capital stock, which is not necessarily invested in the
jurisdiction of residence. There is no wage income. We normalize the
population in each community to be equal to one.
          Local public services (P) are public purchases of the general



                                         7
purpose good.   The public consumption good is financed by a per unit
property tax on capital (T) or by a nondistortionary head tax (H): The
budget balance condition is

(1)             P=TK+H
        Each jurisdiction acts as a '4ash—competitor" and assumes that all
other jurisdictions will not respond to changes in its property tax rate, and
that its action cannot affect the national return to capital, r.
        As each community is homogeneous, the local government maximizes the
utility function IJ(C,P) where C is the consumption of the private good. The
share of after—tax capital income of each community is

                rK
                 N'
where N is the number of identical communities. Total output is a function
of the input of capital

(2)             C+P=F(K).

Making use of (1), the optimization problem facing each government is to

(3)             Max TJ[F(K)—(r + T)K   + rK/N — H, TK +   II],
                 T

where r and H are taken to be fixed. The first order condition for
optimization requires that capital be used up to the point where the marginal
product of capital FK(K) is equal to the cost of capital or

(4)
                r+TFK(K)
        Differentiation of (4) Yields the change in the capital stock
resulting from an increase in the property tax rate:

(5)                   dKl>o   XX

        This term represents the distortionary effects of the property tax.
Each community recognizes that by increasing its tax on capital it will
increase the cost of capital, decrease the property tax base, and decrease
income from land rents.
        When the head tax, H, is a choice variable (along with T) the first
order conditions for an optimum would be




                                         8
 (6)             U/U
                  PC =1
 (7)             U /U =       /[l —
                  PC      1


 where the subscripts denote partial derivatives of the utility function. It
 follows immediately from (6) and (7) that when no constraint is imposed on
 the level of head taxes, the optimal property tax would be zero and the head
 tax financed public services will be provided up to the point where the
marginal rate of substitution equals the marginal rate of transformation.
        However, when the head tax is constrained to be less than the optimal
 level, the government sets T at a positive level where the first order
condition for T is equation 7. Since         is positive it follows that
U /U > 1, which is an indication of the under provision of local
 p c
services at the margin.
        Another result which can be obtained for a changeover from a first
best non—distortionary head tax to a "mixed system" where H is constrained
and a distortionary property tax substituted, is that the after tax return to
capital falls by the amount of the tax T. The assumption of a fixed national
capital stock implies that

(9)             NdK=0
and from condition (4) it follows that

(10)            dr   — dT.

        Within the context of this simple model, this result confirms the
conclusion reached earlier by Mieszkowski (1972) that the return to capital
is decreased by the average rate of property tax in the economy. The point
we stress here is that the exact binding zoning requirements specified by
Hamilton, Fischel, and White are rarely observed, if at all, because
individual communities are composed of diverse stocks of housing, and a wide
variety of industrial and commercial firms.
        However, without the assumption of homogeneous communities and exact
zoning (equivalent to being able to use head taxes), the strict form of
benefit view of the property tax collapses and the new view again applies.
        In Zodrow and Mieszkowski (1984a) and Mieszkowski and Zodrow l984b,
we extend the simple model presented above. The first extension is the
introduction of local public goods that enter as an input into the
production process. The production function in a particular jurisdiction is
F(K, B) where B is the level of—publicly—provided services to business. The



                                         9
results for this model are very similar to those derived for the consumption
good model. If unconstrained, a jurisdiction will use only head tax finance
and will provide public services to industry to the point where the marginal
benefit of these services is equal to the marginal cost of provision. When a
distortionary property tax is used as a source of finance, publicly provided
business services will be under provided and capital will bear the tax.
        The second extension has an essential Tiebout type element in that
two types of communites are allowed with one set of communities composed of
"high demanders" for public services and another set composed exclusively of
low demanders. As in the model presented above, the analysis is a special
form of differential analysis. Initially, both types of communities are
assumed to finance public consumption by a non—distortionary head tax. An
exogenous constraint is imposed on head tax collections and both communities
impose distortionary property taxes on housing and industrial capital as a
partial source of finance. Our method of relaxing the perfect zoning
assumption to assume that icoal zoning ordinances are limited to fixing
residential and non—residential land use and cannot precisely determine the
amount of housing capital in each community. The distortionary tax
discourages public good consumption in both communities and the property tax
rate is higher in the high demander communities.
        As the socially provided good is the composite good, the tax—induced
increase in the cost of this good shifts demands towards housing in each
community. Also the relative cost of housing is increased (decreased) in the
high (low) tax communities and capital flows from (into) the high (low) tax
communities. These capital flows lead to offsetting redistributions of
income between fixed factors of production in the two sets of jurisdictions.
Labor employed in the production of the composite good in the low tax
jurisdictions gains at the expense of labor in the high tax jurisdiction.
Similarly land used in the production of housing in the low (high) tax
jurisdictions increases (decreases) in price after the introduction of a

distorting property tax.
        The effects resulting from interjurisdictional tax rate differences
and the consumption distortion complicate the incidence result.
        However, these effects are qualifications and extensions of the main
result; the incidence expressions derived in Mieszkowski and Zodrow (1984b)
all contain terms that reflect the "profit—tax effect" ——   the depressing
effect of a tax on capital on the after—tax return to capital.



                                      10
 IV The Bown—Harberger Proposition


           The strongest theoretical case for the position that the incidence of
 distortionary property taxes falls on the owners of capital is the "Brown
proposition developed by Harry Gunison Brown some sixty years ago. Brown's
basic idea is that incidence analysis should not ignore the general
equilibrium effects associated with the imposition of a distortionary tax in
 (on) a small jurisdiction (industry).
constant factor prices in analysis of the effects ot tax on a small                of
the economy is misleading.
           Brown's idea has been formally demonstrated in a short, elegant paper
by David Bradford (1978). But the idea is not well known and its full
implications for incidence theory and the theory of capitalization have not
been developed. In particular, we demonstrate here that there is no
inconsistency in claiming that a tax in a small community depresses the rate
of return to capital in the overall economy        that   the immobile residents
of the taxing community suffer from the imposition of the tax,
           We demonstrate Brown's proposition in a strong form,2 The model
is the same used in the previous section. Although no explicit reference is
made to expenditures and benefits, we offer the following differential in-
cidence interpretation. Assume a "closed system" where the number of juris-
dictions (industries) is fixed. The amount of land in each jurisdiction is
fixed and there is a fixed amount of capital that is perfectly mobile between
jurisdiction. Initially all jurisdictions use non—distortionary taxes to
finance public expenditure, Then one jurisdiction is constrained in the
level of neutral taxes it can utilize and to raise part of its revenues,
imposes a small tax on property. The other jurisdictions continue to utilize
non—distortionary taxation or user changes.
           These assumptions are equivalent to assuming a zero tax initial
equilibrium and we thus abstract from excess burden effects. Also we make the
simplifying assumption that all N+l jurisdictions produce a single community
with the same two—factor technology, and that they have the same endowments
of land.

           Before the imposition of a tax on capital by jurisdiction A, the
total capital stock K is distributed among the N+1 jurisdiction so that

(11)
                  KA+NKBK

                                         11
where KA= KB.
        Jurisdiction A imposes a tax on capital, expressed as a per unit tax,
T. In equilibrium the after tax rate of return (r) is equalized across
jurisdictions. Thus, the change in the before tax rate of return in the
taxing state, dA is equal to the after tax return plus the tax

(12)             drA = drB + T

         As factor pricing reflects marginal productivity we can write (12) as

(12')            drX dKAF( ) = T + dKBF(       )




where F"A(   ) and F"B( ) is the second derivative of the
production function in A and B respectively.
         Since the marginal product of capital was equalized across
jurisdictions in the initial non—distorted equilibrum, F"A(      =
                                                                     F:B.
Also, since the capital stock is fixed and regions are identical dKA
    dK
—   — and    (12') simplifies to


(13)
                 drA

         From (13) it follows that when N=1, there are two jurisdictions, and
the before tax rate of return increases by one—half of the tax rate. Also, as
expected when the taxing region is small relative to the nation, (N becomes
large) the change in before tax rate of return becomes negligibly small.
         The change in the after tax rate of return is obtained by
substituting (12) into (13) to obtain

(14)             dr    —


Thus, as taxing regions become small relative to the nation, dr tends toward
zero.
         But even for large values of N, the change in the overall after—tax
return to capital does not go to zero; rather it equals tax collection in A.
Multiply (14) by the total capital stock KA(N+l) to obtain

(15)                       N+l =
                KA[_               _KAT

where KAT are tax collections in A.
         Thus, under our strong assumptions, the after—tax return to capital



                                          12
throughout the nation falls by the taxes collected on capital in jurisdiction
A, independently of the number of jurisdictions of type A.
         As we ignore the effects of taxes on output, it follows that total
output remains unchanged and the total return to land in the nation remains
unchanged. The     fall   in land rents in A is exactly equal to the increase in
land rents in the non—taxing jurisdictions. So as N becomes large the fall
in land rents in the taxing state is approximately equal to tax collections.
This last result supports our claim that in a model with a fixed number of
jurisdictions, capitalization will be relative rather than absolute.
        Essentially the same point can be made in a specialized form of the
two—sector model developed by Arnold ilarberger (1962). This example
approximates the case discussed by Brown (1924) and is presented in order to
reconcile the proposition that a property tax on housing is borne by
consumers and the opposing claim that it is a tax on capital. In the example
there exist two commodities X and Y. Good X is apartment services and is
subject to tax and is consumed only by group A that does not own any capital.
A second group (B) does not consume X and receives none of the income from
capital, Group C owns all of the capital in the economy and spends none of
its income on X. So group A is the only consumer ofX and group C receives
all of the capital income.
        To illustrate Brown's claim that taxes on capital in small sectors
depress the return to capital, we assume tht only 1 percent of the nation's
capital stock is used in providing housing services for group A.
Kx/Kx + Ky where Xx + Ky equals the nation's capital stock,
        In Harberger's two—sector incidence model, labor is the other factor
and both labor and capital are perfectly mobile between sectors. The effects
of a tax on industry X are analysed and the change in the after—tax return to
capital relative to labor is calculated.
        As the model and its general result are well known we relegate this
algebra to a footnote.3 By naking appropriate assumptions about the
relevant parameters we can conclude that the return to capital will fall by
one one hundredth of a tax on capital in X, i.e. dr=—,ol%. But if capital is
the only input in the production of X, the change in the price of X is equal
to T+dr = .991'.   So the price of X increases by virtually the full amount of
the tax, and it appears that consumers (group A) fully bear the burden of the
capital tax on X. However, the return to capital has fallen by 1 percent of
the tax and as the capital in X represents 1 percent of the nation's capital



                                          13
it follows that the overall return to capital hs fallen by the amount of tax.
        Paradoxically it appears that the real incomes of the consumers of
the taxed product and the owners of capital both fall by the amount of the
tax proceeds. To resolve this paradox, recognize that by depressing the
return to capital, the tax increases the real income of group B, the group
that neither consumes the taxed product, X, nor owns capital.
        For example, suppose that group A earns 1 percent of total income and
spends 25 percent of its income on X. Also, suppose that the shares of B and
C in total income are 69 and 30 percent respectively. If tax proceeds are
equal to 100, the balance sheet for the three groups is as follows:


Group   Use of Income Effect      Source of Income Effect   Net Change in Real
             (Consumption)                                         Income


  A                  —99                      0                     —99
  B              .69(100)                     0                      69
  C              .30(100)                   :!!!
Government                                  +100                   —100


        The government and group B gain at the expense of the consumers of A
and the owners of capital.
        Brown's claim that a partial tax on real estate is not a consumption
tax but a tax on capital as a whole is seen to be correct if different groups
have the same average propensity to consume on housing, so that their losses
as consumers of housing are exactly offset by their gains as the consumers of
commodities not subject to tax.
        The case is perfectly analogous to the situation where owners of land
own equal amounts of land in different jurisdictions so that the
capitalization effects of taxes on capital can be ignored as they cancel in
the aggregate. But our claim is not that capitalization effects, or excise
tax effects, should be ignored but that the effects of a partial tax on the
return to capital must also be considered in any incidence analysis.


V. Conclusion


        Our paper arrives at the following three conclusions. First, the
benefit view of local property taxes depends on a very strong assumption
about exact zoning. We do not argue with the logic of this theory, but



                                       14
rather with its basis in fact. Since binding zoning constraints seldom
occur, the assumption that taxes are non—distortionary at the margin seems
counterfactual. Second, property taxes on capital depress the return to
capital, even when each local community chooses its level of public services
optimally under the constraints of perfect capital mobility and limitations
on perfect zoning. Third, the use of distortionary property taxes, even by a
small set of jurisdictions relative to the number of jurisdictions in the
nation, reduces the income to capital owners by approximately the amount of
revenue raised. Although returns to fixed factors fall in the taxing
jurisdictions, these reductions are offset by increases in returns to fixed
factors in the non—taxing jurisdictions; that is, capitalization is relative
rather than absolute.




                                     15
                                     Footnotes


  *

      Department of Economics, Rice University, Houston, TX 77251

1. An alternative specification for a two factor model is to allow community
      formation (agriculture land can be converted to urban use) and to allow
      variations in the quality of sites, according to location and amenity
      value such as climate. In such a model ladn rents and the marginal
      productivity of capital in a particular jurisdiction would vary with
      capital to land ratio. As capital migrates into (out of) a community
      land rents increase (decrease). This basic result is common to a model
      with a fixed number of jurisdictions and one with varying land quality.
      The former is much simpler to work with and the existence of a large
      number of communities insures that each community is a price taker.


2. The first example presented in this section was developed jointly with 3.
      E. Stiglitz. It is somewhat more specialized than David Bradford's
      demonstration.


3. The expression for the change in the after tax return to capital relative
      to the wage rate, for the special where the elasticity of substitution
      between labor and capital in the taxed sector is zero and the share of
      capital in that sector is equal to 1
                                                    K
                                          dr = E          T
                                                   (i—)

                                          E(gk — 1)       — S


      where E is the elasticity of the demand for x, S is the elasticity of
      substitution between labor and capital in the production of y, and gk is the
      share of capital in the production of y. If we take E =    = —.5 and
                                                              Sy
      gk = .25 and K /1 = .01 the change in the after tax return to
                       x y
                                          —.005
      capital,   dr is calculated to be            T, or approximately —.O1T.




                                            16
                                    REFERENCES


Aaron, Henry, T, Who Pays    the Property Tax, Washington, D.C., Brookings
        Institute, 1975.
Atkinson, A.B. and Stern, W,H.,, 'Pigou Taxation and Public Goods," Rev.
        Econ. Stud., 1974, 41, 119—128.
Bradford, David F., "Factor Prices May be Constant But Factor Returns Are
        Not, Economic Letters, August, 1976, 1, pp. 199—203.
Brown, Harry Garrison, The Economics of Taxation, New York, Bolt, 1924.
Fischel, William, "Fiscal and Environmental Considerations in the Location of
        Firms in Suburban Communities, In Fiscal Zoning and Land Use.
        Edited by E.S. Mills and W.E. Oates, Lexington, Mass., D.C. Heath,
        1975.

Hamilton,   Bruce W., "Zoning and Property Taxation in a System of Local
        Governments, " Urban Studies, 1975, 12, pp. 205—211,

                      "Capitalization of Intrajurisdictional Differences in
        Local Tax Prices ," American Economic Review, December 1976, 66,
        743—753.
Harberger, Arnold, C.., "The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax,"
        Journal of Political Economy, December 1962, 70, 215—240.
Mjeszkowski, Peter, "The Property Tax: An Excise Tax or A Profits
        Tax," Journal of Public Economics, April 1972, 1, 73—96.
Mieszkowski, Peter and Zodrow, George R., "The New View of the Property Tax:
        A Reformulation," unpublished manuscript, l984b.
Thomson, Proctor, "The Property Tax and the Rate of Interest," in The
        American Property Tax, edited by G.C.S. Benson, S. Benson, H.
        MoClellazid, and P. Thomson, Claremont, California, The Lincoln
        School of Public Finance, 1965.
White, Michelle J., "Firm Location in a Zoned Metropolitan Area," in
       Fiscal Zoning and Land Use. Edited by E.S. Mills and W.E. Oates,
        Lexington, Mass.: D. C. Heath, 1975.
Zodrow, George R. and Mieszkowski, Peter M., 'Pigou, Tiebout, Property
        Taxation and the Under—Provision of Local Public Goods, Journal of
        Urba.n Economics, forthcoming, 1984a.




                                       17
