                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       MENSTRUATION AND EDUCATION IN NEPAL

                                            Emily Oster
                                          Rebecca Thornton

                                        Working Paper 14853
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14853


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2009




The Menstruation and Education in Nepal Project is supported by grants from the University of Michigan
Population Studies Center (Mueller and Freedman Funds), the University of Chicago Center for Health
and Social Sciences, Harvard University Women in Public Policy Grant and the Warburg Foundation
Economics of Culture Research Grant at Harvard University. We are extremely grateful for Bishnu
Adhikari, Indra Chaudry, Dirgha Ghimire, Krishna Ghimire, Sunita Ghimire, and Prem Pundit for
their excellent data collection and fieldwork administration. We also thank Nick Snavely for excellent
research assistance as well as respondents and school administration in our sample schools in Chitwan.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Emily Oster and Rebecca Thornton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Menstruation and Education in Nepal
Emily Oster and Rebecca Thornton
NBER Working Paper No. 14853
April 2009
JEL No. I21,J13,J16

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper presents the results from a randomized evaluation that distributed menstrual cups (menstrual
sanitary products) to adolescent girls in rural Nepal. Girls in the study were randomly allocated a menstrual
cup for use during their monthly period and were followed for fifteen months to measure the effects
of having modern sanitary products on schooling. While girls were 3 percentage points less likely
to attend school on days of their period, we find no significant effect of being allocated a menstrual
cup on school attendance. There were also no effects on test scores, self-reported measures of self-esteem
or gynecological health. These results suggest that policy claims that barriers to girls' schooling and
activities during menstrual periods are due to lack of modern sanitary protection may not be warranted.
On the other hand, sanitary products are quickly and widely adopted by girls and are convenient in
other ways, unrelated to short-term schooling gains.


Emily Oster
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
eoster@uchicago.edu

Rebecca Thornton
University of Michigan
426 Thompson St.
Ann Arbor, MI 48106
rebeccal@umich.edu
1    Introduction

Over the past several decades, there has been considerable attention placed on increasing schooling

in developing countries. Girls’ schooling may be particularly important since many studies suggest

an effect of female schooling on health, wealth, empowerment, and the health and schooling

outcomes of girls’ own children later (Behrman and Rosenzweig 2002; Behrman and Wolfe 1989;

Wolfe and Behrman 1987; Glewwe 1999). Historically, there has been a gender gap in education

throughout developing countries, as measured by literacy, enrollment rates, and total years of

schooling. While primary school enrollment rates have become fairly equal between boys and girls in

much of the world, there remains a gender gap in the rate of progression to secondary school (King

and Hill 1993). For example, in Nepal, 46 percent of boys enroll in secondary school as opposed to 38

percent of girls (Nepal Demographic and Health Survey 2001; Huebler 2009). Lower educational

attainment among girls may be due to a number of factors such as fewer job opportunities for girls,

parental or societal favor towards boys, or parents who are credit constrained who may be more

likely to invest in their sons (Parish and Willis 1993; Garg and Morduch 1998; Banerjee 2004; Oster

forthcoming; Qian 2008). Girls may also face additional constraints associated with puberty that

may differentially place burdens on them. Consistent with this, later years of primary school - when

drop-out rates are highest for girls - often coincides with the ages of puberty.

         Women throughout the world face challenges during their monthly period. Some of these

challenges are biological or physical, such as experiencing cramps, fatigue, or PMS. Other challenges

may be particularly difficult for women living in developing countries. In many cultures, there are

menstrual taboos or restrictions that limit women’s mobility (Buckley and Gottleib 1988; Block

Coutts and Berg 1994). Another challenge involves managing menstrual blood without modern

sanitary products. In many cases, women use cloths during their menstrual cycle, which must be

washed frequently. For young school girls, limited access to toilets, water, and the lack of privacy,

may make personal care difficult and embarrassing when they have their period, which could result

in lower rates of school attendance or performance.

         Combining these facts - lower secondary school attendance, and puberty onset, a number of

organizations have suggested that menstruation, in particular, may drive dropout and low

attendance rates at school. These organizations have estimated large effects of menstruation on girls’


                                                   2
schooling. The typical calculation put forward is that if a girl misses 4 days of school every 4 weeks

(due to her period), she may miss 10 to 20 percent of her school days (World Bank 2005). These

organization have suggested that providing girls with modern sanitary products may help them to be

able to attend school during their periods, thereby increasing attendance rates of girls and reducing

the gender gap (LaFraniere 2005, Tjon a Ten 2007, Mawathe 2006). There have been a number of

projects initiated by NGOs and sanitary product manufacturers to increase availability of these

products in developing countries (Deutsch 2007, Callister 2008, Cooke 2006). On the other hand,

while management of menstrual blood may be a barrier to schooling, other constraints associated

with menstruation may be more of a barrier to schooling than lack of sanitary products. Existing

evidence of girls missing school during their periods come from either case studies or self-reported

data asking girls whether or not they miss school due to menstruation (see for example Beyene 1989;

Herz 1991; Mehrah 1995; Chung 2001; Bharadwaj and Patkar 2004), which may be biased

self-reports.

         In this paper we estimate the causal impact of the providing modern sanitary products on

girls’ schooling. In this evaluation we enrolled a sample of 198 adolescent girls and their mothers in

four schools in Chitwan, Nepal and randomized (at the individual level) allocation of menstrual cups

to half of the sample. A menstrual cup is a small, silicone, bell-shaped device which is used

internally during menstruation; the cup fills, and must be emptied and washed approximately every

twelve hours. With proper care, it is reusable for up to a decade. We collected baseline and follow-up

surveys as well as monthly time diaries recorded by the girls. We also collected official school records

and made unofficial attendance checks to measure the effects on school outcomes.

         In contrast to existing claims about menstruation and education, we do not find evidence

that menstruation technology affects school attendance. In our preferred specification, we find that

girls who do not have access to menstrual cups are 2.6 percentage points less likely to be in school on

days they are menstruating. Although this is smaller than the 10-20% estimates by policy makers, it

is still could be considered a substantial effect on these days. However, we find no significant effect of

providing menstrual cups on girls attendance and can reject even very small effects. With 95%

confidence we can reject gains in schooling of 0.5 total days gained among girls in the treatment

group per academic year. Similarly, we find no effects of being given a menstrual cup on test scores.

This is not due to low adoption of the cup: 60% of the treatment girls report using the cup by six

                                                    3
months into the study. The low impact of modern sanitary products may be due, in part, to the fact

that sanitary products only help with management of menstrual blood, rather than cramps or

fatigue. Girls in our study report that the primary reason they miss school during their periods is

due to cramps.

         Despite the lack of schooling effects, this study does support some value to these products.

Among the treatment girls, 61 percent ever used the cup between the baseline and follow-up

meetings and take-up among the control girls who were later given the cup was similarly high. In

addition to reporting ease and convenience with mobility and management of menstrual blood, girls

who were in the treatment group spent 20 minutes per day less doing laundry on days they had their

period. Our results suggest that there are indeed barriers for girls related to menstruation. However,

merely providing modern sanitary products to girls may not be the solution to removing or reducing

these barriers.

         We proceed as follows: we first describe the experimental design and data in Section 2.

Section 3 presents the empirical strategy. Section 4 presents the results and Section 5 presents a

discussion of non-schooling effects of menstrual cup allocation. Section 6 concludes.



2     Experimental Design, Survey and Data

2.1   Research Design and Timeline

The study began in November, 2006 and included four schools in and around Bharatpur City in

Chitwan District, Nepal; of these, two were urban schools and two were peri-urban. From school

rosters of girls who were enrolled in school at the beginning of the school year, 60 seventh-grade and

eighth-grade girls from each school were invited, with their mothers, to participate in the study.

Participation in the study was contingent on attendance at the first study meeting at which time

girls received pens and stickers, and mothers received 100 Nepali Rupees ($1.45). If a mother was not

available, girls could bring an older female relative or guardian to the meeting. Column 1 of Panel A

of Table 1 shows the total number of girl participants in each school; between 7 and 12 of the invited

students in each school were not able to attend the meeting and therefore did not participate in the

study (Approximately 17.5 percent across all schools). Columns 2 and 3 in Panel A show the

composition of the older female participants: 79% of girls participated with their mothers.


                                                  4
          At the initial meeting, a baseline survey was administered to both girls and their mothers.
The survey included questions on basic demographics, schooling, menstruation, and self-esteem. At
the end of the initial meeting, the randomization was carried out. Girls had been given identification
numbers, and the randomization was done with a public lottery, drawing twenty-five numbers out of
a bag. Girls whose numbers were drawn were assigned to the treatment group with their mother or
guardian (we did not randomize girls and their mothers separately). The treatment girls were asked
to remain at the meeting and each treatment girl and her female guardian were given a menstrual
cup. A nurse gave detailed instructions to those in the treatment group on the use of the menstrual
cup.1
          At the meeting, girls were given a booklet of diaries for each month. Diaries consisted of
three main sections. First, a calendar in which girls would circle the days that they begin and end
their period each month. Second, a chart for the first 6 days of each month in which girls would
record their activities for each hour of the day categorized into predefined categories (e.g., cooking,
playing with friends, taking care of others, doing housework, doing laundry, doing agricultural work,
doing homework, being at school, watching tv). The third section asked specific questions for each of
the first six days (i.e. time of arrival and departure at school) as well as questions on menstruation
(i.e. if the girl had her period). Girls were trained how to fill out these diaries at the initial meeting.
          After the initial meeting girls were followed for approximately fifteen months (through
January, 2008). During this time, there was an in-school nurse visit approximately once per month,
at which time girls were also given the opportunity to ask questions. In addition, at each nurse visit,
the diary for that month was reviewed and corrected with the girl if there were any inconsistencies or
problems.
          In February, 2008 a second meeting was held in each school. At this meeting a follow-up
survey, similar to the baseline survey, was administered. At this meeting the control girls and their
mothers or female guardians were given the menstrual cup. One hundred and eighty-three of the
girls in the study attended the follow-up meeting. Of the 15 girls not able to attend the meeting all
but one were interviewed by enumerators at a later date (these included 7 treatment and 7 control
girls). Questions from the baseline and follow-up surveys allow for measuring changes in behaviors
and attitudes in response to being allocated a menstrual cup. In both surveys, girls were asked
questions about their school attendance and performance, as well as measures of self-esteem,
   1
     One of the mother-daughter pairs randomized to the treatment group decided not to accept the menstrual cup. We
analyze the intention to treat effect, and keep this girl in our sample for analysis. This girl and her mother were each
interviewed at the follow-up survey.



                                                           5
empowerment, and health. We discuss construction of indexes of these measures below. After the
final meeting, nurse visits to the schools continued for three months to observe the timing of
menstrual cup take-up among the control girls.


2.2    Sanitary Product and Menstrual Cup Use

Among our sample, the average age of menstruation is 12.8, with 87% of girls having had their
period at the baseline survey (Table 1). Use of sanitary pads is not very common; only 25% of the
girls had ever used them, and only 2% reported using them regularly. The primary sanitary
protection is rags. In contrast to Nepal, most women in industrialized countries use tampons and
sanitary napkins. However, these products might not be the most suitable for school girls in
developing countries such as Nepal. Each girl would need a large and continuous supply of these
products which would not be feasible for most of these girls because the products are not available or
are unaffordable. In addition, the product would need to be disposed of, which raises sanitary issues
and limits the ability to keep the period private.2 Another benefit to using a menstrual in the
context of an evaluation of sanitary products is that girls are not as likely to share the products,
thus reducing the chances for contamination in the experiment. The girls were given instructions not
to share and there was only one cup given per girl, rather than a supply of pads that might be more
prone to sharing across treatment and control groups.
          The sanitary technology we use in this project is a menstrual cup, specifically the MoonCup
brand cup, shown in Figure 1.3 The cup is a small, silicone, bell-shaped cup which is inserted in the
vagina to collect menstrual blood. For most women, the cup is emptied approximately every twelve
hours during menstruation. With proper care, the cup is re-usable for up to a decade. There is no
risk of Toxic Shock Syndrome, and generally no risk of complications from the cup. This menstrual
cup has been FDA approved in the United States.


2.3    Sample Characteristics and Data

Panel B of Table 1 presents some baseline demographic summary statistics for the girls. The average
age is 14, and girls are evenly divided between the 7th and 8th grades, as was designed by the
stratified randomization. Education levels of parents is quite low - on average mothers have only
   2
     When the girls were asked why they do not use pads, availability or knowledge of pads is the largest barrier stated
(56 percent). Approximately 19 percent report that pads are uncomfortable and 11 percent report that their parents do
not approve. Very few, only 2 percent, report that money is a barrier to purchasing pads. However, it is not clear that
even if these pads were available, if the girls would be able to afford them.
   3
     For more information, see http://www.mooncup.co.uk/ .


                                                           6
completed 2.7 years of schooling with fathers completing 5.6 years of schooling. The four schools are
located in both peri-urban and rural communities and agriculture is important in the households. On
average, households own 2.2 chickens, 0.9 water buffalo and 2 sheep. This is also evident in the fact
that only 66 percent of fathers and 32 percent of mothers work for pay. Girls also sometimes work for
pay - 22 percent report doing so. In our sample, approximately 47 percent households report being
of high Hindu caste, 13 percent report being of a Tibetan or Hills ethnic group, 6.8 percent report
belonging to a low Hindu caste, 4.7 percent report being Newari, and 28 percent report being Tharu.
Despite the large differences in ethnicity, the majority, 92 percent, practice the Hindu religion.
           In addition to data collected directly from the girls, official school records of test scores and
attendance were collected for each student in school for the academic years prior and
post-intervention. Attendance was recorded for each day indicating if the school was closed (for
example a holiday or due to strikes), or if a student was present or absent. This information is
typically recorded by the teacher and then stored in the head teachers office after the end of the
school year. Across the four schools, in the pre-intervention academic year, there were between 145
and 169 days of instruction. This does not differ greatly from the United States where there is
usually 180 days of instruction per year. In these official data, students were marked present 85.8
percent of the time.
           Our project also made a series of unannounced visits during the school year to collect
attendance data. These visits were randomly assigned between 8:00 am to 3:00 pm and were made
two times per month for approximately 10 months. Based on these random attendance checks, girls
were recorded present 86 percent of the time. Finally, we use a third source of attendance data: the
time diaries recorded by the girls themselves. In these diaries, on average, girls reported going to
school 51 percent of the time.4 It is reasonable that the attendance rates from the time diaries are
significantly lower than both the official and unofficial measures of attendance given that these
questions were not conditional on the day (girls answered these questions on Saturday) and whether
school was closed for a holiday or exam.
           It is worth noting that these three measures of attendance differ due to differing reporting
mechanisms and reporting times. The comparisons between each attendance measure are presented
   4
     School attendance was recorded in two different ways on the time diaries. First, girls recorded their activities each
hour of the day, including a category indicating “being in school”. The second way attendance was recorded was by
explicitly asking if the girl went to school on that day, and if so, at what time did she arrive and what time did she leave.
These measures have a correlation coefficient of 0.88. We use a combination of these attendance measures which marks
a girl present if the girl answered that she was in school for either of these questions. Results in the paper are robust to
using either measure of attendance.



                                                             7
in Appendix A on days that we have multiple observations.5


3       Empirical Strategy and Cup Adoption

3.1     Empirical Strategy

A standard analysis for a randomized evaluation involves comparing the difference in mean of an
outcome variable between the treatment and control groups. The randomized allocation of the cup
allows for non-biased estimates of the difference between treatment and control girls. However, we
have two ways to make our estimates more precise with difference-in-difference estimates: first, we
use data from before the intervention as a control and second we use data during menstrual days and
non-menstrual days.
          To be precise, for the analysis, in some cases we have data before and after the intervention;
in this case we estimate effects of being allocated a menstrual cup as a difference-in-difference
estimate, before and after the intervention between treatment and control girls. We estimate:


                          Yit = α + δ1 T reatment · Af terit + δ2 Af terit + γi + it                                 (1)


          In this specifications, T reatment is an indicator of being in the treatment group, Af ter is
an indicator that the question was asked at the follow-up survey, after the intervention, and P eriod
indicates if the girl had her period on a particular day. We include individual fixed effects and
cluster standard errors for each girl. The coefficient of interest is δ1 which indicates the impact of
being allocated to the treatment group.
          In other cases, we have daily data available only after the intervention. In that case, we
utilize the fact that we know the days that girls are menstruating and estimate the
difference-in-difference between the treatment and control girls on days they have, and do not have
    5
     Official and unofficial attendance (random checks), matched 87 percent of the time. Given the variation in times
students arrive or leave school and that random attendance checks occurred throughout the day, it is not surprising that
some observations do not match. Unfortunately, we do not know what time the official attendance was recorded nor what
time the girl would have reported arriving or leaving school. Of the five random checks that coincided with the first six
days of the month when time diaries were recorded, unofficial attendance and time diaries reported by girls matched 80
percent of the time. In all but one of the cases, the reported arrival time or leaving time was within one to two hours of
the unannounced visit. Official attendance and time diary attendance matched 69 percent of the time, with the majority
of errors being when a girl recorded being present and the school reported being closed or not having a regular school
day.




                                                            8
their periods. More specifically, we estimate the following:


                          Yit = α + β1 T reatment · P eriodit + β2 P eriodit + γi + it                                (2)


            In the case where we have daily data - specification (2) - we include month, year, and day of
week fixed effects.6


3.2      Baseline Characteristics by Treatment Status

Estimating the causal impact of being allocated a menstrual cup on schooling relies on the
identifying assumption that treatment and control girls are similar, except that the treatment girls
were given menstrual cups. The treatment and control group were generally balanced on observable
characteristics (Table 2). There was no difference in previous use of menstrual pads, or whether a
girl’s father had knowledge of when the girl got her period. Treatment girls have similar baseline test
scores as control girls and have roughly the same rates of school attendance, although treatment girls
attend approximately 1.3 percentage points more than control girls.
            Treatment girls were ten percentage points more likely to have started their periods. Given
the small sample size, it is not surprising that there are some statistically significant differences
between the treatment and the control groups. However, if in the unlikely case that girls who had
begun their periods were in someway able to influence the survey team to enroll them into the
treatment, this would threaten the validity of the randomization and identification strategy for
measuring the causal effect of having menstrual cups. There are several reasons why we believe this
should not be a concern. First, the difference between the likelihood of menstruating among the
treatment and control girls was only significantly different in one of the schools. The results in this
paper are robust to excluding this school. Second, the randomization was a public lottery in front of
all of the mothers and girls in which identification numbers were written down immediately. The
public nature of the lottery makes it difficult for girls to “game the system” in order to be included
in the treatment group. In addition, girls and their mother did not know about the menstrual cup
prior to the lottery and thus would not have incentive to try to game the system. Third, only 87
percent of the mothers or guardians were still menstruating and we find no significant difference of
the likelihood of menstruating among the treatment women and control women.
            Our identification strategy (discussed below) involves comparing treatment and control girls
  6
      Results are robust to a similar specification using date rather than day of week fixed effects (Results not shown).



                                                             9
either before and after the intervention, or between days when they had or did not have their period.
We include individual fixed effects in each estimate; thus, any remaining individual differences
between the treatment and the control group will be differenced out.


3.3   Adoption of the Menstrual Cup

Among girls in the treatment group, adoption of the menstrual cup was relatively high. Figure 2
shows the use of the menstrual cup among the treatment girls in the sample, beginning two months
after introduction, January 2007 continuing through January 2008. These usage data were recorded
by the nurse on monthly school visits. Usage of the menstrual cup increases dramatically in the first
six months, from 10% in January to 60% in June. After this, usage is fairly constant, with little
movement from June 2007 to January 2008.
         Additional evidence that girls in the treatment group used the menstrual cup come from the
baseline and follow-up surveys. Girls were asked “Girls use different methods to soak up the blood
during their period. Which methods do you normally use?”. If girls reported using any pads, they
would be asked how many pads they used during their period. If girls reported using any rags during
their period, they were asked how many rags they normally use during their period. Table 3 presents
the difference-in-difference estimate of the impact of being allocated a menstrual cup on reported
uses of sanitary products. The main effect of being allocated the menstrual cup was a substitution
with rags. Treatment girls were 35 percentage points less likely to be using rags after the
intervention with no statistically significant reduction in use of pads. It should be noted that overall
use of rags is quite high (85 percent) in comparison to the lower use of pads (26 percent). On
average, treatment girls report washing washing one less rag per menstrual cycle than the control.
         In sum, we see that girls in the treatment group on average adopted the menstrual cups and
substituted away from rags. We next turn to estimating the causal effects of being in the treatment
group on schooling.


4     Effects of Menstrual Cup Allocation

4.1   Schooling

Table 4 presents the effects of being allocated menstrual cups on daily school attendance as
measured by three different sources of attendance data: official, unofficial and time diary data. Each
column represents OLS regressions after the intervention that compare girls in the treatment group


                                                   10
and the control group when they have and do not have their period.
          Using official school data - where we have daily attendance observations - girls who were not
given a menstrual cup are 2.6 percentage points less likely to attend school on days they are
menstruating (Table 4, Panel A, Column 1). Time diary data also indicates a negative effect of
menstruating on school attendance: the effect is approximately twice that of the official data at
0.054. In addition to school days lost, girls in the control group report being in school approximately
21 minutes less when they have their period (Table 4, Panel A, Column 4). It should be pointed out
that the random attendance checks indicate no significant difference between attendance of girls
when they have their period and when they do not, although the sample size is relatively small and
the confidence interval is wide (Table 4, Panel A, Column 2).
          Despite the difference in school attendance between days when girls have their period and
days when they do not, we find no significant treatment effects of being allocated the menstrual cup.
In our preferred specification, where we have the most attendance observations (Table 4, Panel A,
Column 1), the point estimates of the treatment effect on official attendance is close to zero (-0.007;
standard error 0.017), and we can reject an effect on attendance over 0.021 percentage points with
95% confidence. The treatment effect on random attendance checks is also close to zero, with a
negative point estimate of -0.08 (Column 2). We can reject a treatment effect on the random
attendance checks of anything over 0.027 with 95% confidence. The treatment effect using the
self-reported diaries is slightly higher, but is still not significantly different than zero (0.024, standard
error 0.041). However, the confidence interval is wider and we can only reject an effect over 0.10 with
95% confidence. Similarly, the effect of being allocated a cup on time in school reported by girls in
diaries is not statistically different than zero, but the confidence interval of the treatment effect is
relatively larger (Column 4).7
          While girls are more likely to miss school on days of their period, these effects are not as
large as policy makers and advocates put forward. Using the point estimates in our specification
from official attendance data, girls miss approximately 0.64 days of school per year due to their
period (180 days * 4.5 period days * 0.026 days lost during periods * 0.86 non-period attendance
   7
     Given that not all girls in the treatment group were actually using the cup each month, the intention to treat
estimates may underestimate the effects on girls who were using the cup. However, if those who benefit most from using
cup are more likely to adopt (for example, if they work more for pay or if they have more to gain because they have longer
or heavier periods), the treatment on the treated estimates are likely be biased upward. We estimate the treatment on
the treated effects of menstrual cup use by instrumenting use by being assigned to the treatment group in which case
the effects on official and unofficial attendance are -0.042 and -0.095 respectively (standard errors 0.060 and 0.223) and
are not statistically significantly different from zero. The program effect on attendance measured by the time diaries is
slightly larger, 0.111, with a standard error of 0.127 (Results not shown).



                                                           11
rate /28 period days per month). Even in calculating school days missed from the time diary data
only yields 1.3 days of school missed per month.
         In terms of the effects of the menstrual cup, our preferred estimate suggests that at most,
providing modern sanitary products results in a 0.021 percentage point increase in the likelihood of
attendance on school days when girls have their period. This translates to at most, a gain of 0.5 days
of school per year (or 0.003 years of school). For an intervention to increase schooling among girls,
this is an extremely small effect. In contrast to the effects of providing menstrual cups, other
randomized interventions that reduce the cost of schooling, provide incentives to attend, or improve
health of students, have found much larger gains to attendance. Deworming children in Kenya
resulted in increased attendance of 7 percentage points (Miguel and Kremer 2004) and there were
similar increases in attendance among pre-schoolers in India who were randomly given iron
supplements and deworming medicine (Bobonis, Miguel and Sharma 2004). A program that gave
uniforms to students found an increase in 0.046 years of schooling (Evans and Kremer 2005).
Another program that provided uniforms, textbooks and built classrooms found decreases in dropout
rates and increases in 15 percent years of schooling (Kremer et al. 2002). Providing direct incentives
also result in relatively large attendance gains. Offering merit based scholarships increased school
participation among girls in Kenya by 3 percentage points, or approximately 5.4 days of school
(Miguel, Kremer and Thornton 2008).
         There may be many reasons why girls’ school attendance is lower on days that they have
their period. We have some qualitative evidence as to these mechanisms. Table 4, Panel B presents
girls’ answers at the baseline to why they missed school in the previous academic year during their
period. There were a variety of answers that mainly related to either physical reasons (cramps or
fatigue) or logistical reasons (managing menstrual blood). Many girls, 43.8 percent, listed cramps as
the main reason why they did not want to go to school during their period. We also asked girls how
they managed to change their cloths during school days and the majority (68 percent) indicate only
limited difficulty with dealing with menstrual rags at school. The remaining reported that they go
home to change their rags. This might suggest only limited scope for an impact of providing modern
menstruation products to girls on their school attendance.


4.2   Grades

Given that we do not observe gains in school attendance on days when there is regular classroom
instruction, it is not likely that we will observe substantial direct effects of being allocated a


                                                    12
menstrual cup on gains in school performance. However, there may be indirect effects on school
performance if girls who use the menstrual cup are better able to concentrate during school because
they do not need to worry about changing their rags or the rags leaking during instruction. We
report the effects of being allocated to the treatment group on school performance in Table 5. Girls
were asked at the baseline and the follow-up surveys which division in school they were (1 is the top,
2 in the middle, and 3 is the bottom), up to which grade they believed they would study, if they
thought they were a good student, and if they thought they would make the top division in the next
school year. There is no effect of being allocated the menstrual cup on these answers.
         In addition, we have both baseline and post-intervention test scores for each subject exam.
On average, 89 percent of the girls took the post-intervention exam. The likelihood of taking the
exam was not affected by being in the treatment group (Table 5, Panel B, Column 1). For those who
did take the exam, we standardize each exam by the mean and standard deviation of the girls in the
control group, for each school and grade (due to the different tests). There is no significant impact of
being assigned to the treatment group on normalized test scores.


5    Benefits of Menstrual Cups?

We find no direct benefits of being allocated menstrual cups on school attendance or test scores.
Moreover, we can reject program effects larger than a 0.021 percentage point gain, which is
equivalent to 0.5 additional days of school. However, the girls appeared to have liked the cup as
revealed by high adoption rates. In the follow-up survey 61 percent of the treatment girls reported
that they would use the cup in the future and in nurse visits 3 months after the follow-up survey, 61
percent of the treatment girls and 56 percent of the control girls reported using the cup. Our data
reveal that rather than changes in schooling behavior, the primary benefits of the menstrual cup
were related to increased convenience of menstrual blood management and increased mobility.
         Qualitatively, when asked what the good things were about the menstrual cup, treatment
girls reported that it was easy to use (31 percent), convenient for walking and cycling (14 percent),
that they didn’t need to wash rags (19 percent), and that it was convenient to manage menstrual
blood (25 percent). Our time diary data filled out by the girls throughout the project help to further
quantify the convenience of having a menstrual cup. On days that girls were menstruating, they
spent approximately 22 additional minutes doing laundry and were 18 percentage points more likely
to do any laundry at all (standard errors 4.0 and 0.03 respectively); this additional time spent was



                                                  13
presumably in order to wash menstrual rags. Being given a menstrual cup significantly reduced the
amount of time doing laundry on period days. Girls in the treatment group spent 20 minutes less
time on laundry than the control girls on period days and were 18 percentage points less likely to do
any laundry at all as compared to control girls on their period days (standard errors 4.6 and 0.04).
Thus, menstrual cups entirely reduced additional time for laundry on days girls were menstruating
(Results not shown).
         We find that girls who were menstruating were three percentage points less likely to be in
school on days they were menstruating. There are several mechanisms through which policy makers
have postulated that menstruation and lack of sanitary products may be a barrier to girls schooling.
Some proposed reasons include cultural taboos preventing girls from attending school (Deutsch
2007), reduced gynecological health due to unsanitary cloths, or lower self-esteem or empowerment
that might be related to worries about changing menstrual cloths. While we do not measure the
causal effects of these factors on schooling directly, we find no evidence that providing menstrual
cups affects daily activities, gynecological health, or self-esteem.
         For example, although girls spend approximately 50% less time (10 minutes) doing religious
worship and 50% less time cooking (17 minutes) on days when they are menstruating, there was no
difference on time allocation towards these activities between the treatment and control girls on
period days. Our survey gives insight into why time use on these activities, and others, was not
affected by being given a menstrual cup. Girls were asked whether some activities were limited
during their period and if so, the reasons why. Religious activities such as doing puja (religious
worship) or touching a cow (holy deity) were almost completely eliminated and almost half of the
girls completely eliminated household activities related to food and water (cooking rice, eating with
family, or fetching water) during a girl’s period. When asked why they did an activity less during
their period, the overwhelming response for girls on these activities was “it’s just our culture”. Our
questions do not allow us to understand if girls self-impose these cultural restrictions on themselves
or if they are due to others in society (such as families members). Our results, however, indicate no
effects of modern menstrual products on these type of activities .
         Using follow-up survey questions on self-reported symptoms of vaginal discharge, pain
urinating, having sores or itching, we see little evidence that the menstrual cups had an effect on
gynecological health (either positive or negative). We also find no impact on period-specific
symptoms of cramps or PMS (results not shown).




                                                    14
          Lastly, we asked a number of questions to elicit self-esteem or empowerment.8 For each
measure, we find no significant program impact. However, there are three important caveats to this
analysis. First, our small sample of girls makes it difficult to detect changes with precision. Second,
our follow-up survey was conducted only one year after the menstrual cup was allocated and
self-esteem or empowerment may take longer to change. Third, it is very difficult to quantify
self-esteem and empowerment in the context of a survey instrument and these questions were only
asked on the day of the follow-up meetings, rather than when girls were at home on their own.


6     Conclusion

Policy advocates for girls’ education have suggested large losses in schooling due to menstruation
and the lack of proper sanitary hygiene in developing countries. In this paper we evaluate the effects
of being allocated a menstrual cup among adolescent girls in Nepal. In terms of the effects of
menstruation on schooling, we find that girls are less likely to be in school on days of their period.
However, in contrast to public policy claims that the effects of menstruation on girls’ schooling is
large, our results indicate that the effects are small. Girls miss on average 1.3 days of school over the
course of the year due to their period. Not only are these effects small, but our estimates suggest
that at most, providing modern sanitary products results in a 0.021 percentage point increase in the
likelihood of attendance on school days when girls have their period. This translates to at most, a
gain of 0.5 days of school per year.
          We find no evidence that the menstrual cup increased grades, gynecological health, or self
esteem. However, there were benefits of the menstrual cup and adoption rates were high. However,
the main effects of providing menstrual sanitary products appear to be convenience. Girls who were
given the menstrual cup decreased their use of rags and number of rags washed. They also spend 20
minutes less on laundry because they do not have to wash their rags. They report being able to cycle
with ease, and “forgetting” they have their period. While increasing schooling for girls’ is a priority
    8
      Empowerment statements included: It is wrong to use contraceptives or other means to avoid/delay pregnancy; It
is alright for a couple to kiss before marriage; if they have decided to marry; A husband should make most decisions in
the household; A girl should be married before her first menstruation; Girls and heir families should start looking for
a husband after they get their first period; Women should not be touched during their monthly period; the girl can do
most things as well as other girls. Individuals were asked if they agreed or disagreed at varying levels and responses were
coded from one to five with five indicating more empowerment. Self-esteem statements included: “In the past week, how
many times did you: not feel like eating; feel proud of yourself; feel happy; feel ashamed; feel that you were unable to
express opinions to others; feel pressure to do something you did not want to do; feel free to say what you wanted to”.
Responses were coded as “not at all; Rarely (less than once per week); Some of the time (about 1-2 times per week);
Occasionally (3-4 times per week); Most of the time (5-7 times per week); or Don’t know”.




                                                            15
for development agencies, gains for girls overall well-being should not be underestimated and this
product may be a cheap and easy way to help ease the burden of puberty for girls in developing
countries.




                                                 16
References

 Banerjee, Abhijit, “Educational Policy and the Economics of the Family,” Journal of
 Development Economics, 2004, 74(1), 3–32.
 Behrman, Jere and Barbara Wolfe, “Does more schooling make women better nourished and
 healthier?,” Journal of Human Resources, 1989, 24, 644–663.
     and Mark Rosenzweig, “Does increasing women’s schooling raise the schooling of the next
 generation?,” American Economic Review, 2002, 92, 323–334.
 Beyene, Yewoubdar, From Menarche to Menopause: Reproductive Lives of Peasant Women in
 Two Cultures, State University of New York Press, 1989.
 Bharadwaj, Sowmyaa and Archana Patkar, “Menstrual Hygiene and Management in
 Developing Countries: Taking Stock,” Junction Social, 2004.
 http://www.mum.org/menhydev.htm.
 Bobonis, Gustavo J., Edward Miguel, and Charu Puri-Sharma, “Anemia and School
 Participation,” Journal of Human Resources, 2004, XLI, 692–721.
 Buckley, Thomas and Alma Gottlieb, eds, Blood Magic: The Anthropology of Menstruation,
 University of California Press, 1988.
 Callister, Lynn Clark, “Always Stay in School,” Journal of Maternal Child Nursing, May/June
 2008.
 Chung, C.E., R.D. Straatman, M.Q. Crdova, G.F. Reynaga, S.A. Burchfield, and
 T. Kavanaugh, “Menarche and its Implications for Educational Policy in Peru.,” Girls and
 Women’s Education Policy Research Activity, 2001. USAID Bureau of Global Affairs, Office of
 Women in Development. Boston: World Education.
 Cooke, Jeanette, “Practical Interventions to Meet the Menstrual Hygiene Needs of Schoolgirls:
 A Case Study from Katakwi, Uganda.” PhD dissertation, Cranfield University August 2006.
 Coutts, L. Block and D.H. Berg, “The Extended Curse: Being a Woman Everyday,” Health
 Care Women International, 1994, 15(1), 11–22.
 Deutsch, Claudia, “A Not-So-Simple Plan to Keep African Girls in School,” New York Times
 Company, November 2007.
 Evans, David and Michael Kremer, “The Impact of Distributing School Uniforms on
 Children’s Education in Kenya,” Unpublished Manuscript, 2005. available from:
 http://www.csae.ox.ac.uk/conferences/2008-EDiA/papers/297-Ngatia.pdf - retrieved 20/1-09.



                                              17
Garg, Ashish and Jonathan Morduch, “Sibling Rivalry and the Gender Gap: Evidence from
Child Health Outcomes in Ghana,” Journal of Population Economics, 1998, 11(4), 471–493.
Glewwe, Paul, “Why does mother’s schooling raise child health in developing countries?
Evidence from Morocco,” Journal of Human Resources, 1999, 34(1), 124–159.
Herz, B., “Letting girls learn: Promising approaches in primary and secondary education,”
World Bank Discussion Paper, 1991, 133.
Huebler, Friedrich, “Nepal: trends in primary education, 1980-2004,” huebler.blogspot.com,
March 2007.
   , “Primary and secondary school attendance in Nepal,” hubeler.blogspot.com, April 2007.
International, Macro, Nepal Demographic and Health Survey 2001.
King, Elizabeth M. and M. Anne Hill, eds, Women’s education in developing countries:
barriers, benefits, and policies, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993. Published for the World
Bank.
Kremer, Michael, Edward Miguel, and Rebecca Thornton, “Incentives to Learn,” Review
of Economic Statistics, Forthcoming.
LaFraniere, Sharon, “Another School Barrier for African Girls: No Toilets,” The New York
Times, December 2005.
Mawathe, Anne, “Period misery for Kenya schoolgirls,” British Broadcasting Company, March
2006.
Mehrah, Golnar, “Girls’ Drop-Out from Primary School in the Middle East and North Africa:
Challenges and Alternatives,” United Nations Children’s Fund, 1995.
Miguel, Edward and Michael Kremer, “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and
Health in the Presence of Treatment Externalities,” Econometrica, 2004, 72, 159–217.
Oster, Emily, “Does Increased Access Increase Equality? Gender and Child Health Investments
in India,” Journal of Development Economics, forthcoming.
Parish, William L. and Robert J. Willis, “Daughters, Education, and Family Budgets:
Taiwan Experiences,” Journal of Human Resources, 1993, 28(4), 863–898.
Qian, Nancy, “Missing women and the price of tea in China: The effect of sex-specific income on
sex imbalance,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2008, 123(3).
Ten, Varina Tjon A, “Menstrual Hygiene: A Neglected Condition for the Achievement of
Several Millennium Development Goals,” Europe External Policy Advisors, October 2007.
Wolfe, Barbara and Jere Behrman, “Women’s schooling and children’s health: Are the effects


                                               18
robust with adult sibling control for the women’s childhood background?,” Journal of Health
Economics, 1987, 6 (3), 239–254.




                                             19
                                                                   Figure 1: MoonCup Photo




                                                                         Figure 2:
                                                                   MoonCup Usage Over Time

                                0.6




                                0.5
         d MoonCup this Month
                        M




                                0.4
Share Used




                                0.3




                                0.2




                                0.1




                                 0
                                      January   February   March     June     August       October        November       December


Notes: This figure shows MoonCup Trial and usage over time. MoonCups were distributed in November or December, depending on the school.




                                                                             20
                      Table 1: Summary Statistics
                            Panel A: Sample Size
                                                        Female
                                    Girls     Mothers Guardians
School 1                             54         41         13
School 2                             48         33         13
School 3                             48         42          6
School 4                             48         35          8
                        Panel B: Demographics
                                    Mean       SD     Observations
Age                                 14.2       1.23       197
7th Grade (0/1)                     0.53        0.5       197
Father Hindu Ethnicity              0.47        0.5       197
Menses at baseline (0/1)            0.87       0.33       197
Age at first menses                 12.8       1.01       172
Ever used sanitary pads (0/1)       0.25       0.43       172
Works for money (0/1)               0.22       0.41       197
Normalized Testscores               -0.04      1.01       197
Attendance (Official)               0.86       0.35     37388

Notes: This table shows summary statistics on sample sizes and basic
demographics. All girls were in either 7th or 8th grade. One girl (and her mother)
assigned to the treatment group did not want to participate in the menstrual cup
study and did not take the menstrual cup. Age at menses and use of sanitary pads
are reported only for girls who have their menses at baseline. Normalized test
scores were based on total score for 2006 test scores and were normalized by the
scores of girls in the control group. Attendance is measured from official school
data before the intervention.
              Table 2: Baseline Characteristics by Treatment and Control
                                              Treatment (N=98)         Control (N=)         Difference
Age                                                14.208                14.237               -0.029
7th Grade (0/1)                                     0.505                 0.557               -0.052
Father Hindu Ethnicity                              0.465                 0.485               -0.019
Menses at baseline (0/1)                            0.921                 0.825              0.096**
Mother menses at baseline (0/1)                     0.898                 0.870               0.028
Works for money (0/1)                               0.218                 0.216                0.001
Ever used sanitary pads (0/1)                       0.215                 0.300               -0.085
Normalized test scores                             -0.072                 0.000               -0.072
Attendance (Official)                               0.870                 0.856              0.013**

Notes: Columns present the average values by treatment and control group among respondents at the
baseline. Normalized test scores were based on total 2006 test scores and were normalized by the scores
of girls in the control group. Attendance is measured from official school records after the intervention.
        Table 3: Impact of Menstrual cup on Sanitary product use and privacy
                                                   Number                  Number
                                      Any Rags       Rags   Any pads       of pads    Any cup
                                          (1)          (2)      (3)           (4)        (5)
Treatment * After                     -0.353***    -1.085**   -0.037        -0.154    0.644***
                                       [0.091]      [0.420]  [0.099]       [0.694]     [0.068]
After                                 0.155***      0.505*  0.186**         0.814
                                       [0.056]      [0.275]  [0.076]       [0.561]
Observations                             396          395      396           395         396
R-squared                                0.61         0.62     0.69           0.7        0.79
Average                                  0.85          2.6     0.26           1.4        0.16

Standard errors in brackets
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Notes: Columns present OLS regressions. Regressions in include individual fixed effects as the
dependent variable contains pre- and post-intervention observations for each girl. Any rags and
any pads represent whether the girl answered to using rags or pads (respectively) normally during
her menstrual period. Rags washed indicaes the number of times rags are washed. Each
specification clusters standard errors at the individual level.
                                       Table 4: Schooling
Panel A: Effect of Menstrual Cup Allocation
                                             Present in School                     Time in School
                                  Official       Unofficial       Time Diary          Time Diary
                                     (1)             (2)               (3)                (4)
Treatment * Period                 -0.007          -0.088            0.024              17.222
                                  [0.017]         [0.055]           [0.041]            [15.656]
Period                           -0.026**          0.037           -0.054**            -21.180*
                                  [0.012]         [0.039]           [0.027]            [11.145]
Observations                       31819            2549             8075                8075
R-squared                           0.11            0.21              0.25               0.31
Average                             0.86            0.86              0.58              175.04

Panel B: Reasons for Missing School because of Period
Cramps                                        43.82
Cramp and bleeding                             7.87
Bleeding                                      13.48
Clothes (Changing/Washing)                    13.48
Don't want to go                               8.98
Difficult to walk/sit                          5.62
Seeing/touching others                         2.24
Have to be outside home                        4.49

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Notes: Columns in Panel A present OLS estimates predicting daily attendance or time in school
(minutes) after the intervention. Controls also include month, year, and individual fixed effects and
each specification clusters at the individual level. Attendance is measured from three sources:
official school records, random attendance checks, and from self-reported time diaries.
                               Table 5: Impact of Menstrual Cup distribution on Academic Performance
Panel A: Self-Reported                  Thinks will Thinks is Thinks will
Academic Performance                    make first     good   study up to
                               Division  division    student   this level
                                  (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)
Treatment * After                 0.1      -0.024     -0.003     0.201
                               [0.261]    [0.152]    [0.072]    [0.155]
After                           -0.063     0.171    0.118**      0.067
                               [0.179]    [0.110]    [0.052]    [0.115]
Observations                     356        336         370       385
R-squared                        0.63       0.69       0.71       0.77
Average                          1.47        0.7       0.91       11.4

Panel B: Academic                Took                                                                     Social         Population/
Performance                     Exam            Total       Nepali        English        Math    Science Studies         Environment Health           Civics
                                  (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)       (6)     (7)               (8)       (9)             (10)
Treatment * After               -0.033          -0.17        0.011         -0.197       -0.315    -0.056 -0.042             0.095     -0.403          -0.256
                               [0.083]        [0.289]       [0.268]       [0.377]      [0.300]   [0.273] [0.276]           [0.281]   [0.494]         [0.485]
After                         -0.165***        -0.036        -0.044        0.047        -0.027    -0.043 -0.026             -0.103    0.059           -0.077
                               [0.058]        [0.184]       [0.168]       [0.208]      [0.188]   [0.201] [0.200]           [0.188]   [0.307]         [0.326]
Observations                      396            352          352            353          352       352    352                352      294              294
R-squared                        0.57           0.75          0.78          0.68         0.72      0.74    0.72              0.76       0.7              0.7
Average                          0.89           -0.09        -0.005         -0.09        -0.07     -0.07  -0.01              -0.16     0.00            -0.06

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Notes: Columns present OLS regressions. Regressions include individual fixed effects as the dependent variable contains pre- and post-intervention
observations for each girl. Each specification clusters standard errors at the individual level. Test scores are normalized by the scores of comparison girls
for each grade and subject of the exam.
       Appendix A: Comparing Measures of Attendance
                                                          Obs      Percent
        Official            Unofficial                     (1)       (2)
             Matched attendance                           2186      0.87
        Closed                Absent                        8       0.00
        Closed               Present                       128      0.05
        Absent               Present                        78      0.03
        Present               Absent                       119      0.05

     Time Diary           Unofficial                       (1)        (2)
           Matched attendance                              147       0.80
       Absent              Present                          16       0.09
       Present              Absent                          20       0.11

     Time Diary            Official                        (1)        (2)
           Matched attendance                             6,318      0.69
       Absent              Present                         247       0.03
       Present              Closed                        2365       0.26
       Present              Absent                         250       0.03

Notes: Observations are at the respondent-day level. Attendance comes from
three main sources: Official school records where teachers recorded whether
each student was present or absent or if school was closed. Unofficial
attendance checks on randomly assigned days and time from the
Menstruation project team. Time diaries which were self-administered on the
first 6 days of each month for approximately 10 months which asked 1) if
girls had gone to school that day and 2) recorded school attendance based off
of recorded daily activities for each hour. There was some discrepancies for
the time diary measures, although the two attendance measures have a
correlation coefficient of 0.88. Official and unofficial attendance records
rates only on days where school was not marked as being closed. Time
diaries measures rates of attendance for each day.
