                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE INVESTMENT STRATEGIES OF SOVEREIGN WEALTH FUNDS

                                          Shai Bernstein
                                           Josh Lerner
                                         Antoinette Schoar

                                        Working Paper 14861
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14861


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2009




We thank Harvard Business School’s Division of Research for financial assistance and various audiences
for helpful comments. Chris Allen and Jacek Rycko provided excellent research assistance. All errors
and omissions are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Shai Bernstein, Josh Lerner, and Antoinette Schoar. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Investment Strategies of Sovereign Wealth Funds
Shai Bernstein, Josh Lerner, and Antoinette Schoar
NBER Working Paper No. 14861
April 2009
JEL No. G23,G24,H11

                                                ABSTRACT

This paper examines the direct private equity investment strategies across sovereign wealth funds and
their relationship to the funds’ organizational structures. SWFs seem to engage in a form of trend chasing,
since they are more likely to invest at home when domestic equity prices are higher, and invest abroad
when foreign prices are higher. Funds see the industry P/E ratios of their home investments drop in
the year after the investment, while they have a positive change in the year after their investments
abroad. SWFs where politicians are involved have a much greater likelihood of investing at home
than those where external managers are involved. At the same time, SWFs with external managers
tend to invest in lower P/E industries, which see an increase in the P/E ratios in the year after the investment.
By way of contrast, funds with politicians involved invest in higher P/E industries, which have a negative
valuation change in the year after the investment.


Shai Bernstein                                          Antoinette Schoar
Harvard Business School                                 Sloan School of Management
Baker Library 220                                       50 Memorial Drive, E52-455
Boston, MA 02163                                        Cambridge, MA 02142
sbernstein@hbs.edu                                      and NBER
                                                        aschoar@mit.edu
Josh Lerner
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 214
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jlerner@hbs.edu
1. Introduction
       The role of sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) in the global financial system has been

increasingly recognized in recent years. The resources controlled by these funds—estimated to

be $3.5 trillion in 2008 (Fernandez and Eschweiler [2008])—have grown sharply over the past

decade. Projections, while inherently tentative due to the uncertainties about the future path of

economic growth and commodity prices, suggest that they will be increasingly important actors

in the years to come.



       Despite this significant and growing role, financial economists have devoted remarkably

little attention to these funds. While the investment behavior of financial institutions with less

capital under management, such as hedge and private equity funds, have been scrutinized in

hundreds of articles, only a handful of pieces have sought to understand sovereign funds. The

lack of scrutiny must be largely attributed to the deliberately low profile adopted by many SWFs,

which makes systematic analysis challenging.



       In this paper, we analyze whether there exist differences in investment strategies and

performance across sovereign wealth funds, focusing on their direct private equity investments.

Since it is generally believed that the private equity market is characterized by greater

information asymmetries than public markets, differences among institutions should be most

pronounced here. Moreover, it is one of the few dimensions of these funds’ investments that we

can obtain systematic information on. We analyze how SWFs vary in their investment styles and

performance across various geographies and governance structures.




                                                2
        After merging three publicly available investment databases, Dealogic’s M&A Analytics,

Security Data Company’s (SDC) Platinum M&A, and Bureau van Dijk’s Zephyr, we identify

2662 investments between 1984 and 2007 by 29 SWFs, including acquisitions, venture capital

and private equity investments, and structured minority purchases in public entities. We examine

the propensity of funds to invest domestically, the equity price levels at the time of their

investments, the changes in equity prices after their investments, and the size of the acquired

stakes.1



        We find several interesting patterns in the data:

       SWFs are more likely to invest at home when domestic equity prices are higher, and

        more likely to invest abroad when foreign prices are higher.

       On average, funds invest at significantly lower price-earnings (P/E) ratios when investing

        at home and higher P/E levels outside. This result is mainly driven by Asian and Mid-

        Eastern funds, while the opposite holds for Western funds.

       Asian groups and, to a somewhat lesser extent, Middle Eastern SWFs, see the industry

        P/E ratios of their home investments drop in the year after the investment, while they see

        a positive change in the year after their investments abroad.

       SWFs where politicians are involved in governance have a much greater likelihood of

        investing at home, while those relying upon external managers display a lower likelihood.




1
 Because many of the target firms in the sample are private, we examine the weighted average of
the price-earnings ratio of firms in the same industry, country, and year.

                                                  3
      Once we control for the differing propensity to invest domestically, SWFs with external

       managers tend to invest in lower P/E industries, while those with politicians involved in

       the governance process invest in higher P/E industries.

      Investments by SWFs with the involvement of external managers tend to be associated a

       more positive change in industry P/E in the year after the deal, while for funds where

       politicians are involved, the trend goes the other way round.



       Taken as a whole, two competing interpretations can be offered for these results. It may

be that funds investing more heavily in their domestic markets, particularly those with the active

involvement of political leaders, are more sensitive to the social needs of the nation. As a result,

they might be willing to accept investments which have high social returns but low private ones.

Since the social returns are not easily observable to us, it would appear that these funds are

investing in industries with lower performance. The alternative interpretation would suggest that

greater investment at home is a symptom of poor investment decisions, since the funds are prone

to home bias or else to have decisions distorted by political or agency considerations.



       It is difficult, however, to reconcile the first view with some of the results. In particular, it

is hard to understand why economic development needs would compel firms to invest

domestically when equity prices are relatively higher, which presumably should be a time when

capital constraints are less limiting. Similar, it is hard to explain why social welfare concerns

would lead politician-influenced funds would led to invest in the highest P/E industries,

especially in light of the negative returns that subsequently characterize these sectors. While




                                                  4
these results are only suggestive given the preliminary nature of the data, they raise a number of

important questions about the investment strategies and management structures of SWFs.



       The plan of this paper is as follows. In the second section, we review relevant theoretical

perspectives and the earlier studies on SWFs. Our data sources and construction are described in

Section 3. Section 4 presents the analysis. The final section concludes the paper.



2. Theoretical Perspectives and Earlier Work

       Numerous accounts by both objective observers and practitioners suggest that there is

substantial variation in the investment criteria and sophistication of institutional investors. In

particular, practitioner accounts suggest (e.g., Swensen [2009]), institutions often rely on overly

rigid decision criteria or lack a sufficient understanding of key asset classes. Observers attribute

these failures to underlying factors such as inappropriate incentives—for example, the limited

compensation and autonomy that investment officers enjoy, which leads to frequent turnover,

and a predilection to select ―safe‖ investments even if the expected returns are modest—and

conflicting objectives, particularly the pressures by fund overseers to invest in projects sponsored

by local entrepreneurs, even if the expected investment returns (and in some cases, social

benefits) are modest.



       Recent papers by Gompers and Metrick [2001] and Lerner, et al. [2007] have highlighted

the enormous heterogeneity in investment strategies and ultimately returns across different types

of institutional investors. However, the evidence on SWFs is limited thus far due to many data

restrictions. In addition, SWFs are unique institutions: while these funds manage very large pools



                                                 5
of capital, their objective functions are often quite complex and do not only focus on financial

returns alone. On the one hand, sovereign funds face political pressures to further short-term and

local goals, as suggested in Shleifer and Vishny [1994]: e.g., to invest in local companies, rather

than saving for the long term. On the other hand, as nations become wealthier, their ability to

invest in government institutions grows. Moreover, citizens and businesses are likely to demand

better governmental services. As a result, nations with more wealth per citizen should have better

governance of their SWFs and a greater ability to use SWFs to further long term investment goals,

rather than being captured by government institutions.



       A more focused body of work has looked at the rationales for and against state-owned

banks. These arguments concerning the involvement of the government in the financial sector

can also be relevant for the role of SWFs in an economy. Three alternative theories have

attracted wide currency:

      The development perspective suggests that governments collect savings and direct them

       toward strategic long term projects, overcoming market failures and generating aggregate

       demand and foster growth. Hence state owned banks, unlike private banks, maximize

       broader social objectives rather than just profits (Atkinson and Stiglitz [1980]; Stiglitz

       [1993]).

      The political perspective argues that politicians are self-interested individuals who pursue

       their own goals, and hence state-owned banks enable governments to finance the

       inefficient but politically desired projects, such as maximizing employment or financing

       favored enterprises (Shleifer and Vishny [1994]).




                                                6
      The agency perspective argues, like the development perspective, that state owned banks

       are created to maximize social welfare, but can generate corruption and misallocation

       (Banerjee [1997]; Hart, et al. [1997]). The agency costs within government bureaucracies

       can result in weak managerial incentives (Tirole [1994]). Under this view, state-owned

       banks channel resources to socially profitable activities, but public managers exert less

       effort (for instance, by diverting resources to advance personal ends or by taking steps to

       facilitate obtaining future private sector jobs) than would their private counterparts.



       Finally, a more recent literature looks specifically at sovereign wealth funds. Fotak, et al.

[2008] considers the financial impact of SWF investments in listed companies around the world.

They collect data from Securities Data Company (SDC), direct disclosures of SWFs, and

financial press. Their final sample contains of 75 investments in public firms by 16 SWFs in the

years 1989 to 2008. While they find an average abnormal return of +1% for targets on the day in

which the SWF investments are announced, over two years after the transaction, the abnormal

buy-and-hold returns average -41%. They find that this effect is not related to the size of equity

stake purchased by the SWF, and also does not differ across the various SWFs. They interpret

the results as indicative of the additional agency costs that the SWF impose on the companies

and cause with a deterioration of performance.



       Le Borgne and Medas [2008] consider specifically SWFs in the Pacific island countries,

which are typically used to dampen the volatility of public revenues. While systematic data are

not available, the authors briefly describe the spending rules used by the governments, and the

funds’ governance structures. They suggest that the poor performance of these funds in achieving



                                                 7
their goals is related to the weakness of public financial management systems and the lack of

spending controls. In some cases, the rigid operational rules of the funds hindered their ability to

alleviate revenue volatility.    In other instances, the SWFs focused on achieving ambitious

financial returns, which led in some cases to risky investment profiles, mismanagement, and

substantial losses in assets.



3. Data Sources and Construction

          To analyze the direct investment strategies of SWFs, we combine three sets of data:

information on the SWFs themselves, the direct investments that the funds made, and the

investment climate around the time of the transaction. The data for all the three components are

been drawn from publicly available sources.



          SWF sample construction: We start with a preliminary sample of SWFs by combining

the profiles of the funds published by JPMorgan (Fernandez and Eschweiler [2008]) and Preqin

(Friedman [2008]). In the cases where the two databases use different names for the same SWF,

we employ the fund address and related information to eliminate duplicates. We add five funds

to the sample that were not included in these two compilations but are frequently described as

SWFs in at least one of the investment datasets noted below. This initial search yields a

population of 69 institutions, including some SWFs that have been announced but are not yet

active.



          We then merge this initial sample of funds with the available data on direct investments

and characteristics of SWFs. We are careful to extract investment data for both the SWFs and



                                                 8
their ―subsidiaries,‖ which we define as entities in which SWF has at least a 50% ownership

stake. The two SWF directories and the investment datasets noted below did not always

explicitly note the links between SWFs and their subsidiaries. To extract transactions involving

SWF subsidiaries, we supplement our list of SWF subsidiaries by employing ownership data in

the Directory of Corporate Affiliations and Bureau van Dijk’s Orbis.



       SWF Characteristics: The fund profiles in the JPMorgan and Preqin databases contain

information on the size and operations of the funds. If there was a discrepancy between the two

databases, we reconfirm the accuracy of the information through web searches and newspaper

articles. The key variables collected are:

      Assets under Management—JPMorgan and Preqin profiles contain estimates of fund

       sizes. In case of discrepancy, JPMorgan’s estimate of assets under management was

       given preference. Preqin’s estimate of assets under management was used only when no

       JPMorgan estimate existed.

      The Presence of Politicians in the Managing Bodies—The JPMorgan report emphasizes

       governance structures of funds. We form a dummy variable that indicates if a fund’s

       JPMorgan profile contains evidence of presence of politicians in the governance of the

       fund. For example, Khazanah Nasional’s JPMorgan profile indicates that the fund’s

       board of directors ―has an eight-member Board comprising representatives from the

       public and private sectors. Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, the Right Honorable Prime Minister

       of Malaysia, is the Chairman of the Board of Directors.‖ Similarly, the Alaska Permanent

       Reserve Fund’s profile indicates that the fund’s Board of Trustees ―is comprised of four

       public members, the Commissioner of Revenue and one additional cabinet member of the


                                               9
       governor's choosing.‖ In other cases, the volume indicates that the governance of the fund

       is in the hands of a board consisting of investment professionals and/or outside business

       leaders.

      Reliance on External Managers/Advisors—We create a dummy variable that is one if

       either of our sources contain evidence that the institution relies on external management

       or advisors. For example, the JPMorgan profile indicates that the Hong Kong Exchange

       Fund ―employs external fund managers to manage about one third of the Fund’s assets,

       including all of its equity portfolios and other specialized assets.‖

These measures, it must be acknowledged, have important limitations. First, these are reported as

of 2008: we do not have a time series on the governance of or advisor usage by the funds.

Second, these measures are extremely crude characterizations of the SWFs’ organizational

structures.



       Investment Data: Information regarding SWF target investments is identified in

Dealogic’s M&A Analytics, SDC’s Platinum M&A, and Bureau van Dijk’s Zephyr. All three of

these databases compile information on direct investments by institutional and corporate

investors. Transactions included in the database encompass outright acquisitions, venture capital

and private equity investments, and structured minority purchases in public entities (frequently

called PIPEs, or private investments in public entities). The databases do not include investments

into hedge, mutual or private equity funds, or open market purchases of minority stakes in

publicly-traded firms.




                                                 10
       For each of the three datasets, we run multiple acquirer name keyword searches

individually for every fund in the sample. We also search for investments carried out by their

subsidiaries. Finally, text fields of acquirer descriptions are searched for phrases such as ―SWF,‖

―sovereign fund,‖ or ―sovereign wealth fund.‖ These additional transactions are examined, and if

there is a match in the SWF’s identity (e.g., if there is a slight misspelling of the SWF’s name)

and location, the entries are added to the database. The variables we obtain about each deal are

the announcement date, transaction size, share of the equity acquired, and the country and

industry of the target. In the case of discrepancies across the databases, we use press accounts

and web searches to resolve the differences. Some of the databases include proposed deals that

were not consummated. If the transactions are described in the databases as ―withdrawn‖ or

―rejected,‖ we drop them from the analysis.



       After merging the three databases, we are left with 2662 transactions between January

1984 and December 2007 by 29 SWFs. We confirm that the bulk of the funds that are not

included are either very new (indeed, some had not yet commenced operations by the end of

2007) or very small. Of the 29 institutions with transactions in our sample, 24 are profiled in

either the JPMorgan or Preqin volumes, or in both publications. There exist 23 JPMorgan and 16

Preqin profiles for the funds in our sample.



       In the bulk of the analyses below, we also exclude 36 transactions where the targets were

in Central America, South America, or Africa. This decision reflects our desire to focus on

investments in the major markets—i.e., Asian, Middle Eastern and Western countries (North

America, Europe and Australia)—where the vast majority of the investments are concentrated.



                                                11
        Environment Data: We also characterize the pricing and subsequent returns in the

industry and the nation of the transaction. Ideally, we would have liked to analyze deal pricing

using the actual target firm’s P/E ratio. However, since most SWF’s investments are in private

firms, these data are not available.



        Instead, we use:

       Industry P/E ratios - To obtain a measure of deal valuations, we use the weighted average

        of the P/E ratios of firms in the target company’s industry and company headquarters

        nation. To calculate the P/E ratios for the target countries, we use the P/E ratios of public

        companies in the same industry and country from the Datastream database, dropping

        companies with negative P/E ratios. The main challenge was to get P/E ratios for Middle

        Eastern targets, particularly in the Persian Gulf region. In 73 cases, we could not compute

        a P/E ratio using the Datastream information. Weighted average P/E ratios were formed

        for each target investment at the country-industry-year level (using market values of the

        firms as weights). We used industry classifications based on the Standard Industrial

        Classification scheme2 (for the distributions of investments by industries, see Table 1,

        Panel E). The distribution of P/E values was winsorized at the 5% and 95% level in order

        to reduce the impact of extreme observations. We also construct an approximate

        performance measure for each deal: the change in the weighted mean industry-country

        P/E ratio in the year following the transaction.




2
 We use a broader definition than the 2-digit SIC level since under this classification the number
of companies per industry is very small in some target countries.
                                                 12
       Home P/E and versus Outside P/E - To measure the P/E levels in the home nation versus

        outside the nation, we construct Home P/E and Outside P/E variables using the MSCI

        database (downloaded from Datastream). These ratios are weighted by market

        capitalization and measured at the country-year level. We complete missing country-level

        P/E ratios using the Zawya database and Datastream’s P/E indexes for emerging markets.

        For investments made abroad, the variables Home P/E and Outside P/E correspond to the

        P/E level of the home country of the SWF and the target country, respectively. If

        investments are made at home, the Outside P/E variable equals the weighted average (by

        the total amount invested by SWFs over the sample period) P/E ratios of all countries in

        which investments were made by SWFs, excluding the home country.



4. Analysis

        Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics of the 2662 transactions made by the 29

sovereign wealth funds in our sample. Panel A of Table 1 sorts the funds into three regions: Asia,

Middle East,3 and Western groups. The Western group includes funds from North America,

Australia, and Europe. Our sample consists of seven funds in the Asian group, 15 funds in the

Middle Eastern group, and seven funds in the Western group. The number of transactions of

Asian funds (2046 observations) is substantially larger than the Middle Eastern group (532

observations) and the 84 observations of the Western group.



        One possible explanation for these differences in sample size is that we have only partial

coverage of the deals. However, we believe that this can only explain part of the differences.

3
  We add the single investment by the Venezuelan SWF to the totals for the Middle East, given
the petroleum-driven nature of that economy.
                                                13
More important, we believe, are the differences in fund sizes and the willingness to engage in

direct investments. For example, the average Asian and Middle Eastern funds have $132B and

$124B under management, respectively, and are substantially larger than the average Western

fund ($40B).



       While the sample consists of transactions between the years 1984 and 2007, more than

97% of the transactions are after 1991. While both the Asian and Middle Eastern funds’

investments go back to the mid 1980s, the Western funds’ investments are more recent,

beginning around 2003. Panels C and D show that the vast majority of direct investments of

Asian funds are in Asia itself (75.7%), but only 37.4% of the investments are made in the actual

home nation of the fund. Outside of the region, the Asian funds tend to invest in Europe and

North America. In contrast, Middle Eastern funds invest mostly outside of their region (only

16.5% of investments are at the same region and only 9% of investments are made in the home

country). Most of the investments of the Middle Eastern funds are made in Europe, North

America, and Australia (61.7%). Finally, all of the investments of the Western funds in the

sample are made in the Western region, with 94% of the investments in the home country.

However, we should highlight that the actual number of direct investments undertaken by

Western funds is significantly smaller than Asian and Mid-East ones.



       We find that the average transaction size is $351 million, but there is substantial

heterogeneity between the funds. Middle Eastern funds, on average, have the largest deals, with

an average of $604 million, while Western funds have the smallest average deal size with only

$97 million per transaction. Similarly, the average acquisition stake of sovereign wealth funds is



                                               14
substantial (56.59%). Parallel to above, the average stake of Middle Eastern funds is much larger

(62.2%) than in the Western funds (25.7%), with Asia in between the two.



       Panel F shows that the average P/E level in the industry-country-year of the target of a

SWF transaction is 25.6. The Asian funds invest in industries with the highest P/E levels of 26.2,

while the Western funds’ investments have the lowest industry P/Es. If we measure the

performance of investments with the change in industry-country P/Es in the year after the

investment, Western funds fare best, with an average change of +1.2 following investments,

while the Middle Eastern and Asian have average shifts in P/Es of -1.21 and -1.17, respectively.

For the approximately 20% of the transactions where an equity security was publicly traded, we

also examine the market-adjusted returns in the six months after the transaction (see the detailed

description below). Here, the pattern appears to go the other way, with the poorest performance

by the Western SWFs’ investments.



       The last panel of Table 1 reports variables that capture the governance structure of the

funds. Recall that for each fund, we develop indicator variables for whether politicians are

involved in the board and for whether the fund relies on external managers. About 24% of the

funds have politicians involved in the fund and 28% of the funds rely on outside managers. We

see that both funds with politicians and external managers tend to make larger investments.

Interestingly, when politicians are involved, funds invest more in the home country (44% of the

deals in the sample), relative to funds without politicians involved (only 31% of the

transactions). Funds with external managers involved invest less in the home country (8%)

relative to 36% for funds that do not rely on external managers.



                                                15
          We now analyze whether the characteristics of the SWFs are associated with differences

in their investment strategies. The main dimensions of SWFs that we investigate are:

      1. the geographic region of the funds, that is, differences across SWFs in the Asian, Middle

          Eastern, and Western groups, and

      2. the governance structure of funds, i.e., whether the SWF relies on external managers for

          investment advice and whether politicians are involved in the fund.

We will analyze investment strategies of SWFs based on their propensity to invest at home, the

industry-country P/E levels at the time of the investments, the subsequent changes in the P/E

ratios, and the size of the acquisition stakes of their investments.



          The unit of observation in our analysis is at the transaction level (that is, for a specific

SWF and target), with standard errors at clustered at the level of the nation in which the fund is

based.     In many regressions, we control for the year that the investment is made and the

sovereign wealth fund making the investment.            In most specifications, we use weighted

regressions, with where each observation weighted by the transaction size (transaction sizes are

all expressed in 2000 U.S. dollars). Since we only have sizes for 67% of our transactions, we

impute missing weights by constructing the fitted values from a regression of deal sizes on fixed

effects for the investment year, target industry, target region, and fund. After adding imputed

observations, we winsorize the deal size variable at the 5% and 95% level, in order to reduce the

impact of extreme observations.4




4
    We report unweighted regressions in the Appendix.
                                                  16
Propensity to invest at home

       In order to analyze how funds vary in their allocation of investments between the home

nation and outside, we estimate a weighted probit model where the dependent variable is a home

investment dummy. This dummy variable is one if the target investment is made within the home

nation of the SWF and zero otherwise.



       In Table 2, column (1), we regress the home dummy on indicator variables for the

geographic location of the SWF (Asian, Middle Eastern, and Western), controlling for the home

country’s gross domestic product (expressed using the logarithm of GDP, again in 2000 U.S.

dollars) and GDP growth in the calendar year prior to the year of the investment. The Western

group is omitted from the set of geographic dummies. We find that Asian and Middle Eastern

funds are significantly less likely to invest at home (by 31.4% and 37.4%, respectively) relative

to Western funds. This result continues to holds when controlling for year fixed effects in

column (2). This result might not be too surprising, since SWFs in Asia and the Middle East are

very large relative to the size of the local economies, which is different from the situation for

Western SWFs. So one could conjecture that Asian and Middle Eastern funds are almost

mechanically forced to invest outside their home nations.



       To get a better understanding of the decision to invest in the home nation or invest

outside, we look at how the allocation of capital by SWFs responds to the pricing levels at home

and abroad. As noted above, in case of an outside investment, the Outside P/E level is the P/E

ratio in the target country in the year of the investment. In cases of a home investment, Outside

P/E is equal to the average (weighted by total transaction amounts) P/E ratio in the year of



                                               17
investment of all other countries in which investments were made by SWFs during the entire

period analyzed.



       The results in column (3) show that the Home P/E level significantly affects the

likelihood of investing at home, but in a manner that may be puzzling. SWFs are more likely to

invest at home when prices there are relatively higher. The magnitude of this effect is substantial:

an increase of one standard deviation of Home P/E increases the likelihood of investing at home

by 6.69%. Similarly, higher P/E levels in the other countries are correlated with a lower

propensity to invest at home. An increase in one standard deviation of Outside P/E decreases the

likelihood of investing at home by 3.11%. If we add year fixed effects in column (4), the

coefficient on Home P/E is still positive, but much smaller and insignificant. The coefficient on

the Outside P/E becomes significant at 1% level and the magnitude is larger. Finally, the results

hold even when we add group dummies in columns (5) and (6). We verify that the results hold

with equally weighted regressions in the appendix.



       The cross-sectional results suggest that SWFs invest less at home if their local equity

markets have relatively low P/E levels. One possible explanation for this pattern is that SWFs

shun low-valued local markets because these financial markets are not as well developed. But

this hypothesis has difficulty explaining away the fact that the propensity to invest at abroad

increases as the pricing level in foreign markets rises. Rather, it appears more consistent with a

second explanation: the SWFs tend to ―trend chase,‖ that is, to gravitate to markets where equity

values are already high.




                                                18
The determinants of industry P/E levels, performance, and acquisition stake

       In a second step, we examine whether there are significant differences in investment

strategies across funds. More specifically, we analyze whether funds vary in their propensity to

time industry valuation cycles (measured as industry-nation P/E levels at the time of investment

and the change in P/Es in the year after the investment).



       Industry P/E levels – In Table 3, we focus on the industry-nation P/E in the sector and

year of the transaction as the dependent variable. In column (1), we estimate a weighted ordinary

least squares (OLS) regression of the mean P/E ratio on the dummy denoting whether the

investment is in the home country. Standard errors are again clustered at the level of the country

of the SWF. We find a large negative and statistically significant coefficient on the home

investment dummy (-5.97), with a standard error of 2.6. While Table 2 showed that home

investments by SWFs are more likely when domestic P/E ratios are relatively higher, domestic

markets are still cheaper. In column (2), we see that this result is unchanged if we add dummies

for the different regions in which the SWF is based (Asia and Middle East, with the West again

serving as the reference group). The coefficients on the indicators for Asian and Middle Eastern

groups are not significant and close to zero.



       In column (3), we add interaction terms between the home investment dummies and the

group indicators. These interactions allow us to explore whether the negative home investment

effects varies across the groups of SWFs. We see that the home investment dummy now turns

positive and significant. This implies that SWFs in the Western group choose industries with

higher P/E ratios when investing at home, while both Asian and Middle Eastern funds choose



                                                19
investments with substantially lower P/E ratios at home (the coefficients on the interaction terms

are -6.8 and -8.5, respectively). We also see that the direct effect of Asia and ME is now positive,

which suggests that these funds are investing in targets with higher industry P/E ratios when

going abroad. These results are also significant when we substitute fund fixed effects for group

dummies in column (4).



       Finally, in columns (5) and (6) we add dummy variables for the region of the target

investments, in order to control for overall valuation levels in each region. We see in column (5)

that the coefficient on the interaction between home investment and Asian group does not change

when we include the target controls, suggesting that Asian funds investing at home do so at a

lower industry P/Es than other sovereign funds who invest in Asia. This distinction is less

significant for the Middle Eastern funds: the coefficient on the interaction between home

investment and Mid-East groups drops by almost 80% once we add the target controls. In

column (6), we repeat the same regression but add year fixed effects. The results are unchanged

from column (5). These results are even more significant in the equally weighted regressions.



       Overall these results suggest that funds from different regions (Asian, Middle Eastern,

and Western) do not vary significantly in the average P/E levels of the sectors in which they

invest. However, there is a sharp distinction when looking at domestic versus outside deals. On

average, funds invest at significantly lower P/E levels when investing at home and higher P/E

levels outside. But this result is mainly driven by Asian and Middle Eastern funds, while the

opposite holds for Western funds.




                                                20
       By themselves, these results could be consistent with two separate and diametrically

opposed interpretations. First, SWFs might have lower P/E ratios in their home investments since

they have better information about these markets and thus are able to invest at more favorable

valuations. This interpretation fundamentally relies on the belief that it is possible to time market

cycles. A second, alternative explanation relies on the assertion that P/E levels are true

reflections of the investment opportunities of firms. Under that assumption, lower P/E levels at

home would mean that SWFs are willing to invest in firms with lower investment opportunities

in their home country.



       To shed some light on these two competing interpretations, we now look at the

performance of equities in the industry and country in the year after the deal. If the first

interpretation is true, we should see Asian and Mid-East SWFs outperform at home, while the

opposite would hold under the second explanation.



       Performance – Table 4 is structured to be parallel to Table 3, but now with the change in

mean P/E ratio of firms in that country and industry in the year following the investment as the

dependent variable. In column (1), we regress the change in the industry-country P/E ratio in the

year after the investment on a dummy for home investments. We find that the home investment

dummy is negative but insignificant. When adding indicator variables for Asian and Middle

Eastern groups in column (2), we see that the coefficient on the home investment does not

change. The coefficient on Mid-East groups is negative and significant, which suggests that

overall these groups do not seem to be able to time industry trends.




                                                 21
       In column (3), we now add interaction terms between group and home investments.

Interestingly, the coefficient on the interaction terms for both Asian and Middle Eastern groups

are negative and economically important, but only significant for the case of Asia. However, the

direct group effects for the Mid-East and Asia are now positive and significant. Similarly, the

coefficient on the home investment variable, which captures the change in industry P/E of the

Western groups’ home investments, is significantly positive. In column (4), we again substitute

group dummies with fund fixed effects and see that the signs of the interaction terms remain

unchanged but the significance is higher: domestic investments by both Asian and Middle

Eastern groups underperform their other transactions. In columns (5) and (6), we add dummies

for the target region and the main results are unchanged. The results described here also hold in

unweighted regressions, although some of the interaction terms are less significant.



       The results in Table 4 suggest that Asian groups and, to a somewhat reduced extent,

Middle Eastern SWFs see the industry P/E ratios of their home investments drop in the year after

the investment, while they experience a positive change one year out for their investments

abroad. In contrast, Western groups see a more positive change in industry P/E one year out in

their home investments relative to the ones abroad. These results suggest that while Asian and

Middle Eastern SWFs invest in lower P/E industries at home, they do not seem to have a

differential ability to time these industry trends, since the ex post change in the P/E ratios in the

year after the investment is negative. This finding might suggest that the lower P/E investments

at home for Asian and Middle Eastern groups is a reflection of generally lower prospects for

local firms, rather than informational advantages at home.




                                                 22
       We also undertake a robustness check of the performance regressions, by examining the

returns of the subset of firms that were publicly traded at the time of the SWF investment. We

search the Datastream database for all target companies that were publicly traded, and extract

their monthly returns. We determine the benchmark returns for the stock exchanges in which the

target companies were traded and extract those returns as well. We compute cumulative

abnormal returns relative to the benchmark in the six months after the transaction, which leads to

a considerably larger coverage than one-year returns (many of the 2007 investments did not have

one year of performance data due to reporting delays).



       We estimate in Tables 5 and A-5 weighted and unweighted ordinary least squares

regressions similar to those in Table 4 and A-4, but now with the difference between the return

of the target in the six months after the transaction and the return of the corresponding

benchmark over the same period as the dependent variable. We use 538 observations in these

estimations. We find once again that in the basic regressions that the home investment dummy

has a significantly negative coefficient. When we add interactions between the home dummy and

the group location, we find the home dummy becomes significantly positive. The interactions

between the dummy variables for Asian and Middle Eastern groups and home investments are

again negative. The interaction with the Asian groups is significant across all the specifications

that we estimate. The significance of the interaction with the Mid-East groups falls, however,

when we add controls for the location of the target. While the sample of publicly traded

transactions is considerably smaller, the similarity to the results in Table 4 is reassuring.




                                                  23
        Acquisition stake – Finally in Table 6, we explore how the size of the acquisition stakes

varies between groups. We use equally weighted regressions here, since weighting based on deal

sizes will bias our results. Again, the set-up of the table is parallel to the specifications in Tables

3 and 4. Column (1) shows that there is no significant difference in the size of acquisition stakes

between home or outside investments. However, columns (2) and (3) show that Asian and

Middle Eastern funds tend to acquire significantly bigger stakes in their target companies than

Western funds. We see that Asian funds acquire approximately 30% larger stakes in their targets

companies relative to Western funds, and Middle Eastern funds acquire 37% larger stakes.



       In column (4) we add target region dummies. Interestingly, funds acquire significantly

smaller stakes in Asian countries relative to Western countries (23% smaller stakes in target

companies). This is also true with respect to Middle Eastern target investments, although with a

smaller magnitude. This effect also holds in column (5), when we substitute group dummies with

fund fixed effects, although the Mid-East target variable is no longer significant. Finally, it is

interesting to note that, when controlling for target regions, the home investment dummy turns

positive and significant at the 1% level.



Governance structure and the propensity to invest at home

       We now turn to analyzing whether the variations in governance structures across funds—

that is, whether politicians or/and external managers are involved in investment decisions—are

associated with differences in the investment behavior of SWFs.




                                                  24
       In Table 7, we look at the correlation between the likelihood of allocating capital at home

or abroad and the involvement of politicians and external managers. As in Table 2, we estimate a

weighted probit model and regress a home investment dummy on the same covariates, but add

dummies for politicians’ involvement and reliance on external managers. Column (1) shows a

stark difference between SWFs where politicians and external managers are involved in

investment choices and those where they are not. Funds where politicians are involved show a

36% higher likelihood of investing at home. In contrast, funds where external managers are

involved have a significantly lower propensity to invest at home (a decrease of 26%). These

results are very robust to adding the usual covariates we included before, as can be seen in

columns (2) through (8). Note that the results reported in Table 2 remained unchanged after the

addition of dummy variables for the involvement of politicians and external managers. These

results are also unchanged when we estimate non-weighted regressions.



Governance and industry P/E levels, performance, and acquisition stake

       Industry P/E levels. In Table 8, we investigate whether there are significant differences in

the industry-country P/E levels of investments where politicians and/or external managers are

involved in the fund. In column (1), we regress P/E levels on dummies for politicians and

external managers. We find that coefficient on the politician dummy is positive, and negative for

the external managers one. But the results are insignificant. The same results hold when we add

group dummies in column (2).



       However, when we add a control for home investments in column (3), the estimated

effects for external managers and politicians become significant at the 1% level. These effects



                                               25
are also economically meaningful: funds where politicians are involved make investments whose

P/E levels are 4.5 higher; while funds with external managers have on average a P/E level 5.0

lower. In column (4), we see that these results also hold when controlling for the region in which

the target is located. The inclusion of the home dummy is important because, as we saw in Table

7, funds with politicians involved tend to favor home investments (which have lower P/Es). Once

we control for the investment mixture, we see that funds involving external managers tend to

invest in lower P/E sectors, while politician-influenced ones favor higher P/E ones.5



       Performance. To disentangle the possible differences between the investment strategies

of funds involving politicians and external managers, we also look in Table 8 at the change in

P/E ratios one year out. Column (5) shows that the estimated coefficient for external managers is

positive and significant (2.6). Meanwhile, the relationship between subsequent changes in

industry P/E and involvement of politicians in the fund is the opposite: the estimated coefficient

on the politicians variable is -3.9, with a standard error of 0.6. These results are robust to the

inclusion of group dummies, home investment dummies, and target region dummies, as

demonstrated in columns (6) through (8).        In the unweighted regressions, the results for

politicians are unchanged, but the coefficients on the external managers variable are not

significant. Overall, the results suggest that investments by external manager-influenced funds

are associated a more positive change in industry P/E in the year after the deal, while in funds

where politicians are involved, the trend goes the other way.




5
 However, one should note that these results are not robust to the estimation of unweighted
regressions, which suggest that these findings are driven by larger acquisitions.


                                                26
       It is ultimately difficult to know whether these discrepancies in performance are a result

of differences in the sophistication of the politician- versus external manager-influenced funds,

or whether funds where politicians are involved face more pressures to direct capital to

investments where the social returns are likely to be higher (but the private ones lower). It is

somewhat challenging, however, to reconcile the second hypothesis with the results in Table 2. If

politicians are directing funds to make investments in troubled local companies, we would

anticipate that these investments would accelerate at the times when they were performing the

worst: that is, when the P/E of local firms in the same sector was particularly low. Instead, the

opposite pattern appears.



       Acquisition stakes. In Table 9, the dependent variable is the acquisition stake. As in Table

6, we estimate an unweighted OLS regression. As is clear from column (1), the involvement of

external managers (again, recall this is recorded at the fund level as of 2008) leads to smaller

acquisitions. The coefficient on the external managers’ dummy is -0.13, and is significant at the

1% level. The impact of politicians on the size of acquisition stake is much weaker. While it is

still significant in column (1), its magnitude is substantially lower (-0.03). Moreover, the

coefficient on the politician variable is not significant in the subsequent specifications. The

impact of external managers on the acquisition stake remains economically and statistically

significant when we include group dummies, a home investment dummy, and target region

controls.



5. Conclusions




                                               27
       This paper documents a number of interesting differences in the investment strategies

across sovereign wealth funds and their relationship to the funds’ organizational structures. We

analyze the direct private equity investments of SWFs, since we believe that due to the lower

degree of efficiency in these markets, differences in strategies will be more pronounced here.

Moreover, it is one of the few dimensions of SWF investments on which we can obtain

information.



        Overall we find several patterns when comparing investments at home and abroad.

SWFs seem to engage in a form of trend chasing, since they are more likely to invest at home

when domestic equity prices are higher, and invest abroad when foreign prices are higher. Funds

see the industry P/E ratios of their home investments drop in the year after the investment, while

they have a positive change in the year after their investments abroad.



       SWFs where politicians are involved have a much greater likelihood of investing at home

than those where external managers are involved. At the same time, SWFs with external

managers tend to invest in lower P/E industries, which see an increase in the P/E ratios in the

year after the investment. By way of contrast, funds with politicians involved invest in higher

P/E industries, which have a negative valuation change in the year after the investment.



       Taken as a whole, our results lend support to the idea that high levels of home

investments by SWFs, particularly those with the active involvement of political leaders, are

associated with trend chasing and worse performance. This could be an outcome of less

sophisticated decision structures within these funds or outright distortions in the investment



                                                28
process due to political or agency problems. This interpretation is also supported by our finding

that politician-influenced funds invest in the highest P/E industries.



       While these results are only suggestive, given the preliminary nature of the data, they

raise a number of important questions about the investment decisions and management structure

of SWFs. A logical extension of this analysis would be to investigate the strategies of SWFs

across a wider set of asset classes. Such an analysis, however, would be challenging given the

opacity of many of these funds. More generally, we believe that much interesting work remains

to be done in understanding the underlying investment objectives of SWFs, their investment

strategies, and organizational differences, as well as the constraints they face due to internal and

external pressures. For example, many reports suggest that SWFs are often employed to further

the geopolitical and strategic economic interests of their governments. A recent example is the

emphasis of Singaporean SWFs on investing into India and China, which has been interpreted as

forging strategic ties with the city-state’s larger and more powerful neighbors. In other cases,

political considerations have led to the abandonment of prescient investment strategies, as when

the Norway’s Government Pension Fund caused an uproar in 2006 by shorting the shares of

Icelandic banks. Thus, SWFs present an ideal object of investigation to understand the

interaction between finance and political economy.




                                                 29
                                           References



Atkinson, Anthony B., and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1980, Lectures on Public Economics, London,
McGraw Hill.

Banerjee, Abhijit V., 1997. A theory of misgovernance. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112,
1289–1332.

Fernandez, David G. and Bernhard Eschweiler, 2008, Sovereign Wealth Funds: A Bottom-Up
Primer, New York, JPMorgan Research. 2008.

Fotak, Veljko, Bernardo Bortolotti, and William L. Megginson, 2008, The financial impact of
sovereign wealth fund investments in listed companies, Unpublished working paper, University
of Oklahoma and Università di Torino.

Friedman, Tim, 2008, Preqin Sovereign Wealth Fund Review, London, Preqin Limited.

Gompers, Paul A., and Andrew Metrick, 2001, Institutional investors and equity prices,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 229-259.

Hart, Oliver, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1997, The proper scope of government:
Theory and an application to prisons, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 1127–1162.

Le Borgne, Eric and Paulo A. Medas, 2008, Sovereign wealth funds in the Pacific Island
countries: Macro-fiscal linkages, Working paper no. 07/297, International Monetary Fund.

Lerner, Josh, Antoinette Schoar, and Wan Wongsunwai, 2007, Smart institutions, foolish
choices? The limited partner performance puzzle, Journal of Finance, 62, 731-764.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny, 1994, Politicians and firms, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 109, 995–1025.

Swensen, David, 2009, Pioneering Portfolio Management: An Unconventional Approach to
Institutional Investment, 2nd edition, New York, Simon and Schuster.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., 1993. The role of the state in financial markets, in Proceedings of the World
Bank Annual Conference on Economic Development, Washington, International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development/World Bank, pp. 19–56.

Tirole, Jean, 1994, The internal organization of governments, Oxford Economic Papers, 46, 1–
29.




                                               30
                       Appendix: Discussion of Supplemental Analyses



       We also undertake a variety of supplemental tests to explore the robustness of the results.

In Table A-1, we conduct simple weighted mean tests. As noted earlier, SWFs commonly invest

in private entities. Therefore we use industry price-earnings ratios in target countries to measure

performance. For each target company, we calculate the weighted P/E ratio of firms in the same

industry and country in the year in which the transaction was made. Performance is measured by

the change in the weighted mean of the P/E ratio in the year following the transaction. We

eliminated the small number of transactions in target countries in Central America, South

America, and Africa.



       First, we compare groups’ investments across different regions. Panel A.1 demonstrates

that there is significant heterogeneity between the groups in terms of the mean industry-country

P/E ratios. The Asian funds’ weighted average of P/E ratio level is the highest at 25, relative to

23.48 for Middle Eastern funds and 19.96 for Western funds. Note that the differences between

the reported averages in Table A-1 with the summary statistics in Table 1 are a result of

weighting transactions by deal sizes.      Asian funds invest in higher P/E level industries.

Moreover, Asian funds, similar to Middle Eastern funds, invest in sectors with substantially

lower P/E ratios in the Middle Eastern region and higher P/E ratios in Western targets.



       When calculating performance as weighted averages, we see in panel A.2 that funds in

general face sharp drops in the year following investments. This is especially true for

investments in Middle East targets (the one-year change in industry P/E in the Middle East



                                                31
region is -4.1). We see that the Asian funds perform better than the Middle Eastern group,

although the differences are not significantly better in a specific region. There are no significant

differences between the performance of Asian and Western funds. However, in the non-weighted

mean tests (not reported here), the Western funds outperform the Asian funds. This suggests that

the Western funds are especially successful at selecting small investments.



       We then consider the investment selection and performance of funds at home versus

abroad. As we see in panel B.1, the three groups differ significantly in terms of the choice to

invest at home. While 94% of the Western funds’ investments are in their home country, only

9% of the investments of Middle Eastern funds are in the home country. The Asian funds’

investments are somewhere in the middle, with 37% of investments made at home. Despite

these differences, the P/E levels of industries selected for investment at home by Middle Eastern

and Western funds are not significantly different. However, the Asian funds seem to invest at

home at significantly higher P/E ratios relative to the other groups. When investing abroad, the

Asian funds invest at the highest P/E ratio (25.9, on average) relative to 23.9 of the Middle

Eastern funds. These are significantly different. Interestingly, there are substantial differences

between the P/E levels funds choose to invest at abroad versus at home. Both Asian funds and

Middle Eastern funds invest in industries with significantly higher P/E ratios when investing

abroad, while Western funds invest in substantially lower P/E sectors abroad.



       In terms of performance of investments at home versus abroad, in panel B.2 it is evident

that Western funds significantly outperform the Asian and Middle Eastern funds when we

consider performance at home. There are no significant differences between the Asian and



                                                32
Middle Eastern investments at home. The difference is substantial when we explore investments

abroad. The Asian funds significantly outperform both the Middle Eastern and Western funds

when investing abroad. Finally, Asian and Middle Eastern funds perform better abroad relative

to their performance at home, while the Western funds perform substantially better at home.



       In panel C, we consider the impact of politicians’ involvement in the fund or a reliance

on external managers. Interestingly, it seems that the main impact of external managers or

politicians in terms of investment selection is on the choice of whether to invest at home. The

involvement of politicians increases the likelihood of investing at home: 44% of transactions are

made at home (relative to 31% for funds without politician involvement). However, when

external managers are involved, only 8% of transactions are made at home (relative to an average

of 36% to funds without external manager involvement). Finally, neither the involvement of

politicians nor that of external managers seems to have a substantial impact on the selection of

industries’ P/E levels. However, funds with politicians involved perform worse than other funds.



       Tables A-2 through A-5, A-7, and A-8 repeat the regressions reported in the text, but now

using unweighted data. (Because Tables 6 and 9 use unweighted data, variants of these tables are

not presented.) The results are largely the same. When there are significant deviations between

the unweighted and weighted data, we note these in the body of the paper.




                                               33
Table 1 - Descriptive Statistics



Panel A: Groups
                          Number of           Number of              Managed by           Managed by          2008 reported
                           Funds             transactions         external managers       politicians             size
                                                                         (%)                 (%)                 (BN$)

Asia group                    7                2046                    42.85                    57                 132.7
Middle East group            15                 532                    13.33                13.33                  124.76
Western group                 7                  84                    42.85                    14                 40.874




Panel B: Transactions by Year and Group
                         1984-1990    1991-1992       1993-1994          1995-1996       1997-1998       1999         2000        2001           2002        2003   2004        2005   2006         2007   All Years
Asia group                   41          39                 85              123            151           143           168        117            114         138    168         197    229           332     2045

Middle East group            26          21                 18               22             24           17            25          9             17          17     15          46     73            203     533

Western group                1           0                  1                  2            3             1             0          2              4           9     15          14     17            15       84

Overall                      67          60                 104             147            179           161           193        128            135         164    198         257    319           550     2662




Panel C: Transactions by Target Region and Group
                                                            Asia            Middle East         Europe    North         Central         South      Africa           Australia           All Regions
                                                                                                         America        America        America
Asia group                                                  1505                   32            159       194            6               4             4             141                     2045

Middle East group                                            95                    87            224          78             2            8             12               27                   533

Western group                                                0                      0             4           2              0            0             0                78                   84

Overall                                                     1600                   119           387       274               8           12             16            246                     2662




                                                                                                         34
Panel D: number of transactions by Home/Region Investments
                                                        Home              Region, not     Same          Western        US
                               All Transactions
                                                     Investments            home          Region       Target (%)     Target
                                                         (%)                 (%)           (%)                         (%)
Asia group                           2045                37.4                35.8          75.7           24.1         8.6
Middle East group                     533                  9.0                7.5           16.5          61.7         12.9

Western group                            84                94.0               0.0           94.0         100.0            2.4

Overall                              2662                  33.5              29.3           62.8          34.1            9.3




Panel E: Transactions by Industry and Group
                                                                                                        Transportation,
                                  Agriculture, Forestry,                          Constructio Manufact                  Wholesale Retail                  Finance, Insurance,                   Public         All
                                                                  Mining                               Communications,                                                            Services
                                      And Fishing                                     n        uring                     Trade    Trade                     and Real Estate                  Administration Industries
                                                                                                           Utilities

Asia group                                    7                     38               62            320               445               35       30               671                417            8          2033

Middle East group                             0                     8                16            69                141               5        10               179                102            0           530

Western group                                 1                     5                 2            24                16                3        1                 21                 10            0            83

Overall                                       8                     51               80            413               602               43       41               871                529            8          2646




Panel F: Transactions
                                                            Overall                          Asia Group                         Middle East Group                    Western Group

                                                    N       Mean         Std. Dev       N     Mean        Std. Dev              N     Mean     Std. Dev          N      Mean    Std. Dev

Acquisition Stake (%)                              1998     56.59         39.01       1542    56.15        38.47                405   62.19     39.78           51      25.66    33.96
Deal Size ($MM)                                    1752 351.39           1846.92      1397 305.65         1928.67               304   604.31   1574.89          51      96.66   239.82
Home Investment (0/1)                              2662     0.34           0.47       2045     0.37         0.48                533    0.09     0.29            84      0.94     0.24
Region (not home) Investment (0/1)                 2662     0.29           0.46       2045     0.36         0.48                533    0.08     0.26            84      0.00     0.00
Target Industry P/E Ratio                          2642     25.60         13.48       2034    26.22        13.77                524   23.94     12.93           84      21.03    6.20
Target Industry P/E Ratio -1 year change           2632     -1.17         11.19       2026     -1.21       11.44                522   -1.38     10.78           84      1.17     6.31
Target market-adjusted 6 months return             543      0.06           0.49       388      0.07         0.50                111    0.06     0.49            44      -0.01    0.52

                                                                                                                       35
Panel G: Politicians and External managers
                                            Politicians Involved      No politicians Involved        External managers reliance    No external managers reliance

                                           N     Mean    Std. Dev    N      Mean      Std. Dev       N      Mean      Std. Dev     N      Mean        Std. Dev

Acquisition Stake (%)                      366   49.16    39.19     1625    58.35      38.79         203    42.19       40.28     1788    58.31         38.54
Deal Size ($MM)                            378 705.71    3554.14    1367   250.20      912.45        219    735.92    2567.93     1526    293.33       1715.10
Home Investment (0/1)                      508   0.44      0.50     2146    0.31        0.46         275     0.08       0.27      2379     0.36         0.48
Region (not home) Investment (0/1)         508   0.31      0.46     2146    0.29        0.45         275     0.43       0.50      2379     0.28         0.45
Target Industry P/E Ratio                  506   25.29    13.07     2128    25.70      13.59         272    26.00       13.87     2362    25.57         13.44
Target Industry P/E Ratio -1 year change   502   -2.62    11.17     2122    -0.82      11.18         269    -2.00       12.19     2355     -1.07        11.08




                                                                                                36
Table 2

The sample consists of 2662 investments by 29 Sovereign Wealth funds. It excludes transactions which were withdrawn or rejected.
The dependent variable is a dummy denoting whether the investment target was based in the same nation as the SWF. The variables
Orig log(GDP) and Orig GDP growth represent the logarithm of the GDP in the year of the investment and the growth of the GDP in
the calendar year prior to the investment in the SWF’s home country. Group ASIA and Group ME are dummy variables equal to 1
when a fund is based in Asia or the Middle East. The Home P/E variable is the country-level P/E ratio of home country. The Outside
P/E variable is equal to the target country P/E ratio if investment is not in the SWF’s home nation. If investment is at home, Outside
P/E is equal to the average (weighted by the total transaction sizes of the SWF deals in the sample) P/E ratios of all other countries in
which investments were made by SWFs. The estimation method is a weighted probit model, using as weights winsorized transaction
sizes (converted to 2000 U.S. dollars). The displayed coefficients are marginal effects. Robust standard errors, allowing for data
clustering by the countries in which the SWFs are based, are shown in parenthesis. When year dummies are added, the sample only
includes transactions from 1991 onward.

Dependent Variable : Home Dummy
                                              (1)               (2)           (3)             (4)               (5)             (6)
Orig log(GDP)                              0.058*          0.092***        0.095***        0.125***          0.060**        0.098***
                                           (0.030)           (0.031)        (0.025)         (0.028)          (0.028)         (0.033)
Orig GDP growth                             -0.004            -0.004       -0.015**        -0.030**         -0.007**          -0.012
                                           (0.004)           (0.012)        (0.007)         (0.014)          (0.004)         (0.017)
Group ASIA                               -0.314***         -0.329***                                       -0.307***        -0.272**
                                           (0.063)           (0.099)                                         (0.068)         (0.118)
Group ME                                 -0.374***         -0.333***                                       -0.333***       -0.291***
                                           (0.069)           (0.064)                                         (0.072)         (0.078)
Home P/E                                                                   0.009***          0.006           0.006**           0.001
                                                                            (0.002)         (0.004)          (0.003)         (0.004)
Outside P/E                                                                -0.006**       -0.008***          -0.005*        -0.007**
                                                                            (0.003)         (0.003)          (0.003)         (0.003)
year dummies                                No                 Yes            No              Yes               No              Yes
Pseudo R-Squared                           0.091              0.131          0.07            0.124            0.097            0.135
N                                          2626               2558           2557            2515             2557             2515
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01




                                                                   37
Table 3

The sample consists of 2662 investments by 29 Sovereign Wealth funds. It excludes transactions which were withdrawn or rejected.
The dependent variable is the weighted (by firm value) average of the P/E ratios of publicly traded firms in the industry, country and
year of the transaction. Home Investment is a dummy variable which equals one if the target is based in the same country as the
SWF. Group ASIA and Group ME are dummy variables equal to 1 when a fund is based in Asia or the Middle East. Target Asia and
Target ME are dummy variables indicating that the location of target companies is in Asia or Middle East. The estimation method is a
weighted ordinary least squares model, using as weights winsorized transaction sizes (converted to 2000 U.S. dollars). Robust
standard errors, allowing for data clustering by the countries in which the SWFs are based, are shown in parenthesis. When year
dummies are added, the sample only includes transactions from 1991 onward.


Dependent Variable : Industry P/E Levels
                                   (1)                  (2)                (3)           (4)               (5)             (6)
Home Investment                -5.975**              -5.064*           1.851***       1.965***         2.048***         2.260***
                                (2.595)              (2.592)            (0.556)        (0.381)          (0.535)          (0.391)
Group ASIA                                            0.301            5.618***                        5.814***
                                                     (2.093)            (0.590)                         (0.738)
Group ME                                              -0.713           4.750***                        5.439***
                                                     (1.886)            (0.429)                         (0.472)
Home X Group Asia                                                       -6.813*       -8.383**         -7.435**         -8.937**
                                                                        (3.382)        (3.247)          (3.393)          (3.313)
Home X Group ME                                                       -8.553***       -7.325**          -1.866*           -0.487
                                                                        (0.732)        (2.986)          (1.013)          (3.669)
Target ME                                                                                             -7.478***        -7.779***
                                                                                                        (1.143)          (1.276)
Target Asia                                                                                              0.474             0.163
                                                                                                        (0.348)          (0.209)
Constant                          25.217***         24.907***         19.621***      25.157***        19.646***        25.678***
                                   (0.475)           (1.890)           (0.448)        (0.363)           (0.445)          (0.375)
year dummies                         Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes               Yes
fund dummies                         Yes                No                No            Yes                No               Yes
R-squared                           0.176             0.135             0.137          0.178             0.151             0.192
N                                   2541              2541              2541           2541              2541              2541
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01




                                                                 38
Table 4

The sample consists of 2662 investments by 29 Sovereign Wealth funds. It excludes transactions which were withdrawn or rejected.
The dependent variable is the change in the weighted (by firm value) average of the P/E ratios of publicly traded firms in the industry
and country of the transaction in the year after the deal. Home Investment is a dummy variable which equals one if the target is
based in the same country as the SWF. Group ASIA and Group ME are dummy variables equal to 1 when a fund is based in Asia or
the Middle East. Target Asia and Target ME are dummy variables indicating that the location of target companies is in Asia or Middle
East. The estimation method is a weighted ordinary least squares model, using as weights winsorized transaction sizes (converted to
2000 U.S. dollars). Robust standard errors, allowing for data clustering by the countries in which the SWFs are based, are shown in
parenthesis. When year dummies are added, the sample only includes transactions from 1991 onward.


Dependent Variable : Industry P/E Change
                                    (1)                   (2)              (3)            (4)                (5)             (6)
Home Investment                   -1.925                -2.542         2.393***        2.964***         2.457***          3.039***
                                 (1.438)               (1.613)          (0.471)         (0.238)           (0.477)          (0.228)
Group ASIA                                              -1.729         2.224***                         1.955***
                                                       (1.287)          (0.163)                           (0.295)
Group ME                                              -2.730**          0.882**                           0.927**
                                                       (1.182)          (0.317)                           (0.354)
Home X Group Asia                                                      -5.543**         -5.175**         -6.027**         -5.683**
                                                                        (2.173)          (1.862)          (2.201)          (1.954)
Home X Group ME                                                          -2.794        -4.432***           -1.606        -3.587***
                                                                        (1.888)          (0.219)          (1.817)          (0.521)
Target ME                                                                                                -1.279**          -0.890*
                                                                                                          (0.478)          (0.418)
Target Asia                                                                                               0.735*             0.87
                                                                                                          (0.417)          (0.624)
Constant                            -4.490***         -2.549**         -6.348***       -4.528***        -6.322***        -4.740***
                                      (0.247)          (1.168)           (0.181)         (0.239)          (0.178)          (0.295)
year dummies                            Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes
fund dummies                            Yes              No                No              Yes               No              Yes
R-squared                              0.138            0.113             0.115           0.139             0.117            0.14
N                                      2532             2532              2532            2532              2532            2532
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01




                                                                  39
Table 5

The sample consists of 538 publicly traded investments. It excludes transactions which were withdrawn or rejected. The dependent
variable is the difference between the return of the target in the six months after the transaction and the return of the
corresponding benchmark over the same period. Group ASIA and Group ME are dummy variables equal to 1 when a fund is based in
Asia or the Middle East. Target Asia and Target ME are dummy variables indicating that the location of target companies is in Asia or
Middle East. The estimation method is a weighted ordinary least squares model, using as weights winsorized transaction sizes
(converted to 2000 U.S. dollars). Robust standard errors, allowing for data clustering by the countries in which the SWFs are based,
are shown in parenthesis. When year dummies are added, the sample only includes transactions from 1991 onward.

Dependent Variable : Market-Adjusted Returns (6 months after transaction)
                                             (1)             (2)           (3)                       (4)
Home Investment                          -0.119***        -0.082*       0.584***                0.590***
                                           (0.037)        (0.038)        (0.115)                  (0.117)
Group ASIA                                                 0.037        0.703***                0.677***
                                                          (0.055)        (0.111)                  (0.110)
Group ME                                                   -0.078       0.580***                0.563***
                                                          (0.066)        (0.114)                  (0.111)
Home X Group Asia                                                      -0.680***                -0.703***
                                                                         (0.136)                  (0.140)
Home X Group ME                                                         -0.363**                   -0.567
                                                                         (0.149)                  (0.320)
Target ME                                                                                           0.224
                                                                                                  (0.190)
Target Asia                                                                                         0.04
                                                                                                  (0.025)
Constant                                          -0.036            -0.051      -0.712***       -0.704***
                                                 (0.042)           (0.081)        (0.123)         (0.125)
year dummies                                        Yes               Yes           Yes              Yes
fund dummies                                        Yes               No            No               No
R-squared                                          0.181            0.067          0.069            0.073
N                                                   538              538            538              538
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01




                                                                 40
Table 6

The sample consists of 2662 investments by 29 Sovereign Wealth funds. It excludes transactions which were withdrawn or rejected.
The dependent variable is the share of the target company acquired by the SWF in the transaction. Home Investment is a dummy
variable which equals one if the target is based in the same country as the SWF. Group ASIA and Group ME are dummy variables
equal to 1 when a fund is based in Asia or the Middle East. Target Asia and Target ME are dummy variables indicating that the
location of target companies is in Asia or Middle East. The estimation method is an ordinary least squares model. Robust standard
errors, allowing for data clustering by the countries in which the SWFs are based, are shown in parenthesis. When year dummies are
added, the sample only includes transactions from 1991 onward.


Dependent Variable : Acquisition Stake
                                                (1)               (2)             (3)             (4)                 (5)
Home Investment                               -0.012                            -0.009        0.075***             0.071***
                                             (0.020)                           (0.008)          (0.011)             (0.010)
Group ASIA                                                    0.309***        0.304***        0.530***
                                                               (0.021)         (0.021)          (0.026)
Group ME                                                      0.370***        0.362***        0.494***
                                                               (0.042)         (0.041)          (0.035)
Target ME                                                                                      -0.098**               -0.038
                                                                                                (0.039)              (0.042)
Target Asia                                                                                   -0.226***            -0.237***
                                                                                                (0.013)              (0.010)
Constant                                    0.553***          0.210***        0.217***        0.136***              0.677***
                                             (0.044)           (0.054)         (0.052)          (0.043)              (0.048)
year dummies                                   Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes                   Yes
fund dummies                                   Yes               No              No               No                    Yes
R-squared                                     0.085             0.04            0.04             0.084                 0.134
N                                             1923              1923            1923             1923                  1923
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01




                                                               41
Table 7

The sample consists of 2662 investments by 29 Sovereign Wealth funds. It excludes transactions which were withdrawn or rejected. The dependent variable is a dummy
denoting whether the investment target was based in the same nation as the SWF. The variables Orig log(GDP) and Orig GDP growth represent the logarithm of the GDP in the
year of the investment and the growth of the GDP in the calendar year prior to the investment in the SWF’s home country. The Politicians variable is a dummy equals to 1 if
politicians are involved in the management of the fund. The External Managers variable is a dummy equals to 1 if external managers are involved in the management of the
fund. Group ASIA and Group ME are dummy variables equal to 1 when a fund is based in Asia or the Middle East. The Home P/E variable is the country-level P/E ratio of home
country. The Outside P/E variable is equal to the target country P/E ratio if investment is not in the SWF’s home nation. If investment is at home, Outside P/E is equal to the
average (weighted by the total transaction sizes of the SWF deals in the sample) P/E ratios of all other countries in which investments were made by SWFs. The estimation
method is a weighted probit model, using as weights winsorized transaction sizes (converted to 2000 U.S. dollars). The displayed coefficients are marginal effects. Robust
standard errors, allowing for data clustering by the countries in which the SWFs are based, are shown in parenthesis. When year dummies are added, the sample only includes
transactions from 1991 onward.

          Dependent variable: Home Dummy
                                     (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)               (7)              (8)
          Orig log(GDP)             0.046           0.069*           0.037           0.065*            -0.018           -0.001            -0.021           0.003
                                   (0.048)          (0.042)         (0.044)          (0.036)          (0.032)          (0.030)           (0.029)          (0.032)
          Orig GDP growth         -0.009*          -0.020*         -0.016*         -0.033***           -0.002              0            -0.006**           -0.002
                                   (0.005)          (0.011)         (0.008)          (0.010)          (0.003)          (0.006)           (0.003)          (0.008)
          Politicians             0.360**          0.329**         0.357**          0.323**          0.408***         0.415***          0.427***         0.422***
                                   (0.176)          (0.163)         (0.165)          (0.150)          (0.129)          (0.134)           (0.117)          (0.127)
          External managers      -0.263***        -0.247***       -0.264***        -0.249***        -0.267***        -0.261***         -0.274***        -0.265***
                                   (0.066)          (0.048)         (0.045)          (0.037)          (0.033)          (0.030)           (0.026)          (0.027)
          Group ASIA                                                                                -0.542***        -0.588***         -0.547***        -0.566***
                                                                                                      (0.117)          (0.124)           (0.118)          (0.127)
          Group ME                                                                                  -0.444***        -0.427***         -0.406***        -0.416***
                                                                                                      (0.061)          (0.065)           (0.058)          (0.068)
          Home P/E                                                0.007***            0.004                                               0.005*           -0.002
                                                                   (0.002)           (0.003)                                             (0.003)          (0.002)
          Outside P/E                                             -0.007**         -0.009***                                             -0.006*         -0.008**
                                                                   (0.003)           (0.003)                                             (0.003)          (0.003)
          year dummies                No             Yes             No                Yes             No                Yes                No               Yes
          Pseudo R-squared          0.128           0.173           0.153             0.192           0.183             0.21               0.192            0.22
          N                          2618           2550            2549              2507            2618              2550               2549             2507
          * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01



                                                                                      42
Table 8

The sample consists of 2662 investments by 29 Sovereign Wealth funds. It excludes transactions which were withdrawn or rejected. The dependent variables are the weighted
(by firm value) average of the P/E ratios of publicly traded firms in the industry, country and year of the transaction and the change in the weighted (by firm value) average of
the P/E ratios of publicly traded firms in the industry and country of the transaction in the year after the deal. The External Managers variable is a dummy equals to 1 if external
managers are involved in the management of the fund. The Politicians variable is a dummy equals to 1 if politicians are involved in the management of the fund. Group ASIA and
Group ME are dummy variables equal to 1 when a fund is based in Asia or the Middle East. Home Investment is a dummy variable which equals one if the target is based in the
same country as the SWF. Target Asia and Target ME are dummy variables indicating that the location of target companies is in Asia or Middle East. The estimation method is a
weighted ordinary least squares model, using as weights winsorized transaction sizes (converted to 2000 U.S. dollars). Robust standard errors, allowing for data clustering by the
countries in which the SWFs are based, are shown in parenthesis. When year dummies are added, the sample only includes transactions from 1991 onward.

Dependent Variable:                 Industry P/E Levels                                                       Industry P/E Change
                                            (1)                 (2)               (3)              (4)                (5)              (6)                   (7)            (8)
External managers                         -2.112              -2.102         -5.023***        -4.562***            2.590***        2.884***              2.160***       2.266***
                                         (1.733)             (1.820)           (1.201)          (1.307)             (0.341)         (0.342)               (0.599)        (0.668)
Politicians                                1.923              1.974           4.502***         4.153***           -3.977***       -4.788***             -4.168***      -4.207***
                                         (1.811)             (1.940)           (1.271)          (1.300)             (0.549)         (0.252)               (0.404)        (0.423)
Group ASIA                                                  2.391***            -1.639           -0.803                            0.936***                -0.048         -0.423
                                                             (0.746)           (1.585)          (1.849)                             (0.278)               (0.745)        (0.838)
Group ME                                                    2.707***            -1.761           -0.214                             -0.905*               -2.000*        -2.139*
                                                             (0.621)           (1.739)          (2.153)                             (0.437)               (1.008)        (1.092)
Home Investment                                                              -6.526***          -5.607*                                                    -1.595         -1.749
                                                                               (2.076)          (2.625)                                                   (1.209)        (1.250)
Target Asia                                                                                      -0.162                                                                    0.489
                                                                                                (0.284)                                                                  (0.419)
Target ME                                                                                     -5.433***                                                                   -0.178
                                                                                                (1.267)                                                                  (0.916)
Constant                                24.170***          21.661***         26.756***        26.148***           -4.671***            -4.583***        -3.335***      -3.194***
                                         (0.444)            (0.645)           (1.830)           (2.126)             (0.929)              (0.367)          (0.954)        (0.962)
year dummies                               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes                  Yes              Yes             Yes
R-squared                                 0.105              0.106             0.141              0.152              0.121                0.127            0.13            0.131
N                                         2533               2533              2533               2533               2524                 2524             2524            2494
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01


                                                                                        43
Table 9

The sample consists of 2662 investments by 29 Sovereign Wealth funds. It excludes transactions which were
withdrawn or rejected. The dependent variable is the share of the target company acquired by the SWF in the
transaction. The External Managers variable is a dummy equals to 1 if external managers are involved in the
management of the fund. The Politicians variable is a dummy equals to 1 if politicians are involved in the
management of the fund. Group ASIA and Group ME are dummy variables equal to 1 when a fund is based in Asia
or the Middle East. Home Investment is a dummy variable which equals one if the target is based in the same
country as the SWF. Target Asia and Target ME are dummy variables indicating that the location of target
companies is in Asia or Middle East. The estimation method is an ordinary least squares model. Robust standard
errors, allowing for data clustering by the countries in which the SWFs are based, are shown in parenthesis. When
year dummies are added, the sample only includes transactions from 1991 onward.

Dependent Variable: Acquisition Stake
                                                 (1)                 (2)             (3)              (4)
External managers                            -0.134***          -0.141***       -0.154***        -0.172***
                                               (0.023)            (0.036)         (0.035)          (0.040)
Politicians                                   -0.034*              -0.028          -0.019           -0.014
                                               (0.017)            (0.024)         (0.024)          (0.027)
Group ASIA                                                       0.317***        0.299***        0.533***
                                                                  (0.031)         (0.032)          (0.036)
Group ME                                                         0.372***        0.348***        0.482***
                                                                  (0.047)         (0.045)          (0.038)
Home Investment                                                                   -0.028*        0.056***
                                                                                  (0.014)          (0.016)
Target Asia                                                                                      -0.233***
                                                                                                   (0.013)
Target ME                                                                                           -0.083
                                                                                                   (0.049)
Constant                                      0.563***          0.237***        0.262***         0.180***
                                               (0.035)           (0.059)         (0.057)           (0.045)
year dummies                                     Yes               Yes             Yes                Yes
R-squared                                       0.035             0.055           0.056              0.103
N                                               1916              1916            1916               1916
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01




                                                       44
Appendix

Table A.1 – Weighted Mean Tests

Part A : Where do funds invest?

Panel A.1 – P/E Levels

                                                                     Asia/ME     Asia/Western   ME/Western
                            All Groups   Asia      ME      Western
                                                                     (p-value)     (p-value)     (p-value)
 Overall (mean)               24.371     25.018   23.476   19.957     0.055         0.000         0.000
 Asia Targets (mean)          24.598     24.404   27.021              0.353
 ME Targets (mean)            17.853     18.002   17.814              0.915
 Western Targets (mean)       25.027     26.441   24.204   19.957     0.044         0.000         0.000
 Asia / ME (p-value)          0.000      0.000    0.002
 Asia/Western (p-value)       0.000      0.054    0.321
 ME / Western (p-value)       0.597      0.000    0.000


Panel A.2 – Performance (P/E Change)

                            All Groups   Asia      ME      Western   Asia/ME     Asia/Western   ME/Western
 Overall (mean)                -1.410    -1.002   -2.272    -.216    (p-value)
                                                                       0.084       (p-value)
                                                                                     0.432       (p-value)
                                                                                                   0.053
 Asia Targets (mean)           -1.247    -1.141   -2.569              0.559
 ME Targets (mean)             -4.089    -3.246   -4.317              0.620
 Western Targets (mean)        -1.200     -.644   -1.821    -.216     0.234         0.711         0.150
 Asia / ME (p-value)           0.014      0.271    0.509
 Asia/Western (p-value)        0.949      0.597    0.761
 ME / Western (p-value)        0.009      0.184    0.063




                                                                     45
Part B: How do home and international investments differ?

Panel B.1 – P/E Levels

                            All Groups       Asia        ME     Western       Asia/ME     Asia/Western    ME/Western
 Home Investment (%)           33.5          37.4        9.0      94.0        (p-value)
                                                                                0.000       (p-value)
                                                                                              0.000        (p-value)
                                                                                                             0.000
 Abroad (%)                    66.5          62.6       91.0      6.0          0.000           0.000           0.000
 Industry P/E at home         22.023        22.795     18.387    20.245        0.015           0.017           0.308
 Industry P/E abroad          25.039        25.853     23.928    18.962        0.035           0.000           0.000
 Home/Abroad (p-value)        0.000         0.002      0.002     0.236


Panel B.2 – Performance (P/E Change)

                            All Groups       Asia        ME     Western       Asia/ME     Asia/Western    ME/Western
 Home Investment (%)             33.5         37.4       9.0      94.0        (p-value)
                                                                                0.000       (p-value)
                                                                                              0.000        (p-value)
                                                                                                             0.000
 Abroad (%)                      66.5         62.6      91.0       6.0         0.000           0.000           0.000
 Industry P/E at home          -2.922       -3.210     -3.796     .869         0.701           0.000           0.004
 Industry P/E abroad            -.981        -.171     -2.139    -3.969        0.017           0.096           0.426
 Home/Abroad (p-value)         0.009         0.001      0.261     0.043


Part C : How does organizational structure matter?

Panel C

                         Politicians     No      External       No External        Politicians / No External/No
                          (mean)     Politicians Managers        Managers           Politicians (p-   External
                                      (mean)      (mean)          (mean)                value)       (p-value)
Home Investment (%)        0.442        0.309         0.080       0.364                0.000           0.000
Industry P/E level         24.760       24.359       23.306       24.642               0.686           0.250
P/E Change                 -3.731        -.743       -2.295       -1.237               0.001           0.248




                                                                              46
Table A-2

The sample consists of 2662 investments by 29 Sovereign Wealth funds. It excludes transactions which were withdrawn or rejected.
The dependent variable is a dummy denoting whether the investment target was based in the same nation as the SWF. The variables
Orig log(GDP) and Orig GDP growth represent the logarithm of the GDP in the year of the investment and the growth of the GDP in
the calendar year prior to the investment in the SWF’s home country. Group ASIA and Group ME are dummy variables equal to 1
when a fund is based in Asia or the Middle East. The Home P/E variable is the country-level P/E ratio of home country. The Outside
P/E variable is equal to the target country P/E ratio if investment is not in the SWF’s home nation. If investment is at home, Outside
P/E is equal to the average (weighted by the total transaction sizes of the SWF deals in the sample) P/E ratios of all other countries in
which investments were made by SWFs. The estimation method is a probit model. The displayed coefficients are marginal effects.
Robust standard errors, allowing for data clustering by the countries in which the SWFs are based, are shown in parenthesis. When
year dummies are added, the sample only includes transactions from 1991 onward.

Dependent Variable : Home Dummy
                                            (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)                (5)                (6)
Orig log(GDP)                              0.013           0.059          0.087        0.133**             0.017               0.07
                                         (0.048)          (0.047)        (0.060)        (0.057)           (0.041)            (0.053)
Orig GDP growth                           -0.006           -0.01         -0.020*      -0.062***           -0.011*             -0.031
                                         (0.005)          (0.019)        (0.012)        (0.016)           (0.006)            (0.022)
Group ASIA                             -0.622***        -0.604***                                       -0.604***          -0.511***
                                         (0.093)          (0.116)                                         (0.097)            (0.137)
Group ME                               -0.530***        -0.509***                                       -0.495***          -0.459***
                                         (0.052)          (0.058)                                         (0.055)            (0.060)
Home P/E                                                                 0.012***      0.014***          0.008***             0.004
                                                                          (0.001)       (0.002)           (0.003)            (0.003)
Outside P/E                                                             -0.017***     -0.017***         -0.016***          -0.017***
                                                                          (0.003)       (0.002)           (0.002)            (0.002)
year dummies                               No              Yes              No            Yes                No                 Yes
Pseudo R-Squared                          0.097           0.112            0.062         0.102             0.114              0.131
N                                         2626            2558             2557          2515              2557                2515
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01




                                                                   47
Table A-3

The sample consists of 2662 investments by 29 Sovereign Wealth funds. It excludes transactions which were withdrawn or rejected.
The dependent variable is the weighted (by firm value) average of the P/E ratios of publicly traded firms in the industry, country and
year of the transaction. Home Investment is a dummy variable which equals one if the target is based in the same country as the
SWF. Group ASIA and Group ME are dummy variables equal to 1 when a fund is based in Asia or the Middle East. Target Asia and
Target ME are dummy variables indicating that the location of target companies is in Asia or Middle East. The estimation method is
an ordinary least squares model. Robust standard errors, allowing for data clustering by the countries in which the SWFs are based,
are shown in parenthesis. When year dummies are added, the sample only includes transactions from 1991 onward.

Dependent Variable : Industry P/E Levels
                                   (1)                   (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)              (6)
Home Investment                -5.689***            -5.959***          1.655***         4.645          1.642***           4.745
                                 (0.991)              (0.871)           (0.313)        (3.478)          (0.362)          (3.375)
Group ASIA                                             -0.784          6.438***                        7.780***
                                                      (0.844)           (0.608)                         (0.807)
Group ME                                            -3.360***          3.628***                        4.686***
                                                      (0.934)           (0.600)                         (0.766)
Home X Group Asia                                                     -7.836***       -10.577**       -7.232***        -10.065**
                                                                        (0.794)         (3.582)         (0.899)          (3.499)
Home X Group ME                                                        -5.905**        -8.785*           0.232            -2.578
                                                                        (2.237)         (4.664)         (2.759)          (4.909)
Target ME                                                                                             -7.215***        -7.852***
                                                                                                        (1.259)          (1.015)
Target Asia                                                                                           -1.800***        -1.950***
                                                                                                        (0.369)          (0.337)
Constant                          26.289***         27.559***         20.418***      26.038***        20.527***        27.581***
                                   (0.714)           (1.027)           (0.769)        (0.644)           (0.853)          (0.752)
year dummies                         Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes               Yes
fund dummies                         Yes                No                No            Yes               No                Yes
R-squared                            0.14             0.131             0.132          0.141             0.141             0.15
N                                   2541              2541              2541           2541              2541              2541
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01




                                                                 48
Table A-4

The sample consists of 2662 investments by 29 Sovereign Wealth funds. It excludes transactions which were withdrawn or rejected.
The dependent variable is the change in the weighted (by firm value) average of the P/E ratios of publicly traded firms in the industry
and country of the transaction in the year after the deal. Home Investment is a dummy variable which equals one if the target is
based in the same country as the SWF. Group ASIA and Group ME are dummy variables equal to 1 when a fund is based in Asia or
the Middle East. Target Asia and Target ME are dummy variables indicating that the location of target companies is in Asia or Middle
East. The estimation method is an ordinary least squares model. Robust standard errors, allowing for data clustering by the countries
in which the SWFs are based, are shown in parenthesis. When year dummies are added, the sample only includes transactions from
1991 onward.
Dependent Variable : Industry P/E Change
                                   (1)                   (2)               (3)             (4)               (5)             (6)
Home Investment                -1.372***              -1.194**            1.634           2.068             1.651           2.056
                                 (0.407)               (0.429)          (1.850)          (1.275)          (1.818)          (1.253)
Group ASIA                                           -2.586***            0.072                            -0.465
                                                       (0.384)          (1.890)                           (1.948)
Group ME                                             -2.074***            0.602                             0.402
                                                       (0.431)          (1.885)                           (1.844)
Home X Group Asia                                                        -2.832         -3.425**          -3.212*        -3.796***
                                                                        (1.821)          (1.265)          (1.774)          (1.213)
Home X Group ME                                                          -3.119         -4.076**           -2.965         -4.478**
                                                                        (2.294)          (1.408)          (2.771)          (1.809)
Target ME                                                                                                   0.046           0.714
                                                                                                          (1.293)          (0.862)
Target Asia                                                                                                 0.871           0.981
                                                                                                          (0.549)          (0.673)
Constant                           -4.970***         -2.670***         -5.311**        -5.045***         -5.331**        -5.630***
                                     (0.292)           (0.465)          (1.894)          (0.298)          (1.864)          (0.552)
year dummies                           Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes
fund dummies                           Yes               No               No               Yes               No              Yes
R-squared                             0.095             0.082            0.082            0.095             0.083           0.096
N                                     2532              2532             2532             2532              2532            2532
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01




                                                                  49
Table A-5

The sample consists of 538 publicly traded investments. It excludes transactions which were withdrawn or rejected. The dependent
variable is the difference between the return of the target in the six months after the transaction and the return of the
corresponding benchmark over the same period. Home Investment is a dummy variable which equals one if the target is based in the
same country as the SWF. Group ASIA and Group ME are dummy variables equal to 1 when a fund is based in Asia or the Middle
East. Target Asia and Target ME are dummy variables indicating that the location of target companies is in Asia or Middle East.
Robust standard errors, allowing for data clustering by the countries in which the SWFs are based, are shown in parenthesis. When
year dummies are added, the sample only includes transactions from 1991 onward.



Dependent Variable : Market-Adjusted Returns (6 months after transaction)
                                               (1)                (2)                       (3)                     (4)
Home Investment                            -0.095***            -0.062                   0.544***               0.547***
                                             (0.025)           (0.044)                    (0.047)                (0.049)
Group ASIA                                                       0.037                   0.632***               0.606***
                                                               (0.054)                    (0.045)                (0.040)
Group ME                                                         0.025                   0.610***               0.594***
                                                               (0.070)                    (0.043)                (0.026)
Home X Group Asia                                                                       -0.621***              -0.634***
                                                                                          (0.092)                (0.106)
Home X Group ME                                                                         -0.264***                 -0.385
                                                                                          (0.073)                (0.239)
Target ME                                                                                                          0.136
                                                                                                                 (0.198)
Target Asia                                                                                                        0.035
                                                                                                                 (0.065)
Constant                                          0.087**              0.018            -0.572***              -0.570***
                                                  (0.037)             (0.077)             (0.032)                (0.029)
year dummies                                        Yes                 Yes                 Yes                     Yes
fund dummies                                        Yes                 No                  No                      No
R-squared                                           0.12               0.048               0.052                   0.054
N                                                   538                 538                 538                     538
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01




                                                               50
Table A-7

The sample consists of 2662 investments by 29 Sovereign Wealth funds. It excludes transactions which were withdrawn or rejected. The dependent variable is a dummy
denoting whether the investment target was based in the same nation as the SWF. The variables Orig log(GDP) and Orig GDP growth represent the logarithm of the GDP in the
year of the investment and the growth of the GDP in the calendar year prior to the investment in the SWF’s home country. The Politicians variable is a dummy equals to 1 if
politicians are involved in the management of the fund. The External Managers variable is a dummy equals to 1 if external managers are involved in the management of the
fund. Group ASIA and Group ME are dummy variables equal to 1 when a fund is based in Asia or the Middle East. The Home P/E variable is the country-level P/E ratio of home
country. The Outside P/E variable is equal to the target country P/E ratio if investment is not in the SWF’s home nation. If investment is at home, Outside P/E is equal to the
average (weighted by the total transaction sizes of the SWF deals in the sample) P/E ratios of all other countries in which investments were made by SWFs. The estimation
method is a probit model. The displayed coefficients are marginal effects. Robust standard errors, allowing for data clustering by the countries in which the SWFs are based, are
shown in parenthesis. When year dummies are added, the sample only includes transactions from 1991 onward.

Dependent variable: Home Dummy
                               (1)                    (2)      (3)             (4)               (5)            (6)           (7)      (8)
Orig log(GDP)                 0.047                  0.087    0.042           0.078            -0.065         -0.040       -0.063*    -0.03
                             (0.086)               (0.084)   (0.079)         (0.068)          (0.043)        (0.041)       (0.036) (0.047)
Orig GDP growth             -0.012*                 -0.027  -0.018*        -0.059***           -0.003          0.000     -0.007*** -0.016
                             (0.007)               (0.018)   (0.011)         (0.015)          (0.002)        (0.008)       (0.002) (0.014)
Politicians                 0.348**               0.331** 0.337**           0.316**         0.398***        0.397***      0.403*** 0.390***
                             (0.158)               (0.164)   (0.156)         (0.148)          (0.115)        (0.126)       (0.109) (0.120)
External managers          -0.364***             -0.355*** -0.364***       -0.354***        -0.370***      -0.371***     -0.377*** -0.373***
                             (0.083)               (0.076)   (0.066)         (0.057)          (0.045)        (0.046)       (0.038) (0.039)
Group ASIA                                                                                  -0.771***      -0.778***     -0.754*** -0.729***
                                                                                              (0.054)        (0.059)       (0.055) (0.078)
Group ME                                                                                    -0.564***      -0.556***     -0.528*** -0.516***
                                                                                              (0.027)        (0.034)       (0.027) (0.042)
Home P/E                                                      0.011***     0.014***                                       0.007**    0.003
                                                               (0.001)       (0.003)                                       (0.003) (0.003)
Outside P/E                                                  -0.017***     -0.017***                                     -0.016*** -0.017***
                                                               (0.002)       (0.002)                                       (0.002) (0.002)
year dummies                    No                  Yes          No            Yes             No              Yes            No       Yes
Pseudo R-squared               0.089               0.117        0.125         0.159           0.169           0.179         0.186    0.197
N                              2618                2550         2549          2507            2618            2550          2549      2507
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01


                                                                                       51
Table A-8

The sample consists of 2662 investments by 29 Sovereign Wealth funds. It excludes transactions which were withdrawn or rejected. The dependent variables are the weighted
(by firm value) average of the P/E ratios of publicly traded firms in the industry, country and year of the transaction and the change in the weighted (by firm value) average of
the P/E ratios of publicly traded firms in the industry and country of the transaction in the year after the deal. The External Managers variable is a dummy equals to 1 if external
managers are involved in the management of the fund. The Politicians variable is a dummy equals to 1 if politicians are involved in the management of the fund. Group ASIA and
Group ME are dummy variables equal to 1 when a fund is based in Asia or the Middle East. Home Investment is a dummy variable which equals one if the target is based in the
same country as the SWF. Target Asia and Target ME are dummy variables indicating that the location of target companies is in Asia or Middle East. The estimation method is an
ordinary least squares model. Robust standard errors, allowing for data clustering by the countries in which the SWFs are based, are shown in parenthesis. When year dummies
are added, the sample only includes transactions from 1991 onward.
Dependent Variable:             Industry P/E Levels                                                Industry P/E Change
                                       (1)            (2)                 (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)                 (7)      (8)
External managers                    2.131           2.418               -0.67          -0.59            1.146          1.052              0.555     0.661
                                    (2.361)         (2.339)            (1.253)        (1.186)           (0.899)        (0.893)            (1.099)   (1.170)
Politicians                          -0.986          -1.48               0.632         0.528          -2.179***       -2.009**            -1.675*  -1.701*
                                    (2.204)         (2.129)            (1.300)        (1.278)           (0.716)        (0.683)            (0.825)   (0.838)
Group ASIA                                         3.223***             -0.825        1.483*                         -1.328***          -1.970*** -2.786***
                                                    (0.398)            (0.598)        (0.757)                          (0.250)            (0.449)   (0.760)
Group ME                                           1.956***          -3.241***         -1.113                        -0.931***          -1.761*** -2.200***
                                                    (0.282)            (0.766)        (0.878)                          (0.302)            (0.404)   (0.500)
Home Investment                                                      -6.110***      -5.113***                                            -0.972** -1.258**
                                                                       (0.760)        (0.850)                                             (0.417)   (0.501)
Target Asia                                                                         -2.012***                                                        0.827
                                                                                      (0.270)                                                       (0.609)
Target ME                                                                           -4.823***                                                        0.014
                                                                                      (1.426)                                                       (0.821)
Constant                           24.609***         21.989***      27.624***       26.790***         -4.929***          -3.802***      -2.905*** -2.641***
                                    (1.211)           (0.714)        (0.718)          (0.860)           (0.374)            (0.397)        (0.361)   (0.334)
year dummies                          Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes            Yes       Yes
R-squared                            0.093             0.096          0.132            0.138             0.082              0.082          0.084     0.084
N                                    2533              2533           2533              2533             2524               2524           2524      2524
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01
                                                                                        52
