                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   RATIONAL MID SELF—FULFILLING
                    BALANCE—OF-PAYMENTS CRISES


                         Maurice Obstfeld


                      Working   Paper No. i186




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November 198L




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies and project in Productivity (World
Economy). Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                     NBER Working Paper #1486
                                     November 1984




                Rational and Self—Fulfilling
                 Balanc e—of—Payments Crises


                         ABS TRACT


     The recent balance—of—payments literature shows that
speculative attacks on a pegged exchange rate must sometimes
occur if the path of the rate is riot to offer abnormal profit

opportunities. Such attacks are fully rational, as they reflect
the market's response to a regime breakdown that is inevitable.

This paper shows that, given certain expectations about policy,
balance—of--payments crises can also be purely self—fulfilling
events. In such cases even a permanently viable regime may

break down, and the economy will possess multiple equilibria
corresponding to different subjective assessments of the prob-
ability of collapse. The behavior of domestic interest rates
and foreign reserves will naturally reflect the possibility of
a speculative attack.

     Work on foreign—exchange crises derives from the natural—
resource literature initiated by Salant and Henderson (1978),
where the definition of "abnormal" profit opportunities is
straightforward. Because the definition is not always straight-

forward in a monetary context, this paper also shows how crises
occur in a discrete—time stochastic monetary model when an
eventual breakdown is inevitable.


                                     Maurice Obstfeld
                                     Department of Economics
                                     Columbia University
                                     New York, NY 10027
                                     (212) 280—5489
Introduction

   The collapse of a fixed exchange rate is typically marked by one or

more balance—of—payments crises in which speculators acquire a large por-

tion of the central bank's foreign reserves as the bank attempts in vain to

support its currency. Economists have long attributed such crises to

inappropriate domestic policies that ultimately place the central bank in

the uncomfortable position of offering speculators a one—sided bet. The

recent balance—of—payments literature, beginning with the work of Krugman

(1979), tends to support the foregoing view. When asset holders have per-

fect foresight and the current peg must eventually be abandoned, profit

maximization dictates that a sharp attack on the central bank's reserves

occur at some point on the economy's path.' Speculative attacks appear to

be self—fulfilling, since they may occur even when the level of reserves

seems sufficient to handle "normal" balance—of—payments deficits. But

under the view sketched above, the attacks are inevitable, and represent an

entirely rational response to persistently conflicting internal and exter-

nal macroeconomic targets.

   This paper demonstrates the existence of circumstances in which balance—

of—payments crises may indeed be purely self—fulfilling events rather than

the inevitable result of unsustainable macroeconomic policies. Such crises

are apparently unnecessary and collapse an exchange rate that would other-

wise have been viable. They reflect, not irrational private behavior, but

an indeterminacy of equilibrium that may arise when agents expect a specu-

lative attack to cause a sharp change in government macroeconomic policies.

   The paper is organized as follows. Section I sets out a simple

stochastic model in which (a) domestic credit may deviate from its

constant mean level only by a serially—correlated disturbance with finite
                                   —2--

variance, (b) shocks to domestic credit are small in a well—defined sense,

and (c) agents do not expect any policy change in the event of a balance—

of—payments crisis. In that setting, a run on the central bank's foreign

reserves Is a probability—zero event. The section goes on to discuss the

timing of the exchange rate's inevitable collapse when domestic credit

follows a random walk with drift rather than a stationary, finite—variance

process.2 Section II then relaxes assumption (c) by postulating that agents

expect an exchange—rate collapse to set off an inflationary domestic—credit

policy. Under the new assumption, self—fulfilling runs become a possibi-

lity. Indeed, the economy is shown to possess a continuum of equilibria,

each corresponding to a different subjective assessment of the likelihood of

an exchange—rate collapse. The nominal interest rate in this economy will

at times exceed the world rate; and a positive innovation in domestic credit

will widen any international interest differential, even while the exchange

rate remains fixed. Section III places the self—fulfilling crisis example

in the context of related literature on bank runs, bubbles, and extrinsic

uncertainty. An appendix discusses some technical questions that arise in

the text.


I. The Economics of Rational Crises

   The model employed is the simple linear one developed by Flood and

Garber (1984a) and used in Obstfeld (1984a). Under the assumptions made

in those papers (and in the earlier literature), speculative attacks on the

currency occur in a setting where the eventual abandonment of the current

fixed exchange rate is inevitable. Speculation can never occur if market

conditions are consistent with the unconditional and indefinite maintenance
                                  —3—

of the fixed exchange rate. After briefly setting out the model, this sec-

tion explains the economics of those results. The next section will give an

example of a scenario under which even a perpetually viable exchange rate

can be attacked.

    A small country enjoys perfect international capital mobility, and its

residents consume and produce a single good. If St is the fixed domestic—

currency price of foreign exchange and      is the foreign—currency price

of output, the domestic price level      is given by         for all




                                                         i
times t. If i is the nominal interest rate on foreign—currency securities,

the domestic nominal interest rate i is given by i =         + E[(S+i/S) — 11,

where E[.] denotes an expectation conditional on time—t information. Both

p* and i are assumed to be constants, equal to 1 and 0, respectively. Let

S denote the level of the initially fixed exchange rate.

    Domestic money is held by domestic residents only, and consists entirely

of the liabilities of the central bank. Let R be the book value of

central—bank foreign reserves and D domestic credit. Equilibrium in this

economy is determined by the equality of money demand,

               =   a   —                                               (1)

and money supply,

       =           +                                                   (2)
                       Dt.

Assume first that as long as the exchange rate is fixed, domestic credit

evolves according to the law

   Dt =    D    + Vt,

where the disturbance v follows the covariance—stationary AR(1) process
                                      —4—

    Vt =   Pvi   +     (0 < p < 1, Et_i[ct] =   0)                              (4)


nd the innovations        are serially independent. The assumptions made above

imply that if the exchange rate is fixed at S and expected to remain so

next period, equilibrium reserves are       = aS —
                                                       D.       In this case, the

domestic interest rate and the world rate coincide.

    The exchange—rate regime collapses when private domestic wealth owners

acquire the entire remaining stock of central—bank foreign reserves.3 A

collapse clearly presupposes the existence of some lower bound on central—

bank reserves, R.     It is worth noting, though, that there is in principle

no reason why a central bank facing perfect international capital markets

cannot borrow indefinitely to support the exchange rate, provided it raises

taxes to service the external debt it incurs (see Obstfeld [1984b]). Nonethe—

less, R is assumed to be an exogenous, possibly negative, constant for the

purpose of the present analysis. It is assumed further that mean reserves

under a permanently fixed rate exceed R, that is, that

    aS — D — R > 0.

    In the models of Krugman (1979), Flood and Garber (1984a), and Obstfeld

(1984a,b), a steadily growing domestic—credit stock makes a breakdown of

the fixed—rate regime inevitable. (I return to this result shortly.) But

the alternative credit—growth process given by (3) and (4) does not imply

that the fixed exchange rate is unconditionally viable. A large enough

realization of the random variable c (given vi) can clearly drive

reserves to their limit R, forcing an unexpected abandonment of the fixed

rate S and a depreciation. It is convenient to rule Out this possibility

by assuming that Prob [c < (1 — p) (aS — D —     R)]   =   1.    (This implies, by
(4), that Prob [v < aS — D — RI =   1.)   Under this additional assumption
                                            —5—

the fixed exchange rate can, with probability one, persist    indefinitely.
    If the domestic—credit rule described by (3) and (4) is followed

regardless of the exchange—rate regime, domestic credit does not grow

steadily and an exchange—rate collapse can never occur. To see why this

is so, recall first that equilibrium reserves always exceed R if the

exchange rate is pegged at S and expected to remain pegged. Suppose now

that there is an equilibrium for the economy involving the private acquisi-

tion of the official reserve stock on some date T.     I will show that the

exchange rate appreciates with probability one as the central bank Is forced

to withdraw from the foreign exchange market. This implies that the

hypothesized run cannot occur along an equilibrium path of the economy. Any

investor who anticipates the exchange rate's path will not participate in

the attack (even if he believes everyone else will), but will prefer to wait

until others have dislodged the exchange rate from its peg so that he can

buy foreign assets at a lower domestic—currency price. Because no one will

wish to participate in the attack, it cannot occur at time T.

    To see that the floating rate ST resulting from a run at time T

lies below 5, solve for the economy's rational—expectations equilibrium

under free floating. All official reserves in excess of R have been

acquired by speculators when floating commences. Together with the assumed

international parity conditions, (1) and (2) therefore imply that the

floating rate's evolution is governed by the difference equation


   —E[S÷i] +        +      =   R   +        (t > T).                    (5)
                                       Dt


The saddle—path solution for 5T is4
                                       —6—

         =       +    —'
                           j   (a )ET[ + DT+j].

Under assumptions (3) and (4), ST can be written
                                                                           (6)




    ST       a1( + ii) + [a + (1 —   p)}'vT.

Because S > a1(R + D), T < S if VT ( 0.        It was assumed above that

VT < aS —    D   — R with probability one. It follows that if VT >   0,

ST < a(R + D + VT) < S with probability one. Since the exchange rate

must appreciate immediately if the central bank loses all reserves at T,

equilibrium runs are probability—zero events. A consequence is that the

domestic and foreign interest rates must always coin dde in the present

setting.

    The key element n the above argument was the stipulation that no

abrupt policy change is expected to occur as the result of a crisis: the

domestic credit process described by (3) and (4) does not change, and the

central bank withdraws from the foreign exchange market when its reserves

are exhausted. Once the foregoing stipulation is dropped, the equilibrium

of the economy may become indeterminate. As a result, runs become

possible, even if the exchange rate would have been viable forever in their

absence.

   Before demonstrating this possibility in the next section, it will be

useful to describe how an exchange—rate collapse occurs in the present

model if domestic credit grows monotonically over time. This is the sce-

nario studied by Flood and Garber (1984a). Consider an economy in which

domestic credit evolves according to the rule
                                      —7—

       =
           Dtl   + 1 (E_i[1J] =   p > 0),                              (7)


where Prob [ii>O} = 1, for all t.       In terms of (3) and (4), p assumes the

value 1 and the mean of    shifts upward. It is assumed again that (7)

holds regardless of the exchange—rate regime, and that no foreign—exchange

intervention occurs after a collapse.

    If the exchange rate floats at any time t (and if central—bank reserves

accordingly are constant at their lower limit ), the equilibrium rate S

is again given by (6). Under the monetary regime (7), however,

    —     —1—         —2
    St = a (R + D) + ci p.                                             (8)


    Suppose first that     < S. As in the previous discussion, the exchange

rate cannot be floating in period t. If the equilibrium floating rate when

reserves equal R is below 5, reserves would exceed R in an equilibrium with

the exchange rate pegged at S. This would be true even if the exchange

rate were expected to float in t+1, since the expected depreciation between

t and t+1 would be reduced by a rise in the rate from      to S. Thus the

central bank can certainly peg the rate at S through period t unless the

public acquires the reserve stock in an attack. But no individual would
                   '/


find it profitable to join in an attack that causes an instantaneous

exchange—rate appreciation. (The bank will lose its remaining reserves in

an attack if St = S, but the exchange rate remains at S until the next

period. I therefore consider it "nonfloating" on date t, a matter of

definition.)

   What if S > 5? Flood and Garber (1984a) note correctly that the

exchange rate must float in the first period that this inequality holds.
                                          —8—

However, the rationale they offer for this assertion ——        that   the condition

S1 > S offers speculators an opportunity to profit at official expense

merely shows (recall the previous paragraph) that if a run is expected, it

will pay for all to join in. In other words, while a path for the economy

such that the exchange rate collapses the first time St > S is an

equilibrium path, it remains to show that no other outcome is consistent

with intertemporal equilibrium.

    This is easily done once a precise defInItIon of "equilibrIum' Is

adopted. At any time t the state of the economy is defined by the current

realization of domestic credit D. Following Salant (1983), define an

equilibrium exchange—rate function S(D) by the properties:

(a) for all realizations D, there is a reserve level R >          R   such that

                                          —
    Rt + D = cS(D) —          E[S(D+i)        S(D)J;
and (b) S(D) =     S   if Rt > R. Then under the central—bank behavior assumed

above, the following result can be demonstrated:

    Theorem. If S(D) is an equilibrium exchange—rate function, there is a

critical domestic—credit level D such that S(D) > S if and only if                >

The threshold D is defined by

    D E   inf   {D: c'(R+D)    +2     >

It follows from (8) that S(D) =           whenever S >

    Proof. It has already been shown that S(D) =         S   in equilibrium if L D

(so that S < 5). To prove that S(D) > S whenever Dt > 5 ( in which case

Rt = R and S(D) =      Sr),   assume the contrary. Thus, let D'> D be the

smallest level of domestic credit such that S(D') > S (more precisely, the

Infimum of the set of 1) with S(D) > S; this set is nonempty because reser-

ves are limited). I will show that there are realizations of domestic cre—
                                                 —9—

dit D between D and D' such that S(D)                      S is inconsistent with

tnoney—market equilibrium.

      So let Dt c CD, D'). Since                 > R, money—market equilibrium requires


      R +                                 —
            Dt < cS —    8E[S(D+i)

if S(D) = S.           Define s(D)        Prob          > D' —
                                                                     Dr].   Then E[S(D÷i)] =

                  +   6(D)E[              > D' —
                                                   DJ
                                                        =
                                                            [1—S(D)] +
                        1._ a.
      +i i t+i L i)_JitJrU pjtj. LL
              I                     f_ uetiue                           Lile pLUL)aUIIiLy ueiisiy

function for               Then the necessary condition (9) can be written:

                                  D '—D
              +                      f0 tpg(p)dp                 .                (10)
                      a[c+S(D)]
      As figure 1 shows, the left—hand side of (10) rises linearly with

and      > S for Dt = D.       The right—hand side of (10) is nonincreasing,

reaching its minimal value S when Dt =               D'.     It is clear that any exchange—

rate function with S(D) =            S    for D < D' does not define an equilibrium

because condition (10) is violated when Dc(D', D').5

      It is clear that the form of domestic—credit rule (7) was a key in-

gredient in the above demonstration that the exchange rate must float as

soon as S exceeds S. The observation that everyone would wish to parti-

cipate in a run if one were expected does not, itself, prove that a run

must occur. The next section underlines this point by providing an example

of an economy in which the exchange rate can remain fixed even if its

floating—rate "shadow" value exceeds S.
          cII



                            ctI
                                +


                          P..

                          4

11                        0
     S.



                                     S..
                                '4
                                 4




                H

                    7i1
                    4.



                +
     4
                                     — 10 —


II.    Self—Fulfilling Crises: An Example

      This section gives an example of a crisis—induced policy change which,

if anticipated, leads to indeterminacy of equilibrium and the possibility

of self—fulfilling or seemingly unnecessary runs. The example involves the

expected adoption of an inflationary domestic—credit growth rule in the

event of a crisis. Initially, however, the exchange rate is fixed at S

and the domestic—credit process is again described by (3) and (4).

      Assume now that the publIc holds the following expectation: If a cri-

sis occurs at any time T, the central bank allows the exchange rate to

float forever and switches to the domestic—credit growth rule (7).

      There are a number of stories that might buttress this assumption of an

expected regime change. For example, when reserves hit R, the central bank

can no longer borrow externally, and the government may need to resort to

inflationary finance.6 This need is exacerbated by the sharp rise in offi-

cial net foreign indebtedness caused by the loss of reserves to private

speculators. The recent experiences of Argentina and Chile confirm that

financial disorder and capital flight may foreshadow heightened future

inflation [see, for example, Daz—Alejandro (1984)]. While the one—way

causation postulated here is inadequate as a description of those

countries' experiences, the example serves to elucidate a factor that may

have played an important role.7

      One equilibrium path for the economy is the one described in the pre-

ceding section. If the public expects that no collapse will ever occur,

there is no run and no switch in the domestic—credit process. Expectations

are self—fulfilling, and the fixed—rate regime never collapses.

      I now argue that there are infinitely many alternative equilibria, each
                                             — 11 —


corresponding to a different set of public beliefs about the probability of
-ajrun.    These, too, are self-fulfilling equilibria. Under the policy sce-
nario assumed here, the authorities are expected to validate any run ex

post by shifting to an inflationary policy. The argument of the previous

section, which ruled out crises in the policy environment described by

unconditional adherence to (3) and (4), no longer applies.

    As a first step in the construction of an alternative equilibrium, note

that in the event of an exchange—rate collapse at time T, the value of the

floating exchange rate is again given by (8), which is reproduced here with

the substitution DT = D ÷ VT:

     -      —1—     —           —2
    STa(R+D+vT)+c p.
Because a crisis now induces expectations of future inflation, it is

possible that the exchange rate depreciates if the central bank is forced

to leave the foreign exchange market. This occurs if                 > S, that is, if

                            2
    1(R +         + VT) +

Clearly the foregoing inequality can hold even when the equilibrium reserve

level in the no—run equilibrium, aS — D —                  exceeds R; it implies that
                                                      VT
a run may take place whenever


               — R — D) —            C   .                                       (11)
    VT >


Because p > 0, inequality (11) may hold even under the boundedness assump-

tion on c made in section I.

    Consider now the following sequence of events. At the start of a

period T, the value of current domestic credit is revealed. Simultaneously,
                                       — 12 —


 an exogenous lottery determines the state of nature. There are two possible

—ates. In state 1, which occurs with probability it, a run on the central

 bank's reserves occurs if, and only if, VT > C [inequality (11)]. In state

 2, which occurs with probability 1 —   it, no run occurs. If state 1 occurs
 and VT > C, every agent will find It advantageous to participate in the run

by selling the central bank as much domestic money as possible. Because

 the exchange rate is expected to depreciate once the central bank can no

longer peg It at S, agents will flee the domestic currency to avoid a sure

capital loss.

    The distribution of events described above clearly defines a stochastic

equilibrium in the special case it =   0,   namely, the no—run equilibrium of

the previous section. If positive choices of it also define equilibria,

runs can occur, and the domestic interest rate I can lie above the world

rate i even while the exchange rate is fixed. This would be necessary

to compensate domestic bond holders for capital losses expected in the
                     8
event of a crisis.

    Do there exist equilibria with it > 0? The technical obstacle to

resolving this question is connected with the foregoing observation con-

cerning the domestic interest rate i. If 'ii > 0, shocks to domestic credit

may alter the domestic interest rate, and thus need not lead to equal off-

setting changes in reserves. If a positive domestic credit innovation

raises i (a conjecture that will be verified below), the upper bound on C

assumed in section I no longer prevents unexpectedly high domestic credit

creation from driving reserves to R and wiping Out the fixed—rate regime

without warning. If inequality (11) can hold only for shocks that drive

reserves below R, the notion of equilibria with it > 0 is vacuous.
                                      — 13 —


    To avoid this problem, it Is sufficient to restrict the range of c more

tightly. Assume there exists a positive B satisfying C < B < aS — D — R

such that Prob[c < (1 — p)B] = 1.     As is shown in the appendix, there

exists a   > 0 so small that for it < n, reserves are no less than R in

equilibrium if state 1 has never occurred and the exchange rate is fixed at

S. The crisis probabilities it   in   the interval [0,u)      define   a continuum of

possible stochastic equilibria for the economy in which the exchange rate

is fixed if state 1 has never occurred.

   With this more stringent restriction on e, it is straightforward to

compute the domestic interest rate for it      in    [O,) while the exchange rate

is fixed. Let Dt =   D   + v summarize the state of the economy on a date t

when no run occurs. If v1 < C, a crisis cannot occur next period, so

S1 will remain at S. If v1 > C, a crisis will occur with probability

n.9 Define q(v) Prob[c+i > C —          pv].        Then by (8),


   Et[St÷i] = [1 —   itq(v)]S + wq(v){a(R + D + pv

                     + E[C+i £+1 > C —         pv])    + a2i}.                   (12)

Equation (12) states that the exchange rate expected to prevail next period

(given that no run has yet occurred) is a weighted sum of S and the

rate expected to equilibrate asset markets in the event of an exchange—rate



and so i =   i
collapse. As the latter cannot be lower than the peg S, E[S+i] 2.

                 + E[(S+i/S) — 1] > .lO

   Because domestic credit shocks are serially correlated, a higher value

of v (given that there is no run) raises the probability that v1 will

exceed the critical level C at which a run becomes possible. In fact, an
                                                        — 14   —




increase in v causes a rise in next period's expected exchange rate, and
Jus a rise in the interest rate i• To see this, let f(.) denote the

(continuous) probability density function of the random variable c. Then

                   (1 —   p)
               =   ff(c)dc (or 0, if C pv 2                      (1    p))
                     —
                         pvt
and

                                           (1 —

      Ek+i c1 >                —
                                   pv1]
                                          =   f             dc        (if q(v) > 0)
                                                  —
                                                      pvt

so that differentiation of (12) implies

      d(Et[S+iJ) = —1
         dv        a ffPq(v) > 0,                                                     (13)
           t
for any ii.        A consequence of (13) is that a positive domestic—credit shock

may actually reduce money demand, occasioning a more—than—offsetting re-

serve loss.


III. Discussion

      The previous section presented an example of an economy in which self—

fulfilling expectations give rise to a continuum of possible equilibria.

Even though a crisis is not inevitable, agents believe that the central

bank will respond to crises by embarking on a program of heightened infla—

tion, The belief that the authorities will (in effect) ratify crises makes

it unprofitable for any individual speculator to hold domestic currency

while a run is taking place.

      In this context, balance—of—payments crises are very similar to bank

runs. Diamond and Dybvig (1983) present a stylized, static model of finan—
                                      — 15   —




cial    intermediation in which there are two equilibria: one in which agents

1ave confidence in the solvency of financial intermediaries, and one in

which lack of confidence leads to a run. Both equilibria involve self—

fulfilling expectations because banks fail if, and only if, there is a run.

As section I showed, balance—of—payments crises, unlike bank runs, need not

be self—ratifying. The stability of a pegged—rate regime hinges on the

anticipated response of the authorities.

    The model of section II differs from that of Diamond and Dybvig in that

It is dynamic; and If runs are to be made possible, it Is necessary to

endow agents with rational subjective probabilities of runs. This was

accomplished by randomizing over the run and no—run equilibria. Blanchard

(1979) uses this device to construct an example of an asset—market bubble

that "crashes" with probability one. He assumes that when the asset price is

on a bubble path, there is a time—invariant probability that It will return

to its fundamental or saddle—path value next period. The type of uncer-

tainty determining the equilibrium agents believe will prevail has been

labelled "extrinsic" uncertainty by ass and Shell (1983). Those authors

study   the allocative effects of extrinsic uncertainty in a utility—
maximizing model with restricted market participation.    Their results

suggest    that a maximization—based version of the present paper's model may
give some deeper insights into   the nature of self—fulfilling balance—of—
payments   crises.

    In their study of gold monetization, Flood and Garber (1984b) give an

example of a self—fulfilling run similar to the one explored above. The

paper shows how an otherwise viable gold standard might break down If

agents anticipate that It will collapse some time in the future. As in the
                                         16 —



example of self—fulfilling balance—of—payments crises, and for the same

-ason, indeterminacy arises only when agents expect the authorities to

resort to inflationary finance in the wake of a regime collapse. While

Flood and Carber's gold model is nonstochastic, the introduction of extrin-

sic uncertainty would result in additional equilibrium paths.

      Flood and Garber (1984a) suggest that the timing of a run may   be inde-
terminate   for reasons different from those explored above. If the floating
exchange rate prevaIlIng after a run can reflect nonstatonary speculatIve
bubbles as well as market fundamentals, the equilibrium floating rate is
indeterminate. This implies that runs can in      principle occur at any time.

The   example studied in   this paper explicitly assumes that the floating

exchange   rate depends entirely on its fundamental determinants, however
[equation   (6)].11 Obstfeld and Rogoff (1983, 1984), using a maximizing

model, show how the government can prevent such bubbles by using its fiscal

powers to guarantee a minimal real redemption value for money.

      The fractional backing described by Obstfeld and Rogoff (1983, 1984) is

an example of an official guarantee which, though never exercised, precludes

inefficient equilibria supported by self—fulfilling expectations. The

deposit   insurance   scheme studied by Diamond and Dybvig (1983) is another

example in this class. These papers make the important argument that anti-

cipated government policies can block the emergence of certain sub—optimal

competitive equilibria. In a sense, the present paper turns that argument

on its head. Expected government actions may lead to undesired outcomes in

economies that would function correctly otherwise.
                                           — 17 —



Appendix
    This appendix demonstrates that the crisis probability it can always be

chosen so small that if the first "state of nature" described in section

II has not occurred, non—collapse of the fixed—rate regime is consistent

with money—market equilibrium.

    In order that this be true, equilibrium reserves in state 2 (the no—run

state of nature) must always exceed R for sufficiently small it. By

(1)—(3). this means that when E [S I
                                       t ti-I-
                                                 is   given by
                                                             - (12).-


               D —         —              —
    Rt
         =
                      Vt       (E[s+i]        s) > R                           (14)


for all t. I argue that there exists a positive ii such that (14) always

holds for it < it.

    Let E [S÷1 c > C—pv] denote the equilibrium floating exchange rate

expected to materialize on date t+1 if a run occurs. By (12), (14) can be

written

    cS —     — Vt —                      I c1 > —pv] ) > R.                    (15)


Equation (12) and inequality (13) imply that q(v)(E[÷1 I E1 >                         —

can be written as a function of v, ('), where '(.)>O. With

this definition, (15) becomes


                                                                               (16)


    Recall that e is bounded above by (1 — p)B; it follows that v can

never exceed B. Since (.)         is   nondecreasing, it attains its maximum

possible value at v = B.         Let it be the positive solution to


    aS—D—R—B—Tr(B)=O.
                                      — 18 —



It is now clear that for any it < ,    (16) holds with probability 1. Thus
L..,r<ir, the fixed—rate regime is always consistent with money—market

equilibrium.
                                    — 19 —


Footnotes

  *
      Jose Saul Lizondo made detailed and extremely useful comments on an

earlier draft of this paper. I am grateful also for helpful discussions

with Guillermo Calvo, Robert Flood, and Peter Garber. All   errors   and opi-

nions are mine. The National Science Foundation and the Alfred P. Sloan

Foundation provided financial support.

      'The literature on rational balance—of—payments crises derives from

Salant and Henderson (1978), who discuss the concept of a rational specula-

tive attack in the context of the gold market. Salant (1983) provides

further developments. The analogy between external payments crises and

attacks in resource markets is closest in the continuous—time,

nonstochastic setting explored by Krugman (1979), Flood and Garber (1984a,

section II), and Obstfeld (1984a), among others. The essential reason is

that it is only in continuous time that an anticipated discrete exchange—

rate jump generally entails "abnormal" profit opportunities. Obstfeld

(1984b) presents a discrete—time maximizing model in which the collapse of

the exchange rate may involve two successive speculative attacks: one on

the first day of floating, and one the period before. In stochastic models

such as those described below the notion of "speculative attack" becomes

even more blurred if one defines speculation as any reduction in private

money demand in anticipation of the fixed rate's possible collapse. In

this sense, there may be any number of "attacks" before the rate finally

does collapse.

      2Flood and Garber (1984a, section III) have already studied this

problem, but their discussion is incomplete at one point. Because the
                                     — 20 —


 logical   step they omit is critical for understanding the self—fulfilling

 equilibria of section II, I discuss it at length in section I.

     3The central bank may commit only a portion of its reserves to the

 defense of the exchange rate, as in Krugman (1979) and Obstfeld (1984a).

 For the present analysis, I assume this is not the case.

     4me general solution to difference equation (5) is the saddle—path

 solution (6) plus a term of the form



    K -4 R
      -r




where K is an arbitrary constant. The saddle—path solution excludes self—

fulfilling nonstationary bubbles by imposing the initial condition K =    0.
    5Figure 1 incorporates the assumption that the density function g(') is

continuous; but the proof is easily extended to encompass discrete distri-

butions. Using the techniques in Salant (1983), a theorem like the one in

the text could be proved for credit processes more general than (7).

However, this would require the assumption that the central bank pegs the

exchange rate at S whenever possible. The restriction that
                                                             Prob[p>O]=1,
also imposed by Flood and Garber (1984a), makes the latter assumption unne-

cessary.

    6The evaporation of the government's credit lines does not, by itself,

imply that the private sector can no longer lend abroad or hold external

assets and liabilities. Thus, the home interest rate may remain linked to

f* by interest parity. This would not be the case if the government were

to impose capital controls. Wyplosz (1983) examines the role of controls

in crises.

    7Other examples are possible. Multiple equilibria also arise if agents
                                           — 21 —



expect a run to provoke an immediate discrete devaluation, but expect no
devaluation otherwise. See Obstfeld (1984a) for a related discussion of

devaluation.

      8Calvo (1983)      discusses   the possibility that an expected devaluation of

uncertain       timing can lead to rises in the domestic nominal interest rate
and the ex post real Interest rate. Lizondo (1983) relates the behavior of
foreign—exchange futures prices under fixed exchange rates to similar con-
siderations. Of course, in the Flood and Garber (1984a) model discussed

above, i exceeds j* whenever there is a chance that the fixed exchange rate

will   collapse next period.
      91t    is being assumed that the borderline case           = C —        has a
                                                                         pv
zero probability weight.

      -°Given the assumed upper bound on the possible realizations of C, it is

possible that Vt S so small that q(v) =             0.   In this case Et[St+i] = S

and         =
                i.   Inequality (13) below remains valid, however.

      "In proving the Theorem of section I it was assumed that the

equilibrium exchange rate is a function of domestic credit alone. This

amounts to excluding from consideration both nonstationary bubbles and

extrinsic uncertainty.
                                    — 22 —


 References

 Blanchard, Oliver Jean. "Speculative Bubbles, Crashes and Rational

    Expectations," Economics Letters 3 (1979), 387—389.

Calvo, Cuillermo A. "1'rying to Stabilize: Some Theoretical Reflections

    Based on the Case of Argentina." In Pedro Aspe Armella, Rudiger

    Dornbusch, and Maurice Obstfeld (eds.), Financial Policies and the

    World Capital Market: The Problem of Latin American Countries.

    Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983.

Cass, David, and Karl Shell. "Do Sunspots Matter?" Journal of Political

    Economy 91 (April 1983), 193—227.

Diamond, Douglas W., and Philip H. Dybvig. "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance,

    and Liquidity," Journal of Political Economy 91 (June 1983), 401—419.

Diaz—Alejandro, Carlos F. "Goodbye Financial Repression, Hello Financial

    Crash." Mimeo, Columbia University, 1984.

Flood, Robert P., and Peter N. Carber. "Collapsing Exchange Rate Regimes:

    Some Linear Examples," Journal of International Economics, forthcoming,

    1984a.

Flood, Robert P., and Peter N. Garber. "Gold Monetization and Cold

    Discipline," Journal of Political Economy 92 (February 1984b), 90—107.

Krugman, Paul. "A Model of Balance—of—Payments Crises," Journal of Money,

    Credit, and Banking 11 (August 1979), 311—325.

Lizondo, Jose Saul. "Foreign Exchange Futures Prices under Fixed Exchange

   Rates," Journal of International Economics 14 (February 1983), 69—84.

Obstfeld, Maurice. "Balance—of—Payments Crises and Devaluation." Journal

   of Money Credit, and Banking 16 (May 1984a), 208—2 17.

Obstfeld, Maurice. "Speculative Attack and the External Constraint in a
                                  — 23 —



   Maximizing Model of the Balance of Payments." Working Paper no. 1437,
   National Bureau of Economic Research, 1984b.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. "Speculative HyperinflatiOns in

   Maximizing Models: Can We Rule Them Out?" Journal of Political

   Econoy91 (August 1983), 675—687.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. "Ruling Out Nonstationary Bubbles:

    Some Further Results." Mimeo, Federal Reserve Board, 1984.

Salant, Stephen W. "The Vulnerability of Price    Stabilization   Schemes to

    Speculative Attack," Journal of Political Economy 91 (February 1983),

    1—38.

Salant, Stephen W., and Dale W. Henderson. "Market Anticipations of

    Government Policies and the Price of Gold," Journal of Political

    Economy 86 (August 1978), 627—648.

Wyplosz, Charles. "Capital Controls and Balance of Payments Crises."

    Mimeo, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1983.
