                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        DSGE MODEL-BASED FORECASTING OF NON-MODELLED VARIABLES

                                           Frank Schorfheide
                                               Keith Sill
                                            Maxym Kryshko

                                         Working Paper 14872
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14872


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2009




We thank seminar participants at the Board of Governors, the FRB Philadelphia, the University of
Richmond, and Texas A&M University for helpful comments. This research was conducted while
Schorfheide was visiting the FRB Philadelphia, for whose hospitality he is thankful. Schorfheide gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and the National Science Foundation
(Grant SES 0617803). The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Frank Schorfheide, Keith Sill, and Maxym Kryshko. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
DSGE Model-Based Forecasting of Non-modelled Variables
Frank Schorfheide, Keith Sill, and Maxym Kryshko
NBER Working Paper No. 14872
April 2009
JEL No. C11,C32,C53,E27,E47

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper develops and illustrates a simple method to generate a DSGE model-based forecast for
variables that do not explicitly appear in the model (non-core variables). We use auxiliary regressions
that resemble measurement equations in a dynamic factor model to link the non-core variables to the
state variables of the DSGE model. Predictions for the non-core variables are obtained by applying
their measurement equations to DSGE model-generated forecasts of the state variables. Using a medium-scale
New Keynesian DSGE model, we apply our approach to generate and evaluate recursive forecasts
for PCE inflation, core PCE inflation, the unemployment rate, and housing starts along with predictions
for the seven variables that have been used to estimate the DSGE model.


Frank Schorfheide                                   Maxym Kryshko
University of Pennsylvania                          University of Pennsylvania
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
3718 Locust Walk                                    3718 Locust Walk
McNeil 525                                          Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297                         mkryshko@sas.upenn.edu
and NBER
schorf@ssc.upenn.edu

Keith Sill
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
10 Independence Mall
Philadelphia, PA 19106-1574
keith.sill@phil.frb.org
                                                                                              1


1    Introduction

Dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models estimated with Bayesian methods
are increasingly used by central banks around the world as tools for projections and policy
analysis. Examples of such models are the small open economy model developed by the
Sveriges Riksbank (Adolfson, Laseen, Linde, and Villani, 2005 and 2008; Adolfson, An-
dersson, Linde, Villani, and Vredin, 2007), the New Area-Wide Model developed at the
European Central Bank (Coenen, McAdam, and Straub, 2008) and the Federal Reserve
Board’s new Estimated, Dynamic, Optimization-based model (Edge, Kiley, and Laforte,
2008). These models extend specifications studied by Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans
(2005) and Smets and Wouters (2003) to open economy and multisector settings. A com-
mon feature is that decision rules of economic agents are derived from assumptions about
preferences and technologies by solving intertemporal optimization problems.

    Compared to previous generations of macroeconometric models, the DSGE paradigm
delivers empirical models with a strong degree of theoretical coherence. The costs asso-
ciated with this theoretical coherence are two-fold. First, tight cross-equation restrictions
potentially introduce misspecification problems that manifest themselves through inferior fit
compared to less-restrictive time series models (Del Negro, Schorfheide, Smets, and Wouters,
2007, henceforth DSSW). Second, it is more cumbersome than in a traditional system-of-
equations approach to incorporate variables other than a core set of macroeconomic aggre-
gates such as real gross domestic product (GDP), consumption, investment, wages, hours,
inflation, and interest rates. Nonetheless, in practical work at central banks it might be
important to also generate forecasts for economic variables that do not explicitly appear in
medium-scale DSGE models. Our paper focuses on the second problem.

    There are in principle two options for generating forecasts for additional variables. First,
one could enlarge the structural model to incorporate these variables explicitly. The ad-
vantage of a larger model is its ability to deliver a coherent narrative that can accompany
the forecasts. The disadvantages are that identification problems are often exacerbated in
large-scale models, the numerical analysis, e.g., estimation procedures that utilize numerical
optimization or posterior simulation routines, becomes more tenuous, and the maintenance
of the model requires more staff resources. The second option is to develop a hybrid em-
pirical model that augments a medium-scale core DSGE model with auxiliary equations
that create a link between explicitly modelled variables and non-modelled variables. For
brevity we will refer to the latter as non-core variables. One could interpret these auxiliary
                                                                                                         2


equations as log-linear approximations of agents’ decision rules in a larger DSGE model.
This paper explores the second approach.

    Recently, Boivin and Giannoni (2006, henceforth BG) integrated a medium-scale DSGE
model into a dynamic factor model for a large cross section of macroeconomic indicators,
thereby linking non-core variables to a DSGE model. We will refer to this hybrid model
as DSGE-DFM. The authors jointly estimated the DSGE model parameters as well as
the factor loadings for the non-core variables. Compared to the estimation of a “non-
structural” dynamic factor model, the BG approach leads to factor estimates that have a
clear economic interpretation. The joint estimation is conceptually very appealing, in part
because it exploits information that is contained in the non-core variables when making
inference about the state of the economy.1 The downside of the joint estimation is its
computational complexity, which makes it currently impractical for real time forecasting
applications.

    Our paper proposes a simpler two-step estimation approach for an empirical model that
consists of a medium-scale DSGE model for a set of core macroeconomic variables and a
collection of measurement equations or auxiliary regressions that link the state variables
of the DSGE model with the non-core variables of interest to the analyst. In the first
step we estimate the DSGE model using the core variables as measurements. Based on
the DSGE model parameter estimates, we apply the Kalman filter to obtain estimates of
the latent state variables given the most recent information set. We then use the filtered
state variables as regressors to estimate simple linear measurement equations with serially
correlated idiosyncratic errors.

    The advantage of our procedure is three-fold. First, since the DSGE model estimation is
fairly tedious and delicate, in real time applications the DSGE model could be re-estimated
infrequently, for instance, once a year. Second, the estimation of the measurement equations
is quick and can be easily repeated in real time as new information arrives or interest in
additional non-core variables arises. The estimated auxiliary regressions can then be used
to generate forecasts of the non-core variables. Third, our empirical model links the non-
core variables to the fundamental shocks that are the believed drivers of business cycle
fluctuations. In particular, the model allows monetary policy shocks and other structural
shocks to propagate through to non-core variables. This allows us to study the effect of
unanticipated changes in monetary policy on a broad set of economic variables.2
  1 Formally   we mean by “state of the economy” information about the latent state variables that appear
in the DSGE model.
   2 The The goal of our analysis is distinctly different from recent work by Giannone, Monti, and Reichlin
                                                                                                       3


    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The DSGE model used for the
empirical analysis is described in Section 2. We are using a variant of the Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2003) model, which is described in
detail in DSSW. Our econometric framework is presented in Section 3. Section 4 summarizes
the results of our empirical analysis. We estimate the DSGE model recursively based on
U.S. quarterly data starting with a sample from 1984:I to 2000:IV and generate estimates
of the latent states as well as pseudo-out-of-sample forecasts for a set of core variables, that
is comprised of the growth rates of output, consumption, investment, nominal wages, the
GDP deflator, as well as the levels of interest rates and hours worked. We then estimate
measurement equations for four additional variables: personal consumption expenditures
(PCE) inflation, core PCE inflation, the unemployment rate, and housing starts. We provide
pseudo-out-of-sample forecast error statistics for both the core and non-core variables using
our empirical model and compare them to simple AR(1) forecasts. Finally, we study the
propagation of monetary policy shocks to auxiliary variables as well as features of the joint
predictive distribution. Section 5 concludes and discusses future research. Details of the
Bayesian computations are relegated to the Appendix.



2     The DSGE Model

We use a medium-scale New Keynesian model with price and wage rigidities, capital ac-
cumulation, investment adjustment costs, variable capital utilization, and habit formation.
The model is based on the work of Smets and Wouters (2003) and Christiano, Eichenbaum,
and Evans (2005). The specific version is taken from DSSW. For brevity we only present
the log-linearized equilibrium conditions and refer the reader to the above-referenced papers
for the derivation of these conditions from assumptions on preferences and technologies.

    The economy is populated by a continuum of firms that combine capital and labor
to produce differentiated intermediate goods. These firms have access to the same Cobb-
Douglas production function with capital elasticity α and total factor productivity At . Total
factor productivity is assumed to be non-stationary. We denote its growth rate by at =
ln(At /At−1 ), which is assumed to have mean γ. Output, consumption, investment, capital,
and the real wage can be detrended by At . In terms of the detrended variables the model
(2008), and Monti (2008) who develop state-space models that allow the analyst to use high frequency data
or professional forecasts to update or improve the DSGE-model based forecasts of the core variables.
                                                                                                               4


has a well-defined steady state. All variables that appear subsequently are expressed as
log-deviations from this steady state.

     The intermediate goods producers hire labor and rent capital in competitive markets
and face identical real wages, wt , and rental rates for capital, rtk . Cost minimization implies
that all firms produce with the same capital-labor ratio

                                              kt − Lt = wt − rtk                                             (1)

and have marginal costs
                                          mct = (1 − α)wt + αrtk .                                           (2)

     The intermediate goods producers sell their output to perfectly competitive final good
producers, which aggregate the inputs according to a CES function. Profit maximization of
the final good producers implies that
                                                                   
                                                            1
                                ybt (j) − ybt = − 1 +                   (pt (j) − pt ).                      (3)
                                                        λf eλef,t

Here ybt (j) − ybt and pt (j) − pt are quantity and price for good j relative to quantity and price
of the final good. The price pt of the final good is determined from a zero-profit condition
for the final good producers.

     We assume that the price elasticity of the intermediate goods is time-varying. Since
this price elasticity affects the mark-up that intermediate goods producers can charge over
marginal costs, we refer to λ
                            ef,t as mark-up shock. Following Calvo (1983), we assume that

in every period a fraction of the intermediate goods producers ζp is unable to re-optimize
their prices. These firms adjust their prices mechanically according to steady state inflation
π∗ . All other firms choose prices to maximize the expected discounted sum of future profits,
which leads to the following equilibrium relationship, known as the New Keynesian Phillips
curve:
                                                  (1 − ζp β)(1 − ζp )      1
                           πt = βIE t [πt+1 ] +                       mct + λf,t ,                           (4)
                                                          ζp               ζp
where πt is inflation and β is the discount rate.3 Our assumption on the behavior of firms
that are unable to re-optimize their prices implies the absence of price dispersion in the
steady state. As a consequence, we obtain a log-linearized aggregate production function of
the form
                                            ybt = (1 − α)Lt + αkt .                                          (5)
   3 We                                                                                    ef,t , where λf is the
          used the following re-parameterization: λf,t = [(1 − ζp β)(1 − ζp )λf /(1 + λf )]λ
                ef,t .
steady state of λ
                                                                                                        5


Equations (2), (1), and (5) imply that the labor share lsht equals marginal costs in terms
of log-deviations: lsht = mct .

    There is a continuum of households with identical preferences, which are separable in
consumption, leisure, and real money balances. Households’ preferences display (internal)
habit formation in consumption captured by the parameter h. Period t utility is a function
of ln(Ct − hCt−1 ). Households supply monopolistically differentiated labor services. These
services are aggregated according to a CES function that leads to a demand elasticity 1 +
1/λw . The composite labor services are then supplied to the intermediate goods producers
at real wage wt . To introduce nominal wage rigidity, we assume that in each period a
fraction ζw of households is unable to re-optimize their wages. These households adjust
their nominal wage by steady state wage growth e(π∗ +γ) . All other households re-optimize
their wages. First-order conditions imply that
                                 h                               i
                 w̃t   = ζw βIE t w̃t+1 + ∆wt+1 + πt+1 + at+1
                                                                                   
                                 1 − ζw β                                   1
                         +                       νl Lt − wt − ξt + b̃t +          φt ,                 (6)
                           1 + νl (1 + λw )/λw                           1 − ζw β

where w̃t is the optimal real wage relative to the real wage for aggregate labor services, wt ,
and νl would be the inverse Frisch labor supply elasticity in a model without wage rigidity
(ζw = 0) and differentiated labor. Moreover, b̃t is a shock to the household’s discount
factor4 and φt is a preference shock that affects the household’s intratemporal substitution
between consumption and leisure. The real wage paid by intermediate goods producers
evolves according to
                                                                1 − ζw
                                    wt = wt−1 − πt − at +              w̃t .                           (7)
                                                                  ζw

    Households are able to insure the idiosyncratic wage adjustment shocks with state con-
tingent claims. As a consequence they all share the same marginal utility of consumption
ξt , which is given by the expression:

     (eγ − hβ)(eγ − h)ξt         = −(e2γ + βh2 )ct + βheγ IE t [ct+1 + at+1 ] + heγ (ct−1 − at ) (8)

                                      +eγ (eγ − h)b̃t − βh(eγ − h)IE t [b̃t+1 ],

where ct is consumption. In addition to state-contingent claims, households accumulate
three types of assets: one-period nominal bonds that yield the return Rt , capital k̄t , and
real money balances. Since preferences for real money balances are assumed to be additively
separable and monetary policy is conducted through a nominal interest rate feedback rule,
  4 For   the estimation we re-parameterize the shock as follows: bt = eγ (eγ − h)/(e2γ + βh2 )b̃t .
                                                                                                6


money is block exogenous and we will not use the households’ money demand equation in
our empirical analysis.

      The first order condition with respect to bond holdings delivers the standard Euler
equation:
                             ξt = IE t [ξt+1 ] + Rt − IE t [πt+1 ] − IE t [at+1 ].            (9)

Capital accumulates according to the following law of motion:

                 k̄t = (2 − eγ − δ) k̄t−1 − at + (eγ + δ − 1)[it + (1 + β)S 00 e2γ µt ],
                                             
                                                                                             (10)

where it is investment, δ is the depreciation rate of capital, and µt can be interpreted as
an investment-specific technology shock. Investment in our model is subject to adjustment
costs, and S 00 denotes the second derivative of the investment adjustment cost function at
steady state. Optimal investment satisfies the following first-order condition:

               1              β                              1
                                                                       (ξ k − ξt ) + µt ,
                           
       it =       it−1 − at +     IE t [it+1 + at+1 ] +                                      (11)
              1+β             1+β                       (1 + β)S 00 e2γ t

where ξtk is the value of installed capital, evolving according to:

  ξtk − ξt = βe−γ (1 − δ)IE t ξt+1 − ξt+1 + IE t (1 − (1 − δ)βe−γ )rt+1
                              k                                  k
                                                                                      
                                                                        − (Rt − πt+1 ) .     (12)

Capital utilization ut in our model is variable and rtk in all previous equations represents the
rental rate of effective capital kt = ut + k̄t−1 . The optimal degree of utilization is determined
by
                                                       r∗k k
                                                ut =      r .                                (13)
                                                       a00 t
Here a00 is the derivative of the per-unit-of-capital cost function a(ut ) evaluated at the steady
state utilization rate. The central bank follows a standard feedback rule:

                         Rt = ρR Rt−1 + (1 − ρR )(ψ1 πt + ψ2 ybt ) + σR R,t .               (14)

where R,t represents monetary policy shocks. The aggregate resource constraint is given
by:
                                                             rk
                                                                  
                                         c∗      i∗
                        ybt = (1 + g∗ )     ct +      it + γ ∗   ut    + gt .                (15)
                                         y∗      y∗       e −1+δ
Here c∗ /y∗ and i∗ /y∗ are the steady state consumption-output and investment-output ratios,
respectively, and g∗ /(1 + g∗ ) corresponds to the government share of aggregate output. The
process gt can be interpreted as exogenous government spending shock. It is assumed that
fiscal policy is passive in the sense that the government uses lump-sum taxes to satisfy its
period budget constraint.
                                                                                                 7


      There are seven exogenous disturbances in the model and six of them are assumed to
follow AR(1) processes:

                                at    = ρa at−1 + (1 − ρa )γ + σa a,t                         (16)

                               µt     = ρµ µt−1 + σµ µ,t

                             λf,t     = ρλf λf,t−1 + σλf λf

                                gt    = ρg gt−1 + σg g,t

                                bt    = ρb bt−1 + σb b,t

                               φt     = ρφ φt−1 + σφ φ,t .

We assume that innovations of these exogenous processes as well as the monetary policy
shock R,t are independent standard normal random variates and collect them in the vector
t . We stack all the DSGE model parameters in the vector θ. The equations presented in
this section form a linear rational expectations system that can be solved numerically, for
instance with the method described in Sims (2002).



3      Econometric Methodology

Our econometric analysis proceeds in three steps. First, we use Bayesian methods to es-
timate the linearized DSGE model described in Section 2 on seven core macroeconomic
time series. Second, we estimate so-called auxiliary regression equations that link the state-
variables associated with the DSGE model to other macroeconomic variables that are of
interest to the analyst, but not explicitly included in the structural DSGE model (non-core
variables). Finally, we use the estimated DSGE model to forecast its state variables and
then map these state forecasts into predictions for the core and non-core variables.


3.1     DSGE Model Estimation

The solution of the linear rational expectations system characterized in Section 2 can be
expressed as a vector autoregressive law of motion for a vector of non-redundant state
variables st :
                                      st = Φ1 (θ)st−1 + Φ (θ)t .                             (17)

The coefficients of the matrices Φ1 and Φ are functions of the DSGE model parameters θ
and the vector st is given by

                          st = [ct , it , k̄t , Rt , wt , at , φt , µt , bt , gt , λf,t ]0 .
                                                                                                  8


The variables ct , it , k̄t , Rt , and wt are endogenous state variables, whereas the remaining
elements of st are exogenous state variables. To estimate the DSGE model based on a
sequence of observations Y T = [yt , . . . , yT ], it is convenient to construct a state-space model
by specifying a system of measurement equations that link the observables yt to the states
st .

       The vector yt used in our empirical analysis consists of quarter-to-quarter growth rates
(measured in percentages) of real GDP, consumption, investment, and nominal wages, as
well as a measure of hours worked, GDP deflator inflation, and the federal funds rate.
Since some of our observables include growth rates, we augment the set of model states
st by lagged values of output, consumption, investment, and real wages. More specifically,
notice that lagged consumption, investment, and real wages are elements of the vector st−1 .
Moreover, according to the DSGE model solution, lagged output, ybt−1 , can be expressed as
a linear function of the elements of st−1 . Thus, we can write

                                  yt−1 , ct−1 , it−1 , wt−1 ]0 = Ms (θ)st−1
                                 [b

for a suitably chosen matrix Ms (θ) and define

                                         ςt = [s0t , s0t−1 Ms0 (θ)]0 .                          (18)

This allows us to express the set of measurement equations as

                                         yt = A0 (θ) + A1 (θ)ςt .                               (19)

The state-space representation of the DSGE model is comprised of (17), (18), and (19).

       Under the assumption that the innovations t are normally distributed, the likelihood
function, denoted by p(Y T |θ), for the DSGE model can be evaluated with the Kalman filter.
The Kalman filter also generates a sequence of estimates of the state vector ςt :

                                          ςt|t (θ) = IE[ςt |θ, Y t ],                           (20)

where Y t = [y1 , . . . , yt ]. Our Bayesian estimation of the DSGE model combines a prior p(θ)
with the likelihood function p(Y T |θ) to obtain a joint probability density function for data
and parameters. The posterior distribution is given by

                               p(Y T |θ)p(θ)
                                                                         Z
                 p(θ|Y T ) =                 ,    where      p(Y T ) =       p(Y T |θ)p(θ)dθ.   (21)
                                   p(Y )

We employ Markov-Chain-Monte-Carlo (MCMC) methods described in detail in An and
Schorfheide (2007) to implement the Bayesian inference. More specifically, a random-walk
                                                                                                            9


Metropolis algorithm is used to generate draws from the posterior distribution p(θ|Y T ) and
averages of these draws (and suitable transformations) serve as approximations for posterior
moments of interest.


3.2       Linking Model States to Non-Core Variables

Due to the general equilibrium structure the variables that are included in state-of-the-
art DSGE models are limited to a set of core macroeconomic indicators. However, in
practice an analyst might be interested in forecasting a broader set of time series. For
instance, the DSGE model described in Section 2 generates predictions for hours worked
but does not include unemployment as one of the model variables. We use zt to denote a
particular variable that is not included in the DSGE model but nonetheless is of interest
to the forecaster. We will express zt as a function of the DSGE model state variables st .
According to (18) one can easily recover st from the larger vector ςt using a selection matrix
M with the property st = M ςt . As discussed in the previous subsection, the Kalman filter
delivers a sequence ςt|t (θ), t = 1, . . . , T . We use ςˆt|t to denote an estimate of ςt|t (θ) that is
obtained by replacing θ with the posterior mean estimate θ̂T , define ŝt|t = M ςˆt|t , and let5

                       zt = α0 + ŝ0t|t α1 + ξt ,   ξt = ρξt−1 + ηt ,   ηt ∼ N (0, ση2 ).                (22)

Moreover, ξt is a variable-specific noise process. The parameters of this auxiliary regression
are collected in the vector ψ = [α0 , α10 , ρ, ση ]0 . As for the estimation of the DSGE model,
we use Bayesian methods for the estimation of the auxiliary regression (22).

      A few remarks about our setup are in order. First, Equations (17), (18), (19), and (22)
can be interpreted as a factor model. The factors are given by the state variables of the
DSGE model, the measurement equation associated with the DSGE model describes how our
core macroeconomic variables load on the factors, and auxiliary regressions of the form (22)
describe how additional (non-core) macroeconomic variables load on the factors. The ran-
dom variable ξt in (22) plays the role of an idiosyncratic error term.

      Second, our setup can be viewed as a simplified version of BG’s framework. Unlike BG,
we do not attempt to estimate the DSGE model and the auxiliary equations simultaneously.
While we are thereby ignoring information about st contained in the zt variables, our analysis
reduces the computational burden considerably and can be more easily used for real time
forecasting. The BG approach is computationally cumbersome. A Markov-Chain Monte
   5 At   this point it is important that the state vector does not contain redundant elements. If it did, the
auxiliary regression (22) would suffer from perfect collinearity.
                                                                                                         10


Carlo algorithm has to iterate over the conditional distributions of θ, ψ, and the sequence
of states S T = [s1 , . . . , sT ]. Drawing from the posterior of S T is computationally costly
because it requires forward and backward iterations of the Kalman filter. Drawing from the
distribution of θ requires a Metropolis-Hastings step and, unlike in a stand-alone estimation
of the DSGE model, the proposal density needs to be tailored as a function of ψ. In turn, it
is more difficult to ensure that the resulting Markov chain properly mixes and converges to
its ergodic distribution at a sufficiently fast rate. Our framework de-couples the estimation
of the DSGE model and the analysis of the auxiliary regressions. If needed, additional non-
core variables can be easily analyzed without having to re-estimate the DSGE model. We
view this as a useful feature in real-time applications.

       Third, in addition to ignoring the information in the zt ’s about the latent states we take
one more short-cut. Rather than using estimates of st|t that depend on θ, we condition on
the posterior mean of θ in our construction of ŝt|t . As a consequence our posterior draws of
DSGE and auxiliary model parameters are uncorrelated and we potentially understate the
posterior uncertainty about ψ. However, in practice we found that there are few gains to
using a more elaborate sampling procedure.

       We proceed by re-writing (22) in quasi-differenced form as

              z1    = α0 + ŝ01|1 α1 + ξ1                                                              (23)

               zt   = ρzt−1 + α0 (1 − ρ) + [ŝ0t|t − ŝ0t−1|t−1 ρ]α1 + ηt ,        t = 2, . . . , T.

Instead of linking the distribution of ξ1 to the parameters ρ and ση2 we assume that ξ1 ∼
N (0, τ 2 ) and discuss the choice of τ below. A particular advantage of the Bayesian frame-
work is that we can use the DSGE model to derive a prior distribution for the α’s for
variables zt that are conceptually related to variables that appear in the DSGE model. Let
α = [α0 , α10 ]0 . Our prior takes the form

                        α ∼ N (µα,0 , Vα,0 ),   ρ ∼ U(−1, 1),           ση ∼ IG(ν, τ ),                (24)

where N (µ, V ) denotes a normal distribution with mean µ and covariance matrix V , U(a, b)
is a uniform distribution on the interval (a, b), and IG(ν, s) signifies an Inverse Gamma
                                                            2
                                                                /2σ 2
distribution with density pIG (σ|ν, s) ∝ σ −(ν+1) e−νs                  . To avoid a proliferation of hyper-
parameters we use the same τ to characterize the standard deviation of ξ1 and the prior for
ση .

       We choose the prior mean µα,0 based on the DSGE model implied factor loadings for a
model variable, say zt† , that is conceptually similar to zt . For concreteness, suppose that zt
                                                                                                              11


corresponds to PCE inflation. Since there is only one-type of final good, our DSGE model
does not distinguish between, say, the GDP deflator and a price index of consumption
expenditures. Hence, a natural candidate for zt† is final good inflation. Let IE D
                                                                                 θ [·] denote

an expectation taken under the probability distribution generated by the DSGE model,
conditional on the parameter vector θ. We construct µα,0 by a population regression of the
form                                                               −1
                                                                 0                 †
                                       µα,0 =        IE D
                                                        θ [s̃t s̃t ]    IE D
                                                                           θ [s̃t zt ],                      (25)

where s̃t = [1, s0t ]0 and θ is in practice replaced by its posterior mean θ̂T . If zt† is among
the observables, then this procedure recovers the corresponding rows of A0 (θ) and A1 (θ) in
the measurement equation (19). Details on the choice of zt† are provided in the empirical
section. Our prior covariance matrix is diagonal with the following elements
                                                             
                                                λ1         λ1
                              diag(Vα,0 ) = λ0 , , . . . ,      .                                            (26)
                                                ω1         ωJ
Here λ0 and λ1 are hyperparameters that determine the degree of shrinkage for the intercept
α0 and the loadings α1 of the state variables. We scale the diagonal elements of Vα,0 by
ωj−1 , j = 1, . . . , J, where ωj denotes the DSGE model’s implied variance of the j’th element
of ŝt|t (evaluated at the posterior mean of θ).6 Draws from the posterior distribution can
be easily obtained with a Gibbs sampler described in Appendix A.


3.3     Forecasting

Suppose that the forecast origin coincides with the end of the estimation sample, denoted by
T . Forecasts from the DSGE model are generated by sampling from the posterior predictive
distribution of yT +h . For each posterior draw θ(i) we start from ςˆT |T (θ(i) ) and draw a
                           (i)         (i)
random sequence {T +1 , . . . , T +h }. We then iterate the state transition equation forward
to construct

                     (i)                         (i)                           (i)
                    sT +h|T      =   Φ1 (θ(i) )sT +h−1|T + Φ (θ(i) )T +h ,              h = 1, . . . , H   (27)
                                             0          0
                     (i)               (i)        (i)
                    ςT +h|T      =   [sT +h|T , sT +h−1|T Ms0 (θ(i) )]0 .

Finally, we use the measurement equation to compute

                                      (i)                                       (i)
                                     yT +h|T = A0 (θ(i) ) + A1 (θ(i) )ςT +h|T .                              (28)
   6 Instead   of assuming that the elements of α are independent, one could use the inverse of the covariance
matrix of ŝt|t to construct a non-diagonal prior covariance matrix for α. To the extent that some of the
elements of st are highly correlated such a prior will be highly non-informative in the corresponding directions
of the α parameter space. We found this feature unattractive and decided to proceed with a diagonal Vα,0 .
                                                                                                12


                                                                           (i)
The posterior mean forecast ŷT +h|T is obtained by averaging the yT +h|T ’s.

      A draw from the posterior predictive distribution of a non-core variable zT +h is obtained
                                       (i)      (i)
as follows. Using the sequence sT +1|T , . . . , sT +H|T constructed in (27), we iterate the quasi-
differenced version (23) of the auxiliary regression forward:

           (i)           (i)            (i)           (i)0          (i)0         (i)   (i)
          zT +h|T = ρ(i) zT +h−1 + α0 (1 − ρ(i) ) + [sT +h|T − sT +h−1|T ρ(i) ]α1 + ηT +h ,

where the superscript i for the parameters of (22) refers to the i’th draw from the posterior
                           (i)                               2(i)
distribution of ψ and ηT +h is a draw from a N (0, ση ). The point forecast ẑT +h|T is
                                 (i)
obtained by averaging the zT +h|T ’s. While our draws from the posterior distribution of θ and
ψ are independent, we maintain much of the correlation in the joint predictive distribution
of yT +h and zT +h , because the i’th draw is computed from the same realization of the state
          (i)
vector, sT +h|T .



4      Empirical Application

We use post-1983 U.S. data to recursively estimate the DSGE model and the auxiliary
regression equations and to generate pseudo-out-of-sample forecasts. We begin with a de-
scription of our data set and the prior distribution for the DSGE model parameters. Second,
we discuss the estimates of the DSGE model parameters and its forecast performance for
the core variables. Third, we estimate the auxiliary regressions and examine their forecasts
of PCE inflation, core PCE inflation, the unemployment rate, and housing starts. Finally,
we explore multivariate aspects of the predictive distribution generated by our model. We
report conditional forecast error statistics and illustrate the joint predictive distribution as
well as the propagation of a monetary policy shock to the core and non-core variables.


4.1      Data and Priors

Seven series are included in the vector of core variables yt that is used for the estimation
of the DSGE model: the growth rates of output, consumption, investment, and nominal
wages, as well as the levels of hours worked, inflation, and the nominal interest rate. These
series are obtained from Haver Analytics (Haver mnemonics are in italics). Real output is
computed by dividing the nominal series (GDP) by population 16 years and older (LN16N)
as well as the chained-price GDP deflator (JGDP). Consumption is defined as nominal
personal consumption expenditures (C) less consumption of durables (CD). We divide by
                                                                                               13


LN16N and deflate using JGDP. Investment is defined as CD plus nominal gross private
domestic investment (I). It is similarly converted to real per-capita terms. We compute
quarter-to-quarter growth rates as log difference of real per capita variables and multiply
the growth rates by 100 to convert them into percentages.

    Our measure of hours worked is computed by taking non-farm business sector hours
of all persons (LXNFH), dividing it by LN16N, and then scaling to get mean quarterly
average hours to about 257. We then take the log of the series multiplied by 100 so that
all figures can be interpreted as percentage deviations from the mean. Nominal wages
are computed by dividing total compensation of employees (YCOMP) by the product of
LN16N and our measure of average hours. Inflation rates are defined as log differences of
the GDP deflator and converted into percentages. The nominal interest rate corresponds to
the average effective federal funds rate (FFED) over the quarter and is annualized.

    Observations for the non-core variables are also obtained from Haver Analytics. We
consider PCE-inflation, core PCE inflation, the unemployment rate, and housing starts
as candidates for zt in this paper. We extract quarterly data on the chain price index
for personal consumption expenditures (JC) and personal consumption expenditures less
food and energy (JCXF). Inflation rates are calculated as 100 times the log difference of
the series. The unemployment rate measure is the civilian unemployment rate for ages 16
years and older (LR). Finally, housing starts are defined as millions of new privately owned
housing units started (HST). We use quarterly averages of seasonally adjusted monthly data,
converted to an annual rate.

    Our choice of prior distribution for the DSGE model parameters follows DSSW and the
specification of what is called a “standard” prior in Del Negro and Schorfheide (2008). The
prior is summarized in the first four columns of Table 1. To make this paper self-contained we
briefly review some of the details of the prior elicitation. Priors for parameters that affect the
steady state relationships, e.g., the capital share α in the Cobb-Douglas production function
or the capital depreciation rate are chosen to be commensurable with pre-sample (1955 to
1983) averages in U.S. data. Priors for the parameters of the exogenous shock processes are
chosen such that the implied variance and persistence of the endogenous model variables
is broadly consistent with the corresponding pre-sample moments. Our prior for the Calvo
parameters that control the degree of nominal rigidity are fairly agnostic and span values
that imply fairly flexible as well as fairly rigid prices and wages. Our prior for the central
bank’s responses to inflation and output movements is roughly centered at Taylor’s (1993)
values. The prior for the interest rate smoothing parameter ρR is almost uniform on the
                                                                                            14


unit interval.

      The 90% interval for the prior distribution on νl implies that the Frisch labor supply
elasticity lies between 0.3 and 1.3, reflecting the micro-level estimates at the lower end, and
the estimates of Kimball and Shapiro (2003) and Chang and Kim (2006) at the upper end.
The density for the adjustment cost parameter S 00 spans values that Christiano, Eichenbaum,
and Evans (2005) find when matching DSGE and vector autoregression (VAR) impulse
response functions. The density for the habit persistence parameter h is centered at 0.7,
which is the value used by Boldrin, Christiano, and Fisher (2001). These authors find that
h = 0.7 enhances the ability of a standard DSGE model to account for key asset market
statistics. The density for a00 implies that in response to a 1% increase in the return to
capital, utilization rates rise by 0.1 to 0.3%.


4.2     DSGE Model Estimation and Forecasting of Core Variables

The first step of our empirical analysis is to estimate the DSGE model. While we estimate
the model recursively, starting with the sample 1984:I to 2000:IV and ending with the
sample 1984:I to 2007:III, we will focus our discussion of the parameter estimates on the
final estimation sample. Summary statistics for the posterior distribution (means and 90%
probability intervals) are provided in Table 1. For long horizon forecasts, the most important
parameters are γ, π∗ , and β. Our estimate of the average technology growth rate implies
that output, consumption, and investment grow at an annualized rate of 1.6%. According
to our estimates of π∗ and β the target inflation rate is 2.9% and the long-run nominal
interest rate is 5.5%. The cross-equation restrictions of our model generate a nominal wage
growth of about 4.5%.

      Our policy rule estimates imply a strong response of the central bank to inflation
ψ̂1 = 3.05 and a tempered reaction to deviations of output from its long-run growth path
ψ̂2 = 0.06. As discussed in Del Negro and Schorfheide (2008), estimates of wage and price
stickiness based on aggregate price and wage inflation data tend to be somewhat fragile. We
obtain ζ̂p = 0.66 and ζ̂w = 0.25, which means that wages are nearly flexible and the price
stickiness is moderate. According to the estimated Calvo parameter, firms re-optimize their
prices every three quarters.

      The technology growth shocks have very little serial correlation and the estimated in-
novation standard deviation is about 0.6%. These estimates are consistent with direct
calculations based on Solow residuals. At an annualized rate, the monetary policy shock
                                                                                                       15


has a standard deviation of 56 basis points. Both the government spending shock gt and the
labor supply shock φt have estimated autocorrelations near unity. The labor supply shock
captures much of the persistence in the hours series.

    We proceed by plotting estimates of the exogenous shocks in Figure 1. These shocks
are included in the vector st = M ςt that is used as regressor in the auxiliary model (22).
Formally, we depict filtered latent variables, ŝj,t|t , conditional on the posterior mean θ̂T for
the period 1984:I to 2007:III. In line with the parameter estimates reported in Table 1, the
filtered technology growth process appears essentially iid. The processes gt and φt exhibit
long-lived deviations from zero and in part capture low frequency movements of exogenous
demand components and hours worked, respectively. µt is the investment-specific technology
shock. Its low frequency movements capture trend differentials in output, consumption, and
investment.

    At this point a comparison between our estimates of the latent shock processes and the
estimates reported by BG is instructive. By construction, our filtered state variables ŝt|t are
moving averages of the observables yt . In contrast, BG’s estimates of the latent states are
functions not just of yt (in our notation), but also of all the other observables included in
their measurement equations, namely numerous measures of inflation as well as 25 principle
components constructed from about 70 macroeconomic time series. Due to differences in
model specification and data definitions, it is difficult to compare our estimates of the latent
states and those reported by BG directly. However, BG overlay smoothed states obtained
from the direct estimation of their DSGE model with estimates obtained from their DSGE-
DFM. The main difference between the estimated DSGE and DSGE-DFM states is that
some of the latter, namely productivity, preferences, and government spending, are a lot
smoother. The likely reason is that the DSGE-DFM measurement equations for the seven
core variables contain autoregressive measurement errors, which absorb some of the low
frequency movements in these series.

    Table 2 summarizes pseudo-out-of-sample root-mean-squared error (RMSE) statistics
for the seven core variables that are used to estimate the DSGE model: the growth rates
of output, consumption, investment, and nominal wages, as well as log hours worked, GDP
deflator inflation, and the federal funds rate. We report RMSEs for horizons h = 1, h = 2,
h = 4, and h = 12 and compare the DSGE model forecasts to those from an AR(1) model,
which is recursively estimated by OLS.7 h-step ahead growth (inflation) rate forecasts refer
  7 The   h-step forecast is generated by iterating one-step ahead predictions forward, ignoring parameter
uncertainty: ŷi,T +h|T = β̂0,OLS + β̂1,OLS ŷi,T +h−1|T , where the OLS estimators are obtained from the
                                                                                             16


to percentage changes between period T + h − 1 and T + h. Boldface entries indicate that
the DSGE model attains a RMSE that is lower than that of the AR(1) model. We used the
Harvey, Leybourne, and Newbold (1998) version of the Diebold-Mariano (1995) test for equal
forecast accuracy of the DSGE and the AR(1) model, employing a quadratic loss function.
Due to the fairly short forecast period, most of the loss differentials are insignificant.

     The RMSE for one-quarter-ahead forecasts of output and consumption obtained from
the estimated DSGE model is only slightly larger than the RMSE associated with the AR(1)
forecasts. The DSGE model generates a lower RMSE for investment and hours worked
forecasts. RMSEs for inflation rates rates are essentially identical across the two models.
The AR(1) model performs better than the DSGE model in forecasting nominal wage growth
and interest rates. The accuracy of long-run forecasts is sensitive to mean growth estimates,
which are restricted to be equal for output, consumption, and investment. Moreover, the
DSGE model implies that nominal wage growth equals output plus inflation growth in the
long-run.

     In Table 3 we are comparing the pseudo-out-of-sample RMSEs obtained with our esti-
mated DSGE model to those reported in three other studies, namely (i) DSSW, (ii) Edge,
Kiley, and Laforte (EKL, 2008), and (iii) Smets and Wouters (2007). Since all studies differ
with respect to the forecast period, we report sample standard deviations over the respec-
tive forecast periods, computed from our data set. Unlike the other three studies, EKL use
real time data and report mean absolute errors instead of RMSEs. Overall, the RMSEs
reported in DSSW are slightly worse than those in the other three studies. This might be
due to the fact that DSSW use a rolling window of 120 observations to estimate their DSGE
model and start forecasting in the mid 1980s, whereas the other papers let the estimation
sample increase and start forecasting in the 1990s. Only EKL are able to attain an RMSE
for output growth that is lower than the sample standard deviation. The RMSEs for the
inflation forecasts range from 0.22 to 0.27 and are very similar across studies. They are only
slightly larger than the sample standard deviations. Finally, the interest rate RMSEs are
substantially lower than the sample standard deviations, because the forecasts are able to
exploit the high persistence of the interest rate series.
regression yi,t = β0 + β1 yi,t−1 + ui,t .
                                                                                                  17


4.3     Forecasting Non-Core Variables with Auxiliary Regressions

We now turn to the estimation of the auxiliary regressions for PCE inflation, core PCE
inflation, the unemployment rate, and housing starts. The following elements are included
in the vector st that appears as regressor in (22):

                      st = M ςt = [ct , it , k̄t , Rt , wt , at , φt , µt , bt , gt , λf,t ]0 .

To construct a prior mean for α1 , we link each zt with a conceptually related DSGE model
variable zt† and use (25). More specifically, we link the two measures of PCE inflation to the
final good inflation πt , the unemployment rate to a scaled version of log hours worked Lt ,
and housing starts to scaled percentage deviations it of investment from its trend path, see
Table 4. Our DSGE model has only a single final good, which is domestically produced and
used for consumption and investment. Hence, using identical measurement equations for
inflation in consumption expenditures and GDP seems reasonable. Linking the unemploy-
ment rate with hours worked can be justified by the observation that most of the variation
of hours worked over the business cycle is due to changes in employment rather than vari-
ation along the intensive margin. Finally, housing starts can be viewed as a measure of
investment, namely investment in residential structures. Since the housing starts series has
no apparent trend, we link it to investment deviations from trend.

      The four panels of Figure 2 depict the sample paths of the non-core variables zt and
the related DSGE model variables zt† . The GDP deflator and hours worked are directly
observable, while the investment series it is latent and obtained from ŝt|t . The inflation
measures are highly correlated. PCE inflation is more volatile and core PCE inflation is less
volatile than GDP deflator inflation. In the bottom left panel we re-scale and re-center log
hours such that it is commensurable with the unemployment rate. These two series are also
highly correlated. The bottom right panel shows that the DSGE model implied investment
series is somewhat smoother than the housing starts series. However, except for the period
from 2000 to 2002 the low frequency movements of the two series are at least qualitatively
similar.

      To proceed with the Bayesian estimation of (23) we have to specify the hyperparameters.
In our framework τ can be interpreted as the prior standard deviation of the idiosyncratic
error ξ1 . We set τ equal to 0.12 (PCE inflation), 0.11 (core PCE inflation), 0.40 (unemploy-
ment rate), and 0.10 (housing starts). These values imply that the prior variance of ξ1 is
about 15% to 20% of the sample variance of z1 . We set the degrees of freedom parameter
ν of the inverted gamma prior for ση equal to 2, restrict λ0 = λ1 = λ, and consider three
                                                                                                 18


values: 1.00, 0.10, and 1E-5. The value 1E-5 corresponds to a dogmatic prior under which
posterior estimate and prior mean essentially coincide. As we increase λ, we allow the factor
loading coefficients α to differ from the prior mean.

    The estimates of the auxiliary regressions are summarized in Table 5. Rather than
providing numerical values for the entire α vector, we focus on the persistence and the
standard deviation of the innovation to the idiosyncratic component. By construction,
ŝ0t|t µα1 ,0 , where µα1 ,0 is the prior mean of α1 , reproduces the time paths of the GDP deflator
inflation, log hours worked, and investment deviations from trend, respectively. Thus, for
1E-5 the idiosyncratic error term ξt essentially picks up the discrepancies between non-core
variables and the related DSGE model variables depicted in Figure 2. For the two inflation
series the estimate of ση falls as we increase the hyperparameter. The larger λ the more of
the variation in the variable is explained by ŝ0t|t α̂1 , where α̂1 is the posterior mean of α1 .
For instance, the variability of core PCE inflation captured by the factors is 5 times as large
as the variability due to the idiosyncratic disturbance ξt if the λ is equal to one. This factor
drops to 1.4 if the prior is tightened. For PCE inflation the idiosyncratic disturbance is
virtually serially uncorrelated, whereas for core PCE inflation the serial correlation ranges
from 0.2 (λ = 1) to 0.5 (λ = 1E-5).

    For unemployment, setting λ = 1E-5 implies that the prior and posterior means of the
factor loadings α are essentially identical. Unemployment loads on ct , it , k̄t , µt , and gt . The
intuition is that output in our model can be obtained from consumption, investment, and
government spending (see Equation (15)) and hours worked can be determined from the
production function as a function of output and capital (see Equation (5)). If the hyper-
parameter is raised to 0.1 or 1.0 then unemployment also loads on the interest rate, wages,
and the shocks at and bt . However, in general we find it difficult to interpret the estimates
of particular elements of α1 , because the some of the variables contained in the vector st
are endogenous equilibrium objects that in turn respond to the exogenous state variables.
Hence, we will focus on the estimate of ŝ0t|t α1 and the response of zt to structural shocks
below. The most striking feature of the unemployment estimates is the high persistence of
ξt , with ρξ estimates around 0.98.

    For housing starts, the measurement error process is slightly less persistent than for
unemployment, but the signal-to-noise ratio is generally low, which is not surprising in view
of the fairly large discrepancy between housing starts and it shown in the bottom right
panel of Figure 2. Unlike for the other three non-core series, the lowest signal-to-noise ratio
for housing starts is obtained for λ = 1. An increase of λ from 1E-5 to 1 decreases the
                                                                                                   19


variability of ŝ0t|t α̂1 by more than the variability of the measurement error process, as is
evident from the bottom right panel of Figure 3.

    Figure 3 displays the time path of α̂0 + ŝ0t|t α̂1 for different choices of the hyperparameter.
Consider the two inflation series. For λ = 1E-5 the factor predicted path for the two inflation
rates is essentially identical and reproduces the GDP deflator inflation. As the λ is increased
to one they more closely follow the two PCE inflation measures, which is consistent with the
estimates of ρ and ση reported in Table 5. The predicted paths for the unemployment rate
behave markedly different. If we set λ = 1, then the predicted path resembles the actual
path fairly closely, with the exception of the end of the sample. Hence, the implied ξt series
stays close to zero until about 2002 and then drops to about -2% between 2002 and 2006.
As we decrease λ to 1E-5, the predicted path shifts downward. The estimate of ξ1 is roughly
2% and ξt follows approximately a random walk process subsequently that captures the gap
between the path predicted with the factors and the actual unemployment series.

    The last column of Table 5 contains log marginal likelihood values ln pλ (Z T ) for the four
auxiliary regression models as a function of the hyperparameter λ. These values can be used
for a data-driven hyperparameter choice that trades off in-sample fit against complexity of
the regression model.8 According to the marginal likelihoods, the preferred choice for λ
is 0.1 for core PCE inflation and the unemployment rate and 1E-5 for PCE inflation and
housing starts. The log marginal data density can also be interpreted as a one-step-ahead
predictive score:
                                         T
                                         X −1 Z
                                  T
                          ln pλ (Z ) =            p(zt+1 |ψ, Z t )pλ (ψ|Z t )dψ.                 (29)
                                         t=0

Thus, we would expect the λ rankings obtained from one-step-ahead pseudo-out-of-sample
forecast error statistics to be comparable to the rankings obtained from the marginal likeli-
hoods.

    Forecast error statistics for the non-modelled variables are provided in Table 6. We
compare RMSEs of the forecasts generated with our auxiliary models to two alternative
models. First, as in Section 4.2 we consider an AR(1) model for zt that is estimated by
OLS and from which we generate h-step forecasts by iterating one-step ahead predictions
forward. Second, we consider multi-step least squares regressions of the form

                                            0
                                 zt = β0 + yt−h β1 + zt−h β2 + ut ,                              (30)
  8A   detailed discussion of hyperparameter selection based on marginal likelihoods can be found, for
instance, in DSSW.
                                                                                            20


estimated for horizons h = 1, h = 2, h = 4, and h = 12. Recall that the filtered states
ŝt|t are essentially moving averages of yt and its lags. Hence, both (23) and (30) generate
predictions of zt+h as a function of zt as well as yt and its lags. However, the restrictions
imposed on the parameters of the implied prediction functions are very different. While our
least squares estimation of (30) leaves the coefficient vector β1 essentially unrestricted and
excludes additional lags of yt , the auxiliary regression model (23) tilts the estimates of α1
toward loadings derived from the DSGE model and additional lags of yt implicitly enter the
prediction through the filtered state vector.

      Over short horizons, our auxiliary regression models attain a lower RMSE than the
AR(1) benchmark for PCE inflation, the unemployment rate, and housing starts. The im-
provements of the unemployment forecasts are significant. For one-step-ahead forecasts, the
preferred choice of λ is 1E-5. For PCE inflation and housing starts the value of λ that yields
the highest marginal likelihood also generates the lowest RMSE. For the unemployment rate
the marginal likelihoods for λ equals 0.1 and 1E-5 are very similar and so are the RMSE
statistics. The only discrepancy between RMSE and marginal likelihood ranking arises for
core PCE inflation. We conjecture that the different rankings could be in part due to the
persistent deviations of core PCE inflation from ŝ0t|t α̂1 at the beginning of the sample, as
evident from the top right panel of Figure 3. According to (29) predictive accuracy at the
beginning of the sample affects the marginal likelihood, but it does not enter our RMSE
statistics, which are computed from 2001 onward. Over a longer horizon, core PCE and un-
employment forecasts from our auxiliary regressions dominate the AR(1) forecasts, whereas
the PCE inflation and housing starts forecasts are slightly less precise. Except for short
to medium term core PCE inflation forecasts, our auxiliary regressions with λ = 1E-5 are
slightly better than the forecasts obtained from the simple predictive regression (30).


4.4     Multivariate Considerations

So far the analysis has focused on univariate measures of forecast accuracy. A conservative
interpretation of our findings and those reported elsewhere, e.g., Adolfson et al. (2005, 2007)
and Edge, Kiley, and Laforte (2008), is that by and large the univariate forecast performance
of DSGE models is not worse than that of competitive benchmark models, such as simple
AR(1) specifications or more sophisticated Bayesian VARs. The key advantage of DSGE
models and the reason that central banks are considering them for projections and policy
analysis, is that these models use modern macroeconomic theory to explain and predict
comovements of aggregate time series over the business cycle. Historical observations can
                                                                                          21


be decomposed into the contributions of the underlying exogenous disturbances, such as
technology, preference, government spending, or monetary policy shocks. Future paths of
the endogenous variables can be constructed conditional on particular realizations of the
monetary policy shocks that reflect potential future nominal interest rate paths. While it is
difficult to quantify some of these desirable attributes of DSGE model forecasts and trade
them off against forecast accuracy in a RMSE sense, we will focus on three multivariate
aspects. First, we conduct posterior predictive checks for the correlation between core
and non-core variables captured by our framework. Second, we present impulse response
functions to a monetary policy shock and document how the shock transmits to the non-core
variables through our auxiliary regression equations. Third, we examine some features of the
predictive density that our empirical model generates for the core and non-core variables.

    Posterior predictive checks for correlations between non-core and core variables are
summarized in Table 7 for λ = 1E-5, which is the value of λ that leads to the lowest
one-step-ahead forecast RMSE. Using the posterior draws for DSGE and auxiliary model
parameters we simulate a trajectory of 100 zt and yt observations and compute sample
correlations of interest. The posterior predictive distribution of these sample correlations
is then summarized by 90% credible intervals. Moreover, we report sample correlations
computed from U.S. data. The empirical model captures the correlations between non-core
and core variables well, if the actual sample correlations do not lie too far in the tails of
the corresponding posterior predictive distribution. With the exception of the correlations
between output growth and the unemployment rate all of the correlations computed from
U.S. data lie inside of the corresponding 90% credible sets.

    An important aspect of monetary policy making is assessing the effect of changes in
the federal funds rate. In the DSGE model we represent these changes – unanticipated
deviations from the policy rule – as monetary policy shocks. An attractive feature of our
framework is that it generates a link between the structural shocks that drive the DSGE
model and other non-modeled variables through the auxiliary regressions. We can compute
impulse response functions of zt to a monetary policy shock as follows:

                                     ∂zt+h  ∂s0
                                           = t+h α1 ,
                                     ∂R,t  ∂R,t

where ∂s0t+h /∂R,t is obtained from the DSGE model.

    In Figure 4 we plot impulse responses of the four non-core variables (bottom panels) and
the four related DSGE model related variables (top panels: output, inflation, investment,
and hours) to a one-standard deviation monetary policy shock. The one standard deviation
                                                                                                 22


increase to the monetary policy shock translates into a 40 basis point increase in the funds
rate, measured at an annual rate. The estimated DSGE model predicts that output and
hours worked drop by 10 basis points in the first quarter and returns to its trend path after
seven quarters. Investment is more volatile and drops by about 19 basis points. Quarter-
to-quarter inflation falls by 10 basis points and returns to its steady state within two years.
Regardless of the choice of hyperparameter, the PCE inflation responses closely resemble
the GDP deflator inflation responses both qualitatively and quantitatively. The core PCE
inflation, unemployment, and housing starts responses are more sensitive to the choice of
hyperparameter. If λ is equal to 1E-5 and we force the factor loadings to match those of
hours worked, the unemployment rises by about 3.5 basis points one period after impact.
As we relax the hyperparameter, which worsens the RMSE of the unemployment forecast,
the initial effect of the monetary policy shock on unemployment is dampened. Likewise,
the core PCE response drops from 10 basis points to about 4 basis points. The annualized
number of housing starts drops by about 6,000 units for λ = 1E-5 and by 22,000 units if
λ = 1. Unlike for core PCE inflation, housing starts respond more strongly to a monetary
policy shock if the restrictions on the factor loadings are relaxed.

    Our empirical model generates a joint density forecast for the core and non-core vari-
ables, which reflects uncertainty about both parameters and future realizations of shocks.
A number of different methods exist to evaluate multivariate predictive densities. To assess
whether the probability density forecasts are well calibrated, that is, are consistent with
empirical frequencies, one can construct the multivariate analog of a probability integral
transform of the actual observations and test whether these transforms are uniformly dis-
tributed and serially uncorrelated. A formalization of this idea is provided in Diebold, Hahn,
and Tay (1999).

    We will subsequently focus on log predictive scores (Good, 1952). To fix ideas, consider
the following simple example. Let xt = [x1,t , x2,t ]0 be a 2 × 1 vector and consider the
following two forecast models
                                                                                
                         0    1       0                                0          1   ρ
      M1 : xt ∼ N   ,                  ,   M2 :    xt ∼ N          ,             .
                         0    0       1                                0          ρ   1

Under a quadratic loss function the two models deliver identical univariate forecasts for
each linear combination of the elements of xt . Nonetheless, the predictive distributions are
distinguishable. Let Σi be the covariance matrix of the predictive distribution associated
with model Mi . The log predictive score is defined as the log predictive density evaluated
                                                                                                         23


at a sequence of realizations of xt , t = 1, . . . , T :
                                                                      T
                                   T        T           1 X 0 −1
                     LP SC(Mi ) = − ln(2π) − ln |Σi | −     x Σ xt .
                                   2        2           2 t t i

Roughly speaking, if the actual xt was deemed unlikely by Mi and falls in a low density
region (e.g., the tails) of the predictive distribution, then the score is low. Let Σ11 , Σ12 ,
and Σ22 denote partitions of Σ that conform with the partitions of x. If we factorize the
joint predictive density of xt into a marginal and a conditional density, we can rewrite the
predictive score as
                                                                          T
                              T           T                 1 X 2
          LP SC(Mi )       = − ln(2π) − ln |Σi,11 | −                x                              (31)
                              2           2               2Σi,11 t=1 1,t
                                                           T                         2
                              T                    1      X
                                                                             −1
                             − ln |Σi,22|11 | −                x2,t − Σi,21 Σi,11 x1,t ,
                              2                 2Σi,22|11 t=1

where
                                   Σi,22|11 = Σ22 − Σi,21 Σ−1
                                                           i,11 Σi,12 .


We can express the difference between log predictive scores for models M1 and M2 as
                                                           T                      T
                                       T                1X 2             1      X
   LP SC(M1 ) − LP SC(M2 ) =             ln |1 − ρ2 | −       x2,t +                (x2,t − ρx1,t )2 .
                                       2                2 t=1        2(1 − ρ2 ) t=1

Here the contribution of the marginal distribution of x1,t to the predictive scores cancels
out, because it is the same for M1 and M2 . It is straightforward to verify that for large
T the predictive score will be negative if in fact the xt ’s are generated from M2 . In fact,
the log score differential has similar properties as a log likelihood ratio and is widely used
                                                                                  PT
in the prequential theory discussed in Dawid (1992). Moreover, notice that T1 t=1 (x2,t −
ρx1,t )2 can be interpreted as the mean-squared-error of a forecast of x2,t conditional on the
realization of x1,t . If x1,t and x2,t have non-zero correlation, the conditioning improves the
accuracy of the x2,t forecast. We will exploit this insight below.

    Figure 5 depicts bivariate scatter plots generated from the joint predictive distribution
of core and non-core variables. The predictive distribution captures both parameter uncer-
tainty as well as shock uncertainty. We focus on one-step-ahead predictions for 2001:IV and
2006:III. We use filled circles to indicate the actual values (small, light blue), the uncondi-
tional mean predictions (medium, yellow), and the conditional means of ouput growth, PCE
inflation, and unemployment given the actual realization of the nominal interest rate. We
approximate the predictive distributions by student t distributions with mean µ, variance
                                                                                                              24


Σ, and ν degrees of freedom.9 We replace µ and Σ by the sample means and covariance ma-
trices computed from the draws from the predictive distributions. Regardless of the degrees
of freedom ν the conditional mean of x2 given the realization of x1 is given by:

                                       x̂2|1 = µ2 + Σ21 Σ−1
                                                         11 (x1 − µ1 ).                                     (32)

In Figure 5 the nominal interest rate plays the role of the conditioning variable x1 .

     First, consider the predictive distribution for output growth and interest rates in 2001:IV.
The predictive distribution is centered at an interest rate of 4% and output growth of about
0%. The actual interest rate turned out to be 2% and output grew at about 20 basis points
over the quarter. Since the predictive distribution exhibits a negative correlation between
interest rates and output growth, conditioning on the actual realization of the interest rate
leads to an upward revision of the output growth forecast to about 30 basis points. In
2006:III the actual interest rate exceeds the mean of the predictive distribution, and hence
conditioning reduces the output growth forecast.

     PCE inflation (λ = 1E-5) and the interest rate are strongly positively correlated and the
conditioning leads to a downward revision of the inflation forecast in 2001:IV and an upward
revision in 2006:III. Our estimation procedure is set up in a way that leaves the coefficients
of the auxiliary regression uncorrelated with the DSGE model parameters. Hence, all the
correlation in the predictive distribution is generated by shock uncertainty and the fact that
the auxiliary regression links the non-core variable to the DSGE model states. Finally, we
turn to the joint predictive distribution of unemployment (λ = 1E-5) and interest rates.
Since the idiosyncratic shock ξt plays an important role for the unemployment dynamics
according to our estimates and it is assumed to be independent of the DSGE model shocks,
the predictive distribution exhibits very little correlation. In this case, conditioning hardly
affects the unemployment forecast.

     Figure 5 focuses on two particular time periods. More generally, if the family of t-
distributions provides a good approximation to the predictive distribution, and our model
captures the comovements between interest rates and the other variables, then we should
be able to reduce the RMSE of the output, unemployment, and inflation forecasts by con-
ditioning on the interest rate. Tables 8 and 9 provide RMSE ratios of conditional and
unconditional forecasts. To put these numbers into perspective we also report the ratio of
the conditional versus the unconditional variance computed from a t distribution with ν = 5
   9 Under   this parameterization, the density of a m-variate t distribution is proportional to [1 + (ν − 2)(x −
µ)0 Σ−1 (x   − µ)]−(ν+m)/2 .
                                                                                                            25


degrees of freedom and a normal distribution (ν = ∞). Using the subscript j to index the
pseudo-out-of-sample forecasts, we define the average theoretical RMSE ratio:
                v
                u ν−2                                             
             J          1 +  1
                                (x    − µ    )0 Σ−1 (x     − µ    )  (Σ22,j − Σ21,j Σ−1
         1                        1,j    1,j           1,j    1,j                    11,j Σ12,j )
                u
           X       ν        ν−2                  11,j
  R(ν) =
                t
                                                                                                  .
         J j=1                                        Σ22,j
                                                                                                          (33)

     The results obtained when conditioning on the interest rate, reported in Table 8, are
somewhat disappointing. Although, except for housing starts, the bivariate correlations
between the interest rate and the other variables are non-zero and would imply a potential
RMSE reduction between 1% and 12%, the RMSE obtained from the conditional forecasts
exceeds that from the unconditional forecasts.10 If we condition on the realization of the
GDP deflator inflation (Table 9), then the results improve and we observe a RMSE reduction
at least for output growth and PCE inflation, although not as large as predicted by R(ν).

     These last results have to be interpreted carefully. It is important to keep in mind
that we are examining particular dimensions of the joint predictive density generated by
our model. While in the past, researchers have reported log predictive scores and predictive
likelihood ratios for DSGE model predictions, these summary statistics make it difficult to
disentangle in which dimensions the predictive distributions are well calibrated. We de-
cided to focus on bivariate distributions, trying to assess whether the DSGE model and the
auxiliary regressions capture the comovements of, say, interest rates with output growth,
inflation, and unemployment. Our results were mixed: bivariate distributions that involved
the interest rate were not well calibrated in view of the actual realizations; bivariate dis-
tributions that involved the GDP deflator were somewhat more successful capturing the
uncertainty about future pairwise realizations. An examination of the sequences of predic-
tive densities and realizations – a few of them were displayed in Figure 5 – suggested to us
that the high RMSEs of the conditional forecasts were often caused by a small number of
outliers, that is, actual observations that fall far into the tails of the predictive distribution.
This suggests that more elaborate distributions for the structural DSGE model shocks might
provide a remedy.
  10 2001:IV   and 2006:III are not representative, since conditioning in these periods leads to a reduction of
the forecast error.
                                                                                           26


5    Conclusion

This paper has developed a framework to generate DSGE model-based forecasts for eco-
nomic variables that are not explicitly modelled but that are of interest to the forecaster.
Our framework can be viewed as a simplified version of the DSGE model based factor model
proposed by BG. We first estimate the DSGE model on a set of core variables, extract the
latent state variables, and then estimate auxiliary regressions that relate non-modelled vari-
ables to the model-implied state variables. We compare the forecast performance of our
model with that of a collection of AR(1) models based on pseudo-out-of-sample RMSEs.
While our approach does not lead to a dramatic reduction in the forecast errors, the fore-
casts are by and large competitive with those of the statistical benchmark model. We
also examined bivariate predictive distributions generated from our empirical model. Our
framework inherits the two key advantages of DSGE model based forecasting: it delivers an
interpretation of the predicted trajectories in light of modern macroeconomic theory and it
enables the forecaster to conduct a coherent policy analysis.



References

 Adolfson, Malin, Stefan Laseen, Jesper Linde, and Mattias Villani (2005): “Forecasting
     Performance of an Open Economy Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Model,”
     Sveriges Riksbank Working Paper Series, 190.

 Adolfson, Malin, Michael K. Andersson, Jesper Linde, Mattias Villani, and Anders Vredin
     (2007): “Modern Forecasting Models in Action: Improving Macroeconomic Analyses
     at Central Banks,” Sveriges Riksbank Research Paper Series, 23.

 Adolfson, Malin, Stefan Laseen, Jesper Linde, and Mattias Villani (2008): “Evaluating
     an Estimated New Keynesian Small Open Economy Model,” Journal of Economic
     Dynamics & Control, 32, 2690-2721.

 An, Sungbae and Frank Schorfheide (2007): “Bayesian Analysis of DSGE Models,” Econo-
     metric Reviews, 26, 113-172.

 Barndorff-Nielsen, O. and G. Schou (1973): “On the Parameterization of Autoregressive
     Models by Partial Autocorrelations,” Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 3, 408-419.

 Boivin, Jean and Marc Giannoni (2006): “DSGE Models in a Data-Rich Environment,”
     Manuscript, HEC Montreal and Columbia University.
                                                                                      27


Boldrin, Michele, Lawrence Christiano, and Jonas Fisher (2001): “Habit Persistence, Asset
    Returns, and the Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 91, 149-166.

Calvo, Guillermo (1983): “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal
    of Monetary Economics, 12, 383-398.

Chang, Yongsung and Sun-Bin Kim (2006): “From Individual to Aggregate Labor Supply:
    A Quantitative Analysis based on a Heterogeneous Agent Macroeconomy,” Interna-
    tional Economic Review, 47, 1-27.

Chib, Siddartha (1995): “Marginal Likelihood from the Gibbs Output,” Journal of the
    American Statistical Association, 90, 1313-1321.

Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities
    and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy,
    113, 1-45.

Coenen, Günter, Peter McAdam, and Roland Straub (2008): “Tax Reform and Labour-
    Market Performance in the Euro Area: A Simulation-Based Analysis Using the New
    Area-Wide Model,” Journal of Economic Dynamics & Control, 32, 2543-2583.

Dawid, A.P. (1992): “Prequential Analysis, Stochastic Complexity and Bayesian Infer-
    ence.” In: J.M. Bernado, J.O. Berger, A.P. Dawid and A.F.M. Smith (Eds) Bayesian
    Statistics 4, 109-125.

Del Negro, Marco and Frank Schorfheide (2008): “Forming Priors for DSGE Models (and
    How it Affects the Assessment of Nominal Rigidities),” Journal of Monetary Eco-
    nomics, 55, 1191-1208.

Del Negro, Marco, Frank Schorfheide, Frank Smets, and Rafael Wouters (2007): “On the
    Fit of New Keynesian Models,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 25,
    123-162.

Diebold, Francis and Roberto Mariano (1995): “Comparing Predictive Accuracy,” Journal
    of Business & Economic Statistics, 13, 253-263.

Diebold, Francis, Jinyong Hahn, and Anthony Tay (1999): “Multivariate Density Forecast
    Evaluation and Calibration in Financial Risk Management: High Frequency Returns
    on Foreign Exchange,” Review of Economic and Statistics, 81, 661-673.
                                                                                     28


Edge, Rochelle, Michael Kiley, and Jean-Phillipe Laforte (2008): “A Comparison of Fore-
    cast Performance Between Federal Reserve Staff Forecasts, Simple Reduced-Form
    Models, and a DSGE Model,” Manuscript, Federal Reserve Board of Governors.

Giannone, Domenico, Francesca Monti, and Lucrezia Reichlin (2008): “Incorporating Con-
    junctural Analysis in Structural Macroeconomic Models,” Manuscript, ECARES and
    London Business School.

Good, I.J. (1952): “Rational Decisions” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society B, 14,
    107-114.

Harvey, David, Stephen Leybourne, and Paul Newbold (1998): “Tests for Forecast Encom-
    passing,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 16, 254-259.

Kimball, Miles and Matthew Shapiro (2003): “Labor Supply: Are the Income and Substi-
    tution Effects Both Large or Both Small?” Manuscript, University of Michigan.

Monti, Francesca (2008): “Forecast with Judgement and Models,” National Bank of Bel-
    gium Working Paper, 153, December.

Sims, Christopher (2002): “Solving Rational Expectations Models,” Computational Eco-
    nomics, 20, 1-20.

Smets, Frank and Rafael Wouters (2003): “An Estimated Stochastic Dynamic General
    Equilibrium Model for the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association,
    1, 1123-1175.

Smets, Frank and Rafael Wouters (2004): “Forecasting with a Bayesian DSGE Model: An
    Application to the Euro Area,” Journal of Common Market Studies, 42, 841-67.

Smets, Frank and Rafael Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
    Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, 97, 586-606.

Taylor, John B. (1993): “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
    Conference Series on Public Policy, 39, 195-214.
                                                                      29




Table 1: Prior and Posterior of DSGE Model Parameters (Part 1)




                            Prior                  Posterior
         Name      Density Para (1) Para (2) Mean     90% Intv.
                             Household
           h       B        0.70       0.05   0.65 [ 0.58 , 0.72 ]
          a00      G        0.20       0.10   0.30 [ 0.13 , 0.47 ]
          νl       G        2.00       0.75   2.29 [ 1.33 , 3.28 ]
          ζw       B        0.60       0.20   0.25 [ 0.15 , 0.35 ]
      400(1/β − 1) G        2.00       1.00   1.034 [ 0.45 , 1.60 ]
                               Firms
           α       B        0.33       0.10   0.20 [ 0.15 , 0.24 ]
          ζp       B        0.60       0.20   0.66 [ 0.53 , 0.84 ]
              00
          S        G        4.00       1.50   2.29 [ 0.84 , 3.91 ]
          λf       G        0.15       0.10   0.14 [ 0.01 , 0.26 ]
                          Monetary Policy
         400π∗     N        3.00       1.50   2.94 [ 2.08 , 3.78 ]
          ψ1       G        1.50       0.40   3.05 [ 2.43 , 3.68 ]
          ψ2       G        0.20       0.10   0.06 [ 0.03 , 0.10 ]
          ρR       B        0.50       0.20   0.86 [ 0.83 , 0.89 ]
                                                                                                      30




      Table 1: Prior and Posterior of DSGE Model Parameters (Part 2)




                                               Prior                   Posterior
                  Name Density Para (1) Para (2) Mean                     90% Intv.
                                                       Shocks
                   400γ G                       2.00      1.00    1.57 [ 1.13 , 2.02 ]
                    g∗    G                     0.30      0.10    0.29 [ 0.13 , 0.43 ]
                    ρa    B                     0.20      0.10    0.19 [ 0.10 , 0.29 ]
                    ρµ    B                     0.80      0.05    0.80 [ 0.74 , 0.87 ]
                    ρλf   B                     0.60      0.20    0.67 [ 0.30 , 0.94 ]
                    ρg    B                     0.80      0.05    0.96 [ 0.95 , 0.98 ]
                    ρb    B                     0.60      0.20    0.85 [ 0.78 , 0.93 ]
                    ρφ    B                     0.60      0.20    0.98 [ 0.96 , 0.99 ]
                    σa    IG                    0.75      2.00    0.62 [ 0.54 , 0.69 ]
                    σµ    IG                    0.75      2.00    0.53 [ 0.38 , 0.68 ]
                    σλf   IG                    0.75      2.00    0.18 [ 0.15 , 0.21 ]
                    σg    IG                    0.75      2.00    0.33 [ 0.29 , 0.37 ]
                    σb    IG                    0.75      2.00    0.36 [ 0.28 , 0.45 ]
                    σφ    IG                    4.00      2.00    2.90 [ 1.99 , 3.80 ]
                    σR    IG                    0.20      2.00    0.14 [ 0.12 , 0.16 ]




Notes: Para (1) and Para (2) list the means and the standard deviations for the Beta (B),
Gamma (G), and Normal (N ) distributions; the upper and lower bound of the support
for the Uniform (U) distribution; s and ν for the Inverse Gamma (IG) distribution, where
                               2
                                   /2σ 2
pIG (σ|ν, s) ∝ σ −(ν+1) e−νs               . The joint prior distribution is obtained as a product of the
marginal distributions tabulated in the table and truncating this product at the boundary of
the determinacy region. Posterior summary statistics are computed based on the output of
the posterior sampler. The following parameters are fixed: δ = 0.025, λw = 0.3. Estimation
sample: 1984:I to 2007:III.
                                                                                          31




             Table 2: RMSE Comparison: DSGE Model versus AR(1)




          Series                          Model h = 1      h=2         h = 4 h = 12
          Output Growth (Q %)             DSGE     0.51    0.50        0.41   0.36
                                          AR(1)    0.50    0.49        0.44   0.37

          Consumption Growth (Q %)        DSGE     0.39    0.38        0.39   0.39
                                          AR(1)    0.37    0.37        0.34   0.31

          Investment Growth (Q %)         DSGE 1.44        1.56 1.47∗∗        1.52
                                          AR(1)    1.56    1.67        1.60   1.60

          Nominal Wage Growth (Q %) DSGE           0.67    0.70        0.66   0.56
                                          AR(1)    0.59    0.59        0.59   0.56

          100 × Log Hours                 DSGE 0.52∗∗ 0.88∗∗ 1.44∗∗ 2.07∗∗
                                          AR(1)    0.66    1.20        2.08   3.40

          Inflation (Q %)                 DSGE 0.22        0.23 0.19∗∗        0.24
                                          AR(1)    0.22    0.23        0.22   0.23

          Interest Rates (A %)            DSGE     0.71    1.34        2.13   2.25
                                                      ∗∗          ∗∗
                                          AR(1) 0.54       1.00        1.73   2.93




Notes: We report RMSEs for DSGE and AR(1) models. Numbers in boldface indicate a
lower RMSE of the DSGE model. ∗ (∗∗) denotes 10% (5%) significance of the two-sided
modified Diebold-Mariano test of equal predictive accuracy under quadratic loss. The RM-
SEs are computed based on recursive estimates starting with the sample 1984:I to 2000:IV
and ending with the samples 1984:I to 2007:III (h=1), 1984:I to 2007:II (h=2), 1984:I to
2006:III (h=4), 1984:I to 2004:III (h=12), respectively. h-step ahead growth (inflation) rate
forecasts refer to percentage changes between period T + h − 1 and T + h.
                                                                                        32




      Table 3: One-Step-Ahead Forecast Performance of DSGE Models




 Study                        Forecast Period      Output Growth Inflation Interest Rate
                                                       (Q %)       (Q %)       (A %)
 Schorfheide, Sill, Kryshko   2001:I to 2007:IV         0.51        0.22        0.71
                                                       (0.47)      (0.22)      (1.68)

 Del Negro et al. (2007)      1985:IV to 2000:I         0.73        0.27        0.87
                                                       (0.52)      (0.25)      (1.72)

 Edge, Kiley, Laforte (2008) 1996:III to 2005:II        0.38        0.22        0.59
                                                       (0.57)      (0.20)      (1.96)

 Smets, Wouters (2007)        1990:I to 2004:IV         0.57        0.24        0.43
                                                       (0.57)      (0.22)      (1.97)




Notes: Schorfheide, Sill, Kryshko: RMSEs, DSGE model is estimated recursively with data
starting in 1984:I. Del Negro et al. (2007, Table 2): RMSEs, VAR approximation of DSGE
model estimated based on rolling samples of 120 observations. Edge, Kiley, and Laforte
(2008, Table 4): Mean absolute errors, DSGE model is estimated recursively with data
starting in 1984:II. Smets and Wouters (2007, Table 3): RMSEs, DSGE model is estimated
recursively, starting with data from 1966:I. Numbers in parentheses are sample standard
deviations for forecast period, computed from the Schorfheide, Sill, Kryshko data set. Q %
is the quarter-to-quarter percentage change, and A % is an annualized rate.
                                                                                      33




          Table 4: Non-Modelled and Related DSGE Model Variables

   Non-Modelled Variable            DSGE Model Variable              Transformation
   PCE Inflation                    Final Good Inflation πt          None


   Core PCE Inflation               Final Good Inflation πt          None


   Unemployment Rate                Hours Worked Lt                  −0.31Lt


   Housing Starts                   Investment it                    0.033it




Notes: Here Lt and it are the DSGE model variables that appear in the model description
in Section 2.
                                                                                                    34




                      Table 5: Auxiliary Regression Estimates




                                      ρ                     ση             Signal/Noise
                                                                                   0
                                                                            var(ŝ
                                                                             ˆ     t|t α̂1 )
Series                  λ    Mean    90% Intv        Mean   90% Intv          var(
                                                                               ˆ ξ̂t )
                                                                                               ln pλ (Z T )
PCE Inflation         1.00   0.05 [ -0.14, 0.26 ] 0.03 [ 0.02, 0.03 ]           3.15             -0.03
                      0.10   0.05 [ -0.16, 0.25 ] 0.03 [ 0.02, 0.04 ]           2.62              4.82
                      1E-5 0.07 [ -0.11, 0.24 ] 0.04 [ 0.03, 0.05 ]             1.47             12.27

Core PCE Inflation    1.00   0.23   [ 0.03, 0.45 ]   0.01 [ 0.01, 0.02 ]        4.99             29.53
                      0.10   0.21 [ -0.02, 0.41 ] 0.01 [ 0.01, 0.02 ]           4.88             39.12
                      1E-5 0.53     [ 0.38, 0.68 ]   0.03 [ 0.02, 0.04 ]        1.35             22.58

Unemployment Rate 1.00       0.98   [ 0.96, 1.00 ] 0.019 [ 0.01, 0.02 ]         3.45             17.71
                      0.10   0.97   [ 0.95, 1.00 ] 0.019 [ 0.01, 0.02 ]         3.67             23.68
                      1E-5 0.98     [ 0.97, 1.00 ] 0.025 [ 0.02, 0.03 ]         1.91             22.78

Housing Starts        1.00   0.89   [ 0.76, 1.00 ] 0.007 [ 0.00, 0.01 ]         0.74             68.21
                      0.10   0.88   [ 0.74, 1.00 ] 0.007 [ 0.01, 0.01 ]         0.95             80.81
                      1E-5 0.96     [ 0.92, 1.00 ] 0.009 [ 0.01, 0.01 ]         0.88             82.64




Notes: The posterior summary statistics are computed based on the output of the Gibbs
sampler. The sample variance ratios are computed using the posterior mean estimate of α1 .
Estimation sample: 1984:I to 2007:III.
                                                                                         35



      Table 6: RMSEs for Auxiliary Regressions [PARTIALLY UPDATED]




        Series                          Model     λ    h = 1 h = 2 h = 4 h = 12
        PCE Inflation (Q %)             Aux     1.00   0.34     0.37   0.34   0.32
                                        Aux     0.10   0.33     0.35 0.32     0.35
                                        Aux     1E-5 0.32       0.34 0.30     0.33
                                        Regr.          0.33     0.35 0.32     0.49
                                        AR(1)          0.36     0.35   0.33   0.32

        Core PCE Inflation (Q %)        Aux     1.00   0.18     0.19   0.16   0.12
                                        Aux     0.10   0.18     0.18   0.15   0.11
                                        Aux     1E-5   0.16     0.20   0.18   0.15
                                        Regr.          0.14     0.14 0.17     0.35
                                        AR(1)          0.16     0.16   0.18   0.17

        Unemployment Rate (%)           Aux     1.00 0.16∗∗ 0.27 0.43         1.02
                                                           ∗∗
                                        Aux     0.10 0.15       0.24 0.39     0.97
                                        Aux     1E-5 0.15∗∗ 0.23∗ 0.37        0.74
                                        Regr.          0.20     0.37   0.72   1.39
                                        AR(1)          0.21     0.37   0.63   1.01

        Housing Starts (4 Million / Q) Aux      1.00   0.11     0.18   0.31   0.50
                                        Aux     0.10   0.11     0.17   0.29   0.48
                                        Aux     1E-5 0.10       0.16   0.27   0.45
                                        Regr.          0.10     0.16 0.26     0.43
                                        AR(1)          0.10     0.16   0.27   0.43




Notes: We report RMSEs for DSGE, AR(1), and regression models. Numbers in boldface
indicate that DSGE model attains lower RMSE than AR(1) model. ∗ (∗∗) denotes 10% (5%)
significance of the two-sided modified Diebold-Mariano test of equal predictive accuracy
under quadratic loss. The RMSEs are computed based on recursive estimates starting with
the sample 1984:I to 2000:IV and ending with the samples 1984:I to 2007:III (h=1), 1984:I
to 2007:II (h=2), 1984:I to 2006:III (h=4), 1984:I to 2004:III (h=12), respectively. h-step
ahead growth (inflation) rate forecasts refer to percentage changes between period T + h − 1
and T + h.
                                                                                           36




           Table 7: Posterior Predictive Check: Cross-Correlations




                                         Output Growth     Inflation      Interest Rates
       PCE Inflation         90% Intv.    [-0.46, 0.01]   [0.50, 0.91]     [ 0.11, 0.63]
       λ = 1E-5              Data            -0.07            0.75             0.42


       Core PCE Inflation    90% Intv.    [-0.47, 0.03]   [0.50, 0.91]     [ 0.07, 0.63]
       λ = 1E-5              Data             0.01            0.68             0.61


       Unemployment Rate 90% Intv.        [-0.32, 0.09]   [-0.26, 0.36]    [-0.24, 0.63]
       λ = 1E-5              Data             0.15            0.17             0.12


       Housing Starts        90% Intv     [-0.11, 0.33]   [-0.26, 0.33]    [-0.47, 0.43]
       λ = 1E-5              Data             0.23            0.05            -0.22




Notes: We report 90% credible intervals of the posterior predictive distribution for the
sample correlations of non-modelled variables with core variables. The data entries refer to
sample correlations calculated from U.S. data.
                                                                                           37




Table 8: RMSE Ratios: Conditional (on Interest Rates) versus Unconditional




    Series                              h=1          h=2          h=4         h = 12
    Output Growth (Q %)                 1.08         1.18         1.22          1.17
                                     (0.93, 0.94) (0.91, 0.99) (0.93, 1.06) (0.97, 0.99)

    100 × Log Hours                     1.23         1.42         1.57          2.05
                                     (0.96, 0.98) (0.91, 0.98) (0.93, 1.03) (0.96, 0.97)

    Inflation (Q %)                     1.14         1.18         1.86          2.02
                                     (0.80, 0.81) (0.90, 0.97) (0.90, 1.01) (0.93, 0.94)

    PCE Inflation (Q %)                 0.95         1.01         1.40          1.69
    λ = 1E-5                         (0.90, 0.90) (0.90, 0.97) (0.90, 1.01) (0.90, 0.91)

    Core PCE Inflation (Q %)            0.99         1.05         1.91          3.26
    λ = 1E-5                         (0.88, 0.87) (0.89, 0.96) (0.90, 1.01) (0.91, 0.92)

    Unemployment Rate (%)               1.16         1.43         1.60          1.45
    λ = 1E-5                         (0.98, 0.98) (0.97, 1.04) (0.96, 1.08) (0.93, 0.94)

    Housing Starts (4 Million / Q)      1.01         1.00         0.99          1.00
    λ = 1E-5                         (1.00, 0.99) (1.00, 1.08) (1.00, 1.12) (1.00, 1.02)




Notes: Using the draws from the posterior predictive distribution of two variables x1 and
x2 we construct conditional mean forecasts for x2 given x1 , assuming that the predictive
distribution is student-t with ν = 5 or ν = ∞ degrees of freedom. We report RMSE ratios
for conditional and unconditional recursive h-step ahead pseudo-out-of-sample forecast as
well as the theoretical reductions R(∞) and R(5) in parenthesis (see Equation (33) for a
definition).
                                                                                          38




Table 9: RMSE Ratios: Conditional (on GDP Deflator Inflation) versus Un-
conditional




   Series                              h=1          h=2          h=4         h = 12
   Output Growth (Q %)                 0.94         0.91         0.94          1.04
                                    (0.94, 0.88) (0.74, 0.69) (0.76, 0.68) (0.98, 0.90)

   100 × Log Hours                     1.01         1.03         1.06          0.92
                                    (0.98, 0.92) (0.74, 0.69) (0.74, 0.66) (0.98, 0.90)

   PCE Inflation (Q %)                 0.71         0.68         0.83          0.83
   λ = 1E-5                         (0.69, 0.65) (0.68, 0.63) (0.67, 0.60) (0.67, 0.61)

   Core PCE Inflation (Q %)            1.07         0.98         1.26          2.11
   λ = 1E-5                         (0.58, 0.55) (0.63, 0.59) (0.67, 0.60) (0.68, 0.62)

   Unemployment Rate (%)               1.06         1.08         1.09          1.10
   λ = 1E-5                         (0.99, 0.92) (0.99, 0.92) (0.99, 0.89) (0.95, 0.86)

   Housing Starts (4 Million / Q)      1.00         1.00         1.00          1.00
   λ = 1E-5                         (1.00, 0.93) (1.00, 0.93) (1.00, 0.90) (1.00, 0.91)




Notes: See Table 8.
                                                                                             39




                Figure 1: Latent State Variables of the DSGE Model



                            a                                        φ
           2                                       20
                                                    0
           0
                                                  −20
           −2                                     −40
            1985 1990 1995 2000 2005                1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

                            µ                                        b
           4                                        4
           2                                        2
           0                                        0
           −2                                      −2
            1985 1990 1995 2000 2005                1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

                            g                                       λf
           2                                        1
           0                                      0.5
           −2                                       0
           −4                                     −0.5
            1985 1990 1995 2000 2005                 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005




Notes: The six panels of the figure depict time series of elements of ŝt|t . Estimation sample:
1984:I to 2007:III.
                                                                                                 40




             Figure 2: Non-Core Variables and Related Model Variables


                     PCE Inflation, Inflation                 Core PCE Inflation, Inflation
            1.5                                        1.5

              1
                                                         1
            0.5
                                                       0.5
              0            pce                                        cpce
                           π                                          π
            −0.5                                        0
              1980       1990        2000       2010    1980        1990        2000      2010

                  Unemployment Rate, Hours                    Housing Starts, Investment
              8                                          1

                                                       0.5
              6
                                                         0
              4
                           ur                          −0.5           hs
                           −0.31 L                                    0.033 i
             2                                          −1
             1980        1990        2000       2010    1980        1990        2000      2010




Notes: The top two panels depict quarter-to-quarter inflation rates. In the bottom panels
we add constants to the scaled log of hours worked and investment deviations from trend
to match the means of the unemployment rate and housing starts over the period 1984:I to
2007:III.
                                                                                                                                41




                            Figure 3: Non-Core Variables and Factors



                           PCE Inflation                                                   Core PCE Inflation
   1.6                                                          1.6


   1.4                                                          1.4


   1.2                                                          1.2


    1                                                             1


   0.8                                                          0.8


   0.6                                                          0.6


   0.4                                                          0.4


   0.2                                                          0.2


    0                                                             0

           actual                                                        actual
  −0.2                                                          −0.2
           λ=1                                                           lam=1
           λ=1e−5                                                        lam=1e−5
  −0.4                                                          −0.4
   1980    1985     1990       1995        2000   2005   2010     1980    1985      1990         1995           2000   2005   2010




                      Unemployment Rate                                                    Housing Starts
    8                                                           2.6


                                                                2.4
    7
                                                                2.2


    6                                                            2


                                                                1.8
    5
                                                                1.6


    4                                                           1.4


                                                                1.2
    3
           actual                                                1       actual
           λ=1                                                           λ=1
           λ=1e−5                                                        λ=1e−5
     2                                                          0.8
    1980   1985     1990       1995        2000   2005   2010    1980    1985       1990         1995           2000   2005   2010




Notes: Figure depicts the actual (blue, solid) path of the non-core variables as well as the
factor predictions α̂0 + ŝ0t|t α̂1,T for λ = 1E-5 (light blue, dashed) and λ = 1 (red, dotted).
                                                                                          42



               Figure 4: Impulses Response to a Monetary Policy Shock



           (i) Core Variables: Output, GDP Deflator Inflation, Hours, Investment

                                    y                              π
                          0                          0.02

                       −0.02                            0

                                                     −0.02
                       −0.04
                                                     −0.04
                       −0.06
                                                     −0.06
                       −0.08                         −0.08

                        −0.1                          −0.1
                            0   5   10    15   20         0   5    10    15   20


                                    L                              i
                        0.02                          0.1

                          0                          0.05

                                                        0
                       −0.02
                                                     −0.05
                       −0.04
                                                      −0.1
                       −0.06
                                                     −0.15
                       −0.08                          −0.2

                        −0.1                         −0.25
                            0   5   10    15   20        0    5    10    15   20




(ii) Non-core Variables: PCE Inflation, core PCE Inflation, Unemployment, Housing Starts

                                    pce                           cpce
                        0.02                         0.02

                          0                             0

                       −0.02                         −0.02

                       −0.04                         −0.04

                       −0.06                         −0.06

                       −0.08                         −0.08

                        −0.1                          −0.1
                            0   5   10    15   20         0   5    10    15   20


                                    ur                            hs
                        0.04                        0.005

                        0.03                            0

                                                    −0.005
                        0.02
                                                     −0.01
                        0.01
                                                    −0.015
                          0                          −0.02

                       −0.01                      −0.025
                           0    5   10    15   20      0      5    10    15   20




Notes: Non-core variables: we depict log level responses for output, hours, and investment.
(ii) Non-core variables: we overlay two responses, corresponding to the auxiliary regressions
estimated with λ = 1E-5 (red, solid), and λ = 1 (blue, dashed). Estimation sample: 1984:I
to 2007:III.
                                                                                                                             43




                                   Figure 5: Bivariate One-Step-Ahead Predictive Distributions


                                             2001:IV                                                    2006:III
                              3                                                            3
       Output Growth (Q %)




                                                                     Output Growth (Q %)
                              2                                                            2
                              1                                                            1
                              0                                                            0
                             −1                                                            −1
                             −2                                                            −2
                             −3                                                            −3
                              0         2         4       6    8                            0      2         4       6   8
                                        Interest Rate (A %)                                        Interest Rate (A %)



                                             2001:IV                                                    2006:III
                             1.5                                                           1.5
     PCE Inflation (Q %)




                                                                   PCE Inflation (Q %)




                                  1                                                            1

                             0.5                                                           0.5

                                  0                                                            0

                             −0.5                                                          −0.5

                              −1                                                            −1
                               0         2         4       6   8                             0     2         4       6   8
                                         Interest Rate (A %)                                       Interest Rate (A %)



                                             2001:IV                                                    2006:III
                              6                                                             6
                                                                   Unemployment Rate (%)
     Unemployment Rate (%)




                             5.5                                                           5.5


                              5                                                             5

                             4.5                                                           4.5

                              4                                                             4
                               0        2         4       6    8                             0     2         4       6   8
                                        Interest Rate (A %)                                        Interest Rate (A %)



Notes: The panels depict a scatter plot of draws from the one-step-ahead predictive distri-
bution. The three filled circles denote: the actual value (small, light blue), the unconditional
mean predictor (medium, yellow), and the conditional mean predictor (large, brown). We
set λ = 1E-5.
                                                                                                 A-1


A        MCMC Implementation

DSGE model coefficients. The posterior sampler for the DSGE model is described in
An and Schorfheide (2007).

Gibbs sampler for the coefficients that appear in the measurement equations.
We will in turn derive the conditional distributions for a Gibbs sampler that iterates over
the conditional posteriors of α, ρ, and ση2 . We will start from the quasi-differenced form (23)
of the auxiliary regression. τ , λ0 , and λ1 are treated as hyperparameters and considered as
fixed in the description of the Gibbs sampler. Let L denote the lag operator.

Conditional posterior of α: The posterior density is of the form

                        p(α|ρ, ση2 , Z T , S T ) ∝ p(Z T |S T , α, ρ, ση2 )p(α).                (A.1)

Define

                       ση            ση
              y1   =      z1 , x01 =    [1, ŝ01|1 ]
                        τ            τ
              yt   =   (1 − ρL)zt , x0t = [1 − ρ, (1 − ρL)ŝ0t|t ]0 ,       t = 2, . . . , T,

which implies that (23) can be expressed as linear regression

                                           yt = x0t α + ηt .                                    (A.2)

If we let Y be a T × 1 matrix with rows yt and X be a T × k matrix with rows x0t , then we
can rewrite the regression in matrix form

                                           Y = Xα + E.

We deduce
                                                                       
                                                 1
              p(α|ρ, ση2 , Z T , S T ) ∝ exp − 2 (α − α̂)0 X 0 X(α − α̂)                        (A.3)
                                                2ση
                                                                             
                                                  1             −1
                                         × exp − (α − µα,0 )0 Vα,0 (α − µα,0 ) ,
                                                  2

where
                                        α̂ = (X 0 X)−1 X 0 Y.

Thus, the conditional posterior of α is N (µα,T , Vα,T ) with
                                                                  
                                              −1          1
                          µα,T = Vα,T Vα,0       µα,0 + 2 X 0 X α̂
                                                         ση
                                                        −1
                                         −1     1
                          Vα,T =        Vα,0 + 2 X 0X        .
                                               ση
                                                                                           A-2


Conditional posterior of ρ: Given the U(−1, 1) prior for ρ, the posterior density is of
the form
                        p(ρ|α, ση2 , Z T , S T ) ∝ p(Z T |S T , α, ρ, ση2 )I{|ρ| < 1}.    (A.4)

We now define
                       yt = zt − α0 − ŝ0t|t α1 ,     xt = zt−1 − α0 − ŝ0t−1|t−1 α1 .

Again, we can express (23) as linear regression model

                                               yt = xt ρ + ηt .                           (A.5)

Using the same arguments as before we deduce that
                                                                         
                     2    T   T                     1         0 0
             p(ρ|α, ση , Z , S ) ∝ I{|ρ| < 1} exp − 2 (ρ − ρ̂) X X(ρ − ρ̂)                (A.6)
                                                   2ση

with
                                            ρ̂ = (X 0 X)−1 X 0 Y.

Thus, the conditional posterior is truncated normal: I{|ρ| < 1}N (µρ,T , Vρ,T ) with

                                   µρ,T = ρ̂,       Vρ,T = ση2 (X 0 X)−1 .


Conditional posterior of ση2 : The posterior density is of the form

                           p(ση2 |α, ρ, Z T , S T ) ∝ p(Z T |S T , α, ρ, ση2 )p(ση2 ).    (A.7)

Solve (23) for ηt :
                           ηt = (1 − ρL)zt − (1 − ρ)α0 − (1 − ρL)ŝ0t|t α1 .              (A.8)

Now, notice that
                                                                            
                                                                       1 X 2
                      p(ση2 |α, ρ, Z T , S T ) ∝ (ση2 )−(T +2)/2 exp − 2  ηt .            (A.9)
                                                                      2ση

This implies that the conditional posterior of ση2 is inverted Gamma with T degrees of
freedom and location parameter s2 = ηt2 . To sample a ση2 from this distribution generate
                                       P
                                                                  hP        i−1
                                                                    T
T random draws Z1 , . . . , ZT from a N (0, 1/s2 ) and let σ̃η2 =   j=1 Zj
                                                                          2
                                                                                .

Marginal Data Density: Can be approximated using Chib’s (1995) method. Let α̂, ρ̂,
and σ̂η2 be the posterior mean estimates computed from the output of the Gibbs sampler.
According to Bayes Theorem,

                                           p(Y |α̂, ρ̂, σ̂η2 )p(α̂)p(ρ̂)p(σ̂η2 )
                               p(Y ) =                                                   (A.10)
                                         p(α̂|ρ̂, σ̂η2 , Y )p(ρ̂|σ̂η2 , Y )p(σ̂η2 |Y )
                                                                                                         3


All but the following two terms are straightforward to evaluate. First, let α(i) and ρ(i)
denote the i’th draw from the Gibbs sampler. Then we can use the approximation:
                                                    n
                                                1X
                               pb(σ̂η2 |Y ) =         p(σ̂η2 |α(i) , ρ(i) , Y ).                    (A.11)
                                                n i=1

Now consider a “reduced” run of the Gibbs sampler, in which we fix ση2 = σ̂η2 and iterate over
p(α|ρ, σ̂η2 , Y ) and p(ρ|α, σ̂η2 , Y ) using the conditional densities in (A.3) and (A.6). Denote
the output of this Gibbs sampler by ρ(s) and α(s) . Then,
                                                        m
                                                   1 X
                              pb(ρ̂|σ̂η2 , Y ) =         p(ρ̂|α(s) , σ̂η2 , Y ).                    (A.12)
                                                   m s=1

                                                        Pp
Generalization to AR(p): Let ρ(L) = 1 −                     j=1   ρp Lp , where L is the lag operator, then
we can express the auxiliary model as:

                        zt   = α0 + ŝ0t|t α1 + ξt ,         t = 1, . . . , p

                   ρ(L)zt    = ρ(1)α0 + ρ(L)ŝ0t|t α1 + ηt ,             t = p + 1, . . . , T

where [ξ1 , . . . , ξp ]0 ∼ N (0, τ 2 Ω(ρ(L))) and Ω(ρ(L)) is the correlation matrix associated with
the stationary AR(p) specification of ξt . The conditional posteriors of α and ση2 are ob-
tained from a straightforward generalization of (A.3) and (A.9). The conditional posterior
distribution of ρ1 , . . . , ρp is now non-normal and requires a Metropolis step. A general-
ization of (A.6) can serve as proposal density. To conveniently enforce stationarity of the
autoregressive measurement error process it could be re-parameterized in terms of partial
autocorrelations as in Barndorff-Nielson and Schou (1973).
