                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE ALCHEMY OF CDO CREDIT RATINGS

                                         Efraim Benmelech
                                          Jennifer Dlugosz

                                        Working Paper 14878
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14878


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2009




This paper has being prepared for the Carnegie-Rochester conference series. We are grateful for comments
from Adam Ashcraft, Amit Seru, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, The Editors (Marvin Goodfriend and
Bennett McCallum), and seminar participants at the Carnegie-Rochester November 2008 conference,
Harvard University and the Stockholm Institute for Financial Research. We thank Shaunak Vankudre,
Alex Radu, Daniel Oshima, and Akilah Crichlow for excellent research assistance. All remaining errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Efraim Benmelech and Jennifer Dlugosz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings
Efraim Benmelech and Jennifer Dlugosz
NBER Working Paper No. 14878
April 2009
JEL No. G01,G24,G28

                                            ABSTRACT

Collateralized Loan Obligations (CLOs) were one of the largest and fastest growing segments of the
structured finance market, fueling the 2003-2007 boom in syndicated loans and leveraged buyouts.
The credit crisis brought CLO issuance to a halt, and as a result the leveraged loan market dried up.
Similar to other structured finance products, investors in CLOs rely heavily on credit rating provided
by the rating agencies, yet little is known about CLO rating practices. This paper attempts to fill that
gap. Using novel hand-collected data on 3,912 tranches of Collateralized Loan Obligations (CLO)
we document the rating practices of CLOs and analyze their existing structures.


Efraim Benmelech
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer 233
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
effi_benmelech@harvard.edu

Jennifer Dlugosz
Harvard University
Department of Economics and HBS
Littauer 233
Cambridge, MA 02138
jdlugosz@hbs.edu
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


1. Introduction

          Collateralized Loan Obligations (CLOs) are Collateralized Debt Obligations (CDOs)

backed predominantly by loans. CLOs played a key role in financing billions of dollars of private

equity firms’ leveraged buyouts around the world.             As of 2006, Standard & Poor’s Loan

Syndications and Trading Association (S&P LSTA) estimated that structured investment

vehicles like CLOs represented 60% of institutional participation in the syndicated loan market.

The influx of capital from these investment vehicles was so extraordinary that the amount of

capital committed to private equity in 2006 and 2007 reached record levels, surpassing the

leverage buyout wave of the late 1980s (Kaplan and Stromberg (2008)). However, following the

subprime mortgage crisis, investors lost confidence in structured finance credit ratings and CLO

issuance virtually dried up. CLO issuance in the first quarter of 2008 was down 85% from the

previous year’s level.3 Leveraged loan originations followed suit, falling 74% in the first quarter

of 2008 compared to same period in 2007. Leverage buyout (LBO) lending slowed down to a

near standstill in 2008 with issuance levels being the lowest in almost a decade. The rise and fall

(and potential resurrection) of the CLO market has important implications for private equity and

leveraged loans lending.

          One important aspect of structured finance markets in general, and of the CLO market in

particular, is the extent to which investor demand is driven by credit ratings. CDOs contain

hundreds of underlying assets and modeling the payoffs to these securities requires sophisticated

cash flow models. Investors rely on credit ratings as a focal point, yet there is little public

information on how these ratings are calculated, and how ratings on CDO securities relate to the

underlying collateral quality. While there is a growing body of literature that studies the credit




3
    SIFMA Global CDO Issuance Tables: http://www.sifma.org/research/pdf/CDO_Data2008-Q4.pdf


                                                     2
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


ratings of residential-mortgage backed securities and CDOs,4 less is known about the credit

ratings of CLOs. Our paper attempts to fill this gap by studying the relation between CLO credit

ratings and the quality of the underlying collateral backing these securities. Using novel hand-

collected data on 3,912 tranches of collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) we document the

structure of CLO tranches and the credit quality of the underlying collateral supporting these

tranches.

        Collateralized Loan Obligations are interesting for several reasons. CLOs are the second

largest segment of the CDO market, accounting for 30% of the dollar volume of securities

issued.5 While CLOs have not yet suffered downgrades or impairments as dramatic as those

experienced by asset-backed CDOs and mortgage-backed securities, there is concern that the

deepening recession may lead to deterioration in the credit quality of CLOs portfolios. We

provide detailed information on underlying structures of CLOs to further the understanding of

these securities, their structures, and credit ratings.

        Similar to other structured finance products, a large fraction of the securities issued by

CLOs are AAA rated. 70.7% of the value of securities issued by CLOs in our sample is rated

AAA. Excluding unrated equity tranches, AAA tranches account for 79.2% of the dollar value

of securities issued. In contrast to mortgage-backed securities, the assets in the collateral pools of

CLOs are rated on the same scale as the liabilities, which facilitates an examination of the credit

enhancement achieved through structuring. There is a large gap between the rating of CLO

tranches and the credit quality of the underlying assets supporting these tranches. We find that

85% of the CLOs in our sample have collateral pools with a weighted average credit rating of B,

8% have a weighted average credit rating of BB, and for 7% the information is missing. We use
4
  See for example, Ashcraft and Schuermann (2008), Coval, Jurek, and Stafford (2008a) Coval, Jurek, and Stafford
(2008b), and Mason and Rosner (2007).
5
 Between 2005-2008, only structured finance CDOs (CDOs backed by structured securities like RMBS, ABS, other
CDOs, or CDS) accounted for a larger share of issuance (56%). See SIFMA Global CDO Issuance statistics.


                                                       3
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


the term “alchemy” to describe the mismatch between the credit ratings of CLO securities and

the credit quality of the underlying collateral. We also document a large degree of uniformity

among cash-flow CLOs; 63% of the CLOs in our sample had one of four major liability

structures or deal types. Moreover, there is very little variation in the required composition of the

collateral pools in the CLOs. We speculate that the uniformity of CLO structures is driven by a

boiler-plate model that was used to rate CLOs targeting the highest possible credit rating at the

lowest cost, while catering to investor demand.

           The rest of our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the market for

CDOs, presenting statistics on global issuance and the economic motivation for CDO issuance.

Section 3 describes our data. Section 4 presents our empirical analysis of the structure of CDOs

and their credit ratings.       Section 5 discusses the demand for highly rated structured products

tranches. Section 6 concludes.



2. The Market for Collateralized Debt Obligations

           Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) are special-purpose vehicles that buy portfolios of

assets and issue securities backed by the cash flows from those assets. The collateral assets, in

turn, are sold to a special-purpose entity, often located in the Cayman Islands or Ireland, to

ensure bankruptcy remoteness from the issuer. While the first CDOs were created in the 1980s,

global issuance remained low, under $100 billion annually, until the mid-1990s.6 Since 2002,

CDOs have been the fastest growing sector of the asset-backed securities market.



2.1. The Economics of CDOs




6
    See Fabozzi (2006), p. 3.


                                                    4
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


       The defining feature of CDOs and CLOs is their multi-tiered liability structure (see

Figure 1). CDOs and CLOs issue multiple classes of financial claims with differing levels of

seniority against diversified pool of assets. When assets in the collateral pool miss payments or

default, subordinate tranches absorb losses first. More senior tranches only suffer losses once the

cushion below them has been depleted.

       The process of pooling of assets achieves diversification as long as the assets are not

perfectly correlated, while structuring of tranches with different levels of seniority reallocates

risk across different securities. In a Modigliani-Miller world with perfect markets, there would

be no benefit to this kind of repackaging by tranching, however in the presence of various market

imperfections, gains from tranching may exist. DeMarzo (2005) lists three types of market

frictions that are important in explaining securitization: (i) transactions costs, (ii) market

incompleteness, and (iii) asymmetric information. According to DeMarzo and Duffie (1999) and

DeMarzo (2005), asymmetric information plays a key role in explaining the existence of

tranched securities.    DeMarzo (2005) notes that market incompleteness cannot explain the

existence of pass-through pools or most CLOs because they do not augment the span of tradeable

claims; additionally, transactions costs explain why pooling is valuable but not tranching.

DeMarzo (2005) presents a model of a financial intermediary that would like to sell assets about

which it has superior information. When the number of assets is large and their returns are

imperfectly correlated, the intermediary maximizes his revenue from the sale by pooling and

tranching, as opposed to simply pooling or selling the assets individually. Similar to the intuition

in Myers and Majluf (1984), tranching allows the intermediary to concentrate the default risk in

one part of the capital structure, resulting in a large share of the liabilities being almost riskless

which in turn reduces the overall lemons discount that buyers demand. In order to create a large

share of safe securities from a pool of very risky assets the issuer of a typical CLO needs to



                                                   5
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


enhance the creditworthiness of the most senior tranches of the deal. We illustrate the credit

enhancement mechanisms in CLOs using a representative deal in the next subsection.



2.2 CLO Structure and Credit Enhancement: A Representative Deal

         Table 1 illustrates the sources of credit enhancement in CLOs and the transformation of

B-rated loans into AAA securities using a representative deal from our sample, Octagon

Investment Partners V Ltd. Octagon Investment Partners V was a $300 million deal that closed

on January 14, 2003, with a portfolio consists primarily of non-investment grade loans as well as

a limited amount of high-yield bonds and structured finance securities.7 The weighted average

rating of the underlying collateral is BB-. The CLO financed the purchase of these assets with a

mix of tranched liabilities: out of which 79% is AAA, 7% A, 5% BBB, 2% BB, and 8% unrated.

         There are several sources of credit enhancement in CLO structures, which support the

creation of investment grade claims backed by speculative grade assets: (a) diversification (b)

overcollateralization and subordination (c) excess spread, and (d) the active management of the

pool.    The collateral guidelines of Octagon V indicate that the manager must maintain a

minimum level of diversification in his portfolio. The maximum allowable concentration in

securities from a single issuer is 2% ($6 million).8 When losses do occur, investors in the higher-

rated tranches are insulated from loss by the tranches subordinate to them. All of the rated

noteholders benefit from the ‘overcollateralization’ provided by the equity tranche. Octagon V

purchased assets with an aggregate principal balance of $300 million, issuing $276.75 million

worth of rated notes. The difference, $23.25 million (8%) of the asset purchase, was financed by

equity investors in the deal, who receive payments from interest and principal cash flows only

7
  Although 50% of deals in our sample were issued between 2004 and 2006, we describe a deal from 2003 because
information about the spread on assets in the CLO portfolio is largely missing from S&P reports after 2003.
8
  Many deals also limit concentration within an industry to 8-12% of the portfolio, although this deal does not have
that requirement.


                                                          6
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


after rated noteholders have been paid. Additionally, investors in the senior tranches of Octagon

V are protected from loss by the mezzanine tranches of the deal. In Octagon V, 21% of the

capital structure serves as a cushion against loss for those investors.

         In cash-flow CLOs, subordination is achieved by distributing cash flows from the assets

to investors in order of seniority. Panels C and D of Table 1 show the ‘waterfalls’ that govern

how interest and principal cash flows from the collateral are allocated to investors in the deal.

After taxes and administrative fees have been paid, interest receipts are used to pay CLO

investors in the most senior class, A. As long as par coverage and interest coverage ratios meet

their required levels (specified in the CLO indenture), interest flows down the capital structure to

the next most senior class, B.9 If the ratios are not met, proceeds must be used to pay down class

A, and restore compliance before subordinate investors receive any payments. Preferred

shareholders collect the residual interest after all the classes senior to them have been paid. In

Octagon V, the manager has an incentive to make sure that the equityholders will receive a

minimum IRR of 14% because his incentive fee is conditional on it.10

         Another source of credit enhancement is excess spread. The weighted average spread on

a CLO’s assets typically exceeds the weighted average spread on its liabilities. In Octagon V,

the weighted average spread on the assets expected at the time the portfolio is fully ramped is

3.125%11 (Table 1, Panel E) while the weighted average spread on its liabilities is 87 basis points

(Table 1, Panel A). Expected excess spread at the time of deal close is 2.26%. The deal requires

the manager to maintain a minimum weighted average spread on assets of 2.75%, or excess

spread of at least 1.88%. Octagon V, like most CLOs, is a revolving deal. The notes issued by

9
  Par coverage for a class = [total par of collateral assets + cash + defaulted securities at lower of MV or recovery] /
[par value of securities outstanding in class & all classes senior]; Interest coverage for a class = [interest received
during period + net swap payments]/[total amount of interest payable on the tranche]
10
   Not all structures have this feature. Another common setup is, after the interest-paying classes have been paid, the
manager takes 50% of the residual as an incentive fee and the rest goes to equity.
11
   This calculation assumes 100% of the portfolio assets are floating rate for simplicity, although 10% of the
portfolio can be fixed rate securities.


                                                           7
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


the CLO mature in November 2014. For the first five years of the deal (the ‘reinvestment

period’), the manager may use principal proceeds to reinvest in additional assets; after the

reinvestment period, proceeds must be used to pay down notes. During the reinvestment period,

the manager may also engage in limited trading, under certain conditions (Table 1, Panel F).

Octagon V’s manager can trade assets that decline or improve in credit quality and may also

make discretionary sales, as long as those sales do not exceed 25% of the aggregate principal

balance of the portfolio.12 After sales and purchases, the issuer must run Standard & Poor’s

CDO Monitor to confirm that the portfolio satisfies coverage tests (overcollateralization and

interest coverage limits by tranche) and collateral quality tests (portfolio concentration limits,

weighted average spread tests, etc). If, at any point, overcollateralization or interest coverage

tests are not satisfied, investors in the rated notes may force redemption in order of seniority.

Octagon V also provides the issuer with the option to redeem the notes in full after a three-year

non-call period, subject to the approval of more than 50% of the preferred shareholders



2.3. Collateralized Debt Obligation Types and Issuer Motivation

 Table 2 presents summary statistics on global issuance of al types of CDOs for the period 2004-

 2008.13 Issuance is broken down by type of structure and by issuer motivation. There are three

 main types of CDO structures: (i) cash-flow, (ii) synthetic, and (iii) market-value. Cash-flow

 structures are the most common (74%), with synthetic (14%) and market-value (10%) structures

 accounting for a much smaller share of issuance. A cash-flow CDO issues notes to investors

 and uses the proceeds to invest in primary financial assets such as loans, mortgages, bonds, etc.

 As interest and principal are generated by the underlying collateral, proceeds are distributed to

12
   A 25% limit for discretionary sales is relatively high; most CLOs limit this to 10-15% of the aggregate principal
balance.
13
   The information in Table 2 is reproduction of data from the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association
(SIFMA) and Thomson Financial reports.


                                                         8
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


 the CDO investors in a pre-specified way, in order of seniority. In contrast, synthetic CDOs

 obtain their credit exposure through derivatives contracts instead of assets purchases.                          A

 synthetic CDO issues notes to investors, invests the proceeds in risk-free securities, and enters

 into a series of credit default swaps (selling protection). Investors in a synthetic CDO receive

 periodic payments from swap premiums, and their principal is written down if the reference

 entities on the swaps default.14 Market-value CDOs account for a growing share of the market.

 They are similar to cash-flow CDOs except the amount of liabilities the CDO can issue is

 determined by advance rates for each asset in the pool and collateral is marked-to-market

 frequently. When the liabilities outstanding exceed the advance rates, the manager must sell

 collateral and pay down notes until compliance is restored. While cash-flow CDOs can alter the

 credits in their collateral pools, trading is less frequent in cash-flow CDOs than in a market-

 value CDO.15

         Table 2 also decomposes CDO issuance by issuer motivation. 86 percent of CDOs issued

from 2004 through the first half of 2008 were arbitrage-motivated, rather than balance-sheet

motivated. Arbitrage CDOs are typically sponsored by an investment manager or hedge fund

that acquires assets on the open market and packages them into a CDO to earn management fees

on the deal. Balance-sheet CDOs are motivated by a financial institution’s desire to achieve

relief from regulatory capital requirements or to free up capital for lending. Balance-sheet

issuers are typically lending institutions. The arbitrage versus balance-sheet label is provided to

Thomson Financial by the underwriter. We were unable to get any further details from Thomson

about how the distinction is made, but an examination of the transactions labeled as balance-



14
   In contrast, investors in an unfunded synthetic CDO do not make any upfront payments. The CDO enters into
default swaps and investors are required to post funds on-demand when reference entities default.
15
   Most managed cash-flow CDOs limit trading to certain types of securities (e.g. – defaulted securities, credit-risk
securities for which the mark has widened by 100bp) and/or limit discretionary trading to 10-20% over the life of the
CDO or annually.


                                                         9
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


sheet deals by S&P reveals that these transactions typically contain assets from a single

originator.



3. Data and Sample Construction

Collateralized Loan Obligations are largely sold in private markets (registered under 144A or

Reg S), hence data on their structures is not publicly available. The SDC Platinum New Issues

database tracks issuance in these markets but assembling a sample of CDOs from these data is

difficult due to inconsistencies in SDC’s classification of CDOs.16 Moreover, SDC Platinum only

provides information on the liability side of the CDO (the notes that have been issued), but does

not contain detailed information about the underlying collateral that supports the notes.



3.1. Sample Construction

        We construct our sample of CLOs using Standard & Poor’s RatingsDirect database, by

hand-collecting micro-level data on the structure of a large sample of CLOs. The S&P data

allows us to observe both the asset side and the liability side of a CLO, in addition to a host of

information about the ratings decision. RatingsDirect provides real-time access to S&P’s credit

research and ratings for currently-rated fixed income securities. At the time we gathered the data,

October 2007, the database contained 3,237 CLOs (1,704 cash-flow, 970 synthetic, and 563

market-value or hybrids). We focus on cash-flow CLOs for which the collateral is primarily

corporate loans. There are 744 such transactions in the database, comprising 44% of cash-flow

CLOs and 23% of all CLOs by number. This is the largest single category of CDO in Ratings

Direct, by number.



16
  For example, SDC alternatively labels CDO tranches as floating rate notes, collateral bonds, preferred shares, and
collateralized loan obligations.


                                                         10
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


        Figure 2 plots issuance volume by year for our sample, while Table 2 reports the

corresponding numbers for Figure 2. Our sample contains 531 cash-flow CLOs that were issued

between 2000 and the third quarter of 2007.17 The phenomenal growth of the CDO market is

reflected in this segment of the market that we observe. From 2004 to 2006, the par value of

issuance increased by about 75% annually. While the year 2007 was on track to surpass the

record issuance numbers of 2006, the credit crisis brought CDO and CLO issuance to a complete

halt. The small number of CLOs in our sample issued between 2000 and 2002 is due to the

nature of the database. RatingsDirect drops securities that are not currently rated. Most cash-

flow CLOs can be called or redeemed by the issuer after a five to seven year non-call period

(subject to the approval of a majority of preferred shareholders), and it is likely that many issued

in the early part of the window have been. Our results do not change if we exclude these CLOs

from the analysis. Additionally, since the non-call period is typically at least five years, we have

no reason to suspect that the CLOs in our sample that were issued post-2002 are subject to any

selection bias. As Table 2 demonstrates, the majority of CLOs – 72% by amount, 75% by

number over the whole period – are US-dollar denominated. Issuance of Euro-denominated

CLOs increased over time from 20% of the dollar volume of issuance in 2002 to 36% in the first

three quarters of 2007.

        Figure 3 and Table 3 provide a detailed description of CLO deal structures. The average

CLO in our sample has 7.3 tranches but deals range from 2 tranches to 21 tranches. Average deal

sizes and tranche sizes have risen over time. In 2002, the median CLO issued securities totaling

$397 million; by 2007, the median deal was $500 million. In 2002, the median tranche size was

$17 million while, in 2007, the median tranche size was $35 million.18


17
   We get our descriptive data from S&P analyst reports, which were only available for 534/744 cash-flow CLOs.
Reports for three of these CDOs were missing critical information hence the CDO sample size of 531.
18
   2000 and 2001 have only 4 and 10 CLOs respectively.


                                                       11
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


         For each CLO, we gather data from two sources in RatingsDirect: (i) an analyst report,

Presale report or New Issue report, and (ii) Current Ratings reports.                         Around the time a

transaction closes, S&P releases the Presale report or New Issue report: an analyst report

summarizing the rating decision and the deal structure. We supplement the information from the

Presale Report with data from the Current Ratings report. We also record the tranche structure in

the Current rating report and check it against the structure in the analyst report.

         Presale Reports are typically released two to three days before the expected closing date

of a transaction. New Issue Reports appear anytime from one day to one year after a transaction

has closed (the median is 73 days after). At least one of these reports is available for 534 of the

744 cash-flow CLOs in Ratings Direct. We hand-collected data from these reports, using the

New Issue Report when available, otherwise the Presale Report. One concern about Presale

reports is that they are issued prior to issue date, and may not reflect the actual collateral pool or

the deal structure. To address this concern, we use the Current Ratings report, which has up-to-

date information on tranche structures and ratings, to check whether actual deal structures match

the ones in the Presale reports. In 405 out of 534 CLOs (75.8%), the tranche structures are

similar across the two reports alleviating concerns about the accuracy of Presale reports.19



4. The Credit Ratings of CLOs

4.1. Credit-Rating Arbitrage and the Uniformity of CLO Structures

Managers of cash-flow arbitrage CDOs make money by buying assets such as loans in secondary

markets, refinancing them by issuing tranches that are secured by these assets, and taking a share

of the profits. Part of the cost-of-capital advantage that CLOs enjoy is due to their legal status as
19
  If any back-and-forth occurs between CLO arrangers and the rating agency it probably happens before any analyst
reports are issued. .However, it is unlikely that such negotiations are necessary. S&P’s CDO Evaluator software is
distributed freely to arrangers so they know, for the most part (the rating agency may raise concerns that are outside
the scope of the model, e.g., about the manager’s track record), how changing the structure changes the amount of
each class of rated notes that can be supported before the rating committee’s review begins.


                                                          12
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


special-purpose entities,20 but most of it is the result of structuring, which produces highly-rated

securities. As their name suggests, cash-flow arbitrage CLOs exploit credit-rating arbitrage; in

the process of pooling and tranching, low-rated securities are transformed into highly rated

tranches.

         Table 4 and Figure 4 decompose the par value of notes issued by credit rating. In the

sample as a whole, 71% of issuance is rated AAA; 5% is AA, 6% is A, 5% is BBB, 2% is BB,

0.1% is B and 11% is NR (unrated). The composition of issuance across years is almost

identical to the overall composition with a slight downward trend in the amount of AAA and an

upward trend in the amount of unrated tranches over time. Table 5 presents a more detailed

analysis of deal structures. We find that every CLO except one has an AAA tranche, and the

median AAA tranche represents 73% of the deal’s total value. Likewise, 98% of CLOs have an

unrated tranche and the median tranche, conditional on having one, comprises 8.8% of the deal.

The interquartile ranges show that there is little variation in the composition of rated tranches

across deals. For example, 80% of CDOs have a AA tranche and the median AA tranche

represents 6% of the deal’s par value. The interquartile range for the size of AA tranches is

[4.7%, 7.7%]. Issuing liabilities in notched rating classes (e.g., AA+ or AA-) is relatively

uncommon for every rating letter category.                We also document a large degree of uniformity

among cash-flow CDOs. According to Panel A of Table 6, 63% of the CDOs in our sample had

one of four major liability structures (“deal types”): 40% are {AAA, AA, A, BBB, BB, NR}

deals; 13% are {AAA, AA, A, BBB, NR}; 7% are {AAA, AA, A, BBB-, BB-, NR}; 4% are

{AAA, A, BBB, BB, NR}.21 The remaining 137 deals have idiosyncratic structures that appear

less than 20 times each.


20
  Not subject to capital requirements like most financial institutions and located in low-tax jurisdictions.
21
  These results do not distinguish between deals that have 1 tranche per rating class or multiple tranches per rating
class.


                                                          13
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


4.2. The Uniformity of Collateral Restrictions

         The majority of the CLOs in our sample are managed, that is collateral managers can

engage in limited trading over the designated ‘reinvestment period’, typically the first 5-7 years

of a 12-year CDO.22 In managed CLOs, the credit quality of the pool is controlled by covenants

in the deal that constrain the manager’s asset allocation. Table 7 summarizes the frequency and

nature of collateral composition restrictions in our sample. These restrictions fall into a few

broad categories: (1) Restrictions on asset type, (2) Restrictions on the fraction of near-default

securities in the pool, (3) Restrictions on the mix of fixed/floating rate securities and the payment

frequency of the collateral, (4) Diversification requirements by industry and issuer, (5) Currency

and domicile restrictions on collateral, (6) Rating restrictions.

         Conditioning on the presence of any given restriction, there is very little variation in the

magnitude of the restriction. For example, nearly 70% of the CDOs in our sample require a

minimum fraction of the collateral pool be invested in senior secured loans. When this restriction

is present, in 40% of the cases it takes the value of 90%, and the interquartile range is [85%,

90%]. Furthermore, 46% of CDOs restrict the amount of second lien loans as a percentage of

total asset par; the median limit is 10% and the interquartile range is [10%, 12.5%]. Likewise,

60% of CDOs limit the amount of structured finance collateral as a percent of total asset par; the

median limit is 5% and the interquartile range is [3%, 5%]. We find similar clustering on all

other types of restrictions.         According to S&P, collateral constraints “are specified by the

sponsor, banker, and collateral manager based on their perceptions of what the investor

community wants and can be comfortable with” (Global Cash Flow & Synthetic CDO Criteria,

p. 19-21). In the rating process, and as ratings are monitored during the life of the CDO,

collateral restrictions only affect tranche ratings insofar as default, correlation, and recovery rates

22
  Typically 10-15% of the par value of assets may be traded per year in addition to securities defaulted securities or
credit-risk securities.


                                                          14
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


assumed for individual assets depend on asset class, rating, maturity, and domicile. (We explain

the details of the rating model in Section 5.1). That is, there is no additional penalty vis-à-vis the

rating agencies for including for example more than 5% of structured finance collateral. The

uniformity in collateral restrictions suggests that investors may to some extent rely on simple

rules to judge the riskiness of these complex and idiosyncratic structures. Additionally, there is

reason to believe that rating agencies influence investor perceptions of what constitutes an

acceptable allocation of collateral.    S&P’s Presale and New Issue reports have a ‘Strengths,

Weaknesses, and Concerns’ section where they highlight collateral characteristics that they deem

unusually risky; often this involves pointing out when allocations to certain baskets (e.g., rated

below CCC+, structure finance securities, etc) exceed levels seen in Table 7.



4.3. The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings

       We now turn to analyze the relation between the underlying collateral quality, and the

credit rating of the secured tranches. Our main measure of collateral quality is the weighted

average rating (WAR) of all the assets in the pool. The WAR is reported in the Presale reports

and is calculated as a weighted-average of all the loans, bonds and securities in the collateral

pool. S&P requires that every asset in the pool will have either an actual or assessed credit rating.

One concern about weighted-average rating as a measure of collateral quality is that it does not

sufficiently describe the riskiness of the collateral pools. Two portfolios with the same WAR

could have very different loss distributions. Consider, for example, a portfolio that contains only

B-rated securities versus a portfolio that contains some AA securities pooled together with many

CCC-rated securities or near-default loans. However, based on the collateral restrictions we




                                                  15
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


observe, it seems likely that most of the collateral in a CDO with a WAR of B is probably, in

fact, B-rated.23

         We find that 85% of the CLOs in our sample have collateral pools with a WAR of B, 8%

have a WAR of BB, and for 7% the information about WAR is missing.24 As Panel B of Table 6

demonstrates, we do not find any correlation between deal type and WAR of the collateral pool;

each type of deal is more likely to be backed by collateral with an average rating of B than BB. It

is interesting to note that there is a trend in weighted-average collateral quality over time: with

BB-backed CDOs all but disappearing by 2006-2007. This deterioration in average collateral

quality over time implies that debt or equity investments in later CDOs are potentially riskier.

         As is typical in structured finance products, there is a gap between the credit ratings on

the notes issued by CDOs and the credit quality of the underlying collateral. Figure 5 quantifies

the ratings transformation that takes place in our sample of CDOs. Cash-flow CLOs finance the

purchase of junk-rated assets (typically B+) largely with AAA-rated borrowings. While 70.7% of

the dollar amount of CDOs in our sample was initially rated as AAA, the collateral that supports

these issues had an average credit rating of B+.



4.4. How Does the CLO Credit Rating Model Work?

In this subsection we review the process that S&P uses to determine credit ratings for CLO

tranches. The rating process for cash-flow CLOs involves two steps. In the first stage, an

expected loss distribution for the underlying collateral pool is estimated. In the second stage,

cash flow simulations are used to determine whether a tranche can withstand the necessary level

of defaults to earn a given rating.              The model requires many assumptions about default

23
   Sixty percent of CDOs restrict the amount of collateral that can be rated CCC+ or lower to five to seven percent of
the portfolio.
24
   These are compressed ratings. The full WAR distribution is: 0.2% BBB-, 0.6% BB+, 0.4 BB, 7% BB-, 65%
B+, 16% B, 4% B-, 0.2% CCC+, 7% missing data.


                                                         16
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


probabilities, correlation, interest rate movements, and more. The model generates two key

statistics that determine the level of credit enhancement of each of the tranches in a CLO deal.

The first statistic, calculated for each tranche, is S&P’s ‘scenario default rate’ (SDR). The

‘scenario default rate’ is the level of default in the collateral pool that a tranche must be able to

withstand to earn its rating. SDRs allow us to characterize, at least partially, the loss distribution

that was estimated in the rating process for each collateral pool. The second statistic – ‘break-

even default rate’ (BEDR) indicates the level of portfolio defaults that each tranche can

withstand, according to the underwriter’s cash-flow models

        To estimate an expected loss distribution for a CLO’s collateral, S&P uses historical data

on rating transitions from its CreditPro database (1981-present).25 Each asset in the collateral

pool is assigned an expected default probability based on asset class (corporates, ABS,

sovereigns, etc), rating, and maturity.26           Some simple assumptions are made about default

correlation. For example, two corporate securities in the same sector are assigned a 0.15

correlation; while corporate securities from different sectors obtain a correlation of 0.05.27

Monte Carlo simulation is used to generate the distribution of portfolio losses. S&P then uses

this loss distribution to generate a “scenario default rate” (SDR) for each tranche – this is the

level of portfolio losses that a tranche must be able to withstand in cash flow simulations to earn

its rating.28 There are two steps in calculating the SDR. First, S&P identifies the default rate on


25
   Calculations may be based on the expected composition of the asset pool to some extent because only 50-70% is
typically ramped up at the closing date.
26
   According to the CDO Evaluator Technical Document, p. 5-6, S&P calculates a one-year transition matrix from
historical data and generates predicted default rates by raising it to higher powers. Appendix 1 of this document
shows the one-year transition matrix and the predicted default rates (up to 30yrs). This methodology implicitly
assumes that current rating is the only determinant of the likelihood of default.
27
   Standard & Poor’s “CDO Evaluator 3.0: Technical Document”, p.22. This document describes version 3.0 of the
CDO Evaluator Model which was released in December 2005. In previous versions, correlation assumptions for
corporates were 0.30 within industry and 0.00 across industries (Standard & Poor’s “Global Cash Flow and
Synthetic CDO Criteria, p. 46 and Standard & Poor’s “S&P Launches Latest Version of CDO Evaluator Modeling
Tool”, p. 2).
28
   According to S&P “withstand” means to pay timely interest and ultimate principal by the final legal maturity of
the notes.


                                                        17
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


corporate bonds that have the same rating as the one being sought for the tranche and maturity

equal to the weighted-average maturity of the CDO’s assets (“x%”). Then, using the loss

distribution generated for the collateral pool, they identify the default rate that has no greater

chance of being exceeded than x%; this is the SDR.

        Consider a CDO tranche backed by collateral with a weighted-average maturity of 10

years that is being tested for an A rating. If the expected default rate of a 10-year A-rated

corporate bond is 3%, the SDR for the tranche is set equal to the level of default in the CDO’s

collateral pool that has no greater than 3% chance of being exceeded. When the underwriter runs

cash-flow simulations, he will test that the tranche can withstand cumulative defaults up to the

SDR without missing interest or final principal payments. The logic is “if the tranche can

survive defaults up to the SDR then its probability of default is no greater than 3%, as would be

appropriate for an A rating” (Global Cash Flow and Synthetic CDO Criteria, p. 42).

        SDRs allow us to back out, partially, the loss distributions that were estimated for each

CLO’s collateral pool. For example, the loss distribution for a CLO backed by a pool of assets

with a weighted average maturity of seven years must satisfy: 29

Pr(asset defaults as % of total par > SDRAAA)≤ default rate of 7 year, AAA-rated corporate bond = 0.14%

Pr(asset defaults as % of total par > SDRAA) ≤ default rate of 7 year, AA-rated corporate bond = 0.40%

Pr(asset defaults as % of total par > SDRA) ≤ default rate of 7 year, A-rated corporate bond = 0.96%

Pr(asset defaults as % of total par > SDRBBB) ≤ default rate of 7 year, BBB-rated corporate bond = 4.6%

Pr(asset defaults as % of total par > SDRBB) ≤ default rate of 7 year, BB-rated corporate bond = 14.1%

Pr(asset defaults as % of total par > SDRB) ≤ default rate of 7 year, B-rated corporate bond = 32.2%


29
  Seven-year default rates were taken from the credit curves in Appendix 1 of “CDO Evaluator Version 3.0:
Technical Document”, which are calculated by repeated application of a 1-yr transition matrix. It is unclear
whether these are the correct figures, because these default rates do not control for the maturity of the issue;
however, we could not locate any other statistics on corporate bond default rates by maturity published by S&P.
For a comparison, Moody’s default rates for corporate bonds with 7-year maturities are Aaa=0.31%, Aa=0.55%,
A=0.78%, Baa=2.86%, Ba=15.32%, B=35.55% (Moody’s Default & Recovery of Corporate Bond Issuers)


                                                         18
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


        Figure 6 illustrates the relationship between the loss distribution and SDRs.

Table 8 summarizes SDRs by tranche rating for our sample. As the table shows, median SDRs

by rating class are:      AAA=41%, AA=37%, A=32%, BBB=26%, BB=20%. Assuming, for

simplicity, that all CDOs have assets with a weighted-average maturity equal to the sample mean

(7-years), the typical CDO in our sample is backed by collateral that has an expected loss

distribution like the one below:

Pr (defaults as % of total asset par> 41%) ≤ 0.14%

Pr (defaults as % of total asset par>37%) ≤ 0.40%

Pr (defaults as % of total asset par>32%) ≤ 0.96%

Pr (defaults as % of total asset par>26%) ≤ 4.6%

Pr (defaults as % of total asset par>20%) ≤ 14.1%

An AAA tranche is a tranche that can withstand the cumulative default rate that has no greater

than 0.14% of being exceeded (41%). An AA tranche is one that can withstand the cumulative

default rate that has no greater than 0.40% of being exceeded (37%). Clearly this methodology

relies on estimating the loss distribution with a high degree of precision. Yet small changes in

correlation assumptions can have dramatic effects on the right tail of the loss distribution.



5. CLO Ratings and Investor Demand

Similar to many other structured finance products, most of the liabilities of CLOs are AAA-

rated. In the previous section we described the credit rating model used to generate the supply of

AAA tranches. In this section we suggest that to a large extent CDO structures - and in particular

their AAA-rated tranches - are driven by investor demand, which in turn is potentially driven by

rating-dependent regulation, asymmetric information, and investor guidelines and heuristics.



5.1. Rating-dependent Regulation


                                                     19
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


Extensive use of credit ratings in the regulation of financial institutions created a natural clientele

for CDO and CLO securities. According to Hunt (2008), at least 44 SEC rules and forms

incorporated agency ratings as of June 2008. Minimum capital requirements at banks, insurance

companies, and broker-dealers, depend on the credit ratings of the assets on their balance

sheets.30 Pension funds, a $10 trillion source of capital in the United States, also face ratings-

based regulations. A recent survey of two hundred pension plan sponsors and investment

managers in the US and Europe (Cantor, Gwilym, and Thomas, 2007) found that 75% have

minimum rating requirements for bond purchases and 50% set limits on portfolio distribution by

rating class. Meanwhile, modifications to the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of

1974 (ERISA) over the past twenty years have gradually expanded the range of structured

finance securities that pension funds can hold.31 This matrix of regulation creates institutional

demand for highly-rated securities, yet the supply of highly-rated single-name securities is fairly

limited. For example, only five nonfinancial companies and a few sovereigns had AAA ratings

as of 2007. Thus, it is not surprising that highly rated CDO securities, especially those that are

rated AAA, are attractive to many of these financial institutions. Highly-rated CDO securities

incur smaller capital charges, may be used as collateral, and provide a higher yield than single-

name securities with the same rating. Moreover, private investors not subject to rating-based

regulation, may develop internal investment rules using credit ratings as inputs even when not

required by regulation to do so.



5.2. Heuristics and Asymmetric Information


30
   Basel II allows banks to choose between two methodologies for calculating capital requirements for credit risk.
The standardized approach, a modification of Basel I, is credit-rating based. The internal ratings based (IRB)
approach allows banks us their internal estimates of risk components (e.g., expected default, loss given default,
unexpected loss) to calculate the capital required for a given exposure. (http://www.bis.org/pubs/bcbs107b.pdf)
31
   In 1989, the Department of Labor began allowing ERISA plans to invest in highly-rated asset-backed securities
with the passage of Prohibited Transaction Exemption (PTE) 89-88.


                                                         20
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


Ratings-based regulation explains some of the demand for highly-rated securities, but does not

fully explain why we see so much AAA in CDO structures, as opposed to AA or A. Behavioral

economics provides some insight as to why investors might demand AAA securities even in the

absence of rating-dependent regulation. As described above, according to DeMarzo (2005) under

asymmetric information, a CLO issuer maximizes his revenue from the sale by pooling and

tranching, which results in the concentration of the default risk in few tranches. According to

Demarzo’s model, in order to alleviate any concerns about adverse selection in the securities

issued by the CLO arranger, these securities would need to be certified as risk-. If investors use

heuristics to classify assets, as in Barberis and Shleifer (2003), and only AAA-rated securities are

perceived to be riskless then issuers would cater to investor demand by carving out large portions

of their collateral pools as AAA.



5.3. Investor Demand and the Supply of Uniform Securities

       While it is difficult to quantify the extent to which regulation, heuristics, or asymmetric

information, individually drive demand for CLO securities, the uniformity of CLO structures

suggests that investor demand in general is an important determinant of their structures.

Uniformity reduces the amount of time investors must spend analyzing a new deal by making it

easy to identify deviations from commonly used practices. If some CLO structures have been

perceived as more desirable then other issuers will follow the same convention. Anecdotal

evidence suggests that the S&P rating model was known to CLO issuers and was provided to

them by the rating agency. Figure 7 displays excerpts from the CDO Evaluator Manual which we

have downloaded from S&P’s website. The CDO Evaluator software enabled issuers to structure

their CDOs to achieve the highest possible credit rating at the lowest possible cost. For example,

Figure 7 shows that one of the outputs that the CDO Evaluator provides to the issuer is “excess



                                                  21
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


collateral” which, according to S&P, “tells what percentage of assets notional needs to be

eliminated (added) in order for the transaction to provide just enough (i.e. ROC equals to

100%) support at a given rating level.”32 In other words, the model provided a sensitivity

analysis feature that made it easy for issuers to target the highest possible credit rating at the

lowest cost.



6. Conclusions

The innovation represented by Collateralized Loan Obligations has been instrumental to the

growth of the syndicated loan market. By creating highly-rated securities out of junk quality

loans, CLOs have brought new investors into the loan market - rating-constrained institutions

that would not be allowed to hold the non-investment grade loans directly – and helped to

finance a record-breaking leveraged buyout wave from 2003 to 2007. While CLOs have not yet

suffered downgrades or impairments as those experienced by asset-backed CDOs, there are some

signs that the deepening recession is causing deterioration in the quality of outstanding loans that

serve as collateral for CLOs. Table 9 displays collateral performance by vintage as been reported

recently by S&P. As the Table demonstrates, the fraction of assets rated BB and B has declined,

while the share of assets rated CCC or those in actual default (D) increased across most vintages.

These changes reflect the transition of assets from BB and B ratings to CCC and D within CLOs’

collateral pools as a result of the current recession and credit crisis. While most of the effect of

the decline in collateral quality led to downgrades of mezzanine tranches of CLOs rather than the

most senior tranches, if this trend continues, more senior tranches may be affected as well.33 The




32
   See Rajan, Seru, and Vig (2008) who provide evidence that securitization led to loans with worse fundamentals
due to the tendency to rely on statistical models and reduction in the incentives to collect soft information.
33
   CLO managers may be required to sell defaulted loans if they violate collateral quality requirements, however
secondary markets for loans have dried up as well, which may result in loan fire-sales.


                                                        22
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


future of CLOs as well as the resurrection of the leveraged loan market will likely be determined

by the ability of CLOs to withstand corporate defaults.




                                                  23
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


                                          REFERENCES

Ashcraft, A., Schuermann, T., 2008, Understanding the securitization of subprime mortgage
credit, Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Bank for International Settlements, 2005, Basel II: International convergence of capital
measurement and capital standards: A revised framework, http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbsca.htm.

Bentham, M., Albulescu, H., 2008, CDO spotlight: reviewing A decade of U.S. CLO
performance and equity returns, Standard & Poor’s.

Cantor, R., Packer, F., 1994, The credit rating industry, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Quarterly Review.

Cantor, R., Gwilym, O. A., and S., Thomas, 2007, The use of credit ratings in investment
management in the US and Europe, Working Paper.

Coval, J., Jurek, J., and E., Stafford, 2008a, Economic catastrophe bonds, American Economic
Review (forthcoming).

Coval, J., Jurek, J., and E., Stafford, 2008b, The economics of structured finance, Journal of
Economic Perspectives (forthcoming).

DeMarzo, P., 2005, The pooling and tranching of securities: A model of informed
intermediation, Review of Financial Studies, 18(1) 1-35.

DeMarzo, P., and Duffie, D., 1999, A Liquidity-based model of security design, Econometrica
67, 65–99.

Fabozzi, F. J., Goodman, L., and D., Lucas, 2006, Collateralized debt obligations, John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.

Hu, J., 2007, Assessing the credit risk of CDOs backed by structured finance securities: rating
analysts’ challenges and solutions, Moody’s Investors Service.

Hunt, J. P., 2008, Credit rating agencies and the “worldwide credit crisis” the limits of
reputation, the insufficiency of reform, and a proposal for improvement, Working paper.

Mason, J., Rosner, J., 2007, Where did the risk go? How misapplied bond ratings cause mortgage
backed securities and collateralized debt obligation market disruptions, Working paper.

Myers, S., Majluf, N., 1984, Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms have
information that investors do not have", Journal of Financial Economics, 13(2) 187-221.

Rajan, Uday, Seru, A., and Vig, V., 2008, The failure of models that predict failure: distance,
incentives and defaults, Working paper University of Chicago.

Shleifer, A., Barberis, N., 2003, Style investing, Journal of Financial Economics 68, 161-199.


                                                  24
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings




Standard & Poor’s. Global Cash Flow and Synthetic CDO Criteria. 2002.

Standard & Poor’s. CDO Evaluator Version 3.0: Technical Document. December 2005.

Standard & Poor’s. CDO Evaluator Handbook. February 2006.




                                                  25
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


                               Figure 1: Typical CDO Structure




                                      Figure 2: CDO Issuance by Year
  1400                                                                                      100,000


                                                                                            90,000
  1200
                                                                                            80,000

  1000                                                                                      70,000


                                                                                            60,000
   800

                                                                                            50,000

   600
                                                                                            40,000


   400                                                                                      30,000


                                                                                            20,000
   200                                                                  169
                                                                                126
                                                                99                          10,000
                                                     66
                                         41
          4         10         16
     0                                                                                      -
          2000       2001      2002       2003        2004       2005   2006   2007 (3/4)

                                       CDOs      Tranches    $ mil




                                                   26
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


                            Figure 3: The Distribution of the Number of Tranches per CDO

                  150
                  100                  Tranches Per CDO, n=531 CDOs
      Frequency
                  50
                  0




                        0                 5                 10               15              20
                                                           tranches



   Total number                 Total number   Mean             Std of      Min number of   Max number of
   of CDOs                      of tranches    number of        number of   tranches        tranches
                                               tranches         tranches

                        531            3,920          7.37             7             2              21




                                                           27
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


                                  Figure 4: CDO rating Structure




                                         Par Value of Issuance by Rating


    100%




     80%



                                                                                                         AAA
     60%                                                                                                 AA
                                                                                                         A
                                                                                                         BBB
                                                                                                         BB
     40%                                                                                                 B
                                                                                                         NR



     20%




      0%
             2000        2001       2002       2003        2004        2005      2006      3/4 of 2007
              (n=4)      (n=10)     (n=16)      (n=41)      (n=66)      (n=99)   (n=169)     (n=126)




                                                  28
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


                 Figure 5: CDO vs. Underlying Collateral Credit Ratings (3,912 tranches)
This figure compares the credit rating of CDO tranches with the average credit rating of the underlying collateral
pools that back them. The height of the bars pertaining to the tranche ratings represents the total par value of CDO
securities issued with a given rating. The height of the bars pertaining to the underlying collateral represents the
total par value of the CDOs where each CDO’s par value is allocated based on the weighted average rating of the
underlying collateral pool. The sum of the heights of the blue bars equals the sum of the heights of the red bars.


                                      CDO rating      Collateral rating
              250,000,000



              200,000,000



              150,000,000
   $ (000s)




              100,000,000



               50,000,000



                       -




                                                        29
 Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


                           Figure 6: Calculating Scenario Default Rates




Probability
   (%)



                                                                      SDRA = 32%

                                                                      0.96% chance
                                                                      of exceeding


                                                                               SDRAA = 37%

                                                                               0.40% chance
                                                                               of exceeding


                                                                                     SDRAAA = 41%

                                                                                     0.14% chance
                                                                                     of exceeding




                            Default rates (% of portfolio balance defaulted)




                                                   30
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


                                  Figure 7: S&P CDO Evaluator




                                                  31
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


           Table 1: Payment Priority Structure for Octagon Investment Partners V Ltd.


Panel A: Tranche Structure (CLO Liabilities)

Class           Rating      Original Principal Balance                     Interest Rate
A               AAA         US$ 236,250,000                       3-MONTH LIBOR + 60.00bp
B               A           US$ 21,000,000                        3-MONTH LIBOR + 175.00bp
C               BBB         US$ 15,000,000                        3-MONTH LIBOR + 300.00bp
D               BB          US$ 4,500,000                         3-MONTH LIBOR + 825.00bp
Pref. shares    NR          US$ 23,250,000                        Residual


Panel B: Collateral Profile (CLO Assets)

Weighted average rating                                  BB-
Weighted average maturity                                5.84
Expected portfolio default rate                          14.34%
Standard deviation of expected portfolio default rate    4.12%


Panel C: Interest Waterfall

Priority                 Payment
1              First, taxes, filing, and registration fees; second, trustee fees; third, capped administrative expenses
2              Hedge payments
3              Senior management fees
4              Class A interest
5              Class A coverage tests. If fail, pay down class A
6              Class B interest.
7              Class B coverage tests. If fail, pay down class A and then class B. I
8              Class B deferred interest
9              Class C interest
10             Class C coverage tests. If fail, pay down class A, class B, and then class C.
11             Class C deferred interest
12             Class D interest
13             Class D coverage tests. If fail, pay down class A, class B, class C, and then class D.
14             Class D deferred interest.
15             During the reinvestment period, if class D overcollateralization test is not satisfied, deposit to
               collection account as principal until class D reinvestment O/C test is satisfied.
16             Deposit to collection account as principal proceeds amount that principal proceeds were used to pay
               (1)-(4), (6), (8), (9), (11), (12), and (14) above.
17             Subordinated hedge termination payment
18             Payments due in clause 1 above the capped amount
19             Subordinated management fee
20             At the discretion of the collateral manager, with the consent of a majority of the preference shares, to
               deposit in the collection account as principal
21             Preference shares up to an internal rate of return (IRR) of 14%
22             If IRR is 14% or greater, 20% of remaining interest proceeds to the collateral manager as an incentive
               management fee and 80% of any remaining interest proceeds.




                                                          32
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


Panel D: Principal Waterfall

Priority    Payment
1           Items 1 to 14 in the interest waterfall
2           If payment date is a redemption date, the redemption prices of all the notes and any preference shares
            to be redeemed. If payment date requires a special redemption, pay sequentially A, then B then C then
            D, until each note is paid in full as required. If payment date requires a partial redemption, pay pro
            rata to the class A, B, C, and D notes and the preference shares.
3           During the reinvestment period to purchase additional collateral
4           After the reinvestment period, pay down class A notes until paid in full
5           After the reinvestment period, pay down class B notes until paid in full
6           After the reinvestment period, pay down class C notes until paid in full
7           After the reinvestment period, pay down class D notes until paid in full
8           After the reinvestment period, to the payment of (17)-(19), (21) and (22) of the interest waterfall.



Panel E: Expected Portfolio Characteristics

                                Expected On Effective Date     Required
Weighted average spread (%)     3.125                          2.750
Weighted average coupon (%)     8.750                          8.500



Panel F: Sale and Reinvestment of Collateral Restrictions

The transaction structure permits the collateral manager to sell collateral debt securities under the
following conditions:

•   The collateral debt security is a defaulted security, a workout asset, or a current pay
    obligation
•   The collateral debt security is an equity security
•   The collateral debt security is deemed a credit risk security
•   The collateral debt security is deemed a credit-improved security
•   The collateral debt security is subject to withholding tax
•   As a result of an optimal redemption
•   As a result of a rating confirmation failure on the effective date

The transaction also allows the collateral manager to sell collateral debt securities outside the
requirements set forth above, if the total volume of these sales does not exceed 25% of the
aggregate principal balance of the collateral debt securities for a given annual period.




                                                      33
    Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


                                Table 2: Global CDO Issuance Volume ($mil)
    This table reproduces global CDO issuance statistics from the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association
    (SIFMA). Issuance is broken down by type of structure and by issuer motivation. The original data is available at
    http://www.sifma.org/research/global-cdo.html



                                                         BY TYPE:                                 BY ISSUER MOTIVATION:
                                  Cash Flow &             Synthetic         Market Value          Arbitrage             Balance Sh
                   TOTAL             Hybrid                Funded                                                            eet
                        $
                                     $           %         $          %           $       %        $           %         $         %

    2004          157,418       119,531          76     37,237        24    650       0       146,998          93   10,419         7

    2005          271,803       206,225          76     64,957        24    620       0       227,403          84   44,399         16
    2006          551,709       414,743          75     89,042        16    47,924    9       472,197          86   79,511         14
    2007          502,978       362,651          72     46,230        9     94,096    19      436,102          87   66,876         13

    2008 – 1H     36,807        26,190           71     1,212         3     9,404     26      28,855           78   7,951          22

    Total         1,520,715     1,183,340        74     238,678       16    152,694   10      1,311,555        86   209,156        14



                                          Panel B: Sample Issuance Volume




                   All CDOs                             US$ denominated                           Euro denominated

Year       CDO    Tranches       Total           CDO       Tranches         Total          CDO         Tranches      Total ($mil)
            (#)      (#)         ($mil)           (#)         (#)           ($mil)          (#)           (#)

2000    4         33           1,840        4              33              1,840      0                0            0

2001    10        74           5,793        8              60              4,577      2                14           1,216

2002    16        115          5,955        13             88              4,789      3                27           1,166

2003    41        297          16,666       35             244             14,613     6                53           2,053

2004    66        477          29,137       53             354             22,785     13               123          6,353

2005    99        741          51,139       80             573             40,313     19               168          10,826

2006    169       1,261        86,573       126            909             62,620     43               352          23,953

2007*   126       922          74,521       86             622             47,943     40               300          26,579

Total   531       3,920        271,624      405            2,883           199,479    126              1,037        72,145




                                                                 34
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


                                 Table 3: CDO and tranche size ($mil)

                                               Panel A
                                     Summary Statistics for CDO size

        Year      Mean         25th       Median        75th           Std    Min     Max
                           Percentile                Percentile
        2000      460      401           414        519            102       400    612

        2001      579      438           511        750            194       321    895

        2002      372      307           397        432            72        250    482

        2003      406      306           356        439            165       212    1,023

        2004      441      354           408        500            162       200    1,107

        2005      517      364           499        600            209       210    1,250

        2006      512      400           467        544            254       286    3,000

        2007      591      424           500        647            343       300    3,529

        Entire    512      400           460        557            257       200    3,529
        sample


                                                Panel B
                                    Summary Statistics for Tranche Size

        2000      56       15            23         37            90         1.2    365

        2001      79       11            22         50            145        1.8    654

        2002      54       8             17         34            90         2.0    381

        2003      58       10            19         41            96         0.5    847

        2004      63       12            24         45            99         0.1    633

        2005      69       15            27         57            108        0.02   681

        2006      69       18            29         53            106        1.0    1,080

        2007      81       23            35         72            124        0.5    1,849

        Entire    70       16            28         57            109        0.02   1,849
        sample




                                                    35
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


                 Table 4: Par Value of Notes Issued by CDOs, by Rating (in $ mil)



        2000        2001       2002       2003        2004       2005       2006       2007       Total

AAA     1,248       4,363.9    4,490.8    12,316.2    20,799.0   36,293.7   60,962.4   51,284.0   191,757.9
        (67.8%)     (75.3%)    (75.4%)    (73.9%)     (71.4%)    (71.0%)    (70.4%)    (68.8%)    (70.6%)

AA      65.0        312.6      218.0      620.3       1,191.1    2,580.2    4,848.2    4,816.6    14,651.9
        (3.53%)     (5.4%)     (3.7%)     (3.7%)      (4.1%)     (5.0%)     (5.6%)     (6.5%)     (5.4%)

A       35.0        260.4      297.5      889.0       1,720.8    3,291.0    4,924.6    4,504.6    15,922.7
        (1.9%)      (4.5%)     (5.0%)     (5.3%)      (5.9%)     (6.4%)     (5.7%)     (6.0%)     (5.9%)

BBB     58.0        122.6      252.5      670.0       1,478.7    2,552.7    4,389.3    3,658.8    13,182.5
        (3.2%)      (2.1%)     (4.2%)     (4.0%)      (5.1%)     (5.0%)     (5.1%)     (4.9%)     (4.9%)

BB      13.0        173.0      119.9      236.8       370.8      772.8      2,369.9    2,329.6    6,385.8
        (0.7%)      (3.0%)     (2.0%)     (1.4%)      (1.3%)     (1.5%)     (2.7%)     (3.1%)     (2.4%)

B       0.0         0.0        0.0        0.0         10.0       15.0       58.0       111.6      194.7
        (0.0%)      (0.0%)     (0.0%)     (0.0%)      (0.0%)     (0.0%)     (0.1%)     (0.2%)     (0.1%)

NR      420.7       560.2      576.0      1,933.9     3,567.5    5,633.4    9,020.2    7,816.3    29,528.2
        (22.9%)     (9.7%)     (9.7%)     (11.6%)     (12.2%)    (11.0%)    (10.4%)    (10.5%)    (10.9%)

Total   1,839.7     5,792.6    5,954.7    16,666.1    29,137.8   51,138.8   86,572.9   74,521.5   271,624
        (100.0%)    (100.0%)   (100.0%)   (100.0%)    (100.0%)   (100.0%)   (100.0%)   (100.0%)   (100%)




                                                     36
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


                                      Table 5: Deal Structure



              CDOs with tranche:   Tranche amount as a % of the par value of the CDO:


     Rating   N        %           Mean    SD     p10      p25     Median    p75        p90

     AAA      530      100%        71.4    7.3    63.7     68.2    73.0      75.4       77.4

     AA+      4        0.8%        5.4     2.7    2.6      3.3     5.1       7.5        8.9
     AA       427      80%         6.5     3.8    3.7      4.7     6.0       7.7        9.1
     AA-      9        2%          11.5    4.8    5.6      8.5     10.1      14.0       10.6

     A+       17       3%          5.4     2.6    2.4      3.2     5         6.8        9
     A        425      80%         6.3     3.8    4.5      5       5.8       6.6        8.4
     A-       65       12%         6.6     2.2    4.4      4.9     6.7       8.5        9.1

     BBB+     8        2%          3.3     3.4    0        1.3     2.2       4.2        10.9
     BBB      411      77%         5       1.7    3.3      3.9     4.6       5.8        7.1
     BBB-     97       18%         5.2     2      2.6      4.1     5.5       6.3        7

     BB+      9        2%          1.4     1.1    0        0.6     1.6       2.5        3.1
     BB       304      57%         3.2     0.9    2.1      2.7     3.2       3.8        4.3
     BB-      69       13%         3.8     1.5    2.3      3.0     3.8       4.3        5.2

     B+       0        0%
     B        10       2%          1.8     0.3    1.4      1.7     1.9       2          2.2
     B-       3        0.6%        1.1     0.6    0.5      0.5     1         1.8        1.8

     NR       524      99%         10.3    6.1    7.3      7.8     8.8       10.5       14.0




                                                  37
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


                                 Table 6: Uniformity of Deal Structures
This table summarizes the liability structures observed for CLOs in our sample. Panel A shows that most CLOs
have one of four combinations of rated tranches. Panel B examines whether liability structure is correlated with
underlying collateral quality.


                            Panel A: Commonly Observed Deal Structures

                       Number (CDOs)                   %                 Contains tranches rated:

Type 1                209                     40%                      AAA, AA, A, BBB, BB, NR
Type 2                69                      13%                      AAA, AA, A, BBB, NR
Type 3                38                      7%                       AAA, AA, A, BBB- , BB- , NR
Type 4                20                      4%                       AAA, A, BBB, BB, NR
Other*                197                     37%
All CDOs              531                     100%
*Each structure in this category appears less frequently than Type 4




                                                         38
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


                                           Table 6, continued

                 Panel B: Asset & liability structures of four major deal types

                        Collateral quality frequency (when available)
                                  Type 1            Type 2           Type 3         Type 4
         BBB-                        1
         BB+                         1
          BB                         1
          BB-                       8                5                               2
          B+                       153               49                 19           18
           B                        38               10                 18
          B-                         5                3
         Total                     207               67                 37           20
                        Liabilities: Rated tranches as % of deal par
                           Type 1             Type 2          Type 3          Type 4
% AAA
Median                     73.1               74.3            66.8            76.1
Mean                       71.9               70.1            66.7            75.6
SD                         4.2                10.8            3.5             2.2
% NR
Median                     8                  9.3             10              8.4
Mean                       8.6                11.9            10              9.1
SD                         2.2                9.9             1.1             1.9
% AA
Median                     5.7                5.1             8
Mean                       6                  5.5             7.8
SD                         1.9                2.2             1.5
%A
Median                     5.4                5.7             6               8.2
Mean                       5.6                6.2             5.9             8.1
SD                         1.2                2.3             1.1             1.4
%BBB
Median                     4.3                6.3                             4.3
Mean                       4.6                6.3                             4.1
SD                         1.3                1.7                             0.8
%BBB-
Median                                                        6
Mean                                                          6
SD                                                            0.9
%BB
Median                     3.2                                                3.1
Mean                       3.3                                                3.2
SD                         0.9                                                0.5
%BB-
Median                                                        3.6
Mean                                                          3.6
SD                                                            1.0




                                                     39
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


                                      Table 7: Collateral Restrictions
This table examines the frequency of collateral restrictions across CLOs, and the value of the restriction conditional
on observing it. Most CLOs are revolving pools where the manager can turnover a fraction of assets each year, but
the portfolio composition is governed by collateral restrictions decided upon at the time of issuance.

                                       CDOs with                    Conditional Distribution Statistics
                                       restriction
                                       N        %      Mean       SD      10th     25th    Median      75th     90th
                                                                           %        %                   %        %
MIN senior secured loans              355   67%      86.8      7.4         80       85        90        90       95
MIN senior loans                       58   11%     84.3      10.1         75       80        85        90       95
MAX second lien loans                 244   46%      11.7     10.1          5       10        10       12.5      15
MAX high-yield bonds                  144   27%      6.9       4.4          5        5         5        10       15
MAX corp. bonds                        25    5%      7.7       5.5          5        5         5        10       10
MAX structured fin securities         307   58%      5.1      3.9          3        3         5         5       7.5
                                            Near default securities:
MAX current pay                       223   42%      6.0       2.2     5            5          5        7.5      7.5
MAX rated CCC+ or lower               309   58%      8.9       9.5     5            5         7.5       7.5      15
MAX debtor-in-possession loans        359   68%      6.7       3.5     5            5          5        7.5      10
MAX discounted obligations            115   22%      7.0       2.4     5            5         7.5        8       10
MAX obt. in bankruptcy exch.           14    3%      4.1       2.3     2            2          5         5        5
                                           Collateral interest type:
MIN floating rate                     197   37%     92.8       8.1    85            90        95        95       100
MAX fixed rate                        322   61%      8.1       9.4     3            5         5         8        15
                                        Payment frequency of collateral:
MAX paying less than quarterly        275   52%       9.1      5.1     5            5         10        10       15
MAX paying less than                  158   30%      6.3       3.6     5            5         5         5        10
semiannual.
MAX pay-in-kind                       254     48%      5.3      3.6    2.5          5          5          5       5
MAX zero coupon                       164     31%      4.2      1.5     2          2.5         5          5       5
MAX maturing after CDO                242     46%      2.6      1.3     2           2         2.5         3       4
                                                 Diversification:
MAX conc. in single issuer            356     67%      2.2      1.0    1.5         1.6         2        2.5       3
MAX conc. in top 3 issuers, each       36      7%      2.9      1.2     2           2         2.5        3        5
MAX conc. in single industry          133     25%     8.9       2.2     8           8          8         8       10
MAX conc. in top 2 ind., each          37      7%     11.6      4.2    10          10         10        12       14
MAX conc. in top 3 ind., each          54     10%     13.0      7.3    10          10         12        12       12
                                              Domicile of obligors:
MAX non-US                            257     63%     16.9      5.0    10           15        20        20       25
MAX non-US/UK/Canada                  62      15%     10.5      6.3     3            5        10        15      17.5
                                             Currency of obligations:
MAX non-US dollar                     21       5%     6.4       6.4     0           0         5         10       15
MAX non-Euro                          111     88%     28.0     10.2   19.5          25        30        30       35
                                                   Rated by:
MIN rated by S&P                       19      4%     86.1      9.5    80           85        90        90       90
MAX rated by other agency              37      7%     10.0      2.4    10           10        10        10       10




                                                         40
Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings


     Table 8: Level of portfolio defaults that rated tranches must/can withstand in rating
                                   agency simulation model
Scenario default rate = level of portfolio defaults that a tranche should be able to withstand (paying timely interest
and ultimate principal by maturity) in cash-flow simulations; it is equal to the level of defaults in the collateral pool
that has no greater than x% chance of being exceeded, where x% is the historical default rate on a corporate bond of
the same rating and maturity as the tranche in question. Break-even default rate = level of portfolio defaults that a
tranche can withstand, according to underwriter cash-flow simulations


                                          Scenario Default Rate                            Breakeven Default Rate
Rating    N(tranches)      N      Mean       SD     P25     Median      P75     N      Mean      SD     P25     Median      P75

AAA       1,082            903    44.1       9.1    37.1    40.6        51.9    762    51.9      11.7   43.2    48.5        59.2

AA+       4                3      43.4       12.4   30.8    44.0        55.5    3      48.1      12.6   36.5    46.3        61.5
AA        458              403    40.5       9.3    32.8    36.9        49.0    333    47.1      10.5   39.3    43.5        55.0
AA-       13               10     32.5       4.1    27.7    32.5        36.0    3      41.0      6.0    34.0    44.5        44.5

A+        21               21      29.6      3.1    27.4    29.6        31.4    18     36.3      6.0    31.1    36.0        40.0
A         472              418     36.0      9.4    28.9    32.0        45.1    361    39.6      9.5    32.9    35.7        47.7
A-        83               74      30.4      6.6    26.3    29.1        32.2    48     33.4      5.6    29.5    31.4        35.6

BBB+      10               6       29.0      7.0    23.3    28.1        28.9    6      33.5      7.5    29.4    29.4        36.0
BBB       507              448     29.4      8.3    24.3    26.2        32.5    402    31.9      8.8    26.4    28.2        35.7
BBB-      108              88      31.7      7.8    25.4    30.5        35.1    44     32.8      8.7    26.8    28.3        40.4

BB+       12               6       22.1      2.8    20.7    22.0        23      4      28.3      2.4    26.8    28.1        29.9
BB        345              307     24.3      8.5    18.5    20.3        27.2    278    27.9      8.3    22.3    24.1        34.7
BB-       82               59      26.9      8.7    20.4    24.2        37.0    12     29.4      8.5    22.8    27.1        34.8

B+        0
B         10               5       28.7      8.4    20.7    34.2        34.9    3      29.5      7.0    21.8    31.1        35.6
B-        3                3       22.0      9.4    16.0    17.1        32.9    3      30.4      9.6    24.7    24.9        41.5

Total     3,210




                                                           41
   Benmelech and Dlugosz: The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings




                                     Table 9: Collateral Performance
   This table summarizes the portfolio allocation of all CLOs rated by S&P that were outstanding as of
   January 2009.

        2007 Vintage             2006 Vintage          2005 Vintage            2004 Vintage          2003 Vintage
        CLOs                         CLOs                  CLOs                    CLOs                  CLOs
             Portfolio              Portfolio             Portfolio               Portfolio             Portfolio
         Allocation as of:      Allocation as of:     Allocation as of:       Allocation as of:     Allocation as of:
        Jan    Dec     Chg    Jan     Dec    Chg     Jan      Dec    Chg     Jan    Dec    Chg     Jan    Dec    Chg
         08     08             08      08             08       08             08     08             08     08
%AAA    0.00   0.07    0.07   0.00    0.06    0.06   0.01     0.06    0.05   0.01   0.03   0.02    0.00   0.07    0.07
%AA     0.02   0.20    0.18   0.07    0.13    0.06   0.08     0.18    0.10   0.13   0.19   0.06    0.03   0.14    0.11
%A      0.41   0.64    0.23   0.19    0.54    0.35   0.35     0.64    0.29   0.18   0.44   0.26    0.05   0.23    0.18
%BBB    2.25   2.97    0.72   1.80    2.50    0.70   1.42     2.46    1.04   1.52   2.40   0.88    1.14   2.32    1.18
%BB     20.2   18.1   -2.11   22.8    19.9   -2.87   23.0     19.9   -3.11   22.7   20.7   -2.02   20.9   18.8   -2.08
%B      70.6   68.8   -1.79   69.1    66.3   -2.78   69.2     66.7   -2.64   65.2   63.7   -1.57   67.4   64.6   -2.79
%CCC    5.78   6.60    0.82   5.13    7.97    2.84   5.02     7.41    2.39   8.51   9.40   0.89    7.92   10.8    2.83
%CC     0.06   0.80    0.74   0.14    0.56    0.42   0.11     0.56    0.45   0.36   0.44   0.08    0.32   0.38    0.06
%D      0.72   1.88    1.16   0.73    1.95    1.22   0.68     2.11    1.43   1.29   2.67   1.38    2.30   2.73    0.43

Total    100    100            100    100            100      100            100    100            100    100



   Source: Standard & Poor’s, “CLO Performance Index Report: January 2009”.




                                                      42
