NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE FINNISH GREAT DEPRESSION:
FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE
Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Enrique G. Mendoza
Linda L. Tesar
Working Paper 14874
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14874

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2009

¸˛The authors would like to thank participants of seminars at the University of Michigan, MIT, Cornell,
UC Davis, UC Berkeley, UCLA, UC Santa Barbara, Western Michigan University, Wharton, NBER,
“Macroeconomics across Time and Space” at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, BREAD Conference
on Development Economics and Society for Economic Dynamics. We also gratefully acknowledge
comments and suggestions from Olivier Coibion, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Seppo Honkapohja, Wolfgang
Keller, Peter Murrell, Maurice Obstfeld, Lee Ohanian, Klara Sabirianova Peter, Christina Romer, Kim
Ruhl, Jeff Smith, Kei-Mu Yi, and Jing Zhang. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Linda L. Tesar. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Finnish Great Depression: From Russia with Love
Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Linda L. Tesar
NBER Working Paper No. 14874
April 2009
JEL No. E32,F41,P2
ABSTRACT
During the period 1991-93, Finland experienced the deepest economic downturn in an industrialized
country since the 1930s. We argue that the culprit behind this Great Depression was the collapse of
Finnish trade with the Soviet Union, because it induced a costly restructuring of the manufacturing
sector and a sudden, large increase in the cost of energy. We develop and calibrate a multi-sector dynamic
general equilibrium model with labor market frictions, and show that the collapse of Soviet-Finnish
trade can explain key features of Finland's Great Depression. We also show that Finland's Great Depression
mirrors the macroeconomic dynamics of the transition economies of Eastern Europe. These economies
experienced a similar trade collapse. However, as a western democracy with developed capital markets
and institutions, Finland faced none of the large institutional adjustments that other transition economies
experienced. Thus, by studying the Finnish experience we isolate the adjustment costs due solely to
the collapse of Soviet trade.

Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu
Enrique G. Mendoza
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
mendozae@econ.umd.edu

Linda L. Tesar
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
ltesar@umich.edu

I

Introduction

Understanding great depressions has long been one of the central challenges in macroeconomics.
Their massive costs as well as disagreement over their causes and propagation vehicles are
subject to continuous debate. We examine the Finnish Great Depression of the early 1990s to
shed new light on important transmission mechanisms that can drive great depressions through
disruption of international trade relationships. We also show that our analysis of the Finnish
Great Depression can be very useful for understanding the macroeconomic implications of large
structural shocks affecting trade arrangements and the terms of trade in other countries
(particularly in the case of the transition economies of Eastern Europe in the aftermath of the
collapse of the Soviet Union).
During the 1991-93 period, Finland experienced the deepest economic slump in an
industrialized country since the 1930s and the deepest peace-time recorded recession in Finnish
history. As illustrated in Panel A of Figure 1, between 1990 and 1993 real GDP declined by 11
percent, real consumption declined by 10 percent and investment fell to 55 percent of its 1990
level. Over the same period, Finland experienced a quadrupling of unemployment from slightly
under 4 percent to a peak of 18.5 percent, and the stock market lost 60 percent of its value.
We argue that the collapse of trade with the Soviet Union played a major role in causing
the 1990s Great Depression in Finland, since it caused a costly restructuring of the
manufacturing sector and a sudden, significant increase in the cost of energy. The barter-type
trade arrangements between the USSR and Finland skewed Finnish manufacturing production
and investment toward particular industries, and effectively allowed Finland to export noncompetitive products in exchange for energy imports at an overvalued exchange rate. The demise
of the USSR provides an exceptionally unique natural experiment for which we know with
precision the timing, nature and size of the exogenous shocks that hit the Finnish economy.
Furthermore, unlike previous analyses of earlier depressions or downturns in developing
economies, we have access to high quality economic data at different levels of aggregation and
frequency.
We develop and calibrate a multi-sector dynamic general equilibrium model that
accounts for the key features of the Finnish Great Depression as the economy’s response to the
two shocks caused by the collapse of trade with the Soviet Union (the sudden loss of the market
for specialized exports to the USSR and the surge in the relative price of imported energy). The

1

model generates large declines in aggregate output, consumption and employment, and replicates
the dynamics of the sector devoted to Soviet trade, the non-Soviet sector of tradable goods, and
the nontradables sector. The deep, persistent recession follows from the rise in energy costs and
the reallocation of resources induced by the sudden obsolescence of the sizable sector that
produced specialized goods destined for export to the Soviet Union. Our simulations also suggest
that downward wage rigidity observed in Finland played a key role in the amplification of the
downturn produced by these shocks.
We validate the model by examining its ability to match the behavior of the Finnish
economy in a previous episode of a sudden rise in energy costs, the oil price hike of the 1970s.
The model does well at reproducing the dynamics of macroeconomic variables in this episode. In
addition, we compare the experience of Finland in the aftermath of the collapse of the Soviet
Union with that of Sweden. Sweden is widely regarded as sharing many of the same structural
features that characterize Finland, and it went through a similar initial economic downturn in the
early 1990s (including currency and banking crises). Sweden did not, however, trade extensively
with the Soviet Union. Hence this comparison provides us with a natural experiment in which
one country (Finland) was hit by the Soviet shock and the other (Sweden) was not. Our findings
from this comparison support the model’s quantitative predictions, because the downturn in
Sweden was much milder and of shorter duration than in Finland.
The impact of the trade shocks on Finland is interesting in its own right, but it is
especially compelling in light of the similar experiences of the Eastern European transition
economies (TEs). Panel B in Figure 1 plots real GDP in the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland,
Slovenia, Slovakia, Bulgaria and Finland. The figure captures the familiar “U-shaped” path for
output characteristic of TEs (Blanchard and Kremer 1997, Roland and Verdier 1999). With the
exception of Poland, output declined between 1990 and 1993 in all TEs, and the magnitude of
the cumulated output drop ranged from roughly 7 to 21 percent of the level of GDP in 1990. The
most remarkable feature of the figure is that the adjustment path for Finnish GDP in the post1990 period is virtually identical to those observed in the TEs.1 Finland experienced the full
1

A number of papers have explored the possible impact of trade on output in transition economies. Shortly after the
dismantling of the Soviet Union, Rodrik (1994) estimated that the collapse of trade with the USSR could account for
a 7 to 8 percent decline in GDP in Hungary and Czechoslovakia and a 3.5 percent decline in Poland. At the time
these papers were written, it was too early to characterize the transition path and U-shaped pattern of output
resulting from the loss of trade, but Rodrik's work suggested that trade was a key factor in understanding the
dramatic decline in output in 1990 and 1991. In Appendix Table E1, we use Rodrik’s method to compute the static
2

force of the Soviet trade shock, but as a western democracy with developed capital markets and
institutions, faced none of the institutional adjustments experienced in the TEs. Thus, by
studying the Finnish experience we isolate the adjustment costs due solely to the collapse of
trade from the other burdens of adjustment borne by TEs. To the best of our knowledge, these
results provide the first quantitative assessment of the significance of the trade shocks for
explaining the downturn in these economies. To the extent that these shocks, combined with
standard macroeconomic reallocation costs and frictions, can account for the depressions in TEs,
the role of other factors such as institutional transformations may be smaller than previously
thought.
The crisis in Finland has been examined in other studies that offer explanations
alternative to ours. One view is that the origins of the Finnish depression were largely financial,
working through the banking sector and ultimately triggering a twin currency-banking crisis
(Honkapohja and Koskela 1999, Honkapohja et al 1996). Another view argues that labor tax
hikes and negative productivity shocks may have been the culprit (Conesa, Kehoe and Ruhl,
2007). While these factors are obviously worth considering as additional important elements of
the Finnish crisis, this paper shows that the mechanism we propose is relevant on its own and can
also rationalize some of the empirical observations that motivate these alternative views.
In the next section of the paper we describe the key features of Finland's trading
relationship with the USSR that are central to our argument. In Section III, we develop the
dynamic model of the Finnish economy. In Section IV the model is calibrated using Finnish data
before the collapse of Soviet trade. Then we hit the model economy with the shocks caused by
the collapse of the Soviet Union, as once-and-for-all unanticipated shocks in a deterministic
environment, and compare the model’s dynamics with the dynamics observed in the data. In
section V, we compare our trade theory of the Finnish recession with alternative explanations
proposed in the literature. In section VI, we compare the Finnish experience with the experience
of TEs, and discuss how our conclusion for Finland can be extended to other countries. We make
concluding remarks in Section VII.

cost of the Soviet trade collapse for Finland. The size of the shock is comparable to the Soviet trade shocks
experienced by Eastern European transition countries.
3

II Finnish-Soviet Trade
Finland and the USSR had a series of five-year, highly regulated trade agreements, similar to the
agreements between the USSR and its East European allies. These agreements established the
volume and composition of trade between the two countries, and by the late 1980s they had
evolved into a barter of Finnish manufactures for Soviet crude oil. In principle, trade was to be
balanced annually, though arrangements were periodically made to allow for temporary
imbalances.2 These trade imbalances were the subject of annual interim negotiations and were
usually cleared on the Finnish side through supplemental exports above the agreed quotas or on
the Soviet side by additional petroleum exports.
By 1975, the USSR was Finland’s most important trading partner. Panel C in Figure 1
plots the share of Soviet exports in total exports over the 1970-2003 period. During the early to
mid-1980s, the USSR accounted for 20-25 percent of Finnish trade flows. Thereafter, the volume
of trade with the Soviet Union began to gradually decline until the collapse of the trade
agreement. Part of the decline during the 1980s was an endogenous contraction, resulting from
falling oil prices. The decline was also a consequence of the reforms under Perestroika, which
attempted to decentralize Soviet decision making but made it difficult for Finnish authorities to
identify those with real authority on the Soviet end of the bargain. The trade regime fully
collapsed and all contracts with the Soviet Union were cancelled on December 18, 1990.
Roughly 80 percent of Finnish imports from the USSR in the early 1980s were in the
form of mineral fuels and crude materials (Panel D, Figure 1). More than 90 percent of imported
oil and 100 percent of imported natural gas came from the USSR. Under the terms of the
bilateral agreement, the value of crude oil exports to Finland was determined by the dollar price
of crude oil on the world market and then converted to rubles using the official ruble/dollar
exchange rate. From the Finnish perspective, the volume of bilateral trade was thus a function of
Finnish oil import demand given the world price of oil. During the oil crises of the 1970s, the oilfor-manufactures structure of trade provided Finland with a buffer against the cyclical
fluctuations experienced in most other industrialized countries. As oil prices rose, Finland was
able to expand employment and production in those sectors exporting to the USSR to finance the
higher cost of energy imports.
2

See Mottola, Bykov and Korolev (1983) and Oblath and Pete (1990) for a more complete discussion of the history
of trade relations between the USSR and Finland and the bilateral clearing system.
4

On the export side, the five-year trade agreements established explicit quotas for the
export of manufactures to the USSR. While the total volume of exports was established by the
bilateral trade agreement, the specific quantities and unit prices of the items to be exported was
established through direct negotiations. Typically, trade associations conducted the negotiations,
applied for export licenses from the Finnish government, and distributed the rights to export
among their members. A key condition of the export license was an 80 percent domestic content
restriction. The majority of exports to the USSR took the form of manufactured goods and
machinery and transport equipment, which included the production of ships.
It was widely perceived that exporting to the USSR was a lucrative business for Finnish
firms. Pre-commitment to the five-year contracts eliminated exchange rate and business cycle
risk for firms. Surveys of managers and industry experts indicated that Soviet trade was a low
risk, low cost, and long-term business. In a survey of the structural effects of Soviet trade on the
Finnish economy, Kajaste (1992, p. 29) concludes that “[Soviet] exports seem to have been
exceptionally profitable.” More formally, Kajaste (1992) uses unit prices of Soviet and nonSoviet exports and estimates that the prices of exports to the Soviet Union were at least 9.5
percent higher than those for exports to western markets. We find an even larger 36 percent
markup when we replicate Kajaste’s analysis using more recent trade data at 5-digit-level of
disaggregation for 1990. This markup suggests that if a Finnish industry redirected its Soviet
trade to other countries, its goods would be competitive only if sold at a 10 to 36 percent
discount.3 Hence, the Finnish economy was subsidized by overvalued prices of Finnish
manufactures bartered for Soviet oil so that the effective price of Soviet oil was at least 10
percent cheaper than its market price.

3

There are several reasons why the USSR was willing to overpay for Finnish goods. First, neutral Finland was the
key source of modern Western know-how for the Soviet Union. For example, Finland supplied products with
sensitive technologies such as deep-sea submersible, nuclear icebreakers, telecommunications equipment (Nokia),
etc. Other countries had much tighter export controls against the Soviet bloc, with particular focus on blocking the
transfer of technology. Second, the Soviet Union used the Finnish-Soviet trade as a lab for testing various forms of
capitalist and socialist cooperation. Political leaders in Finland and the USSR viewed trade as a guarantee of
peaceful co-existence. For example, Urho Kekkonen, the Finnish prime minister and president for three decades,
wrote in 1974, “…our whole stable foreign policy course demands that we do keep the Soviet markets.” Third, the
Soviet subsidy was aimed at maintaining political status quo in Finland where left parties played an important role.
A former leader of Soviet intelligence in Finland once wrote, “One can go to any lengths in thinking, whether
Kekkonen was a Soviet ‘agent of influence’, but hardly anybody denies that the Finns had a president who pumped
enormous amounts of economic benefit from Soviet leaders against short-term political concessions … and thus
Finnish standards of living increased” (cited in Sutela 2007).
5

Finnish exports to the USSR were typically specialized for the Soviet market and did not
compete directly with products traded in western markets. To assess the degree of specialization
of the goods destined for the USSR, Kajaste (1992) computes the share of Soviet exports at 4digit level of CCCN classification and finds strong concentration of trade. Conditional on
exporting a good to the East, more than 80 percent of all exports of this good went to socialist
countries. At the more detailed 7-digit level, Kajaste (1992) identifies 133 items with a Soviet
export share exceeding 90 percent. These items constituted approximately 40 percent of exports
to the USSR. Kajaste (1992) reports that because of the highly specialized nature of goods traded
with the Council of Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA), the collapse of trade with the Eastern
markets was compensated only to a very limited extent by redirecting trade to the West. The
extent of specialization was such that firms’ capacity developed for trading with the USSR
became more or less obsolete overnight.4,5
Table 1 shows exports to the USSR by sector, as a share of sectoral exports and as a share
of sectoral value added. The table focuses on the year 1988, before the uncertainties of
Perestroika began to disrupt trade contracts. Among the sectors with heaviest Soviet-trade
exposure were textiles, textile products, leather and footwear, with Soviet exports accounting for
29 percent of exports and 34 percent of value added. Machinery and equipment also had
significant Soviet exposure at both the aggregate and disaggregated level. The sector with the
heaviest exposure was transport equipment, and this exposure is further concentrated in
shipbuilding (85 percent of exports designated for the USSR and 225 percent of value added)
and railroad equipment (86 percent of exports to USSR and 103 percent of value added). A
message of Table 1 is that while some manufacturing sectors were particularly specialized in
goods destined for the Soviet market, no sector was fully isolated from the loss of Soviet trade.

4

The fact that Finnish exports to the USSR could have had a limited success in the West was clearly understood at
the time. Urho Kekkonen, President of the Republic and a very active promoter of trade and economic cooperation
with the Soviet Union, wrote in a private letter on 20 November 1972: “We must of necessity maintain a relatively
large trade with the West, but of much importance is the fact that we are able to sell to the Soviet market in the main
such goods that would be very difficult to market into the West.” Cited in Sutela (2005).
5
Another important aspect of trade with the USSR was industry concentration. Only 600 or so firms exported to the
USSR in the 1970s, while more than 3,000 firms exported to Sweden (Sutela 1991). In 1989 the total number of
Finnish exporters to the USSR was 1,688. The five largest exporters accounted for 39.9 percent of all exports, the
fifty largest for 78.7 percent, 116 largest for 90 percent (Sutela 2005). This concentration of the Finnish-Soviet trade
resembles trade within CMEA. Given this concentration, economies of scale were often cited as an important source
of profitability in the Finnish-Soviet trade. The scale of production also often implies that firms were likely to be
multi-product.
6

The collapse of Soviet trade was largely unanticipated. It was clear that the Soviet Union
was under distress in the late 1980s, and that some Finnish companies faced difficulty in their
trade dealings with the Soviets. However, news articles and policy analyses from the period
suggest that Finnish government officials and firms remained optimistic about the future of trade
with the USSR.6
The collapse was quick and deep. Imports of oil from the USSR fell from 8.2 million tons
in 1989 to 1.3 million tons in 1992. Exports tumbled down by 84 percent over the same period.
Figure 2 shows the exports of four industries that sent a significant share of their exports to the
USSR (Cable and wire with the 1990 Soviet share of total exports of 30 percent; Railroad
equipments with 96 percent; Shipbuilding with 74 percent; and Footwear with 43 percent). In
general, the loss of Soviet exports caused total exports to fall, suggesting that the goods were not
redirected to other counties. After the collapse of trade with the USSR in December of 1990,
entire industries had to be reorganized throughout the early 1990s. Even for industries that had
some export recovery (e.g., shipbuilding), the loss of the Soviet market was painful as it involved
major transformations in product lines. The strategy of “icebreakers for the communists, luxury
liners for the capitalists” meant that production facilities specialized for Soviet production had to
be shut down.7
To fully understand the reaction of the Finnish economy to the collapse of the Soviet
trade, it is important to examine the Finnish labor market because of its very high degree of
unionization. In 1993, approximately 85 percent of workers belonged to unions and almost 95
percent of workers were covered by collective agreements (Böckerman and Uusitalo, 2006).
6

For example, in July 1990 the Wall Street Journal reported that Finnish Premier Harri Holkeri was surprised by the
announcement that the Soviet Union would end the bilateral agreement in December, earlier than was originally
planned. A representative of the central bank suggested that it was still possible that the system would be reformed,
and not fully dismantled. The private sector was equally surprised by the collapse of the Soviet trade. For example,
Nokia remained confident that sales to the Soviet Union would continue at their mid-1980 levels. In 1991 Nokia’s
sales to the USSR came in at just 2 million markka instead of 121 million markka as projected. More broadly,
Jonung (2008) argues that professional forecasters failed to predict the timing and later the depth of the coming
recessionas well as the collapse of the USSR
7
Sutela (1991) provides a case study of the shipbuilding industry in Finland. Finnish shipbuilders had supplied the
Soviet Union since 1940s. The major companies were Valmet (state-owned), Repola, Wartsila, and Hollming.
Hollming was the only one of these firms specialized in shipbuilding. The other companies were large corporations
with a broad nomenclature of products. Historically shipyards fared well in terms of profits and accumulated a
unique know-how in the industry. For example, most icebreakers operating in the world were produced in Finland.
With the collapse of the Soviet Union, the shipyards were in deep trouble. Policymakers and business circles were
openly discussing whether the Soviets would allow these companies to go bankrupt. Valmet’s shipbuilding
operations were sold to Wartsila, which knowingly took orders for loss-making luxury cruises (another field of
specialization) for the Caribbean, underestimated domestic cost increases and declared its shipbuilding branch
insolvent. The new company established upon the ruins of Wartsila-Marine was later sold to a Norwegian company.
7

Since most employers are organized in federations, the wage bargaining normally starts at the
national level. If a federation or union rejects the nation-wide agreement, it can negotiate its own
terms. Collective agreements stipulate the wages for different levels of job complexity,
education, etc. in a given industry. Typically, agreements allow upward wage drift if firms
perform well. Although the government does not have a formal role in the bargaining process,
the government usually intermediates negotiations.8 Not surprisingly, Finland is often classified
as a country with highly centralized wage setting (e.g., Botero et al 2004).
Unions did not agree to cut nominal wages in 1992-1993, which were the peak years of
the depression.9 Instead, wages were frozen at the 1991 level. Figure 3 reports the distribution of
wage changes over 1990-1994 for individual workers. There is a clear spike at zero percent
change for most types of workers in 1992 and 1993.10 Strikingly, the fraction of workers with no
wage change reached 75 percent. Thus, the national agreement was binding for a broad array of
firms and workers. Given that inflation was quite moderate in the 1990s, real wages fell only to a
limited extent. These findings are consistent with Dickens et al (2007) who cite Finland as the
country with one of the greatest downward wage rigidities.
As we will report later, the dynamics of wages at the macro level are similar to the
dynamics of wages at the micro level. Specifically, wages at the aggregate level had a very weak
downward adjustment during the Finnish Great Depression. Our micro level evidence strongly
suggests that very sluggish adjustment of wages at the aggregate level reflects genuine wage
rigidity rather than compositional changes in employment. We conclude that wage stickiness was
a prominent feature of the Finnish labor market during the depression.

III A Model of Trade-Induced Great Depressions
In this section we develop a model of the Finnish economy that captures the key features of the
trading relationship between the Soviet Union and Finland as well as the Finnish labor market.
These features include the volume of trade, the composition of trade (barter of manufactures for

8

See Snellman (2005) for a more detailed description of the wage bargaining process in Finland.
Table E2 provides a summary of wage agreements in the 1990s.
10
There is more variability in wage changes for manual workers. We should note that the distribution of wage
changes for manual workers in 1992-1993 is similar to the distribution of wages changes in other year. In part, this
distribution reflects the fact that earnings of manual workers are more variable due to changes in hours worked.
Changes in wage rates are much more downward rigid (see Snellman, 2004).
9

8

oil), overvalued terms of trade, low elasticity of substitution between goods destined for the
Soviet market and western markets, and rigid labor markets.
We model the Finnish economy as a small open economy with three sectors. Sector 1
(non-Soviet sector) produces a traded good consumed at home and sold abroad in western
markets. Sector 2 (Soviet sector) produces a good that can be consumed at home or sold
exclusively to the Soviet Union. Sector 3 (services) produces non-tradable goods. We use
baseline functional forms and parameters that seem the most consistent with the Finnish data or
that help us simplify the analysis.11
Households
The representative household chooses a lifetime plan for consumption and labor allocations to
maximize utility U   t 0  tU (Gt , L1t , L2t , L3t ) , where G is a CES consumption aggregator over


four consumption goods and Lit for i=1,2,3 is the labor supplied to each sector. The consumption
aggregator is given by Gt  { 1C1t   2 C 2t   3C3t   4 C 4t }1/  where 1/(1   C ) is the elasticity
C

C

C

C

C

of substitution in consumption,  j are weights in the consumption aggregator, C1t is the
consumption of the good produced by sector 1, C2t is the consumption of the good produced by
the sector with Soviet exposure, C3t is the consumption of services, and C4t is the consumption of
a good imported from the western markets.12
We follow Greenwood, Hercowitz and Huffman (1988) and assume a period utility



function U (Gt , L1t , L2 t , L3t )  11 Gt  111 L11t 1  2 2 1 L22t 1  3 3 1 L33t 1



(1 )

where 1 / 

is the

elasticity of intertemporal substitution, 1/ j is the Frisch elasticity of labor supply in sector j and

 j is the scale of disutility from working in sector j. Note that labor is sector specific and hence
wages are not generally equalized across sectors.13 Total employment is defined as
Lt  L1t  L2 t  L3t .
11

We provide in Appendix D a detailed sensitivity analysis that shows that our results are robust to relaxing several
assumptions of the baseline setup. In particular, we introduce habit persistence in consumption, vary elasticities of
substitution of sectoral labor supplies, allow for adjustment costs in investment and labor, allow for less-than-unitary
elasticity of substitution between capital and labor and introduce decreasing returns to scale.
12
The fourth consumption good allows the model to capture the fact that the Soviet trade accounted only for a
fraction of total trade.
13
We had a modeling choice between having sector specific labor supply and having decreasing returns to scale in
production. These two options ensure that the production possibility frontier is concave and hence the model
economy does not fully specialize (see Baxter (1992) for more details on linearity/concavity of the production
9

We assume that households are exclusive owners of domestic firms. Households face the
following budget constraint:
w1t L1t  w2 t L2 t  w3t L3t  ( q1t  d1t ) K 1,t 1  ( q2 t  d 2 t ) K 2,t 1  ( q3t  d 3t ) K 3,t 1  Rt Bt 

Bt 1  q1t K1,t  q2t K2,t  q3t K3,t  C1t  p2t C2t  p3t C3t  p4t C4t ,

(1)

where wj is the wage rate in sector j = 1,2,3, Bt is a one-period bond traded on international
markets at the gross world interest rate of Rt, qj is the price of capital in sector j, dj is the dividend
on capital in sector j.
Production
Firms in all three sectors use inputs of capital (K), labor and energy (E) to produce. The problem

faced by the representative firm in each industry is to choose inputs to maximize profits. In
sector j = 1,2,3, the representative firm solves the following problem:



t 0



 j K jt
p jt Q jt  ptE E jt  w jt L jt  p jt ( K jt  (1   ) K j ,t 1 )  p jt (
 1) 2 K jt 1  , (2)


R 
2 K jt 1
s 0 s


1

t

where  is the rate of depreciation of the capital stock,  is a capital adjustment cost coefficient,
and pjt is the relative price of goods in sector j (we take good 1 as numeraire so p1t = 1) and ptE is
the relative price of energy.
 j / P

Production functions are given by Q jt  min{a jE E jt ,( jK K j ,Pt 1   jL LjtP )

} , for j=1,2,3,

where ajE is the energy requirement in sector j, 1/(1   P ) is the elasticity of substitution between
capital and labor,  jK and  jL are weights in the capital-labor aggregator, and  j measures
returns to scale in sector j. We assume that energy and value added are perfect complements
because the ability of firms to substitute away from energy is very small in the short run. At an
optimum,

no

input

is

wasted
E

Y jt  p jtQ jt  ptE E jt  ( p jt  apjEt )Q jt

and

so

a jE E jt  Q jt .
the

Value

corresponding

added

value

is

defined

as

added

function

as

possibility frontier for economies where inputs can be accumulated). It was common in Finland that different units
of firms produced goods for different markets (i.e., Soviet, non-Soviet, non-tradable). In our analysis we study the
effects of the Finnish-Soviet trade collapse using synthetic sectors (i.e., Soviet, non-Soviet, non-tradable)
constructed from disaggregate industry level data. Hence, we prefer sector specific labor supply because constant
returns to scale in production allows straightforward aggregation of firms producing different goods (i.e., Soviet,
non-Soviet, non-tradable) into sectors.
10

F j ( K j ,t 1 , L jt , p jt , ptE )  Y jt . Note that for simplicity the three sectors do not have direct linkages
via input-output relationships.
Using first-order conditions, we can find the shadow price of capital and dividend:
I

q jt  p jt (1   j ( K j jt,t1   )),
d jt  MPK j ,t 1   q j ,t 1  p j ,t 1 j (

I j ,t 1
K jt

 )

I j ,t 1
K jt

,

where MPK j ,t 1  Y j ,t 1 / K jt is the marginal product of capital.14
Market clearing and equilibrium
In Sector 1, output is consumed, invested in that same sector (since investment net of

depreciation, I, is also sector specific) or exported:

Q1t  C1t  I1t  X1t  0,

(3)

where X1 measures net exports of the non-Soviet good. These are exports of goods to western
markets in exchange for energy imports, M*, purchased at a world relative price p*, and for
imports of good C4 purchased at world relative price p4t. Hence, the non-Soviet balance of trade
can be defined as follows:

TBt  X1t  pt* M t*  p4t C4t  Bt 1  Rt Bt .

(4)

In the Soviet sector, output is consumed by domestic consumers, invested in sector 2, or
sold to the Soviet market in exchange for energy:

Q2t  C2t  I 2t  X 2t  0,

(5)

where X2t measures export to the USSR. To capture the clearing system in the Finnish-Soviet
trade, we assume that trade with the Soviet Union is balanced at all times. Hence, the Soviet
trade balance is:

p2t X 2t  ptS M tS  0,

(6)

where ptS is the barter price of energy contracted with the Soviet union for a quantity M tS of
energy imports. The values of ptS and M tS are fixed, since they were set by the five-year
agreements between Finland and the USSR.

14

In some specifications of the numerical simulations we allow for returns to scale to be less than one. Profits in
those cases are rebated to the household.
11

We assume that Finland produces no energy domestically and energy is not storable so
that imports of energy are equal to domestic consumption of energy:

M t*  M tS  ( E1t  E2t  E3t )  0.

(7)

In sector 3, since goods are nontradable, domestic production equals domestic absorption:
Q3t  C3t  I 3t  0,

(8)

We enable the model to capture the slow adjustment of wages by assuming that real
wages in each sector j=1,2,3 evolve as follows:

w jt   j w j ,t 1  (1   j ) w Djt ,

(9)

where the parameter  governs the degree of wage stickiness and wD is the reservation wage
given by the household labor supply. One interpretation of these wage dynamics is that trade
unions take the wage in the previous period as a starting point in bargaining (“status quo” wages)
and gradually change the wage to increase the employment of union workers. Specifically,   1
corresponds to complete real wage rigidity, while   0 corresponds to complete real wage
flexibility. Regardless of  , wDj  w j in the pre-Soviet-collapse steady state. Given the wage,
market-clearing in the labor market is demand determined (i.e. by finding the labor allocation
that satisfies the labor demand condition and the settled wage).
An equilibrium of this economy is defined as intertemporal sequences of allocations
{L1t,L2t,L3t,C1t,C2t,C3t,C4t,I1t,I2t,I3t,Y1t,Y2t,Y3t,E1t,E2t,E3t,q1t,q2t,q3t,Q1t,Q2t,Q3t,
prices {p2t,p3t,w1t,w2t,w3t,q1t,q2t,q3t

,X1t,X2t,Bt

and

} that solve the household’s problem and the problem of

each representative firm, and that satisfy the market clearing conditions (3)-(9), for given initial
conditions {K10,K20,K30,w10,w20,w30} and intertemporal sequences of exogenous variables

{ ptE , M tS , p4t , Rt }t0 . In our quantitative analysis we focus on equilibria that start from initial
conditions calibrated to match the Finnish economy at a stationary equilibrium just before the
collapse of the Soviet Union, and with the sequence of exogenous variables set to reflect the
sudden increase in the cost of energy and the collapse of the market for exports to the USSR. The
precise specification of these initial conditions and shocks is described in the next Section.

12

IV Quantitative Analysis
Data

One of the challenges in mapping the model to the data is that the pervasiveness of Soviet
exports throughout the manufacturing sector makes it difficult to separate out a “Soviet” sector
from a “non-Soviet” sector. In the model, the trade shock will be concentrated in sectors with
heaviest exposure to Soviet trade. In the data, the “Soviet-exposed” sector will be defined as a
X
weighted index of industrial sectors. We define it as the share of exports of industry i at time t

to the Soviet Union in total exports of industry i. Let Qit be value added (or any other the variable
of interest) in industry i at time t. Then we compute value added in the Soviet-exposed sector as

QtS  i itX Qit and correspondingly the non-Soviet-exposed sector is QtNS  i (1  itX )Qit . We
X
treat services as a separate sector producing non-tradable goods. We allow the weights, it , to

change over the 1989-1992 period. The relative size of the Soviet sector will therefore decline
automatically as trade with the USSR collapses.
We provide details on data sources and construction of sectors as well as detrending in
the data Appendix B. We take 1989 as the “pre-collapse” benchmark year. Based on this
definition, Table 2 shows the share of the Soviet sector in total value added, capital/labor ratios,
employment and output shares as well as other descriptive statistics in the base year.
Calibration
The model is calibrated at a quarterly frequency. The quarterly deprecation rate of capital is the

same across sectors and equal to   0.025 (i.e., approximately 10 percent at the annual
frequency). The discount factor is   0.99 so that the real rate or return is 4 percent per annum,
assuming the standard stationarity condition that equates the rate of interest with the rate of time
preference. We also calibrate the intertemporal elasticity of substitution as 1/   1/ 2 , the
standard value in the RBC literature.
Micro level studies favor very large values for  , so that the labor supply elasticity 1/ 
is small. On the other hand, macro level models need relatively large labor supply elasticity to
generate large movements in labor. Recently, Hall (2007) provided empirical evidence indicating
that the elasticity is about 0.91 in the United States. In line with this evidence, we set   1 .

13

We assume unit elasticity of substitution in consumption, i.e.,  C  0 . Given this
assumption, consumption shares can be computed from the input-output matrices which provide
us with the information on consumption expenditures by sector. We find that

 1  0.15;  2  0.04;  3  0.54;  4  0.27 .
Our baseline calibration assumes that the production function is Cobb-Douglas (i.e.,

 P  0 ). In this case, we can read the  jL from the labor shares in sector j. In 1989, shares of
labor compensation in value added were 1L  0.57 ,  2 L  0.63 and  3 L  0.63 .15
We define units of oil in such a way that the unit price of oil before the collapse of the
Soviet Union is equal to one (i.e., the price of the numeraire). Because energy and value added
are Leontieff complements, the energy requirement in the non-Soviet sector is given by

a1  Q1 / E1  p1Q1 / p E E1 . Since we know the cost structure (specifically expenditures on
energy), we can compute energy requirement for the non-Soviet sector as the ratio of cost (value
added plus energy expenditures) to energy expenditures. For the non-Soviet sector this ratio is
equal to 21.56. For other sectors, we cannot make this calculation directly because it depends on
prices determined at equilibrium. We can impute the relative prices using cost shares for labor,
capital labor ratios and relative wages and then compute energy intensity for the Soviet and
service sectors: a 2  37.84 and a3  47.51 . These parameter values imply that the share of Soviet
exports in total exports is approximately 18 percent, which is consistent with the share observed
in the data.
Using information on employment shares and relative wages, we can calculate ratios

 2 1  4.127 and  3 1  0.324 . Because utility is Cobb-Douglas and we need only total
expenditures on the imported good C4, we set p4  1 , without loss of generality. Since  1
regulates only the scale of the economy, we set without loss of generality 1  0.4 . Since more
than 90 percent of energy was imported from the USSR we assume that in the pre-Sovietcollapse period no energy was imported from other countries. We assume small to moderate

15

Empirical studies, however, tend to find that the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor is smaller than
one. Thus, in our sensitivity experiments we examined the case with ρP = –1, which implies 0.5 elasticity of
substitution between capital and labor. Also, the Cobb-Douglas formulation imposes constant returns to scale, but
evidence for the United States documented by Rotemberg and Woodford (1995) and Basu and Fernald (1997)
suggests that returns to scale may be about 0.97. Given that Finland has more concentrated industries, the share of
economic profits may be higher than this estimate, so in our sensitivity analysis we set returns to scale to 0.95.
14

adjustment costs in capital stock: 1  2  3  1 .16 We provide more details about the calibration
in Appendix C.
As we have discussed above, wages in Finland are downwardly rigid and wage
adjustment in the early 1990s was very slow. Indeed, we do not observe large movements in real
or nominal wages in Finland over the 1990s (see Figure 3). In light of these facts, we set

1   2   3  0.99 , which corresponds to the maximum annual decline of real wages equal to
4% and approximately matches the 1-2% decline of real wages during the depression. By setting
this high value of wage rigidity we want to capture downward wage rigidity in this particular
historical episode since we anticipate that wages in our model will have to fall in response to the
trade shocks caused by the Soviet collapse. Table 3 summarizes calibrated parameters.
Simulating the Effects of the Soviet Trade Collapse: Benchmark results
We study the response of the Finnish economy to the collapse of trade with the Soviet Union,

modeled as a once-and-for-all unanticipated event at t = 0 in a deterministic environment. As we
explained, this event produced two shocks for Finland. First, Finland lost one of its major export
markets, and because of the specialized trade with the USSR Finnish firms could not easily
redirect trade to other countries. We model this shock as a permanent drop in Soviet oil imports

M tS to zero for all t. This also implied that export to the USSR X 2t vanished. Hence, the second
shock was the end of the Soviet Union’s provision of subsidized energy for Finland. Our
discussion in Section II suggests that this subsidy was at least 10 percent of the world oil price.
Thus we assume that the second shock was equivalent to an increase in the oil price from p E  1
to p E  1.1 also for all t. We hit our model economy with these shocks as of the initial date t=0
and compute the transitional dynamics leading to the new post-Soviet-collapse stationary
equilibrium. We assume that the bond position Bt is zero at t=0.17
Figure 4 plots actual and simulated responses for key macroeconomic variables measured
as percent deviations from the pre-collapse steady state.18 The model can capture the dynamics
16

Groth (2006) presents the range of estimates reported in the literature.
Following Mendoza and Tesar (1998), we use shooting and log-linear approximation around the post-Sovietcollapse steady state to adjust transitional dynamics for steady state changes in the net foreign asset position. We
choose Bt=0 because the average net export to GDP ratio for Finland between 1980 and 1990
was very close to zero.
18
Note that since we fit trends to each series in the data individually, we can have a discrepancy in the dynamics of
output and inputs. Value added and consumption are computed in constant pre-collapse prices.
17

15

of output well in terms of magnitude. The model predicts an output decline of 20 percent nearly
identical to that observed in the data, albeit the trough is reached in 1991 in the model versus
1992 in the data. Very similar results are also obtained for consumption and employment. Both
decline about as much as in the data (about 24 percent), but both reach their troughs a year
earlier than in the data. The model also approximates well the observed dynamics of wages. In
contrast with the data, the model predicts a recovery in consumption while in the data it does not
seem to recover. Note, however, that the model is in line with the data in predicting a protracted
decline in consumption, although of about half the size (10 percent in the model v. 20-22 percent
in the data). The model also predicts a moderate recovery in employment that is somewhat
stronger than what is observed in the data. Consistent with the data, the model predicts an
increase in the net export-GDP ratio, but the increase is gradual in the data while in the model it
peaks in 1991.
The model predicts a 26 percent decline in investment over 1991-1993 and a recovery to
about 12 percent below the long-run trend. This recovery reflects the fact that given our
functional assumptions and calibrated parameter values, the capital stock to output ratio (and
hence investment to output ratio) is fairly insensitive to changes in the price of energy, the
relative prices and wages and consequently the new steady state level of aggregate investment is
not much affected by the Soviet shock.19 In contrast, investment in the data falls by 65 percent
below the trend and although it slightly recovers by 1997 it stays 40 percent below the trend. One
may expect, however, that if utilization of capital requires energy as in Finn (2000), the relative
price of capital is going to be higher in the post-Soviet-collapse period and hence the decline in
investment could be larger and more persistent.
Figure 5 shows the model and data responses for value added, investment, employment
and wages at the sectoral level. Generally, the model captures well the qualitative features of the
dynamics in the Soviet and service sectors, but quantitatively there are non-trivial differences.
The model predicts permanent declines in value added, employment, investment and wages in
the Soviet sector, but the model underestimates the drop in value added in the early years of the
transition, and overestimates the declines in employment, investment and wages. In the services

19

Specifically, in the steady state

⁄

1

1

1

, which follows from the first order

condition for capital in sector j. Note that since aj is relatively large, one needs large variation in pE and pj to change
capital to output ratio significantly.
16

sector, the model does well at matching the initial declines of all four macro aggregates, but it
cannot match the highly persistent declines observed in the data. The model also understates the
magnitudes of the declines in value added, employment, investment and wages in the non-Soviet
sector.
In summary, the model performs reasonably well at matching aggregate dynamics, but is
less successful at explaining some sectoral dynamics. It is particularly important to note the
model’s key prediction that the collapse of Soviet trade, which accounted for only about 5
percent of total employment and value added in Finland, can produce a significant contraction of
output at the aggregate level (almost 20 percent in 1991).
The key to understand this strong amplification mechanism is in the combined effect of
wage rigidity and the role of nontradables. Consider first a two-sector model, with only the
Soviet and non-Soviet sectors. In this economy, the collapse of trade with the Soviets would put
pressure on factors to shift from the Soviet to non-Soviet sector. This happens for two reasons:
first, because the relative price of the Soviet-goods falls, and second, all of Finland’s energy
needs now have to be financed by exports of the non-Soviet good. If factors are perfectly
immobile, the maximum output effect is a fall of about 5 percent. To the extent that factors can
adjust, the decline in output will be smaller.
What happens when there are nontraded goods in the economy? The trade collapse that
causes the relative price of oil to rise, increases production costs in both the non-Soviet and
nontraded goods sectors. In addition, the collapse of demand in the Soviet sector reduces income
and hence the demand for all other goods. These two effects together lead to a decline in the
relative price of nontraded goods and output. Rigid wages amplify the contraction in demand in
the short run. As consumers purchase fewer goods, firms demand less labor which entails further
contraction of demand and the spiral continues. In summary, a combination of higher costs of
producing goods, as well as a fall in demand magnified by rigid wages leads to large short-run
multiplicative effects on the initial shocks. Consistent with this argument, the relative prices of
Soviet and non-tradable goods fell by 17.4 and 13.3 percent respectively below the trend
between 1990 and 1995. The model predicts 18 and 5 percent decline after four years for prices
of Soviet and non-tradable goods respectively. We return to quantitative assessments of the roles
of nontradables and wage rigidity in the sensitivity analysis.

17

To assess the separate contribution of oil price and trade shocks, we perturb the economy
with one shock at a time and plot the resulting transitional dynamics of aggregate variables (see
Figure 4). The economy’s response to an oil price shock is much smaller than to the trade shock.
In addition, the response to the oil price shock tends to produce an expansion of the Soviet
sector, because larger exports to the USSR increase the amount of oil that can be imported and
thus help offset the effect of the higher price of energy (Figure 5). This is consistent with the
Finnish experience in late 1970s and early 1980s when oil prices increased. By contrast, the trade
shock leads to an expansion in the non-Soviet sector. In general, the oil and pure trade shocks
push the Soviet and non-Soviet sectors in different directions, but the two shocks are
contractionary for the services sector.

Sensitivity Analysis

In this subsection we vary parameter values to study the sensitivity of our results to alternative
calibrations. First, we modify the model to introduce habit formation in preferences and add
quadratic labor and investment adjustment costs (in addition to quadratic capital adjustment
costs). Both habit formation and labor and investment adjustment costs make the responses of
macroeconomic aggregates smoother, but neither adjustment costs nor habit formation are
crucial for the qualitative results (see Appendix Figure D1). However, adding these features
improves the model’s ability to match the timing of troughs.
Next we study the implications of altering parameters of the production technology, the
consumption aggregator and labor supply. Our qualitative results are not sensitive to changes in
the production function parameters (Appendix Figure D2). Decreasing the elasticity of
substitution between capital and labor from one to 0.5 amplifies the responses of all variables in
the short run.20 The quantitative results change little when we decrease returns to scale from 1 to
0.95. Likewise, we find that altering the elasticity of substitution in consumption across goods
and over time does not change our main results much although the lower elasticity of substitution
across goods tends to amplify the responses of macroeconomic aggregates (Appendix Figure
D3). In addition, our results are not sensitive to varying the elasticity of substation of labor
supply across sectors (Appendix Figure D5).

20

In the richer model with habit formation and additional adjustment costs in the flow of investment and labor
higher elasticity has smaller effects on the impulse responses.
18

Finally we study the implications of altering the degree of wage stickiness. In contrast
with the other parts of the robustness analysis, we found that wage stickiness plays a very
important role. In particular, the key parameter governing the response of the macroeconomic
variables to the collapse of the Soviet-Finnish trade is the persistence of real wages (Figure 6). In
the case with fully flexible wages, the recession is short and shallow. For example, output,
employment, investment and consumption fall only by 2-5 percent and there are hardly any
dynamics after the first year. Thus, the response of investment, output, consumption and
employment is small when compared to the response of these variables in the data. On the other
hand, the response of real wages is overstated. In the data, wages declined gradually, while the
model with fully flexible wages predicts an immediate 7.5 percent decline. At the sectoral level,
fully flexible wages fail to capture the contraction across sectors. In particular, the non-Soviet
sector expands in response to the collapse of the Soviet-Finnish trade: as resources are released
from the Soviet sector they flow into the relatively more productive non-Soviet sector. In
contrast, when wages are rigid, the oil shock reduces the marginal product of labor and firms
would like to hire less labor at the current wages or to keep employment fixed but cut wages. If
wages are rigid, the adjustment occurs via quantities and the model can capture sizable decreases
in output, consumption, investment and labor. The recession is considerably deeper when wages
are inflexible. In summary, our qualitative and, to a large extent, quantitative results depend only
on adjustment of real wages being sufficiently slow and in this respect our findings echo the
results in Cole and Ohanian (2004). As reported in Section II, however, there is strong evidence
suggesting that this was indeed the case in Finland.
Figure 6 also shows the importance of the service sector in amplifying the response. Note
that when we freeze the size of and prices for the service sector at the pre-collapse levels, we
find that the size of the downturn at the aggregate level is only about half as large as the
downturn when we allow the service sector to respond to the Soviet shock. This finding is in line
with the intuition for amplification described above.
1974 Oil shock
Given the good performance of the model in explaining the recession in the 1990s, we are

interested in assessing whether the model can also perform well in tracking the effects of
previous episodes of energy price shocks. We examine in particular how the model fares in
accounting for the macroeconomic dynamics after the 1974 oil price shock. Like the collapse of
19

Soviet trade, this shock produced a large increase in energy costs for Finland. Unlike the Soviet
trade collapse, however, it did not cause a major dislocation in Finland’s economic structure and
sectoral factor allocations. In particular, during this episode Finland continued to import
subsidized energy from the USSR in exchange for specialized exports. Hence, if in this 1974 oil
shock experiment the model dynamics are still consistent with those observed in the data, we
gain more confidence about the conclusions derived in the previous subsection. In this exercise,
we keep the model calibrated as before. The only modifications we make are to the speed of
wage adjustment, which we set to 1   2   3  0.9 (Finland was less unionized in the early
1970s), and energy intensity, which we set a 25 percent higher (the Finnish economy was more
energy intensive in 1970s than in early 1990s).21
Although most economies experienced the oil shock early in 1974, the shock to the
Finnish economy was somewhat delayed because the oil price in the Finnish-Soviet trade was a
moving average of the world price. Hence, we assume that the shock to the world price occurs in
the first quarter of 1974 and it hits the Finnish economy in the last quarter of 1974. To calibrate
the size of the shock, we compute the unit price of imported oil in 1973 and 1974 and find that
the (log) change in the price was 109 percent.
Figure 7 plots the model’s transitional dynamics in response to the oil price shock and the
dynamics of actual output, consumption and investment. Again, we detrend the data to remove
secular movements in macroeconomic variables. The model broadly matches the response of the
Finnish economy. Although we do not have reliable sectoral data before 1975 to construct
counterfactual movements in the data in the absence of the shock, we know from Figure 5 that
exports to the USSR expanded in response to the oil sector. We also know that output in the
Soviet sector expanded relative to output in the non-Soviet sector. The sectoral responses in the
model (not reported) capture these facts as well.
Sweden vs. Finland
An alternative way to assess the importance of the collapse in the Soviet-Finnish trade in

accounting for the Finnish recession as well as to validate our simulations is to compare the
output dynamics in Sweden and Finland. Both countries had similar institutions (including
regulated labor markets with high downward wage rigidity, see Botero et al (2004) and Dickens
21

The ratio of energy consumption (in millions to TOE) to GDP (in constant 2000 prices) in 1973 was 25% larger
than the same ratio in 1989.
20

et al (2007) for detailed comparisons) and experienced a similar and almost simultaneous
sequence of events (including currency and financial crises) and policy responses in the late
1980s and early 1990s with the only major difference being that Sweden had miniscule trade
with USSR.22 In a sense, Sweden could be used as a counterfactual for what could have
happened to Finland if it did not trade so much with the USSR. Hence, we can utilize this natural
experiment to evaluate the predictions from our model.
Figure 8 plots the time series of percent deviations of output from linear time trend
(estimated on 1970-1990 data) for Finland and Sweden. At the trough of the recession the output
drop in Finland was about 22 percent from trend, while for Sweden it was 8 percent below trend.
If we take the difference as a measure of the contribution of the Soviet trade collapse to the
Finnish depression, then the magnitude of the contribution is broadly in line with impulse
responses in our model. Hence, the observed difference between output paths in Sweden and
Finland is consistent with our argument that the decline of the Soviet-Finnish trade explains a
significant fraction of the downturn in Finland.

V Alternative explanations of the depression
As we noted in the Introduction, two other competing explanations of the Finnish Great
Depression are the “financial view,” which attributes the Depression to the major financial crisis
experienced in Finland in 1992, and the “tax and productivity view” of Conesa et al. (2007),
which argues that the Depression was caused by adverse TFP and labor tax shocks.
According to the financial view, financial liberalization during the 1980s resulted in an
over-expansion of credit, an over-valued stock market, inflated real estate values and a large
stock of debt. A downturn in the economy in the early 1990s due to the loss of the Soviet export
market and a slowdown in European growth triggered both a speculative attack on the currency
and a credit crunch. Clearly these factors played a role but they can also be interpreted as a
byproduct of the financial-sector effects of the Soviet trade shocks that first caused a severe
collapse of the real economy. Indeed, troubles in the Finnish financial sector seem to have
followed the collapse of the Soviet trade rather than preceded it.23 This interpretation of the
22

Comparing the developments in Sweden and Finland between 1985 and 2000, Jonung, Kiander and Vartia (2009)
observe that the two countries behaved as if they were “economic twins.”
23
Real domestic credit, which had increased at a steady pace since the late 1970s, began to fall in 1992:1 and the
exchange experienced a first initial depreciation in 1991:4, with a full currency collapse in 1993:1. Real GDP began
21

financial sector as “following” the real economy can be rationalized if we assume that financial
variables responded to real developments as in a classic cash-in-advance setup. Hence, the severe
retrenchment in consumption and investment expenditures due only to the Soviet trade collapse
could have caused a proportional collapse in demand for real balances, which under a fixed or
managed exchange rate and a set level of foreign reserves, could have been large enough to
trigger a currency crash. If we consider also the possibility of financial amplification via a
working-capital or financial accelerator channel, these developments could have fed back into
the real economy and contribute to enlarge the magnitude and duration of the recession.
We can get a sense of the extent to which a credit crunch can explain the depression by
introducing into our framework an exogenous, persistent increase in the world interest rate. We
assume that the interest rate increased in 1991 by one percent (a relatively modest increase). We
set the serial correlation of the shock to 0.9 which is approximately the persistence of the interest
rate in Finland. We consider two scenarios. First, the interest rate shock is the sole source of the
depression. Second, the interest rate shock happens simultaneously with the collapse of the
Soviet-Finnish trade. The corresponding impulse responses are shown in Appendix Figure D4.
The results show that an increase in the interest rate depresses aggregate economic activity (with
small effects on employment, output, and consumption but a larger effect on investment). We
also find that adding the interest rate shock improves the fit of the model at the sectoral level
when combined with other shocks. Specifically, interest rate shocks help the model to match the
downturn in the non-Soviet sector. By itself, however, the shock has small quantitative effects
for variables other than investment. We conclude from these results that a credit crunch indeed
can be a useful complement to our story, especially for matching the dynamics of investment.
With regard to the tax and productivity hypothesis of Conesa et al. (2007), it is worth
noting that our oil price shock works like a technology shock since an increase in oil prices
reduces firms’ profit margins (provided there is a sufficiently small substitutability of energy
input).24 Although the effect of the oil price shock on measured TFP is relatively small in our
model, the trade shock leads to a significant decline in measured TFP with the dynamics that
resembles the path of measured TFP in the data (Appendix Figure E1). Thus what Conesa et al.
contracting in the last quarter of 1990. In a comprehensive analysis of the banking crisis and credit crunch, Vihriälä
(1997) concludes that collapse of lending is better explained by a decline in firm and household balance sheets and
creditworthiness than by a contraction in supply of credit.
24
A similar argument was made for the case of the United States by Finn (2000).
22

interpret as a TFP shock could be partly capturing the energy price and trade shocks in our
model.
We can also reconcile Conesa et al.’s labor-tax-like effects with our analysis by
interpreting those effects as taking the place of the wage rigidities in our model. In an
equilibrium without labor frictions, the wage received by workers is equal to their reservation
wage, i.e. w jt  w Djt . If wages are rigid, however, the reservation wage is not generally equal to
the wage actually received. Furthermore, in a downturn, workers are willing to accept jobs at
lower wages, but with inflexible wages there is going to be a difference between current market
wages and the reservation wages, in particular w jt  w Djt . Moreover, since firms stay on their
labor demand curve, they cut employment. Because of these arguments, we can reconcile
decreased employment (as observed in the data) with fully flexible wages (as assumed by Conesa
et al. (2007)), if we interpret this situation as if there was a ‘labor tax’ shock. In other words, one
can interpret w jt  w Djt as arising from a labor tax  such that w jt  (1   ) w jt  wDjt where the
after-tax wage is equal to the reservation wage.
While both labor tax hikes and wage rigidities can have similar theoretical effects, we
were unable to find actual evidence of changes in tax rates in the Finnish press and legislation of
the early 1990s. In addition, various measures of the tax burden on labor earnings exhibit little
variation over this period (see Appendix Figure E1). By contrast, we documented earlier strong
evidence of labor rigidities, including wage stickiness, in Finland. Hence, the empirical evidence
suggests that labor frictions may be more relevant than tax shocks. Overall, we agree with
Conesa et al (2007) that productivity and wage-wedge movements are necessary to explain the
dynamics of macroeconomic aggregates; however, we interpret these movements as symptoms
and argue that the Soviet trade shock may be the fundamental force behind these movements.
An additional observation that favors our trade-shocks approach is that industries
exposed to the Soviet trade experienced a deeper downturn than industries not oriented to the
Soviet market. This pattern is clearly reproduced by our model, while shocks other that the
Soviet trade shock should be unable to generate this pattern in general. Figure 9 presents the
scatter plot for export share to the USSR in 1988 and deviation of employment from trend in
1993 by industry. The slope of the OLS fitted line presented in the figure is -14.54 with standard
error 6.4 which suggests a significant relationship between industry’s exposure to the Soviet

23

trade and its decline.25 A one percentage point increase in the share of exports going to the Soviet
Union is associated with a 1.4 percent decline in employment in 1993 relative to trend.

VI Extension to Transition Economies
There is ample evidence indicating that the trade and energy price shocks faced by the TEs of
Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union were at least as severe as those experienced by
Finland. The practice of overpricing machines exported from CMEA countries to the Soviet
Union and underpricing raw materials (mainly energy) exported from the Soviet Union to
CMEA countries is well documented (e.g., Marrese and Vanous 1983). Orlowski (1993),
Krasnov and Brada (1997) and others find the same pattern for intra-USSR trade. In addition,
while there was a strong redirection of trade for transition countries from former socialist trading
partners toward the EU and other industrialized countries (e.g. Campos and Coricelli 2002), there
is little evidence that exports of goods manufactured in the command economy were redirected.
Rodrik (1994) and others argue that reorientation to the EU market of products previously
directed to CMEA was not a prominent feature of the transition period. Furthermore, Rodrik
(1994) reports evidence suggesting that Soviet exports could be sold in the West only with 50
percent or more discounts. Given available micro level evidence, Repkine and Walsh (1999)
contend that firms historically producing under different 5-digit SITC codes for the CMEA
market could hardly reorient production toward very different products.
These observations suggest that our model may be useful in explaining the
macroeconomic dynamics displayed by TEs in the early stages of transition. Our simulation
results showed that the effects of eliminating the energy subsidy and Soviet trade relationship on
output, employment and other aggregate outcomes are greatly amplified by real wage rigidities.
Because of data limitations, it is hard to establish whether real wages were rigid in Eastern
European countries in the initial stages of the transition. Initial estimates of the wage elasticity
with respect to unemployment rates suggested that real wages were fairly flexible in TEs (e.g.,
Blanchflower 2001). However, subsequent studies based on macro and micro level data tend to
find that real wages in transition countries were almost as inflexible as wages in other European
countries (e.g., Kertesi and Kollo 1997, Estevão 2003, Iara and Traistaru 2004, Von Hagen and
25

The estimate based on the Huber-robust regression, which downweighs outliers (e.g., non-metallic mineral
products), is -17.6 with standard error 5.3.
24

Traistaru-Siedschlag 2005). In addition, labor markets in TEs appear to be as regulated as in
other European countries (Botero et al 2004). On the other hand, it is hard to believe that real
wages were strongly inflexible because inflation was high and variable.26 However, there was
also a strong political pressure to maintain living standards. Indeed, Roland (2000) argues that
politicians could not allow wages to fall too fast and too much because otherwise reforms could
be reversed. Wage indexation and dollarization of wages became common practice in transition
economies. Furthermore, as observed in Rodrik (1994), the sharp increase in unemployment rate
across transition countries is the prima facie evidence that wages were inflexible. In summary,
although wages in transition countries adjusted in response to aggregate shocks, the adjustment is
likely to have been incomplete and spread over time. Given that the size of distortions was
greater in former CMEA countries (e.g., greater subsidy from USSR and greater specialization of
trade with the USSR), one can expect that standard macroeconomic factors can explain a bulk of
downturn in economic activity in transition countries.27
To support our hypothesis that the contraction observed in TEs can be explained with the
oil price and trade shocks caused by the demise of the USSR, we would like to compare
simulated transitional dynamics from the model (calibrated for TEs) with the data responses at
the aggregate and sectoral levels (also for TEs). Unfortunately, due to severe data limitations,
this comprehensive analysis is not possible. Indeed, we focus on Finland precisely because,
unlike transition countries, Finland has reliable statistics at all levels of aggregation during and
before the recession. However, we can assess the model’s behavior using a handful of reliable
aggregate series for Poland and Hungary. We choose these two countries because they embody
two different strategies of adjustment in transition. Poland allowed a quick and deep adjustment
of real wages, while in Hungary real wages had gradual and modest adjustment (see e.g. Tonin
2007).
We use the model and calibration from Sections III and IV as the basis of our analysis for
transition economies. Since transition and Finnish economies were different, we need to make a
26

Although wage arrears were another source of wage flexibility, wage arrears were largely limited to former Soviet
Union republics and had little impact in other Eastern European countries.
27
Interestingly, the experience of East Germany after unification is broadly in line with our arguments for transition
economies. East Germany was also dependent on cheap Soviet energy and overvalued exports to the USSR.
Unification with West Germany brought not only world-class institutions to East Germany but also overvalued rigid
wages for workers in East Germany. After reunification, East Germany experienced a severe downturn in economic
activity. Similar to the Finnish experience, wages were rigid and reallocation of resources massive. Even after
almost twenty years after the reunification, East Germany continues to lag behind West Germany in many economic
dimensions. See Akerlof et al (1991) for more detailed discussion on East Germany and effects of high real wages.
25

few adjustments to the calibration. Since wages were more flexible in TEs than in Finland, we
consider a range of values for θ. We also modify the expenditure shares to match the relative
sizes of the sectors. Specifically, we assume 1  0.2,  2  0.15,  3  0.5,  4  0.15 for Hungary
and 1  0.2,  2  0.15,  3  0.45,  4  0.2 for Poland to match the fact that the service sector was
larger in Hungary.28 Given that the energy intensity of output in the former socialist economies
was twice as large as in the OECD economies (EBRD 2001), we also double a1 , a2 , a3 . These
modifications in  's and a's are necessary to match the size of the Soviet sector, which we set to
20-25 percent in Poland and Hungary, and the share of Soviet exports in total exports, which we
set to 30 percent in both countries.29
To calibrate the size of the shock, we use the decline in the volume of exports to the
(former) USSR as well as dependence of Poland and Hungary on energy imports from the Soviet
Union. Hungary was heavily dependent on energy supplies from the USSR and the quality of its
exports was inferior relative to Finnish exports to the USSR. Hence, we double the markup and
assume that after the collapse of the Soviet Union the price of oil is effectively 20 percent more
expensive relative to the pre-collapse price. Poland was less dependent on energy imports from
the USSR and, consequently, we assume a 15 percent markup. To assess the size of the trade
shock, we use the fact that between 1988 and 1991 exports to the USSR decreased by 60 percent
for Hungary and by 45 percent for Poland.30 Consequently, we set the trade shocks to 45 percent
for Poland and 60 percent for Hungary. Finally, we assume that the collapse of the Soviet trade
occurred (or started to occur) in 1990 rather than 1991 as CMEA started to disintegrate before
1991.
Figure 10 plots the dynamics of real GDP in the model and data in response to the Soviet
trade shock. Strikingly, the model response to collapse of the Soviet trade is very similar to the
actual responses of the Polish and Hungarian economies. The model can explain a bulk of the
output contraction and the timing of the trough for both economies. The magnitude of the decline
in the model depends on the speed of wage adjustment. In line with our model’s prediction that
28

In 1991 (the earliest year for which we have reliable data), services accounted for 57% of GDP in Hungary. In
1992 (the earliest year for which we have reliable data), the share was 51% in Poland. Since services contracted less
during the recession, we set sector shares to small magnitudes.
29
We do not have reliable data to assess the size of the Soviet sector. However, various sources indicate that
approximately a quarter of the CMEA economies were primarily concerned with exports to the USSR. The share of
Soviet exports is calculated using IMF Direction of Trade Statistics (DOTS) database.
30
Export statistics are taken from IMF Direction of Trade Statistics (DOTS) database. Other data sources (OECD,
national statistical offices) report similar magnitudes.
26

greater wage inflexibility leads to deeper downturns, the model has a better fit to the data for
Hungary when we use a higher value of θ which is consistent with the fact that Hungary had a
slower wage adjustment than Poland. In any case, it is safe to say that even for relatively flexible
wages the Soviet trade shock accounts for at least 50 percent of the contraction. Hence, this
shock could have been a quantitatively important source of economic downturn in transition
countries.
Although we do not have reliable data for many other transition countries, we can use
fragmentary employment data to check whether adjustment of real wages is correlated with the
response of employment in transition economies. Figure 11 displays a strong negative
relationship between real wages and employment suggesting that countries with smaller declines
in real wages experienced a larger contraction of employment between 1989 and 1995 which is
consistent with our argument that incomplete adjustment of real wages could have contributed to
the depth of downturn in transition economies.
We also conjecture that misallocation of resources in the former Soviet Union could have
played an important role in the dramatic output decline in the early 1990s. Indeed, an enormous
fraction of the Soviet economy was militarized (15-20 percent of GNP according to various
estimates, e.g. Steinberg (1992)) and had only limited ability to switch production to nonmilitary goods. For example, the All-Russian Scientific Research Institute for Experimental
Physics (the developer of nuclear and thermonuclear weapons) was supposed to be organizing
the series production of pipe connections for the milk lines of dairy plants (Menshikov, 2000). A
tremendous shift in demand towards consumer goods meant a gigantic transfer of resources
which was probably even more painful and costly than in other countries of the socialist camp.31
In other words, the shock was internal rather than external. In addition, many relatively energypoor Soviet republics (e.g., Ukraine) had to buy oil and gas at new higher prices (the energy
subsidy was partially or fully removed shortly after the collapse of the USSR) which combined
with the loss of demand from other Soviet republics resembles the shock experienced by other
Eastern European countries and Finland.

31

Menshikov (2000) and others report that military orders declines by almost 70 percent between 1990 and 1992. In
1992 alone, military production fell by 42 percent which constituted about a half of production decline in the
military industry between 1990 and 1997. Cumulatively, between 1990 and 1997 arm procurements fell by 90
percent, employment in formerly military oriented firms fell by up to 3.5 million people, more than 54 percent of
production capacity of defense firms had to be retooled.
27

VII Concluding Remarks
This paper examines the Finnish Great Depression of the early 1990s using a dynamic general
equilibrium framework with labor frictions. Our analysis delivers two key results. First, we find
that the Finnish Great Depression can be explained to a large extent by two exogenous shocks
produced by the collapse of trade with the USSR (the surge in energy prices and the sudden
redundancy of Soviet-oriented manufacturing). Since the identification of these shocks is
particularly clear cut, this natural experiment evidently illustrates the behavior of a small open
economy in response to large exogenous trade shocks. The key mechanism that amplified the
initial trade shocks into a Great Depression was the rigid real wages in the Finnish economy. We
show that our calibrated multi-sector model is successful in reproducing other historical episodes
and produces estimates of trade shock effects which are supported by other pieces of evidence
(in particular, macroeconomic performance in Sweden v. Finland and the response to the 1974
oil shock).
Second, our model can also account for the main features of the early 1990s adjustment
observed in Eastern European transition economies, which displayed output dynamics and trade
patterns similar to those observed in Finland. This similarity is particularly striking and calls for
a reinterpretation of the sources of deep recessions in transition economies since Finland, in
contrast to transition economies, had a well functioning system of markets, courts and other
institutions. Although we cannot rule out alternative explanations for contractions in transition
economies, the quantitative responses to the Soviet trade shock can account for a large share of
the contraction in transition countries and Finland. In other words, the trade shocks we observe
in the data could lead to economic downturns in standard theoretical multi-sector models which
are remarkably close to the size of downturns we observe in transition economies. This important
finding suggests that alternative explanations such as institutional transformations could have
had a smaller effect than thought before.
The natural experiment of the Soviet-Finish trade downfall analyzed in this paper has
broader implications. Specifically, we show that sectoral (trade) shocks can lead to significant
comovement across sectors even in the absence of direct input-output linkages and static
measures of effects of trade shocks can grossly overestimate the short-run cost of reallocation..
Reallocation of resources can be particularly costly in presence of sticky wages and/or prices.
The Finnish experience can also shed some new light on the post-WWII contractions after rapid

28

changes in the composition of aggregate demand (e.g., disarmament in the U.S. after the Korean
War). Likewise, we conjecture that our framework may be useful in analyzing the effects of the
current economic downturn in the U.S. on its major trading partners such as Canada, Mexico,
and China to the extent that their labor markets are rigid and the trade shock is protracted.

29

References
Akerlof, George A., Andrew K. Rose, Janet L. Yellen, and Helga Hessenius, 1991. "East Germany in
from the Cold: The Economic Aftermath of Currency Union," Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1991(1), 1-105.
Basu, Susanto, Fernald, John G., 1997. “Returns to Scale in U.S. Production: Estimates and
Implications,” Journal of Political Economy 105(2), 249-283.
Baxter, Marianne, 1992. “Fiscal policy, specialization, and trade in the two-sector model: The return
of Ricardo?” Journal of Political Economy 100(4), 713-744.
Blanchard, Oliver and Michael Kremer, 1997. “Disorganization,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
112(4), 1091-1126.
Blanchflower, David G., 2001, “Unemployment, Well-Being, and Wage Curves in Eastern and
Central Europe,” Journal of Japanese and International Economics 15(4), 364–402.
Böckerman, Petri, and Roope Uusitalo, 2006. “Erosion of the Ghent System and Union Membership
Decline: Lessons from Finland,” British Journal of Industrial Relations 44(2), 283–303.
Böckerman, Petri, Seppo Laaksonen, and Jari Vainiomaki, 2006. “Micro-level evidence on wage
rigidities in Finland,” Labour Institute for Economic Research, Discussion Paper 219.
Botero, Juan, Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, 2004.
“The regulation of labor,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (4), 1339-1382.
Campos, Nauro F., and Fabrizio Coricelli, 2002. “Growth in Transition: What We Know, What We
Don’t, and What We Should,” Journal of Economic Literature 40(3), 793-836.
Christiano, Larry J., Martin Eichenbaum and Charles L. Evans, 2005. “Nominal rigidities and the
dynamic effects of a shock to monetary policy,” Journal of Political Economy 113 (1), 1-45.
Cole, Harold L., and Lee E. Ohanian, 2004. “New deal policies and the persistence of the great
depression: A general equilibrium analysis,” Journal of Political Economy 112(4),779-816.
Conesa, Juan Carlos, Timothy J. Kehoe, and Kim J. Ruhl, 2007. “Modeling Great Depressions: The
Depression in Finland in the 1990s” in Timothy J. Kehoe and Edward C. Prescott, eds., Great
Depressions of the Twentieth Century, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Dickens, William T., Lorenz Goette, Erica L. Groshen, Steinar Holden, Julian Messina, Mark E.
Schweitzer, Jarkko Turunen, Melanie E. Ward, 2007. “How wages change: Micro evidence
from the International Wage Flexibility Project,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 21(2),
195-214.
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), 2001. Transition Report.
Estevão, Marcello, 2003. “Structural and Cyclical Labor Market Changes in Poland,” in Republic of
Poland: Selected Issues, IMF Country Report No. 03/188, Chapter II, pp. 14–43
(Washington: International Monetary Fund).

30

Finn, Mary G., 2000. “Perfect Competition and the Effects of Energy Price Increases on Economic
Activity,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 32(3), 400-416.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Gregory W. Huffman, 1988. “Investment, Capacity
Utilization, and the Real Business Cycle,” American Economic Review 78(3), 402-417.
Groth, Charlotta, 2006. “Calibrating capital adjustment costs in the New-Keynesian model,”
Economics Letters 93, 26–30.
Hall, Robert E., 2007, “Sources and Mechanisms of Cyclical Fluctuations in the Labor Market,”
Manuscript, Stanford University.
Honkapohja, Seppo and Erkki Koskela, 1999. “The economic crisis of the 1990s in Finland,”
Economic Policy 14(29), 399-436.
Honkapohja, Seppo, Erkki Koskela and Jouko Paunio, “The Depression of the 1990s in Finland: An
Analytic View,” Finnish Economic Papers 9, no. 1, Spring 1996.
Iara, Anna and Iulia Traistaru, 2004. “How flexible are wages in EU accession countries?” Labour
Economics 11(4), 431-450.
Jonung, Lars, Jaakko Kiander and Pentti Vartia, 2009. “Introduction,” in L. Jonung, J. Kiander and P.
Vartia, eds., The Crisis of the 1990s in Finland and Sweden. The Nordic Experience of
Financial Liberalization, Edward Elgar.
Jonung, Lars, 2008. “Lessons from Financial Liberalisation in Scandinavia,” Comparative Economic
Studies 50, 564–598.
Kajaste, Ilkka, “Soviet Trade and the Finnish Economy,” Ministry of Finance of Finland, Discussion
paper no. 33, 1992.
Kertesi, Gabor, and Janos Kollo, 1997. “The Birth of the ‘Wage Curve’ in Hungary, 1989-1995,”
William Davidson Institute Working Papers Series No. 104, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Krasnov, Gregory V., and Josef C. Brada, 1997. “Implicit Subsidies in Russian-Ukrainian Energy
Trade,” Europe-Asia Studies 49(5), 825-843.
Marrese, Michael, and Jan Vanous, 1983. Soviet Subsidization of Trade with Eastern Europe: A
Soviet Perspective. Berkeley, University of California Press.
Mendoza, Enrique G., and Linda L. Tesar, 1998. “ The International Ramification of Tax reforms:
Supply-Side Economics in a Global Economy,” American Economic Review 88(1), 226-245.
Menshikov, Sergey, 2000. “Development Scenarios for the Military-Industrial Complex,” Problems
of Economic Transition 42(10), 34-49.
Mottola, Kari, O. N. Bykov and I.S. Korolev, Finnish-Soviet Economic Relations, London: The
Macmillan Press, 1983.
Oblath, Gabor, and P. Pete, “Mechanism and Institutional System of the Finnish-Soviet Economic
Relations,” in Foreign Trade in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, ed. By Michael
Friedlander, Boulder: Westview Press, 1990.

31

Orlowski, Lucjan T., 1993. “Indirect Transfers in Trade among Former Soviet Union Republics:
Sources, Patterns and Policy Responses in the Post-Soviet Period,” Europe-Asia Studies
45(6), 1001-1024.
Repkine, Alexandre, and Patrick Paul Walsh, 1999. “Evidence of European trade and investment Ushaping industrial output in Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland, and Romania,” Journal of
Comparative Economics 27(4), 730-752.
Rodrik, Dani, 1994. “Foreign Trade in Eastern Europe's Transition: Early Results,” in The Transition
in Eastern Europe, vol. 2, ed. By Olivier Jean Blanchard, Kenneth A. Froot and Jeffrey D.
Sachs. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Roland, Gerard, 2000. Transition and Economics: Politics, Markets and Firms. MIT Press.
Roland, Gerard, and Thierry Verdier, 1999. “Transition and the Output Fall,” Economics of
Transition 7, 1-28.
Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford, 1995. “Dynamic General Equilibrium Models with
Imperfectly Competitive Product Markets,” in T. Cooley, ed., Frontiers of Business Cycle
Research, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Snellman, Kenneth, 2004. “The structure of pay changes at the local level,” Labour Institute for
Economic Research, Discussion Paper 199.
Snellman, Kenneth, 2005. “Finnish Wage Bargaining – Actual Behaviour and Preferences,” in
Hannu Piekkola and Kenneth Snellman, eds., Collective bargaining and wage formation:
Performance and challenges. Heidelberg and New York: Physica-Verlag, pp. 133-151.
Steinberg, Dmitri, 1992. “The Soviet Defence Burden: Estimating Hidden Defence Costs,” Soviet
Studies 44(2), 237-263.
Sutela, Pekka, 1991. “Exporting to the Soviet Union – Microeconomic Aspects for Finland,” Ost.
Wirt. 36(4), 301-315.
Sutela, Pekka, 1992. “Clearing, Money and Investment,” Russian and East European Finance and
Trade 28 (4), 3-29.
Sutela, Pekka, 2005. “Finnish Trade with the USSR: Why Was It Different?” Bank of
Finland/Instittue for Economies in Transition working paper 2005/7.
Sutela, Pekka, 2007. “The Folklore of Finland’s Eastern Trade,” Europe-Asia Studies 59(1), 137-162.
Tonin, Mirco, 2007. “Flexibility and Security in the Labour Market: The Wage Dimension,” in
Sandrine Cazes and Alena Nesporova, eds., Flexicurity: A Relevant Approach in Central and
Eastern Europe, International Labour Organization.
Vihriälä, Vesa 1997. Banks and the Finnish Credit Cycle 1986 – 1995. Bank of Finland
Von Hagen, J. and I. Traistaru-Siedschlag, 2005. “Macroeconomic Adjustment in the New EU
Member States” in C. Detken, V. Gaspar and G. Noblet (eds), The New EU Member States:
Convergence and Stability, Frankfurt: European Central Bank, pp. 121–174.

32

Table 1. Exports to USSR by sector, 1988.

GRAND TOTAL
AGRICULTURE, HUNTING, FORESTRY AND
FISHING
MINING AND QUARRYING
TOTAL MANUFACTURING
of which
Food products, beverages and tobacco
Textiles, textile products, leather and footwear
Wood and products of wood and cork
Pulp, paper, paper products, printing and publishing
Chemical, rubber, plastics and fuel products
Other non-metallic mineral products
Machinery and equipment
Transport equipment
Motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers
Other transport equipment
Building and repairing of ships and boats
Aircraft and spacecraft
Railroad equipment and transport equipment
n.e.c.
Manufacturing nec

Exports to USSR as Exports to USSR as
Share of total value
share of sectoral
share of sectoral value
added
exports
added
0.19
0.06
0.03
0.03
0.19

0.00
0.01
0.24

0.058
0.004
0.242

0.27
0.29
0.07
0.13
0.15
0.15
0.22
0.53
0.09
0.84
0.85
0.02

0.06
0.34
0.12
0.22
0.17
0.05
0.26
1.42
0.23
2.24
3.34
0.01

0.027
0.012
0.014
0.059
0.025
0.011
0.050
0.011
0.005
0.007
0.004
0.001

0.86
0.06

1.03
0.03

0.002
0.009

Source: Finnish Ministry of Statistics, authors’ calculations.

Table 2. Descriptive statistics for Soviet, non-Soviet and service sectors.
Labor cost share
Wages relative to Non-Soviet Sector
Capital to labor ratio
Share of employment
Share of value added
Share of exports in total exports
Ratio of energy cost to value added

Soviet sector
0.630
0.983
79.318
0.055
0.056
0.175
0.049

Non-Soviet sector
0.570
1.000
103.152
0.233
0.269
0.815
0.052

Service sector
0.630
0.914
106.137
0.712
0.675
0.035

Notes: the table reports moments of the data for sectors constructed as described in Appendix. Capital to labor ratio
is computed by dividing capital stock (computed using perpetual inventory with annual depreciation rate of 5
percent) by hours of work. Ratio of energy cost to value added computes the ratio of the cost of imported energy to
value added in a given industry. We use the input-output table for 1989 to allocate of the cost of imported energy
across sectors.

33

Table 3. Summary of calibrated parameters.
Panel A: Sectoral parameters
Consumption shares, ζ
Labor share, αL
Disutility of labor supply,
Energy intensity, a
Price of the final good
Wage rigidity, θ
Capital adjustment cost, 
Investment adjustment cost, 
Labor adjustment cost, 
Panel B: Macroeconomic parameters
Intertemporal elasticity of substitution parameter, 
Labor supply elasticity parameter, 
Capital depreciation rate, δ
Discount factor, β
Elasticity of substation in consumption parameter, ρC
Elasticity of substation in production parameter, ρP
Returns to scale in production, γ
Price of oil, pS
Habit formation in consumption, h

Soviet Sector
0.04
0.57
1.65
37.84
0.99 (0,1)
1
0 (0.5)
0 (1)

Non-soviet
Service sector Foreign good
sector
0.15
0.54
0.27
0.63
0.63
0.40
0.13
21.56
47.51
1
1
0.99 (0,1)
0.99 (0,1)
1
1
0 (0.5)
0 (0.5)
0 (1)
0 (1)

2 (5)
1
0.025
0.99
0 (-1,0.33)
0 (-1)
1 (0.95)
1
0 (0.8)

Notes: figures in parentheses show parameter values used in sensitivity analyses.

34

Figure 1. Macroeconomic dynamics in Finland.
Panel A: Real GDP, Investment and Consumption in Finland.
110

Panel B: Real GDP in Finland and Eastern Europe
140

130

100

Czech Republic
Bulgaria
Slovenia

Finland
Poland
Romaina

Hungary
Slovakia

120
90

110
80

100
70

90

60

50
1985

80

1986

GDP

Consumption

Investment

Employment

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

70
1990

1997

Panel C: Finnish exports to USSR and dollar price of Soviet oil.

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

Panel D: Structure of Finnish imports from the USSR

0.30

70

100%

60

0.25

90%
80%

50
0.20

70%

40
0.15
30

60%
50%

0.10
20

40%
30%

0.05

10

0
1970

20%

0.00
1975
Soviet Oil price, $/bbl

1980

1985

1990

Avg. crude oil price, $/bbl

1995

2000

Share of exports to USSR (right scale)

10%
0%
1970

Mineral fuels
Crude materials, except fuels
Manufactured goods
Chemicals
Food
Other

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Notes: Panel A: Series are normalized to be equal 100 in 1990. The data are from OECD National Accounts database. Panel B: Series are
normalized to be equal 100 in 1990. The data are from National Accounts Estimates of Main Aggregates, United Nations Statistics
Division. Panel C: Soviet oil price series is from International Energy Agency. Average oil price is from IMF IFS. For post 1991 years,
Soviet Union exports are computed as the sum of exports to the 15 republics of the former Soviet Union. The vertical line shows 1991.
The data are from OECD, Finnish Ministry of Statistics, author’s calculations. Panel D: For post 1991 years, Soviet Union exports are
computed as the sum of exports to the 15 republics of the former Soviet Union. The vertical line shows 1991. The data are from OECD,
Finnish Ministry of Statistics, author’s calculations.

35

Figure 2. Soviet and non-Soviet exports for selected industries.
Panel A: Cable and wire

Panel B: Railroad equipment

350

160
Non-Soviet

Soviet

Soviet

Non-Soviet

140

300

120
250
100
200
80
150
60
100

Panel C: Shipbuilding

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

1979

1978

1977

1975

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

1979

1978

0
1977

0
1976

20

1975

50

1976

40

Panel D: Footwear
300

1800
Non-Soviet

Soviet

Non-Soviet

1600

Soviet

250
1400

200

1200

1000
150
800

100

600

400
50
200

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

1979

1978

1977

1976

1975

19
75
19
76
19
77
19
78
19
79
19
80
19
81
19
82
19
83
19
84
19
85
19
86
19
87
19
88
19
89
19
90
19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95
19
96
19
97
19
98
19
99
20
00
20
01
20
02
20
03

0

0

Notes: The stacked area charts display exports by destination, Soviet vs. non-Soviet. Combined area shows total exports. Exports are in thousands of fixed 2000
US dollars. For post 1991 years, Soviet Union exports are computed as the sum of exports to the 15 republics of the former Soviet Union.

36

Figure 3. Distribution of annual nominal wage growth by industry.
1990: Non-manual workers, manufacturing

0
-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

1991: Service sector

0

.05

.05

.1

.1

.15

.15

.2

1991: Non-manual workers, manufacturing

0

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

1991: Manual workers, manufacturing

.2

0

.05

.05

.1

.1

.15

.2

.15

1990: Manual workers, manufacturing

1992: Manual workers, manufacturing

1992: Non-manual workers, manufacturing

1992: Service sector

0

0

0

.2

.05

.2

.1

.4

.4

.6

.15

.6

-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

.8

-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

.2

-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

1993: Manual workers, manufacturing

1993: Non-manual workers, manufacturing

1993: Service sector

0

0

0

.1

.2

.1

.2

.4

.3

.2

.6

.4

.8

-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

.5

-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

.3

-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

1994: Manual workers, manufacturing

1994: Non-manual workers, manufacturing

1994: Service sector

-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

.1
0

0

0

.05

.05

.2

.1

.1

.3

.15

.15

.4

.2

.2

.5

-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

Notes: This figure reports distribution of individual workers’ annual nominal wages. Vertical axis measures fraction. Horizontal
axis measures percent change in annual nominal wages. The bar in blue indicates the level of inflation. Source: Bockerman,
Laaksonen, and Vainiomaki (2006).
37

Figure 4. Macroeconomic aggregates: Simulated response to oil and trade shocks, percent deviations from trend. Baseline calibration.
Value added

Employment

5

5

0

0

-5

-5

-10

-10

-15

-15

-20

-20

-25
1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

-25
1989

1990

1991

1992

Investment

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1994

1995

1996

1997

1995

1996

1997

Consumption

20

5
0

0

-5
-20
-10
-40
-15
-60
-80
1989

-20

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

-25
1989

1990

1991

Wage

1992

1993

Net export to GDP ratio

2

10
8

0

6
-2
4
-4
2
-6
-8
1989

0

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996
data

1997
baseline model

-2
1989
trade shock

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

oil price shock

Notes: The figures plot percent deviations from 1990 value (for net export to GDP ratio) or trend (for all variables). See Appendix B for more details on detrending. Trade shock is
the shock with corresponds to setting trade with USSR to zero while keeping the oil price constant. Oil price shock is the 10 percent increase in the oil price while keeping the
volume of trade with the USSR constant.
38

Figure 5. Simulated response to oil and trade shocks, percent deviations from trend: Sectoral dynamics.
Soviet sector

Non-Soviet sector

20

Service sector

6

5

4
0

0
2

Value added

-20

0

-5

-2
-40

-10
-4

-60

-6

data
baseline model
trade shock
oil price shock

-15

-8
-80

-20
-10

-100
1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

-12
1997 1989

20
0

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

-25
1997 1989

4

5

2

0

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

-20
0
-5

Employment

-40
-2

-60

-10

-80

-4
-15

-100

-6

-120

-20
-8

-140

-180
1989

-25

-10

-160

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

50

-12
1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

-30
1997 1989

20

10

10

0

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

0
-10

0
-50

-20

Investment

-10
-30
-100

-20
-40
-30

-150

-50
-40

-60

-200
-50
-250
1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

-70

-60
1997 1989

5

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1

1997

-80
1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

4

0.5
0

2
0

-5

0

-0.5
-1

Wage

-10

-2

-1.5
-15

-4

-2
-2.5

-20

-6

-3
-25

-8
-3.5

-30
1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

-4
1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

-10
199 1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

Notes: Baseline calibration. The figures plot percent deviations from trend for all variables. See Appendix B for more details on
detrending. Trade shock is the shock with corresponds to setting trade with USSR to zero while keeping the oil price constant. Oil
price shock is the 10 percent increase in the oil price while keeping the volume of trade with the USSR constant.
39

Figure 6. Macroeconomic aggregates, percent deviations from trend: Effects of wage rigidity and service sector.
Value added

Employment

5

5
0

0

-5

-5

-10
-10
-15
-15

-20

-20
-25
1989

-25
1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

-30
1989

1997

1990

1991

1992

Investment

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1994

1995

1996

1997

1995

1996

1997

Consumption

20

5
0

0

-5
-20

-10

-40

-15
-20

-60
-80
1989

-25
1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

-30
1989

1997

1990

1991

Wage
10

0

8

-2

6

-4

4

-6

2

-8

0

1990

1991

1992

1993

1993

Net export to GDP ratio

2

-10
1989

1992

1994

1995
data

1996
baseline model

-2
1989

1997
flexible wages

rigid wages

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

fixed service sector

Notes: The figures plot percent deviations from 1990 value (for net export to GDP ratio) or trend (for all variables). See Appendix B for more details on detrending. Trade shock is
the shock with corresponds to setting trade with USSR to zero while keeping the oil price constant. Oil price shock is the 10 percent increase in the oil price while keeping the
volume of trade with the USSR constant. Scenario “flexible wages” sets 1 = 2 = 3 = 0. Scenario “rigid wages” sets 1 = 2 = 3 = 0.99975.Scenario “fixed service sectors”
presents the response of the economy when we freeze the size as well as prices for the service (nontradabales) sector at the precollapse levels. In this scenraio, 1 = 2 = 3 = 0.99.
40

Figure 7. Oil price shock in 1974, percent deviations from trend.
Value added
2
0
-2
-4
-6

data
model

-8
-10
-12
-14
-16
-18
1973

1974

1975

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

Investment

Consumption

10

0

-2

0

-4
-10
-6
-20
-8
-30
-10
-40

-50
1973

-12

1974

1975

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

-14
1973

1974

1975

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

Notes: Solid line is the deviation of real GDP, real consumption, and real investment from the respective linear time trends estimated on 1950-1973
data. Real GDP, real consumption, and real investment (in 2000 prices) series are taken from Penn World Tables. The deviation adjusted to be zero in
1973. Broken line is the model impulse response to 109% increase in the price of oil. Model parameters are calibrated according to their baseline
values. See text for further details.

41

Figure 8. Real GDP in Sweden and Finland, percent deviations from trend.
5

0

-5

-10

-15

Finland
Sweden
-20

-25

Notes: the figure reports percent deviations from trend estimated on 1970-1990 sample of GDP (in logs) time series.

Employment, percent deviation from trend, 1993
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10

Figure 9. Employment dynamics and exposure to Soviet trade, by industry.
Office equip.
Pharmaceuticals
Rubber
Machinery and equipment

Aircraft

Railroad equip.
Transport equip.

Elect. & optical

Textile
Electrical machinery

Other transport

Instruments
Motor vehicles
Shipbuilding

Non-metallic mineral products

0

.2

.4
.6
Share of exports to USSR, 1988

.8

Notes: Deviation from trend for employment is computed as the log difference between actual value of employment
in 1993 and predicted value for the trend estimated on 1980-1989 data. For shipbuilding and railroad equipment
industries, the deviation is computed as the difference between employment in 1993 and 1989 because these
industries had volatile time series. The slope of the OLS fitted line presented in the figure is -14.54 with standard
error 6.4. (The slope of the Huber-robust fitted line is -17.6 with standard error 5.3.) Data are from STAN OECD.

42

Figure 10. Output dynamics in Poland and Hungary, percent deviations from trend.
Poland
5

0

-5

-10

-15

-20

-25
1989

data

1990

1991

model ( = 0.99)

1992

model ( = 0.95)

1993

model ( = 0.9)

1994

1995

model ( = 0.8)

1996

model ( = 0.7)

Hungary
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25
-30
-35
-40
1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

Notes: Solid line is the deviation of real GDP series from the linear time trend estimated on
1970-1989 data. Real GDP (in 2000 prices) series for Hungary and Poland are taken from Penn
World Tables. The deviation adjusted to be zero in 1989. Other lines are simulated model
responses. See text for further details.

43

Figure 11. Real wages and employment in transition economies.
Finland

Real wage growth, 1989-1995, log points
-1.5
-1
-.5
0

Albania
Hungary

Slovenia

Poland
Belarus

Estonia
Latvia

Moldova
Bulgaria

Romania

Croatia
Uzbekistan

Russia

Ukraine
Kazakhstan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Tajikistan
Kyrgyzstan

-.3

-.2
-.1
Employment growth, 1989-1995, log points

0

Notes: real wages are computed as the ratio of average annual nominal wages to the average
consumer prices index in the given year. Employment covers all sectors. The solid line shows the
fit of the linear regression of the change in real wages on the change in employment. Data on
employment, price level, and wages are from International Labor Organization, International
Monetary Fund, and “10 Years of Commonwealth of Independent States” (“10 let Sodruzhestva
Nezavisimykh Gosudarstv,” published by the Russian Statistical Office in 2001). For countries in
the Commonwealth of Independent States and Baltic countries, statistics are computed for 19911995 because consistent data prior to 1991 at the country level are not available.

44

Appendix A: Data sources
Export: Sectoral data on export by destination is provided by OECD STAN Bilateral Trade
database and Finnish statistical yearbooks. From these data we compute the share of trade with
the USSR for industry j in total exports of industry j. For the post-collapse period, we compute
the shares using the total trade with former Soviet republics. Service sector is assigned zero share
in trade with the USSR. OECD ITCS database is used to construct exports series for 1970-2003.
We aggregate exports to 15 former Soviet republics to compute the volume and structure of
exports to the (former) USSR after 1991.
Output, investment, employment: Sectoral data on employment, hours of work, investment,
output, total labor compensation and wage bill is taken from STAN OECD data base.
Investment, output, and wage bill is in 2000 Finnish markka prices. Labor compensation includes
wages, salaries, and social costs. Wage is computed as the ratio of wage bill to employment.
Labor share is computed as the ratio of total labor compensation to value added. Service sector
excludes public administration and defense as well as compulsory social security. Given
constraints on matching consistent disaggregated production and export statistics, we use the
following industries to construct Soviet and non-Soviet sectors:
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

Textiles, textile products, leather and footwear
Wood and products of wood and cork
Pulp, paper, paper products, printing and publishing
Coke, refined petroleum products and nuclear fuel
Chemicals and chemical products
Rubber and plastics products
Other non-metallic mineral products
Basic metals
Fabricated metal products, except machinery and equipment
Machinery and equipment, n.e.c.
Office, accounting and computing machinery
Electrical machinery and apparatus, n.e.c.
Radio, television and communication equipment
Medical, precision and optical instruments, watches and clocks
Motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers
Other transport equipment
Manufacturing, n.e.c.
Electricity, gas and water supply

Energy: Finnish statistical yearbooks (mainly for 1993) provide information on the cost and
consumption of energy by industry. Unit prices for oil imports are taken from Energy Statistics
1994 published by the Statistics Finland.
Consumption: Aggregate consumption is taken from IMF IFS data base and Finnish statistical
yearbooks. Consumption is in 2000 Finnish markka prices. To compute consumption shares by
sector, we use a detailed Input-Output table for 1989. This table provides information for
consumption expenditures by sector. We apply export shares as weights and aggregate across
sectors to construct domestic consumption of Soviet, non-Soviet, non-tradables (services) and
imported goods. Since we do not know the share of domestic private consumption for imported
goods and in our model imported goods can be only consumed, we multiply imports by the share
of private consumption expenditures in total domestic expenditures (government, investment)
and treat the product as the private domestic consumption of imported goods.

45

Appendix B: Detrending and construction of sectoral data
Since our study does not focus on long-run growth, we study macroeconomic aggregates after
filtering out their long-run trend. Figure B1 plots the dynamics of the series and the fitted linear
time trend. To exclude the effect of the post-Soviet period we use data only for 1975-1989 to fit
the time trend. We interpret the trend as the (counterfactual) dynamics of variables that we would
have observed if there was no collapse of the Soviet Union and interpret deviations from trend as
an impulse response to the Soviet trade shock. To make the comparison between model and data
series straightforward, we rescale the filtered series so that they are equal to zero in 1990, see
Figure B3. Note that the detrended series exhibit a much stronger decline than the raw series. For
example, real value added falls by 11 percent, while filtered real value added decreases by
almost 20 percent. In addition, macroeconomic series seem not to recover from the shock.
Output, consumption, investment and other series stay permanently below the trend.
Further analysis of the Finnish recession requires construction of the Soviet sector. Ideally
we would like to have firm-level data with product output and export by destination. With this
information, we could aggregate output of goods predominantly exported to the Soviet Union
and treat this aggregate as the Soviet sector. The advantage of this approach is that we would be
able to control for entry/exit decisions at the firm level as well as creation and destruction of
products. These data would also allow us to assess to what extent trade with the USSR was
redirected to other countries. Unfortunately, these data are not available so we construct the
Soviet sector using industry level data. The risk of working with industry data is that there could
intra-industry entry and exit of firms and products. For example, shipbuilding firms specialized
in producing icebreakers for the USSR left the market while shipbuilding firms specialized in
producing cruise liners entered the market. In light of this caveat, we construct the Soviet sector
with the following approach.
X
Define it as the share of exports of industry i at time t to the Soviet Union in total
exports of industry i. Let Qit be value added (or any other the variable of interest) in industry i at
time t. Then we compute value added in the Soviet sector as QtS  i itX Qit and correspondingly
the non-Soviet sector is QtNS  i (1  itX )Qit . To control for entry and exit of firms and

products, we assume that the Soviet sector shares in exports to the post-USSR period are fixed at
1992 values when the trade with the Former Soviet Union countries reached its minimum. We
also fix the Soviet sector share at 1988 values for the period before 1988 to eliminate the
extraordinary expansion of the Soviet sector during the period of very high oil prices in the late
1970s and early 1980s. (Recall that trade between USSR and Finland require balanced trade and
Soviet-Finnish trade agreements stipulated volumes of trade rather than values.) Thus we allow
itX to vary only between 1988 and 1992. We refer to the resulting weights as ‘hybrid’ shares.
We treat services as a separate sector producing non-tradable goods. We provide details on data
sources in Appendix A.
We plot series for Soviet, non-Soviet and service sector in Figure B2. Again, since most
series grow over time we remove the trend component using a linear filter estimated on 19751989 data (Figure B3). We fit linear trend model to each series individually. We do not impose a
common trend. The Soviet sector exhibited the largest decline. Value added, investment, and
labor collapsed. There was also a significant, permanent decline in the service sector. The nonSoviet sector experienced a contraction in 1991-1993, but then it gradually recovered and
exceeded its pre-collapse levels. Importantly, wages in each sector gradually decreased during
the recession years.
46

Figure B1. Macroeconomic aggregates: Actual series and estimated trend.
Aggregate: Value added

Aggregate: Employment

12

10
9.9

11.5

9.8
9.7

11

9.6
10.5
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

9.5
1975

1980

Aggregate: Investment

1985

1990

1995

2000

1995

2000

1995

2000

Aggregate: Hours

10.5

15.2
15.1
15

10
14.9
14.8
9.5
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

14.7
1975

1980

Aggregate: Consumption
1.4

11.2

1.2

11

1

10.8

0.8

10.6

0.6
1980

1985

1990

1995

1990

Aggregate: Wage

11.4

10.4
1975

1985

2000

0.4
1975

1980

1985

1990

Note: The figure reports logs of real value added, real investment, real consumption, hours, and real wages. Solid line is time trend estimated on
1975-1989 data. Broken line is actual series.

47

Figure B2. Sectoral dynamics: Actual series and estimated trend.
Hybrid share: Soviet

Hybrid share: non-Soviet

Value added

9

Employment
Investment

11.5

10

11

9.5

10.5

8
7
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

8

9
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

10
1975

8.6

10

8.4

9.5

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

7
6
5
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

8.2
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

9
1975

8

9

10.5

7

8.5

10

6

8

9.5

5
1975

Hours

Hybrid share: Services

10.5

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

7.5
1975

12.5

13.8

12

13.6

11.5

13.4

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

9
1975
15
14.5

Wage

11
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

13.2
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

14
1975

1.5

1.5

1.5

1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

0
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

0
1975

Note: The figure reports logs of real value added, real investment, real consumption, hours, and real wages. Solid line is time trend estimated on
1975-1989 data. Broken line is actual series.

48

Figure B3. Aggregate and sectoral series: percent deviations from trend.
Value added

Employment

50

50

0

0

-50

-50

-100

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

Investment
50
0

-100
Aggregate
Soviet
Non-Soviet 50
Services

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

1998

2000

2002

1998

2000

2002

Hours

0

-50
-50

-100
-150

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

-100

1990

1992

1994

Consumption

Wage

10

5

0

0

-10

-5

-20

-10

-30

1990

1992

1994

1996

1996

1998

2000

2002

-15

1990

1992

1994

1996

Note: The figure plots percent deviations from time trend estimated on 1975-1989 data. The deviation is normalized to be zero in 1990.

49

Appendix C: Calibration.
First, we calibrate elasticity of output with respect to inputs by utilizing data on cost shares
p j jL (1  ppj aE j )Q j
labor cost j
wj Lj
L
sj 


  jL
Value Added j p jQ j  a j E j
p j (1  ppj aE j )Q j
and hence s Kj  1  s Lj . Using data on wages (calculated as value added divided by hours of work)
and on employment shares, we calibrate the disutility of labor. Specifically,
w
w
(  jj )1/
( w1j 1j )1/
Lj
L


share j 
L1  L2  L3 ( w11 )1/  ( w 22 )1/  ( w33 )1/ 1  ( ww12 12 )1/  ( ww13 13 )1/




 w3   share1L 
 w   share1L 
and hence  2  1  2  
and
.




3
1
L 
L 
 w1   share3 
 w1   share2 
Using cost share and relative wages, we can link employment shares to output shares

shareYj 

Yj
Y1  Y2  Y3



w

L j w j /  jL



3
i 1

Li wi / iL



( w1j )
1 ( )
w2
w1

share Lj

share2L

2 L

 jL

L

3
 ( ww13 ) share
3 L

and verify that output shares are consistent with employment shares and relative wages.
We can also impute prices of Soviet and service goods using wages and capital/labor
ratios. Note that we can combine first order conditions for capital and labor to get
 K
1L K1
 K
 w1 , p2 2 L 2  w2 , p3 3 L 3  w3
1K L1
 2 K L2
 3 K L3

w2 ( 11KL

and therefore p2 
w1 ( 22KL

K1
L1
K2
L2


w3 ( 11KL
, p3   3 L
)
w1 ( 3 K

)

K1
L1
K3
L3

)
)

.

Given the implied prices of goods, we can compute the energy requirements from:

Energy Requirement  ER j 

pE E j
Q j ( p j  pE / a j )



pE Q j / a j
Q j ( p j  pE / a j )

 aj 

pE (1  ER j )
p j ER j

.

The implied share of Soviet export in total export is given by:
pEVA3
pEVA1
pEVA2
p2 X 2 j
pE ( E1  E2  E3 )
( a1  pE )  ( p2 a2  pE )  ( p3 a3  pE )


VA1
( 4 /  1 )
 (1 pE / a1 )1 K 
3
X 1  p2 X 2 j
pE ( E1  E2  E3 )  X 1 ( ap1EVApE1 )  ( p2paE2VA p2 E )  ( p3paE3VA
]
 pE )  (1 pE / a1 )  1 ( 4 /  1 )  [1 
1  (1 )



pE share1Y
( a1  pE )
pE share1Y
( a1  pE )

Y

Y

Y

3
2
 ( ppE2ashare
 ( ppE3ashare
2  pE )
3  pE )
Y

Y

 (1 pE / a1 )1 K 
( 4 /  1 )
3
2
1
 ( ppE2ashare
 ( ppE3ashare
 (1share
]
 pE / a1 )  1 ( 4 /  1 )  [1 
1  (1 )
2  pE )
3  pE )

Hence, we can calibrate key parameters of the model using data cost shares, employment shares,
wages, and capital/labor ratios.

50

Appendix D: Sensitivity analysis
In a more general specification of the model we allow for habit formation in consumption and
adjustment costs in labor and investment. Specifically, the household optimization problem has a
more general utility function:




U    tU (Gt , L1t , L2t , L3t ) with Gt   1C1t C   2C2tC   3C3tC   4C4tC
t 0



1/ C

h

where C jt  11h j C jt  1 hj j C j ,t 1 is the habit-adjusted consumption for good j, and parameter h j
describes habit in consuming good j.
In the firm’s profit maximization problem, the generalization amounts to the following
modification in the objective function



t 0

1
t

 Rs

p



jt

K

Q jt  ptE E jt  w jt L jt  p jt I jt  p jt { 2j ( K j ,jtt 1  1) 2 K j ,t 1 

j
2

I

( I j ,jtt 1  1) 2 I j ,t 1 

j
2



L

( L j ,jtt 1  1) 2 L j ,t 1} ,

s o

where parameters  j , j ,  j are adjustment cost coefficients on capital, investment and labor
respectively. All adjustment costs are quadratic.
We assume small to moderate adjustment costs in labor: 1=2=3=1. Christiano,
Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) report that investment adjustment costs are necessary to explain
the response of macroeconomics aggregates to supply side shocks. We follow these authors and
introduce a small quadratic cost to changing the flow of investment: 1=2=3=0.5. This small
cost helps to generate a smoother contemporaneous response of investment to shocks. Numerous
studies find a significant habit in consumption. A typical range is between 0.7 and unity. We take
an intermediate value of habit persistence and set h1= h2=h3=0.8.
We also consider an alternative functional form for the labor supply for different sectors.
In particular, we examine how the choice of ρL (which controls the elasticity of substitution of
labor supply across sectors 1/( ρL − 1)) affects impulse responses:



 1

U (Gt , L1t , L2t , L3t )  11 Gt  11 (1 L1tL  2 L2tL  3 L3tL ) L



(1 )

From the first order conditions and our baseline calibration of labor supply elasticity
being equal to η = 1, one can find that our baseline formulation of the model is approximately
recovered when ρL = 2.

51

Figure D1. Macroeconomic aggregates: Effects of adjustment costs and habit formation, percent deviations from trend.
Value added

Employment

5

5

0

0

-5

-5

-10

-10

-15

-15

-20

-20

-25
1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

-25
1989

1990

1991

1992

Investment

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1994

1995

1996

1997

1995

1996

1997

Consumption

20

5
0

0

-5
-20
-10
-40
-15
-60
-80
1989

-20

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

-25
1989

1990

1991

1992

Wage

1993

Net export to GDP ratio

2

10
8

0

6
-2
4
-4
2
-6
-8
1989

0

1990

1991

1992

1993
data

1994

1995
baseline model

1996

1997
investment adj. costs

-2
1989

1990

habit in consumption

1991

1992

labor adj. costs

1993

1994

all frictions

Notes: The figures plot percent deviations from 1990 value (for net export to GDP ratio) or trend (for all variables). See Appendix B for more details on detrending. Trade shock is
the shock with corresponds to setting trade with USSR to zero while keeping the oil price constant. Oil price shock is the 10 percent increase in the oil price while keeping the
volume of trade with the USSR constant. Scenario “all frictions” includes habit formation in consumption (h = 0.8 for types of consumption goods), investment adjustment costs
(=0.5 in all sectors), and labor adjustment costs (=1 in all sectors).

52

Figure D2. Macroeconomic aggregates: Effects of production function parameters, percent deviations from trend.
Aggregate: Deviation from trend: Value added

Aggregate: Deviation from trend: Employment

10

10

0

0

-10

-10

-20

-20

-30

-30

-40
1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

-40
1989

1990

Aggregate: Deviation from trend: Investment
10

0

0

-20

-10

-40

-20

-60

-30

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1995

1996

1997

1995

1996

1997

Aggregate: Deviation from trend: Consumption

20

-80
1989

1991

1995

1996

1997

-40
1989

1990

1991

Aggregate: Deviation from trend: Wage

1992

1993

1994

Net export to GDP ratio

2

12
10

0

8
-2

6

-4

4
2

-6
-8
1989

0
1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996
data

1997
baseline model

-2
1989
CES production

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

RTS  = 0.95

Notes: The figures plot percent deviations from 1990 value (for net export to GDP ratio) or trend (for all variables). See Appendix B for more details on detrending. Trade shock is
the shock with corresponds to setting trade with USSR to zero while keeping the oil price constant. Oil price shock is the 10 percent increase in the oil price while keeping the
volume of trade with the USSR constant. Scenario “CES production” assumes CES production function in all sectors with elasticity of substitution between capital and labor equal
to 0.5. Scenario “RTS  =0.95” sets returns to scale in each sector equal to 0.95.
53

Figure D3. Macroeconomic aggregates: Effects of consumption parameters, percent deviations from trend.
Value added

Employment

5

10

0

0

-5
-10

-10

-15

-20

-20
-30
-25
-30
1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

-40
1989

1990

1991

1992

Investment
10

0

0

-20

-10

-40

-20

-60

-30

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1994

1995

1996

1997

1995

1996

1997

Consumption

20

-80
1989

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

-40
1989

1990

1991

Wage

1992

1993

Net export to GDP ratio

2

15

0

10

-2
5
-4
0

-6
-8
1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994
data

1995

1996

baseline model

1997
IES parameter  = 5

-5
1989

1990

1991

Elasticity parameter C = -1

1992

1993

1994

Elasticity parameter C = 1/3

Notes: The figures plot percent deviations from 1990 value (for net export to GDP ratio) or trend (for all variables). See Appendix B for more details on detrending. Trade shock is
the shock with corresponds to setting trade with USSR to zero while keeping the oil price constant. Oil price shock is the 10 percent increase in the oil price while keeping the
volume of trade with the USSR constant. Scenario “IES parameter  = 5” corresponds to setting intertemporal elasticity of substitution to 1/5. Scenario “Elasticity parameter C =
-1” corresponds to setting the elasticity of substation across consumption goods (in the consumption aggregator) equal to ½. Scenario “Elasticity parameter C = 0.33” corresponds
to setting the elasticity of substation across consumption goods (in the consumption aggregator) equal to 1.5.
54

Figure D4. Macroeconomic aggregates: Interest rate shock, percent deviations from trend.
Aggregate: Deviation from trend: Value added

Aggregate: Deviation from trend: Employment

5

5

0

0

-5

-5

-10

-10

-15

-15

-20

-20

-25
1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

-25
1989

1990

Aggregate: Deviation from trend: Investment

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1995

1996

1997

1995

1996

1997

Aggregate: Deviation from trend: Consumption

20

5
0

0

-5
-20
-10
-40
-15
-60
-80
1989

-20

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

-25
1989

1990

1991

Aggregate: Deviation from trend: Wage

1992

1993

1994

Net export to GDP ratio

2

10
8

0

6
-2
4
-4
2
-6
-8
1989

0

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995
data

1996

1997

baseline model

-2
1989
transitory interest rate shock

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

exclusive interest rate shock

Notes: The figures plot percent deviations from 1990 value (for net export to GDP ratio) or trend (for all variables). See Appendix B for more details on detrending. Trade shock is
the shock with corresponds to setting trade with USSR to zero while keeping the oil price constant. Oil price shock is the 10 percent increase in the oil price while keeping the
volume of trade with the USSR constant. All models include frictions such as habit formation in consumption (h = 0.8 for types of consumption goods), investment adjustment
costs (=0.5 in all sectors), and labor adjustment costs (=1 in all sectors).
55

Figure D5. Macroeconomic aggregates: Effects of substitutability of labor supply, percent deviations from trend.
Value added

Employment

5

5

0

0
-5

-5

-10
-10
-15
-15

-20

-20
-25
1989

-25
1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

-30
1989

1990

1991

1992

Investment

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1994

1995

1996

1997

1995

1996

1997

Consumption

20

5
0

0

-5
-20

-10

-40

-15
-20

-60
-80
1989

-25
1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

-30
1989

1990

1991

Wage

1992

1993

Net export to GDP ratio

2

10
8

0

6
-2
4
-4
2
-6
-8
1989

0

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996
data

1997
baseline model (L=2)

-2
1989

1990

L=1.25

1991

1992

1993

1994

L=5

Notes: The figures plot percent deviations from 1990 value (for net export to GDP ratio) or trend (for all variables). See Appendix B for more details on detrending. The model
responses correspond for values for the parameter ρL which controls the elasticity of substitution across different types of labor. Specifically, the elasticity is given by (1/(ρL - 1)).

56

Appendix E: Auxiliary tables and figures.
Table E1. Static cost of the collapse in Soviet trade.
Panel A:
A Imports from the USSR
F Exports to the USSR
C
B
D
H
J
K
L

Change in prices in Soviet trade (% from previous year)
Export prices
Import prices
Price premium in Soviet market in 1990 (markup over
price available in other markets)
Change in export volume to USSR
Increase in the domestic price of energy
Value of energy imports from USSR (at domestic prices)
Reduction in energy use by subsidized users

1989

1990

1991

14,816
16,160

12,655
14,324

7,455
4,520

6.17
22.43

25.02
12.99
36

-24.33
-5.86
36

-11.36
15.98
7,642
-0.94

-68.44
-1.14
6,009
-2.43

-661
1,522
-5.8
856

-3529
-1,376
0.8
-4,905
-1,212

521,021
389,798

498,067
356,207

0.16%
0.22%

-0.98%
-1.38%

M Market loss effect = D  F(-1)  H
N Terms of trade effect = A  (C – B)
R Removal of subsidy effect = ½  J  K L
Total loss of income = M + N + R
Total loss of income (million USD)
Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
Private sector value added (PSVA)
Total loss of income
% of GDP
% of PSVA
Lost ruble surpluses (million Finnish markka)
Lost ruble surpluses (million USD)
Total loss of income incl. lost ruble surpluses
% of GDP
% of PSVA

-7,500
-1,853
-2.5%
-3.5%

Panel B:
Cumulative 1990-1991 total loss of income
Poland
Hungary
Czech Republic

% of GDP
-3.5%
-7.8%
-7.5%

Billion
USD
-2.20
-1.97
-3.40

Notes: The cost of the collapsed trade is compute according to the method developed in Rodrik (1994).
Estimate of cumulative shocks for Poland, Hungary and Czech Republic are taken from Rodrik (1994).
Unless indicated, Finnish exports, imports, value added, and lost ruble reserves are in million of Finnish
markka. Sources: Finnish Ministry of Statistics, OECD STAN database.

57

Table E2. Wage bargaining agreements.

1988
1989

Agreement

Union-level agreements
Combined economic and
incomes policy settlement

Period of
validity

Year

General Increase Minimum Average
and lowIncrease
increase32
pay
effective from
%
%
p/hour increase
%
2 year 01.03.1988
98-145
5.3
1 year 01.03.1989
min. 1
40
0.1%
3.6
–

–

employees’ real disposable income to be increased by 2.5
%
earnings development guarantee of 70 p above the agreed
increase paid in addition to the general and equality raise
state measures, including tax revision
target for growth in employees’ real disposable incomes
1990 - 91 4.5%
earnings development guarantee III/89 - III/90 4% above
agreed increase
shop stewards agreement
working time issues
adult education, housing and social policy measures
financing of employment pensions and the employees’
contribution
government measures including maintaining

–
–

the level of unemployment benefits
development of agreements’ system

–
–
–
–

indexation clause
earnings development guarantee 1996 and 1997
working life development
state measures i.e. concerning taxation and unemployment
security

–
–
–
–

indexation clause
earnings development examination
quality of working life
taxation measures

–
1990

Kallio 15.01.1990

2 year 01.03.1990
01.10.1990

min. 0.7
min. 0.7

30
30

0.4%

5.4

–
–
–

1991

2nd phase 15.11.1990

1992

Ihalainen-Kahri 29.11.1991

1993
1994
1995
1996

1997
1998

01.05.1991
2 year Present
agreement
prolonged to
31.11.1993

Ihalainen-Kahri 2nd phase
30.11.1992
Union-level agreements
1 year 1.11.1993
Union-level agreements
1-2 year
Economic, Employment and 2 year 1.11.1995
Labor Market Policy
Agreement 1996 - 97
10.9.1995
2nd phase
Incomes policy agreement
1998 - 1999 12.12.1997

1.10.1996

2 year 1.1.1998

1999
2nd phase
1.1.1999
Source: Central Organization of Finnish Trade Unions (SAK).

32

min. 0.9

50

0.3%

1.7

0

0

0

0.2

0

0

min. 1.8

105

min. 1.3

65

min. 1.6

85 p

min. 1.6

85 p

0

0
3.2
5.2
2.1

0.3%

1.7

0.3%

0.0
2.5

Reforms Related to Centralized Agreement

–
–
–
–

1.7

Industrial workers.
58

Figure E1. Measure TFP in Finland, 1991-1997.
1
data
model

0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7
-8
-9
-10
1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

Notes: The figure plots TFP measured according to standard growth accounting applied to
aggregate series in the data and impulse responses of aggregate series in the model. The method is
described in Conesa et al (2007).

59

Figure E2. Tax burden.
55

50

45

tax rate

40

35

30

25

20

Local government income tax rate
Tax on earnings/Labor compensation

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

15

Effective income tax rate
Total tax revenues/Value added

Notes: This figure reports the tax burden on income. Source: OECD, Finnish Ministry of Finance.

60

