                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           AN ELABORATED GLOBAL CLIMATE POLICY ARCHITECTURE:
SPECIFIC FORMULAS AND EMISSION TARGETS FOR ALL COUNTRIES IN ALL DECADES

                                           Jeffrey A. Frankel

                                         Working Paper 14876
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14876


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2009




 The author would like especially to thank Valentina Bosetti of FEEM who produced, by means of
 the WITCH model, all the simulations of the effects of my formulas, thereby bringing hitherto-abstract
 ideas to life. This paper literally could not have been written without her. He would like to thank
 Joe Aldy and Robert Stavins of the Harvard Project on International Climate Agreements for encouraging
 and supporting this line of research. For comments and suggestions on the outcome he would like
 to thank John Deutch, Robert Keohane, Warwick McKibben, Oyebola Olabisi, Rob Stavins, Jonathan
 Weiner, and an anonymous reviewer. The author would further like to thank for partial support the
 Sustainability Science Program, funded by the Italian Ministry for Environment, Land and Sea, at
 the Center for International Development at Harvard University. The views expressed herein are those
 of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2009 by Jeffrey A. Frankel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
 may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
 the source.
An Elaborated Global Climate Policy Architecture: Specific Formulas and Emission Targets
for All Countries in All Decades
Jeffrey A. Frankel
NBER Working Paper No. 14876
April 2009
JEL No. Q54

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes a detailed plan to set quantitative national limits on emissions of greenhouse gases,
following along the lines of the Kyoto Protocol. It is designed to fill in the most serious gaps: the
absence of targets extending as far as 2100, the absence of participation by the United States and developing
countries, and the absence of reason to think that countries will abide by commitments. The plan
elaborates on the idea of a framework of formulas that can assign quantitative limits across countries,
one budget period at a time. Unlike other century-long paths of emission targets that are based purely
on science (concentration goals) or ethics (equal rights per capita) or economics (cost-benefit optimization),
this plan is based partly on politics. Three political constraints are particularly important. (1) Developing
countries are not asked to bear any cost in the early years. (2) Thereafter, they are not asked to make
any sacrifice that is different in kind or degree than was made by those countries that went before them,
with due allowance for differences in incomes. (3) No country is asked to accept an ex ante target
that costs it more than, say, 1% of GDP in present value, or more than, say, 5% of GDP in any single
budget period. They would not agree to ex ante targets that turned out to have such high costs, nor
abide by them ex post. An announced target path that implies a future violation of these constraints
will not be credible, and thus will not provide the necessary signals to firms today.

The idea is that (i) China and other developing countries are asked to accept targets at BAU in the
coming budget period, the same in which the US first agrees to cuts below BAU; and (ii) all countries
are asked to make further cuts in the future in accordance with a formula which sums up a Progressive
Reductions Factor, a Latecomer Catch-up Factor, and a Gradual Equalization Factor. The paper tries
out specific values for the parameters in the formulas (parameters that govern the extent of progressivity
and equity, and the speed with which latecomers must eventually catch up). The resulting target paths
for emissions are run through the WITCH model. It does turn out to be possible to achieve the carbon
abatement goal (concentrations of 500 PPM in 2100) while simultaneously obeying the economic/political
constraint (no country suffers a disproportionate loss in GDP). Preliminary efforts to achieve a target
of 450 ppm have so far been unable to do so without violating the cost constraint.


Jeffrey A. Frankel
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeffrey_frankel@harvard.edu
                        Global Climate Policy Architecture:
 Specific Formulas and Emission Targets for All Countries in All Decades


        This paper analyzes a framework of formulas that produce precise numerical
targets for emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) in all regions of the world in all decades of
this century. The formulas are based on pragmatic judgments about what is possible
politically. The reason for this approach is a belief that many of the usual science-based,
ethics-based, and economics-based paths are not dynamically consistent: That is, it is not
credible that successor governments will be able to abide by the commitments that
today’s leaders make.
        The formulas analyzed here are driven by seven political axioms:
    1. The United States will not commit to quantitative targets if China and other major
        developing countries do not commit to quantitative targets at the same time, due
        to concerns about economic competitiveness and carbon leakage.
    2. China and other developing countries in the very short run will not make
        economic sacrifices, especially because the United States has not done so.
    3. China and other developing countries, even in the longer run, will not make
        sacrifices different in character from those made by richer countries that have
        gone before them.
    4. In the long run, no country can be rewarded for having “ramped up” its emissions
        well above 1990 levels before joining.
    5. No country will agree to participate if its expected cost during the course of the
        21st century (in present discounted value) is more than Y, where Y is for now set at
        1 percent of gross domestic product (GDP).
    6. No country will abide by targets that cost it more than X in any particular period,
        where X is for now set at 5 percent of GDP.
    7. If one major country drops out, others will become discouraged and the system
        may unravel.

     The targets are formulated assuming the following framework. Between now and
2050, the European Union follows the path laid out in the January 2008 European
Commission Directive; the United States follows the path in recent legislative bills
associated with Senator Joseph Lieberman; and Japan, Australia and Korea follow
statements that their own leaders have recently made. China, India and other countries
agree immediately to quantitative greenhouse gas (GHG) emission targets, which in the
first decades merely copy their business-as-usual (BAU) paths, thereby precluding
leakage. These countries are not initially expected to cut emissions below their BAU
trajectory.
     When the time comes for these countries to join mitigation efforts—perhaps when
they cross certain thresholds—their emission targets are determined using a formula that
incorporates three elements: a Progressive Reductions Factor, a Latecomer Catch-up
Factor, and a Gradual Equalization Factor. These factors are designed to persuade the
developing countries that they are only being asked to do what is fair in light of actions
already taken by others. In the second half of the century, the formula that determines
the emissions path for industrialized countries is dominated by the Gradual Equalization


                                                                                             2
Factor. But developing countries, which will still be in earlier stages of participation and
thus will have departed from their BAU paths only relatively recently, will still follow in
the footsteps of those who have gone before. This means that their emission targets will
be set using the Progressive Reductions Factor and the Latecomer Catch-up Factor, in
addition to the Gradual Equalization Factor. The glue that holds the agreement together
is that every country has reason to feel that it is only doing its fair share.

    We use the WITCH model to analyze the results of this approach in terms of
projected paths for emissions targets, permit trading, the price of carbon, GDP costs, and
environmental effects. Overall economic costs, discounted (at 5 percent), average 0.24
percent of GDP. No country suffers a discounted loss of more than 1 percent of GDP
overall from the agreement, nor more than 5 percent of GDP in any given period.
Atmospheric CO2 concentrations level off at 500 parts per million (ppm) in the latter part
of the century. (The next phase of this research aims for a target of 450 ppm.)

The problem
        There are by now many plans for a post-Kyoto climate change regime, even if one
considers only those that accept the basic Kyoto approach of quantitative, national-level
limits on GHG emissions accompanied by international trade in emissions permits. The
Kyoto targets applied only to the budget period 2008–2012, which is now upon us, and
only to a minority of countries (in theory, the industrialized countries). The big task is
to extend quantitative emissions targets through the remainder of the century and to other
countries—especially the United States, China, and other developing countries.

        Virtually all the other plans for a post-Kyoto agreement are either based on
scientific environmental objectives (e.g., stabilizing atmospheric CO2 concentrations at
450 ppm in 2100), ethical or philosophical considerations (e.g., the principle that every
individual on earth has equal emission rights), or economic cost-benefit analyses
(weighing the economic costs of abatement against the long-term environmental
benefits).1 This paper analyzes a path of emission targets for all countries and for the
remainder of the century that is intended to be more practical than others that have been
put forward, in that it is also based on political considerations, rather than on science or
ethics or economics alone.2

        The industrialized countries did, in 1997, agree to quantitative emissions targets
for the Kyoto Protocol’s first budget period, so in some sense we know that it can be
done. But the obstacles are enormous. For starters, most of the Kyoto signers will
probably miss their 2008–2012 targets, and of course the United States never even

1
  An important example of the science-based approach is Wigley (2007). An important example
of the cost-benefit-based approach is Nordhaus (1994, 2006). An important example of the
rights-based approach is Baer et al. (2008).
2
  Aldy, Barrett, and Stavins (2003) and Victor (2004) review a number of existing proposals.
Numerous others have offered their own thoughts on post-Kyoto plans, at varying levels of detail,
including Aldy, Orszag, and Stiglitz (2001); Barrett (2006); Nordhaus (2006); and Olmstead and
Stavins (2006).


                                                                                               3
ratified. At multilateral venues such as the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) meeting in Bali (2007) and the Group of Eight (G8) meeting
in Hokkaido (July 2008), world leaders have (just barely) been able to agree on a broad
long-term goal of cutting total global emissions in half by 2050. But these meetings did
not come close to producing agreement on who will cut how much, not to mention
agreement on multilateral targets within a near-enough time horizon that the same
national leaders are likely to still be alive when the abatement commitment comes due.
To quote Al Gore (1993, p.353), “politicians are often tempted to mke a promise that is
not binding and hpe for some unexpectedly easy way to keep the promise.” For this
reason, the aggregate targets endorsed so far cannot be viewed as anything more than
aspirational.

        Moreover, nobody has ever come up with an enforcement mechanism that
simultaneously has sufficient teeth and is acceptable to member countries. Given the
importance countries place on national sovereignty it is unlikely that this will change.3
Hopes must instead rest on weak enforcement mechanisms such as the power of moral
suasion and international opprobrium. It is safe to say that in the event of a clash
between such weak enforcement mechanisms and the prospect of a large economic loss
to a particular country, aversion to the latter would win out.


Necessary aspects of a workable successor to Kyoto

       I have suggested six attributes4 that any successor-agreement to the Kyoto
Protocol would have to deliver:

•   More comprehensive participation—specifically, getting the United States, China,
    and other developing counties to join the system of quantitative emission targets.
•   Efficiency—incorporating market-flexibility mechanisms such as international permit
    trading and providing advance signals to allow the private sector to plan ahead, to the
    extent compatible with the credibility of the signals.
•   Dynamic consistency—addressing the problem that announcements about steep cuts
    in 2050 are not credible. The lack of credibility stems from two sources. First, it is
    known that today’s leaders cannot bind their successors. Second, the projected failure
    of most Kyoto signatories to meet their first-period emission targets makes the lack of
    seriousness at a global level painfully obvious.
•   Equity—developing countries point out that industrialized countries created the
    problem of global climate change, while poor countries account for only about 20
    percent of the CO2 that has accumulated in the atmosphere from industrial activity
    over the past 150 years (though admittedly this is changing rapidly). From an equity
    standpoint, developing countries argue that it is not appropriate to ask them to limit
3
  The possibility of trade sanctions is probably the only serious proposal for penalizing non-
participation. But such penalties are not currently being considered at the multilateral level.
(See Frankel, 2009, however, and references therein).
4
  Frankel (2007). Similar lists are provided by Bowles and Sandalow (2001), Stewart and
Weiner (2003), and others.


                                                                                                  4
    their economic development to pay for a climate-change solution; moreover, they do
    not have the capacity to pay for emissions abatement that richer countries do. Finally,
    many developing countries place greater priority on raising their people’s current
    standard of living (including reducing local air and water pollution). These countries
    might reasonably demand quantitative targets that reflect an equal per capita
    allotment of emissions, on equity grounds, even waiving any claims to reparations for
    the disproportionate environmental damages that can be expected to fall on them.
•   Compliance —recognizing that no country will join a treaty if it entails tremendous
    economic sacrifice and that therefore compliance cannot be reasonably expected if
    costs are too high. Similarly, no country, if it has already joined the treaty, will
    continue to stay in during any given period if staying in means huge economic
    sacrifice, relative to dropping out, in that period.
•   Robustness under uncertainty—recognizing that the relationship between cost and
    compliance applies not just to ex ante calculations based on current expectations, but
    also ex post, when future growth rates and other uncertain economic and
    technological variables become known.


    Unlike the Kyoto Protocol, the plan analyzed in this paper brings all countries into an
international policy regime on a realistic basis and looks far into the future. But we
cannot pretend to see with as fine a degree of resolution at a century-long horizon as we
can at a five- or ten-year horizon. Fixing precise numerical targets a century ahead is
impractical. Rather, we need a century-long sequence of negotiations, fitting within a
common institutional framework that builds confidence as it goes along. The framework
must have enough continuity so that success in the early phases builds members’
confidence in each other’s compliance commitments and in the fairness, viability, and
credibility of the process. Yet the framework must be flexible enough that it can
accommodate the unpredictable fluctuations in economic growth, technology
development, climate, and political sentiment that will inevitably occur. Only by
striking the right balance between continuity and flexibility are there grounds for hope
that a framework for addressing climate change would last a century or more.

    An example of such a framework in another policy area is the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade, which emerged after World War II and provided the basis for 50 years
of successful multilateral negotiations to liberalize international trade, culminating in the
founding of the World Trade Organization. Nobody at the beginning could have
predicted the precise magnitude or sequence of reforms to various trade barriers, or what
sectors or countries would be included. But the early stages of negotiation worked, and
so confidence in the process built, more and more countries joined the club, and
progressively more ambitious rounds of liberalization were achieved.
        Another analogy would be with the process of European economic integration,
culminating in the formation of the European Economic and Monetary Union. Despite
ambitions for more comprehensive integration, nobody at the time of the founding of the
European Coal and Steel Community, or the subsequent European Economic
Community, could have forecast the speed, scope, magnitude, or country membership




                                                                                            5
that this path of integration would eventually take. The idea would be to do the same
with the UNFCCC.


    Political constraints

        This paper takes as axiomatic the following six claims regarding political
feasibility.
1. The United States will not commit to quantitative targets if China and other major
    developing countries do not commit to quantitative targets at the same time, though
    this leaves completely open the initial level and future path of the targets. Any plan
    will be found unacceptable if it leaves the less developed countries free to exploit
    their lack of GHG regulation for “competitive” advantage at the expense of the
    participating countries’ economies and leads to emissions leakage at the expense of
    the environmental goal.
2. China, India, and other developing countries will not make sacrifices they view as
        a. fully contemporaneous with rich countries,
        b. different in character from those made by richer countries who have gone
             before them,
        c. preventing them from industrializing,
        d. failing to recognize that richer countries are in a position to make greater
             economic sacrifices than poor countries to address the problem (all the more
             so because rich countries’ past emissions have created the problem), or
        e. failing to recognize that the rich countries have benefited from an “unfair
             advantage” in being allowed to achieve levels of per capita emissions that are
             far above those of the poor countries.
3. In the short run, emission targets for developing countries must be computed relative
    to current levels or BAU paths; otherwise the economic costs will be too great for the
    countries in question to accept. 5 But in the longer run, no country can be rewarded
    for having "ramped up” emissions far above 1990 levels, the reference year agreed to
    at Rio and Kyoto. Fairness considerations aside, if post-1990 increases are
    permanently “grandfathered,” then countries that have not yet agreed to cuts will have
    a strong incentive to ramp up emissions in the interval before they join. Of course
    there is nothing magic about 1990 but, for better or worse, it is the year on which
    Annex I countries have long based planning.
4. No country will accept a path of targets that is expected to cost it more than Y percent
    of GDP throughout the 21st century (in present discounted value), where Y is for now
    set at 1 percent.
5. No country will accept targets in any period that are expected to cost more than X
    percent of GDP to achieve during that period; alternatively, even if targets were
    already in place, no country will in the future actually abide by them if it finds the
    cost to do so would exceed X percent of GDP. In this paper, GDP losses are defined
    relative to what would happen if the country in question had never joined. An
    alternative would be to define GDP losses in a future period relative to what would

5
    Cuts expressed relative to BAU have been called “Action Targets” (Baumert and Goldberg 2006).


                                                                                                    6
   happen if the country were to drop out in that period, after decades of participation.
   For now, I set X at 5 percent.
6. If one major country drops out, others will become discouraged and may also fail to
   meet their own targets, and the framework may unravel. If such unraveling in a
   future decade is foreseeable at the time that long-run commitments are made, then
   those commitments will not be credible from the start. Firms, consumers, and
   researchers base their current decisions to invest in plant and equipment, consumer
   durables, or new technological possibilities on the expected future price of carbon: If
   government commitments are not credible from the start, then they will not raise the
   expected future carbon price. The reason for this political approach is the belief that
   many emissions pathways designed on the basis of scientific or economic analyses
   are not dynamically consistent: That is, it is not credible that successor governments
   will be able to abide by the commitments that today’s leaders make.

Squaring the circle

    Of the above propositions, even the first and second alone seem to add up to a
hopeless “Catch-22”: Nothing much can happen without the United States, the United
States will not proceed unless China and other developing countries start at the same
time, and China will not start until after the rich countries have gone first.
    There is only one possible solution, only one knife-edge position that satisfies the
constraints. At the same time that the United States agrees to binding emission cuts in
the manner of Kyoto, China and other developing countries agree to a path that
immediately imposes on them binding emission targets—but these targets in their early
years simply follow the BAU path. The idea of committing to only BAU targets in the
early decades will provoke outrage from both environmentalists on one side and business
interests in developed countries on the other. But both sides might come to realize that
this commitment is far more important than it sounds: It precludes the carbon leakage
which, absent such an agreement, will undermine the environmental goal and it
moderates the competitiveness concerns of carbon-intensive industries in the rich
countries. This approach recognizes that it would be irrational for China to agree to
substantial actual cuts in the short term. Indeed China might well react with outrage at
being asked to take on binding targets of any kind at the same time as the United States.
But China may also come to realize that it would actually gain from such an agreement,6
by acquiring the ability to sell emission permits at the same world market price as
developed countries (as opposed to the lower prices China has received for lower-quality
project credits under the Kyoto Protocol’s Clean Development Mechanism [CDM] or
joint implementation [JI] provisions).




6
  A number of authors have pointed out that developing countries actually stand to gain economically in the
short run by accepting targets and then selling permits, including the Council of Economic Advisers (1998),
Keohane and Raustiala (2008), and Seidman and Lewis (2009). Of course this only works when the
permits allocated to developing countries are sufficiently generous (i.e., do not reflect a significant
abatement obligation), as is reasonable in the short run, but which the developing countries cannot expect
in the long run.


                                                                                                         7
        In later decades, the formulas do ask substantially more of the developing
countries. But these formulas also obey basic notions of fairness, by (1) asking for cuts
that are analogous in magnitude to the cuts made by others who began abatement earlier
and (2) making due allowance for developing countries’ low per capita income and
emissions and for their baseline of rapid growth. These ideas were developed in earlier
papers (see Frankel 1999, 2005, and 2007 and Aldy and Frankel 2004) where I suggest
that the formulas used to develop emissions targets incorporate four or five variables:
1990 emissions, emissions in the year of the negotiation, population, and income. One
might perhaps also include a few other special variables such as whether the country in
question has coal or hydroelectric power, though the 1990 level of emissions conditional
on per capita income can largely capture these special variables.

         Here we narrow down the broad family of formulas to a more manageable set,
and then put them into operation to produce specific numerical targets for all countries,
for all five-year budget periods of the 21st century. The formulas are made precise
through the development of three factors: a short-term Progressive Reductions Factor, a
medium-term Latecomer Catch-up Factor, and a long-run Gradual Equalization Factor.
The result is a set of actual numerical targets for all countries for the remainder of the
century (presented in Table 1). These are then fed into the WITCH model, by Valentina
Bosetti, a co-author of that model, to see the economic and environmental consequences.
International trading plays an important role. The framework is flexible enough that one
can tinker with a parameter here or there—for example if the economic cost borne by a
particular country is deemed too high or the environmental progress deemed too low—
without having to abandon the entire formulas framework.

Emission targets for all countries: rules to guide the formulas
        All developing countries that have any ability to measure emissions would be
asked to agree in 2010 to emission targets that do not exceed their projected BAU
baseline trajectory going forward. The objective of getting developing countries
committed to these targets would be to forestall emissions leakage and to limit the extent
to which their firms enjoy a competitive advantage over carbon-constrained competitors
in the countries that have already agreed to targets below BAU under the Kyoto Protocol.
(We expect that the developing countries would, in most cases, receive payments for
permits and thus emit less than their BAU baseline.) Most countries in Africa would
probably be exempted for some decades from any kind of commitment, even to BAU
targets, until they had better capacity to monitor emissions.

        One must acknowledge that BAU paths are neither easily ascertained nor
immutable. Countries may “high-ball” their BAU estimates in order to get more
generous targets. Even assuming that estimates are unbiased, important unforeseen
economic and technological developments could occur between 2010 and 2020 that will
shift the BAU trajectory for the 2020s, for example. Any number of unpredictable
events have already occurred in the years since 1990; they include German reunification,
the 1997–1998 East Asia crisis, the boom in the BRIC countries up until 2008 (Brazil,
Russia, India, and China), the sharp rise in world oil prices up until 2008, and the world


                                                                                            8
financial crisis of 2007–2009. A first measure to deal with the practical difficulty of
setting the BAU path is to specify in the Kyoto-successor treaty that estimates must be
generated by an independent international expert body, not by national authorities. A
second measure, once the first has been assured, is to provide for updates of the BAU
paths every decade. To omit such a provision—that is, to hold countries for the rest of
the century to the paths that had been estimated in 2010—would in practice virtually
guarantee that any country that achieves very high economic growth rates in the future
will eventually drop out of the agreement, because staying in would mean incurring costs
far in excess of 5 percent of GDP. Allowing for periodic adjustments to the BAU
baseline does risk undermining the incentive for carbon-saving investments, on the logic
that such investments would reduce future BAU paths and thus reduce future target
allocations. This risk is the same as the risk of encouraging countries to ramp up their
emissions, which we specified above to be axiomatically ruled out by any viable
framework. That is why the formula gives decreasing weight to BAU in later budget
periods and why I introduce a Latecomer Catch-up Factor (explained below), which
tethers all countries to their 1990 emission levels in the medium run.

        Countries are expected to agree to the next step, quantitative targets that entail
specific cuts below BAU, at a time determined by their circumstances. In our initial
simulations, the choice of year for introducing an obligation to actually cut emissions was
generally guided by two thresholds: when a country’s average per capita income exceeds
$3000 per year and/or when its per capita annual emissions approach 1 ton or more.7
But we found that starting dates had to be further modified in order to satisfy our
constraints regarding the distribution of economic losses.

        As already noted, this approach assigns emission targets in a way that is more
sensitive to political realities than is typical of other target paths which are constructed
either on the basis of a cost-benefit optimization or to deliver a particular environmental
and/or ethical goal. Specifically, numerical targets are based (a) on commitments that
political leaders in various key countries have already announced, as of early 2009, and
(b) on formulas designed to assure latecomer countries that the emission cuts they are
being asked to make represent no more than their fair share, in that they correspond to the
sacrifices that other countries before them have already made.
        Finally comes the other important concession to practical political realities: If the
simulation in any period turns out to impose on any country an economic cost of more
than X% of GDP (where X is for the purposes of this analysis is taken to be 5 percent), we
assume that this country drops out. Dropping out could involve either explicit
renunciation of the treaty or massive failure to meet the quantitative targets. For now,
our assumption is that in any such scenario, other countries would follow by dropping out
one by one, and the whole scheme would eventually unravel.8 This unraveling would

7
  Baer et al. (2008) suggest an income threshold of $7,500 per person per year.
8
  A good topic for future efforts to extend this research is to apply game theory, allowing some relatively
less important countries to drop out without necessarily sinking the whole scheme. That is, if the
economic damage to remaining members arising from the defections, and the environmental damage, were
not too great, remaining countries might continue to participate rather than retaliate by likewise dropping
out.


                                                                                                          9
occur much earlier if private actors rationally perceived that at some point in the future
major players will face such high economic costs that compliance will break down. In
this case, the future carbon prices that are built into most models’ compliance trajectories
will lack credibility, private actors will not make investment decisions that reflect those
prices today, based on them, and the effort will fail in the first period. Therefore, our
approach to any scenario in which any major player suffers economic losses greater than
X% would be to go back and adjust some of the parameters of the emission formulas, so
that costs are lower and this is no longer the case.
        We hope by these mechanisms to achieve political viability: non-negative
economic gains in the early years for developing countries, average costs over the course
of the century below 1 percent of GDP per annum, and protection for every country
against losses in any period as large, or larger than, 5 percent of GDP. Only if they
achieve political viability are announcements of future cuts credible. And only credible
announcements of future cuts will send firms the long-term price signals and incentives
needed to guide investment decisions today.

Guidelines from policies and goals already announced by national leaders

        Our model produces country-specific numeric emission targets for every fifth
year: 2012, 2017, 2022, etc. For each five-year budget period, such as the Kyoto period
2008–2012, computations are based on the average of the starting year and ending year.

        The European Union. The EU emissions target for 2008–2012 was agreed at
Kyoto: 8 percent below 1990 levels. In the second 2015–2020 period (for simplicity we
choose the year 2017), the EU target is the one that Brussels announced in January 2008
and confirmed in December 2008:9 namely, 20 percent below 1990 levels. On the one
hand, as with other targets publicly supported by politicians in Europe and elsewhere,
skepticism is appropriate regarding EU member countries’ willingness to make the
sacrifices necessary to achieve this target.10 On the other hand, however, the European
Union’s commitment to this number was not conditional on other countries joining in.
Indeed the European Union has said it would cut emissions 30 percent below 1990 levels
if other countries joined in. So in this sense we are being conservative in choosing the 20
percent target. For the third period (2022–2027), and thereafter up to the eighth period
(2048–2052), the EU targets progress in equal increments to a 50 percent cut below 1990
levels: In other words, targets relative to 1990 emissions start at 25 percent below, and
then progress to 30 percent, 35 percent, 40 percent, 45 percent, and 50 percent below.



9
  Financial Times, Jan. 2, 2009, p.5.
10
   It is not entirely clear that even Europe will meet its Kyoto targets. Perhaps the European Union will
need to cover its shortfall with purchases of emission permits from other countries. European emissions
were reduced in the early 1990s by coincidental events: Britain moved away from coal under Margaret
Thatcher and Germany with reunification in 1990 acquired dirty power plants that were easy to clean up.
But Americans who claim on this basis that the European Union has not yet taken any serious steps go too
far. Ellerman and Buchner (2007, 26-29) show that the difference between allocations and emissions in
2005 and 2006 was probably in part attributable to abatement measures implemented in response to the
positive price of carbon.


                                                                                                       10
        Japan, Canada, and New Zealand. These three countries are assigned the Kyoto
goal of a 6 percent reduction below 1990 levels. Of all ratifiers, Canada is probably the
farthest from achieving its Kyoto goal.11 But Japan dominates this country grouping in
size. We assume that by 2010 the United States has taken genuine measures, which helps
motivate these three countries to get more serious than they have been to date. In a small
concession to realism, we assume that they do not hit the numerical target until 2012
(versus hitting it on average over the 2008–2012 budget period).12
        Japan’s then-Prime Minister, Yasuo Fukuda, on June 9, 2008, announced a
decision to cut Japanese emissions 60–80 percent by mid-century.13 We interpret these
targets as cuts of 10 percent every five years between 2010 and 2050, computed
logarithmically. The cumulative cuts are 80 percent in logarithmic terms, or 51 percent
in absolute terms (i.e., to 49 percent of the year–2010 emissions level).
        The United States. A series of bills to cap US GHG emissions were introduced in
Congress in 2007 and early 2008.14 It is possible that some version of such legislation
might pass by 2010.
        The Bingaman–Specter bill would have reduced emissions to 2006 levels by 2020
and to 1990 levels by 2030, but with a cap or “safety valve” on the price of carbon. The
Lieberman–Warner bill was more aggressive.15 It would have begun by reducing
emissions in 2012 to below 2005 levels and would have tightened the emissions cap
gradually each year thereafter, such that by the year 2050, total emissions would be held
to 30 percent of 2012 levels—in other words, a 70 percent reduction from emissions
levels at the start date of the policy.16 If such a bill were not passed until 2010 or so, the
goal of achieving 2005 levels by 2012 (let alone a 4 percent reduction) would for all
practical purposes be impossible to achieve. The bill’s sponsors would have to adjust
2012 to BAU levels, which are projected to be 39 percent above 1990 levels, or 33
percent logarithmically (i.e., 1990 emissions were 28 percent below current 2012 BAU
projections), so the 2050 target would be 42 percent below 1990 levels.17 A slightly
revised “manager’s” version of the Lieberman–Warner bill earned significant
congressional support in June 2008: Though it did not garner a large enough majority to
become law, the vote was widely considered an important step forward politically for the

11
    The current government’s plan calls for reducing Canadian emissions in 2020 by 20 percent below 2006
levels (which translates to 2.7 percent below 1990 levels) and in 2050 by 60–70 percent below 2006 levels.
(“FACTBOX – Greenhouse gas curbs from Australia to India,” Sept.5, 2008, Reuters.
www.alertnet.org/thenews/newsdesk/L5649578.htm.)
12
      In 2007, Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe supported an initiative to half global emissions by 2050.
(Financial Times, May 25). But ahead of the 2008 G8 Summit, Japan declined to match the EU’s
commitment to cut its emissions 20 per cent by 2020 (FT, April 24, 2008, p.3).
13
   “Japan Pledges Big Cut in Emissions,” FT, June 10, 2008 p.6;
14
    The bills are conveniently summarized in Table 1A in Hufbauer, Charnovitz and Kim (2009).
15
   S. 2191: America's Climate Security Act of 2007
16
    Section 1201, pages 30-32. (The percentage is measured non-logarithmically.)
17
    See, for example,
http://theclimategroup.org/index.php/news_and_events/news_and_comment/carbon_trading_high_hopes_for_lieberman_warner/ (The number is
54 percent, measured logarithmically. This is the preferred way of defining percentage changes, because a
50 percent increase in emissions followed by a 50 percent reduction gets you back where you started from.
Logarithms are too technical for non-specialist audiences. But measuring changes non-logarithmically has
the undesirable property that a 50 percent increase [to 1.50] followed by a 50 percent reduction [to 0.75]
does not get you back to your starting point [1.00].)


                                                                                                                                11
activist camp. It was presumed that a new bill in the next session would probably look
similar and, with a new president, would have better chances of success.18
         If taken at face value, with 2012 emissions returned to 2005 levels or lower, then
the Lieberman–Warner targets would shave off another 13 percent from the target path,
so that emissions in 2050 would be 55 percent below 1990 levels.19 There are three
respects in which it might be naïve to accept these political aspirations at face value.
First, it is not realistic to think that the United States could go from the steady emission
growth rates of 1990–2007 (when emissions increased, on average, by 1.4 percent per
year) to immediate rapid cuts, without passing through an intermediate phase of slowing,
and then peaking or plateauing, before reversing (a trajectory some have called “slow-
stop-reverse”). Second is the point that many voters and politicians who have supported
recent bills in Congress will be unlikely to support the measures that would be needed to
attain the targets contained in those bills in an economically efficient way—that is, by
raising the price of fossil fuels through such measures as a carbon tax or tradable permits.
Third, the Lieberman–Warner target is somewhat more aggressive than Europe’s goal,
measured relative to 1990 emissions, and implies a much more aggressive rate of
emissions decline than Europe’s over the period 2012–2050. So far, American support
for serious action has lagged behind Europe’s.
         On the other hand, if China and other developing countries accept quantitative
targets, as foreseen under this plan, this will boost domestic American support for tough
action. In addition, one could argue that there is more “fat” in US emissions, so one
expects that it would be easier to achieve reductions than in Europe or Japan. The
terminal level of emissions in 2050 under the formula would still probably be
substantially higher than Europe’s, relative to population or GDP.
         We assume that the average annual emissions growth rate is cut in half during the
period 2008–2012, to 0.7 percent per year or 3.5 percent cumulatively, so that emissions
in 2012 are 31.5 percent above 1990 levels.20 At that point, we assume emissions plateau
(growth is held to zero) for the period 2012–2017. Then we implement the rest of the
Lieberman–Warner formula, such that emissions in 2050 reach a level that is 67 percent
below 1990 levels. Using our postponed base this is 98.5 percent below 2012 levels,
logarithmically. Spread over 38 years, this implies sustained reductions of 2.6 percent
per year on average, or 13 percent every five years (which is a more aggressive rate of
reduction than Lieberman–Warner).

        Australia. Canberra has been reluctant to take strong actions because the country
is so dependent on coal. In July of 2008, however, Australian Prime Minister Kevin



18
   This paper was originally written during the 2008 US presidential election campaign, in which both
major presidential candidates supported GHG reduction measures along the lines of recent congressional
bills. John McCain advocated a 2050 emissions target of 60 percent below 1990 levels, or 66 percent
below 2005 levels, close to Lieberman–Warner (Washington Post, May 13, 2008, p. A14; and FT, May 13,
2008, p.4). Barack Obama endorsed a more aggressive target of reducing 2050 emissions 80 percent below
1990 levels (FT, Oct. 17, 2008).
19
   That is 67 percent logarithmically. Or a cut of about 62 percent according to J.R. Pegg, Environmental
News Service, October 2007.
20
   That is, 27 percent logarithmically.


                                                                                                      12
Rudd announced plans to cut emissions to 60 percent below 2000 levels by 2050.21 In
the regional groupings of our model, Australia is classified together with South Korea
and South Africa.
         Korea and South Africa. Until recently it looked unlikely that any “non-Annex
I” countries would consider taking on serious cuts below a BAU growth path within the
next decade. But in March 2008, the new president of South Korea, Myung-bak Lee,
“tabled a plan to cap emissions at current levels over the first Kyoto period.”22 This was
an extraordinarily ambitious target in light of Korea’s economic growth rate. He also
“vowed his country would slash emissions in half by 2050,”23 like the industrialized
countries—of which Korea is now one. Emissions have risen 90 percent since 1990 and
it is hard to imagine any country applying the brakes so sharply as to switch instantly
from 5 percent annual growth in emissions to zero.24 Perhaps President Lee thinks he
can offset growth in South Korean emissions by paying North Korea to reforest. We
choose to interpret the Korean plan to flatten emissions as covering a period that stretches
out over the next fourteen years, so that in 2022 the level of emissions is the same as in
2007.25
         Meanwhile, South African officials evidently announced in 2008 that its
emissions would peak by 2025 and begin declining by 2030. 26

        China. Getting China to agree to binding commitments is the sine qua non of any
successful post-Kyoto plan. Evidently China has announced plans to start cutting GHG
emissions in 2030. Presumably that means relative to BAU, rather than in absolute
terms.27 Of course 2030 is later than industrialized countries would like. The country is
expected to cross the threshold of 1 ton of emissions per capita around 2014 and the
threshold of $3000 in annual per capita income by 2022. A standard five- or ten-year lag
between treaty signing and budget period would point to a first-cuts budget period around
2024–2027. But persuading Beijing to move the 2030 date up by five years is not as

21
   A July 16, 2008, government “green paper,” Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, reported details on
implementation via a domestic cap-and-trade program. Rudd’s initiative appears to have domestic political
support (The Economist, July 26, 2008, p.52). The government went on to set a target for 2020 of 15
percent above 1990 levels (FT, Jan. 2, 2009, p.5), or 5 per cent below 2000 levels, with the prospect of a
further 10 percent revision if other countries also sign on to stronger reductions (ABC News Australia
online, Dec. 15, 2008).
22
   “South Korea Plans to Cap Emissions,” International Herald Tribune, March 21, 2008.
23
    “South Korea: Developing Countries Move Toward Targets,” Lisa Friedman, ClimateWire, Oct. 3, 2008.
24
    This did not stop some environmental groups from criticizing the plan as not sufficiently ambitious.
Such criticisms may give political leaders second thoughts about announcing any specific measures at all,
as opposed to sticking with banal generalities.
25
   One could note, first, that President Lee came to office setting a variety of ambitious goals beyond his
power to bring about, especially for economic growth, and second that his popularity quickly plummeted.
At the time of writing, his ability to persuade his countrymen to take serious measures was in question.
26
   ClimateWire, Oct.3, 2008, op cit. Admittedly, statements from environmental or foreign ministries do
not necessarily carry a lot of weight, if they have not been vetted by finance or economics ministries let
alone issued by heads of government or approved by parliaments. An example would be Argentina’s
announcement of a target in 1998.
27
   This was China’s position in talks near Berlin with five big emerging nations (China, India, South Africa,
Brazil and Mexico), ahead of the June 2007 G8 summit in Germany, according to Germany’s environment
minister ( FT 3/12/07).


                                                                                                         13
critical as persuading it to accept some quantitative target in 2010, even if that target only
reflects BAU. The reason is that if China does not adopt some binding target in the near
term, the United States and most developing countries won’t join, and then the entire
enterprise will be undone.

         The key questions thus become (1) how to determine the magnitude of China’s
cuts in its first budget period—that is, for the first period in which it is asked to make cuts
below BAU; (2) how to determine Korea’s cuts in its second budget period; and (3) how
to set targets for everyone else. (The other regions are Latin America—whose stage of
development logically implies going after Korea but before China —Russia, Middle
East/North Africa, Southeast Asia, India/South Asia, and Africa.) Our general guiding
principle is to ask countries only to do what is analogous to what has been done by others
who have gone before them. To put this general principle into practice, we apply three
factors.

Guidelines for formulas that ask developing countries to accept “fair” targets,
analogous to those who have gone before

         This section discusses three factors for determining “fair” emissions targets for
developing countries. The three factors are additive (logarithmically).
         We call the first the Progressive Reductions Factor. It is based on the pattern of
emission reductions (relative to BAU) assigned to countries under the Kyoto Protocol, as
a function of income per capita. This pattern is illustrated in Figure 1, which comes from
the data as they were reported at that time. Other things equal, richer countries are asked
to make more severe cuts relative to BAU, the status quo from which they are departing
in the first period. Specifically, each 1 percent difference in income per capita, measured
relative to EU income in 1997, increases the abatement obligation by 0.14 percent, where
the abatement obligation is measured in terms of reductions from BAU relative to the EU
cuts agreed at Kyoto. Normally, at least in their early budget periods, most countries’
incomes will be below what the Europeans had in 1997, so that this factor dictates milder
cuts relative to BAU than Europe made at Kyoto. In fact the resulting targets are likely to
reflect a “growth path”—that is, they will allow for actual emission increases relative to
the preceding periods. The formula is:
PRF expressed as country cuts vs. BAU
 = EU's Kyoto commitment for 2008 relative to its BAU + .14 * (gap between the country’s
income per capita and the EU’s 2007 income per capita).
The parameter (0.14) was suggested ordinary least squares (OLS) regression estimates on
the data shown in Figure 1. Other parameters could be chosen instead, if the parties to
a new agreement wanted to increase or decrease the degree of progressivity.




                                                                                            14
      Figure 1: The Emissions Cuts Agreed at Kyoto Were
Progressive with Respect to Income, when Expressed Relative to BAU

                                                  50%
  Percent reduction from 2010 business-as-usual



                                                  40%

                                                  30%

                                                  20%

                                                  10%

                                                  0%

                                             -10%

                                             -20%

                                             -30%
                                                 500
                                                 2.699   1,000    2,000          5,000
                                                                                 3.699      10,000     20,000    50,000
                                                                                                                   4.699
                                                            1996 GDP per capita (1987 US dollars, ratio scale)
Sources: The World Bank, the U.S. Energy Information Administration, and national communications to the UNFCCC




        The Latecomer Catch-up Factor is the second element in the formula.
Latecomers are defined as those countries that have not ratified Kyoto or for which Kyoto
did not set quantitative targets. (Perhaps it would also include those like Canada that
ratified the treaty but, based on current trends, are not expected to meet the goal.) The
formula would be badly designed if it rewarded these countries by permanently
readjusting their targets to a higher baseline. Aside from notions of fairness, such re-
basing would give all latecomers an incentive to ramp up their emissions before signing
on to binding targets, or at a minimum would undercut any socially-conscious incentives
they might otherwise introduce to reduce emissions unilaterally in the time period before
they join the system. Thus the Latecomer Catch-up factor is designed to gradually close
the gap between the starting point of the latecomers and their 1990 emission levels. It is
parameterized according to the numbers implicit in the Lieberman bill to bring US
emissions to 70 percent below 1990 levels by 2050 and the Lee goal to flatten South
Korea’s emissions over a period beginning in 2008. In other words, countries are asked
to move gradually in the direction of 1990 emissions in the same way that the United
States and Korea under current plans will have done before them.



                                                                                                                      15
        The formula for a country’s Latecomer Catch-up Factor (LCF) is as follows.
Further percentage cuts (relative to BAU plus a Progressive Reductions Factor) are
proportional to how far emissions have been allowed to rise above 1990 levels by the
time the country joins in. That is, it is given by:
    LCF = α + λ percentage gap between country’s lagged emissions and 1990 emissions
The parameter λ represents the firmness with which latecomers are pulled back toward
their 1990 emission levels. The value of λ implicit for Europe at the time the Kyoto
Protocol was negotiated was sufficient to pull the EU-average below its 1990 level. But
to calibrate this formula, the most relevant countries are not European (since the
Europeans are not latecomers), but rather the United States and Korea, since these are the
only countries among those that did not commit themselves to Kyoto targets whose
political leaders have said explicitly what targets they are willing to accept in the second
budget period. The parameters α and λ were chosen as the unique solutions to two
simultaneous equations representing the US target in bills sponsored by Senator
Lieberman and the Korean target (a flattening of emissions being interpreted here as
holding absolute emissions in 2022 equal to 2007 levels). The parameters then work out
to
                                        α = 0.2115 and λ = -0.3400
Thus:

LCF = 0 .2115 -0 .3400 log(country’s current emissions / country’s 1990 emissions) 28

        The third element is the Gradual Equalization Factor (GEF). Even though
developing countries under this plan benefit from delaying abatement efforts until after
the rich countries have begun to act, and face milder reduction requirements, they will
still complain that it is the rich countries that originally created an environmental problem
for which the poor will disproportionately bear the costs, rather than the other way
around. Such complaints are not unreasonable. If we stopped with the first two factors,
the richer countries would be left with the permanent right to emit more GHGs, every
year in perpetuity, which seems unfair.
        In the short run, pointing out the gap in per capita targets is simply not going to
alter the outcome. The poor countries will have to live with it. Calls for the rich
countries to cut per capita emissions rapidly, in the direction of poor-country levels,
ignore the fact that the economic costs of such a requirement would be so astronomical
that no rich country would ever agree to it. The same goes for calls for massive transfer
payments from the rich to the poor (as in a call by the Group of 77 developing countries)
        When one is talking about a lead time of 50 to 100 years, however, the situation
changes. With time to adjust, the economic costs are not as impossibly high, and it is
reasonable to ask rich countries to bear their full share of the burden. Furthermore, over a
time horizon this long some of the poor countries will in any case become rich (and
possible vice versa).


28
  If Korea were to back away from its president’s commitment in light of recent economic
difficulties, but some other important middle-income country were to step up to the plate with
explicit and specific numerical targets, then the calculation could be redone.



                                                                                                 16
         Accordingly, during each decade of the second half of the century, the formula
includes an equity factor that moves per capita emissions in each country a small step in
the direction of the global average. This means downward in the case of the rich
countries and upward in the case of the poor countries. Asymptotically, the repeated
application of this factor would eventually leave all countries with equal emissions per
capita, although corresponding national targets would not necessarily converge fully by
2100.29
         The parameter (δ) for the speed of adjustment in the direction of the world
average was initially chosen to match the rate at which the EU’s already-announced goals
for 2045–2050 converge to the world average. This number is δ=0.1 per decade, which
is also very similar to the rate of convergence implicit in the goals set by the Lieberman
bills for the United States during 2045–2050. Thus:

GEF = -0 .1 ( percentage gap between country’s lagged emissions per capita and the world’s).

        We expected to have to adjust the δ parameter, and indeed to add a fourth
parameter for the “aggressiveness” of global emissions targets, in order to ensure that no
single country was confronted with costs above our threshold constraint while still
achieving a relevant global environmental goal in 2100. By lucky coincidence, our initial
method of computing δ satisfied the economic objectives and delivered year-2100
atmospheric CO2 concentrations of 500 ppm. In extensions of this research—where, for
example, we try to hit a year-2100 goal of 450 ppm—we will have to adjust δ and
probably will need to add an aggressiveness parameter, while also adjusting some
countries’ start dates. One possibility is to write an algorithm that searches over these
parameters so as to find values that minimize the threshold of economic cost to any given
country for any given year-2100 environmental goal.


         The formulas are summarized overall as follows:
Log Target (country i, t) = log (BAU i, t ) – (PCF i, t ) + (LCF i, t ) + (GEF i, t ) ,

where the three factors (except in periods when set = 0 as indicated in Table 2) are given by:

PCF i,t = log (emission target EU 2008/ BAU EU 2008)
      + 0.14 log (country i's income/cap t-1 / EU income/cap 2007);
LCF i,t = 0.2115 - 0.3400 log (country i's emissions t-1 / country i's emissions 1990).
GEFi,t = - 0.1 log (country i's emissions per capita t-1 / global average emissions per capita      t-1).




29
   Zhang (2008) and others, motivated by a rights-based approach, propose that countries “contract and
converge” to targets that reflect equal emissions per capita. The Greenhouse Development Rights approach
of Baer et al. (2008), as extended by Cao (2008), emphasizes, from a philosophical standpoint, the
allocation of emission rights at the individual level, though these authors apparently recognize that, in
practice, individual targets would have to be aggregated and implemented at the national level.


                                                                                                      17
        The numerical emission target: paths that follow from the formulas

        Table 1, at the end of the chapter, reports the emissions targets produced by the
formulas for each of eleven geographical regions, for every period between now and the
end of the century. We express the emission targets in several terms:
• in absolute tons (which is what ultimately matters for determining economic and
   environmental effects)
• in per capita terms (which is necessary for considering any issues of cross-country
   distribution of burden)
• relative to 1990 levels, which is the baseline used for Kyoto, and which remains
   relevant in our framework in the form of the Latecomer Catch-up term, and
• relative to the BAU path, which is important for evaluating the sacrifice asked of
   individual countries as they join the agreement in the early decades.

        The eleven regions are:
EUROPE = Old Europe and           New Europe
US = United States                       KOSAU = Korea, South Africa, and Australia (3 coal-users)
CAJAZ = Canada, Japan, and New Zealand TE = Russia and other Transition Economies
MENA = Middle East and North Africa      SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa
SASIA= India and the rest of South Asia  CHINA = PRC
EASIA = Smaller countries of East Asia   LACA = Latin America and the Caribbean

         In the first version of this exercise, China sells over a gigaton of carbon in 2040.
Its permit sales fall off thereafter, as its target kicks in; but Southeast Asian countries
take its place, selling similar quantities in the last two decades of the century. Southeast
Asia and sub-Saharan Africa registered rather substantial economic gains toward the end
of the century.30 These gains reflect the benefits of being spared emissions cuts and
being able to sell permits to richer countries during the period when those countries are
already implementing reductions. Some may judge it appropriate that poor countries
register net economic gains from the abatement regime, since these are also the countries
that will bear the heaviest burden from climate change in any case (by virtue of the fact
that most are located nearer the equator and rely on large agricultural sectors). But we
judge the massive international transfers that are implicit in this scenario to be highly
unsustainable politically. They are not necessary in any case to satisfy the key economic
and political constraints laid out at the beginning of this chapter.
         Accordingly, subsequent versions of the exercise assign Southeast Asia and
Africa emission targets somewhat below BAU in the latter half of the century, with the
result that they do not gain so much for the century as a whole. In addition we move
forward by ten years the date at which China is asked to take on below-BAU targets and
by five years the date at which the Middle East and North African (MENA) countries are
asked to do so. An additional reason for this change was to reduce the slackening in
global targets—observable as a dip in the price of carbon—that would otherwise occur
around 2035. Results for the case where the four developing regions are given more
stringent (earlier) targets are given in Tables 1 and 3b, and in the corresponding figures.
Table 2 summarizes the dates at which all countries are asked to take on BAU targets and
30
  Figures 2a-6a and Table 3a here; or Figures 2-8 and Tables 1 and 2 – especially Figure 7 -- in HPICA
Discussion Paper 08-08, October 2008.


                                                                                                         18
then reductions below BAU as governed by the different formula elements discussed
previously (i.e., PRF, LCF, and then GEF).
        The United States, even more than other rich countries, is currently conspicuous
by virtue of its high per capita emissions.31 But its target path peaks after 2010 and then
begins to decline. Emissions in all the rich regions peak by 2015, and then start to
decline. Figure 2a reports aggregate targets for member countries of the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). It also shows actual emissions,
which decline more gradually than the targets through 2045 because about 1 million
metric tons (equal to 1 gigaton or Gt) of carbon permits are purchased on the world
market, as is economically efficient, out of roughly 4 Gt. (Permit sales to the richer
countries exceed 1 Gt more often in the version where Southeast Asia and Africa are
never asked for targets below BAU, and China and MENA start cutting emissions below
BAU only at later dates.) Though the OECD countries buy a substantial amount of
reductions in the early decades, it is always less than half their total reductions. The
share falls off sharply in the second half of the century. We assume no banking.


Figure 2a: Emissions path for industrialized countries in the aggregate
-- with later targets for developing countries
(Note: Predicted actual emissions exceed caps by amount of permit purchases)
                                                        OECD Emissions
               7

               6

               5
                                                                                          BA U
               4
       tC




                                                                                          Simulated Emissions
      G




               3                                                                          CA P

               2

               1

               0
                                                                        90
                                                          70


                                                                 80




                                                                               00
                            30



                                   40


                                          50


                                                   60
              10


                     20




                                                                             21
                                                 20



                                                        20


                                                               20


                                                                      20
                          20



                                 20


                                        20
            20


                   20




31
     As shown in Figure 2 of HPICA Discussion Paper 08-08. The figure is omitted here to save space.


                                                                                                       19
Figure 2b: Emissions path for industrialized countries in the aggregate
-- with earlier targets for developing countries
(Note: Predicted actual emissions exceed caps by amount of permit purchases)
                                                           OECD Emissions
                    7

                    6

                    5
                                                                                BA U
       tC




                    4                                                           Simulated Emis sions
       G




                                                                                CA P
                    3

                    2

                    1

                    0
                10




                           25




                                   40




                                             55




                                                      70




                                                                85




                                                                          00
              20




                         20




                                 20




                                           20




                                                    20




                                                              20




                                                                        21
Figure 3a: Emission paths for poor countries in the aggregate
 -- with later targets for developing countries
(Note: Predicted actual emissions fall below caps by amount of permit sales)

                                                   NON OECD Emissions
              20




              13                                                               BAU
                                                                               Simulated Emissions
       GtC




                                                                               CAP

                7




                0
               10



                          25



                                  40



                                           55



                                                     70



                                                              85



                                                                       00
             20



                        20



                                20



                                         20



                                                   20



                                                            20



                                                                     21




                                                                                         20
Figure 3b: Emission paths for poor countries in the aggregate
-- with earlier targets for developing countries
(Note: Predicted actual emissions fall below caps by amount of permit sales)

                                                          NON OECD Emissions

                        20


                                                                           BA U
                        13                                                 Simulated Emissions
              tC




                                                                           CA P
             G




                         7




                         0
                        10


                               25


                                      40



                                             55


                                                        70


                                                               85


                                                                      00
                      20


                             20


                                    20



                                           20


                                                      20


                                                             20


                                                                    21



Figure 4a: Emissions path for the world, in the aggregate
-- with later targets for developing countries

                                    World Industrial Carbon Emissions


                   25

                   20                                                               bau

                   15
       GtC




                   10
                                                                                    Sim ulated
                   5                                                                Em is s ions

                   0
                 05



                          20



                                  35



                                         50



                                                     65



                                                            80


                                                                   95
               20



                        20



                                20



                                       20



                                                   20



                                                          20


                                                                 20




                                                                                          21
Figure 4b: Emissions path for the world, in the aggregate
-- with earlier targets for developing countries

                                          W orld Industrial Carbon Emissions



                     25                                                                      bau

                     20

                     15
           GtC




                                                                                             Sim ulated
                     10
                                                                                             Em is s ions
                        5

                        0
                   05



                              20


                                     35



                                             50



                                                     65


                                                             80



                                                                      95
                 20



                            20


                                   20



                                           20



                                                   20


                                                           20



                                                                    20
         Emissions in the non-rich countries, the TE group (transition economies), MENA,
China, and Latin America all peak in 2040.32 Emissions in sub-Saharan Africa and the
smaller East Asian economies all remain at very low levels throughout the century.
Figure 3a shows that among non-OECD countries overall, both emissions targets and
actual emissions peak in 2040, with the latter substantially below the former. In other
words, the poor countries emit below their targets and sell permits to the rest.
         Total world emissions peak in 2045 at a little above 10 Gt, in the case where
China and MENA are given the later starting points (Figure 4a). They peak ten years
earlier, and without exceeding 10 Gt, in the case where China and MENA are given the
earlier starting points (Firgure 4b). In either case, emissions subsequently decline rather
rapidly, falling below 5 Gt by 2090. Thanks to the post-2050 equalization formula,
emissions per capita converge nicely in the long run, falling to below 1 ton per capita
toward the end of the century.33

Economic and environmental consequences of the numerical targets,
according to the WITCH model
       Estimating the economic and environmental implications of these targets is a
complex task. There are many fine models out there.34 I was fortunate to link up with
the WITCH model of FEEM (Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei, in Milan), as applied by
Valentina Bosetti.

32
   Figure 2 of HPICA Discussion Paper 08-08.
33
   Figure 2 of HPICA Discussion Paper 08-08.
34
   Researchers have applied a number of different models to estimate the economic and environmental
effects of various specific emission paths; see, for example, Edmonds, Pitcher, Barns, Baron, and Wise
(1992); Edmonds, Kim, McCracken, Sands, and Wise (1997); Hammett (1999); Manne, Mendelsohn, and
Richels (1995); Manne and Richels (1997); McKibbin and Wilcoxen (2006); and Nordhaus (1994, 2008).
Weyant (2001) provides an explanation and comparison of different models.


                                                                                                    22
        WITCH (www.feem-web.it/witch) is an energy-economy-climate model
developed by the climate change modeling group at FEEM. The model has been used
extensively in the past three years to analyze the economic impacts of climate change
policies. WITCH is a hybrid top-down economic model with energy sector
disaggregation. Those who might be skeptical of economists’ models on the grounds that
“technology is the answer” can rest assured that technology is central to this model.
(Economists are optimists when it comes to what new technologies might be called forth
by a higher price for carbon, but pessimists when it comes to how much technological
response to international treaties will occur absent an increase in price.) The model
features endogenous technological change via both experience and innovation processes.
Countries are grouped in twelve regions, when Western Europe and Eastern Europe are
counted separately, that cover the world and that strategically interact following a game
theoretic set-up. The WITCH model and detailed structure are described in Bosetti et al.
(2006) and Bosetti, Massetti, and Tavoni (2007).
        Original baselines in many models have been disrupted in recent years by such
developments as stronger-than-expected growth in Chinese energy demand and the
unexpected spike in world oil prices that culminated in 2008. WITCH has been updated
with more recent data and revised projections for key drivers such as population, GDP,
fuel prices, and energy technology characteristics. The base calibration year has been set
at 2005, for which data on socio-economic, energy, and environmental variables are now
available (Bosetti, Carraro, Sgobbi, and Tavoni 2008).


Economic effects
        While economists trained in cost-benefit analysis tend to focus on economic costs
expressed as a percentage of GDP, the politically attuned tend to focus at least as much
on the predicted carbon price, which in turn has a direct impact on the prices of gasoline,
home heating oil, and electric power.35

Figure 5a: Price of Carbon Dioxide Rises Slowly Over 50 Years, then Rapidly
                     -- with later targets for developing countries


                               Price of Carbon Permits


               800
               700
               600
     $/tCO2e




               500
               400                                        FRANKEL
               300                                        Architecture
               200
               100
                 0
                     2005 2020 2035 2050 2065 2080 2095
                                                                                         Zoom on Price of Carbon Permits


                                                                                   140
                                                                                   120
                                                                                   100
                                                                         $/tCO2e




                                                                                   80
35
  Frankel (1998). This attitude may seem irrational to an60economist; after all, price effects are largely
                                                                                                        FRANKEL
                                                                                                        Architecture
redistributional. But the public’s instincts may be correct 40
                                                             insofar
                                                            20
                                                                      as predicted   price  effects are more
reliable indicators of the degree of economic dislocation caused
                                                             0      by a carbon policy than GDP losses, which
are subject to larger modeling uncertainty. Furthermore, distributional
                                                                2005    2015
                                                                            effects
                                                                                2025
                                                                                     are 2035
                                                                                         key drivers
                                                                                                2045
                                                                                                      of political
support or opposition to a particular policy.


                                                                                                                           23
Figure 5b: Price of Carbon Dioxide Rises Slowly Over 50 Years, then Rapidly
-- with earlier targets for developing countries
                                      Price of Carbon Permits


                      1000

                       800
            $/tCO2e




                       600
                                                                  FRANKEL
                       400
                                                                  Architecture
                       200

                         0
                             2005 2020 2035 2050 2065 2080 2095
                                                                                                        Zoom on Price of Carbon Permits


                                                                                           180
                                                                                           160
                                                                                           140
                                                                                           120


                                                                                 $/tCO2e
                                                                                           100
                                                                                            80                                            FRANKEL
                                                                                            60                                            Architecture
                                                                                            40
                                                                                            20
                                                                                             0
                                                                                                 2005   2015     2025     2035     2045




         Based on the WITCH simulations conducted for this analysis, the world price of
CO2 surpasses $20 per ton in 2015, as Figure 5 shows. It is then flat until 2030, as a
consequence of the assumption that major developing countries do not take on major
emission cuts before then. The price even dips slightly before beginning a steep ascent,
an undesirable feature. It climbs steadily in the second half of the century, as the
formula-based targets begin to bite seriously for developing countries. Before 2050 the
carbon price has surpassed $100 per ton of CO2. Only toward the end of the century does
it level off, at almost $700 per ton of CO2 in the case where some developing countries
are spared early cuts, and at $800 per ton in the case where they are not spared.

        Most regions sustain economic losses that are small in the first half of the century
—under 1 percent of GDP—but that rise toward the end of the century.36 Given a
positive rate of time discount, this is a good outcome. No region in any period
experiences costs in excess of our self-imposed threshold of 5 percent of GDP. The
estimated costs of the policy to each country-group, in present discounted value (PDV)
36
  Figure 7 of HPICA Discussion Paper 08-08, omitted here to save space, illustrates economic costs,
expressed as fractions of GDP, by region, for the case where the developing countries take on later targets..
In this scenario, the highest decade costs are borne by China, just toward the end of the century, reaching
4.1% of GDP in 2100. (On the other hand the PDV of China’s cost is less than those of the United States
and several other regions.) The maximum GDP loss for the United States in any decade is 1.9%, and for
the EU 1.4%, both occurring around 2080.


                                                                                                                                          24
terms, are reported in Table 3a. No country is asked to incur costs that are expected to
exceed 1 percent of GDP over the century. Only China’s costs creep up to 1.1% of
GDP, when it takes on an earlier target, in Table 3b. (All economic effects are gross of
environmental benefits—that is, no attempt is made to estimate environmental benefits or
net them out.)

        These costs of participation are overestimated, and increasingly so in the later
decades, if the alternative to staying in the treaty one more decade is dropping out after
seven or eight decades of participation. The reason is that countries will have already
substantially altered their capital stock and economic structure in a carbon-friendly
direction. The economic costs reported in the simulations and graphs treat the alternative
to participation as never having joined the treaty in the first place.

         Figure 6 provides Gross World Product loss aggregated across across regions
worldwide, and discounted to present value using a discount rate of 5 percent. Total
economic costs come to 0.24 percent of annual gross world product in the case where
China and MENA start later and Southeast Asia and Africa are not given targets below
BAU. Overall policy costs come to 0.65 percent in the case where the former two start
earlier, the latter two are given targets below BAU, and as a result the price of carbon hits
$800 per ton.




                                                                                          25
Figure 6: Loss of Aggregate Gross World Product by Budget Period, 2015-2100
-- with later targets for developing countries
                                                                      GWP loss

              0.0%



                     05



                             15



                                     25




                                                       45



                                                              55



                                                                     65



                                                                            75



                                                                                   85



                                                                                            95
                                              35
             -0.1%




                                                                   20
                   20



                           20



                                   20



                                            20



                                                     20



                                                            20




                                                                          20



                                                                                 20



                                                                                          20
             -0.2%

             -0.3%

             -0.4%                                                                                      FRANKEL Architecture

             -0.5%

             -0.6%

             -0.7%

             -0.8%




Environmental effects

        The outcome of this plan in terms of cumulative emissions of GHGs is close to
those of some models that build in environmental effects or science-based constraints,
even though no such inputs were used here. The concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere
stabilizes at 500 ppm in the last quarter of the century.


Figure 7a:
CO2 concentrations nearly achieve year-2100 concentration goal of 500 ppm
-- with later targets for developing countries


                                     Carbon Conce ntrations (CO2 only)
            800
            750                                                                                                    bau
            700
            650
            600
     ppmv




            550                                                                                                    FRANK
            500                                                                                                    EL
            450                                                                                                    Archite
                                                                                                                   cture
            400
            350
            300
              05



                      15



                              25



                                       35



                                                45



                                                          55



                                                                 65



                                                                         75



                                                                                85



                                                                                          95



                                                                                                   05
            20



                    20



                            20



                                     20



                                              20



                                                        20



                                                               20



                                                                       20



                                                                              20



                                                                                        20



                                                                                                 21




                                                                                                                26
Figure 7b: CO2 concentrations achieve year-2100 goal of 500 ppm
-- with earlier targets for developing countries


                                             Carbon Conce ntrations (CO2 only)
                                                                                                                          bau
                800
                750
                700
                650
                600                                                                                                       FRANK
        ppmv




                550                                                                                                       EL
                                                                                                                          Archite
                500
                                                                                                                          cture
                450
                400
                350
                300
                   05


                           15


                                      25


                                              35


                                                     45


                                                             55


                                                                     65


                                                                             75


                                                                                        85


                                                                                               95


                                                                                                      05
                 20


                         20


                                    20


                                            20


                                                   20


                                                           20


                                                                   20


                                                                           20


                                                                                      20


                                                                                             20


                                                                                                    21
       Based on the modeled concentration trajectory, global average temperature is
projected to hit 3 degrees Celsius (°C) above pre-industrial levels at the end of the
century, as opposed to almost 4°C under the BAU trajectory (Figure 8). The relationship
between concentrations and temperature is, however, highly uncertain and depends on
assumptions made about climate sensitivity. For this reason both figures are reported.
(Many scientists and environmentalists prefer objectives that are substantially more
ambitious.)


Figure 8a: Rise in temperature under formula targets vs. BAU
– with later targets for developing countries

                         Temperature increase (above pre-industrial)
       4

      3.5

       3                                                                                              bau

      2.5
 °C




       2

      1.5                                                                                             FRANKEL
                                                                                                      Architecture
       1

      0.5

       0
        05


                 15


                        25


                               35


                                       45


                                              55


                                                     65


                                                            75


                                                                   85


                                                                          95


                                                                                 05
      20


               20


                      20


                             20


                                     20


                                            20


                                                   20


                                                          20


                                                                 20


                                                                        20


                                                                               21




                                                                                                                     27
Figure 8b: Rise in temperature under formula targets vs. Business as Usual
– with earlier targets for developing countries
                           Temperature increase (above pre-industrial)
       4
      3.5                                                                          bau

       3
      2.5
 °C




       2                                                                           FRANKEL
                                                                                   Architecture
      1.5
       1
      0.5
       0
        05


               15


                      25


                             35


                                    45


                                           55


                                                  65


                                                         75


                                                                85


                                                                       95


                                                                              05
      20


             20


                    20


                           20


                                  20


                                         20


                                                20


                                                       20


                                                              20


                                                                     20


                                                                            21
Conclusion
       The analysis described here is only the beginning. Several particular extensions
are high priority for future research.

Directions for future research

         A first priority is to facilitate comparisons by tightening some parameters to see
what it would take to hit a 2100 concentration level of 450 ppm or 2°C, which is the goal
of some in the climate change community. Our first attempts to do this impose costs on
many countries, in some periods, that are substantially in excess of 5 percent of GDP.
Figures 9 and 10 show the economic costs and concentration levels, respectively, that
result from one such attempt. These costs violate the economic/political constraint
(even though concentrations have not quite come down to 450 ppm by 2100, but need
another few decades to do so). But we plan to try tinkering further with country strarting
dates and formula parameters to see if it is possible to hit the 450 ppm target without any
country bearing an unreasonable burden. (In the other direction, we could also calibrate
the adjustment so as to hit a 2100 target of 550 ppm, again facilitating comparisons. )
         Second, we could design an algorithm to search over values of some of the key
         parameters in such a way as to attain the same environmental goal— 450 or 500
         ppm —with minimum economic cost. To continue emphasizing political
         feasibility, the objective could be to minimize the expected GDP loss for any
         country in any period, so as to minimize the incentive for any country to drop out.
         Or we could declare that we have already specified a sufficient political constraint
         (e.g., no loss to any country in any period above 5 percent of GDP), and proceed
         to a cost-benefit optimization exercise subject to those constraints.



                                                                                             28
          Figure 9: Path of carbon concentrations to hit 450 ppm

                                          Carbon Conce ntrations (CO2 only)


                 800
                 750                                                                                                  bau
                 700
                 650
                 600
          ppmv




                 550
                                                                                                                      FRANKEL
                 500
                                                                                                                      Architecture
                 450
                 400
                 350
                 300
                   05


                             20


                                        35


                                                   50


                                                              65


                                                                         80


                                                                                    95
                 20


                           20


                                      20


                                                 20


                                                            20


                                                                       20


                                                                                  20




          Figure 10: GDP losses in each of the 12 regions under the 450 ppm scenario

                                                  GWP Losses wrt BaU in 450 CO2 only Scenario                    USA
                                                                                                                 OLDEURO
           2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050 2055 2060 2065 2070 2075 2080 2085 2090 2095 2100   NEWEURO
 2.00%
                                                                                                                 KOSAU
                                                                                                                 CAJAZ
 0.00%
                                                                                                                 TE
                                                                                                                 MENA
 -2.00%
                                                                                                                 SSA

 -4.00%                                                                                                          SASIA
                                                                                                                 CHINA
 -6.00%                                                                                                          EASIA
                                                                                                                 LACA
 -8.00%                                                                                                          WORLD


-10.00%




                                                                                                                        29
         Third, we could compare this set of emissions paths to other plans under
discussion in the climate change policy community or being analyzed using other
integrated assessment models.37 Our hypothesis is that we could identify countries and
periods in alternative pathways where we believe an agreement would be unlikely to hold
up because its targets were not designed to limit economic costs for each country.
         Fourth, we could eventually design a user-friendly "game" that anybody could
play, choosing different emissions targets for various countries over time, and
discovering how easy it is to generate outcomes that are unacceptable, either in economic
or environmental terms. It would be a learning tool, hypothetically, for policymakers
themselves. Anyone who believes that the GHG abatement targets presented in this
paper are insufficiently ambitious, or that the burden imposed on a particular country is
too high, would be invited to try out alternatives for themselves. Perhaps a character
from an adversely impacted country would pop up on the screen and explain to the user
how many millions of his compatriots have been plunged into dire poverty by the user’s
policy choices.
         Fifth, we could take into account GHGs other than CO2.
         Sixth, we could implement constraints on international trading, along the lines
that the Europeans have sometimes discussed. Such constraints can arise either from a
worldview that considers it unethical to pay others to take one’s medicine, or from a more
cynical worldview that assumes international transfers via permit sales will only line the
pockets of corrupt leaders. Constraints on trading could take the form of quantity
restrictions—for example, that a country cannot satisfy more than Z percent of its
emissions obligation by international permit purchases. Or eligibility to sell permits
could be restricted to countries with a score in international governance ratings over a
particular threshold, or to countries that promise to use the funds for green projects, or to
those that have a track record of demonstrably meeting their commitments under the
treaty.

        The seventh possible extension of this research represents the most important step
intellectually: to introduce uncertainty, especially in the form of stochastic growth
processes.38 The variance of the GDP forecasts at various horizons would be drawn from
historical data. We would adduce the consequences of our rule that if any country makes
an ex post determination in any period that by staying in the treaty it loses more than 5
percent of GDP, even though this had not been the expectation ex ante, that country will
drop out. At a first pass, we could keep the assumption that if one country pulls out, the
entire system falls apart. The goal would then be to design a version of the formulas
framework that minimizes the probability of collapse.
        A more sophisticated approach would be to allow the possibility that the system
could withstand the loss of one or two members. We would try to account for the effect

37
   For example, the CLEAR path suggested by Wagner et al. (2008, Table 2) proposes that by 2050 Russia
has cut its emissions 30 percent below 1990 levels, China 46 percent below 2012 levels, India 8 percent
above 2012 levels, and the other non-Annex I countries 23 percent below 2012. The Global Development
Rights approach of Baer et al. (2008) apparently proposes a US emissions target for 2025 that is 99 percent
below its BAU path. (These authors might say that their general approaches are more important than the
specific parameter values by which they chose to illustrate them. I would say the same of mine.)
38
   Among the papers that introduce uncertainty, McKibbin, Morris, and Wilcoxen (2008) address two of the
most recently relevant unexpected developments: growth shocks in Asia and a global housing/equity crash.


                                                                                                        30
of dropouts on remaining members, with some sort of application of game theory.
Ideally we would also try to account from the start for the effect of possible future
breakdown on expectations of firms deciding long-term investments. Of course we could
try other values of X besides 5 percent.
        The ultimate objective in making the model stochastic is to seek modifications of
the policy framework that are robust, that protect against inadvertent stringency on the
one hand—that is, a situation where the cost burden imposed on a particular country is
much higher than expected—or inadvertent “hot air” on the other hand. (“Hot air” refers
to the possibility that targets are based on obsolete emission levels with the result that
countries are credited for cutting tons that wouldn’t have been emitted anyway.) Three
possible modifications are promising. First, we could allow for some degree of re-
adjustment to emission targets in the future, based solely on unexpected changes in the
evolution in population and income. (Note that adjustments would not be allowed on the
basis of unexpected changes in emissions levels, for to do so would be to introduce moral
hazard.) Second, when the target for each decade is set, it could be indexed to GDP
within that budget period. Perhaps the constant of proportionality in the indexation
formula would equal 1, in which case it becomes an efficiency target, expressed in carbon
emissions per unit of GDP. This approach would be much less vulnerable to within-
decade uncertainty.39 A third possible feature that would make the policy more robust
and that is strongly favored by many economists is an escape clause or safety valve that
would limit costs in the event that mitigation proves more expensive than expected,
perhaps with a symmetric floor on the price of carbon in addition to the usual ceiling.

A politically credible framework

         Our results suggest that the feasible set of emission target paths may be far more
constrained than many modelers have assumed. Lofty debates over the optimal discount
rate or fair allocation rules might prove fairly irrelevant: For many discount rates or
cross-country allocations, an international climate agreement could at some point during
the century collapse altogether because it imposes unacceptably high costs on some
countries, relative to defecting. Each defection could raise costs on those who remain in
the agreement, thereby increasing incentives for further defections and posing the
prospect of a snow-balling effect. Commitments to a century-long path that is highly
likely to result in a collapse of the agreement after a few decades would not be believed
today, and thus might evoke few actual steps toward achieving emission reductions in the
near term.

        The traditional integrated assessment result is that an economically optimal path
entails relatively small increases in the price of carbon in the first half of the century and
much steeper ones later. It is interesting that a similar result emerges here purely from
political considerations, with no direct input from cost/benefit calculations.40 This broad

39
   Lutter (2000).
40
   Integrated assessment models (IAMs) tend to give the result that the optimal path entails shallow cuts in
earlier years, deeper cuts coming only later, because (for example) scrapping coal-fired power plants today
is costly, while credibly announcing stringent goals that will take effect 50 years from now would be
cheaper, by giving time to plan ahead. Benefit-cost maximization, though obviously right in theory, is not


                                                                                                          31
similarity of results for the aggregate path does not mean that the difference in
approaches does not matter. The framework analyzed here specifies the allocation of
emission targets across countries in such a way that every country is given reason to feel
that it is only doing its fair share and in such a way as to build trust as the decades pass.
Without such a framework, announcements of distant future goals are not credible and so
will not have the desired effects. Furthermore, this framework—in providing for a
decade-by-decade sequence of emission targets, each determined on the basis of a few
principles and formulas—is flexible enough that it can accommodate, by small changes
in the formula parameters, major changes in circumstances during the course of the
century.




References
Aldy, Joseph, Scott Barrett, and Robert Stavins (2003), “Thirteen Plus One: A Comparison of Global
Climate Architectures,” Climate Policy, 3, no. 4, 373-97.

Aldy, Joseph, and Jeffrey Frankel (2004), “Designing a Regime of Emission Commitments for Developing
Countries that is Cost-Effective and Equitable,” G20 Leaders and Climate Change, Council on Foreign
Relations.

Aldy, Joseph E., Peter R. Orszag, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 2001. "Climate Change: An Agenda for Global
Collective Action." Prepared for The Pew Center Workshop on the Timing of Climate Change Policies. The
Westin Grand Hotel, Washington, D.C. October 11-12, 2001.

Baer, Paul, Tom Athanasiou, Sivan Kartha and Eric Kemp-Benedict, 2008, The Greenhouse Development
Rights Framework: The Right to Development in a Climate Constrained World, Hendrich Boll Stiftung,
Stockholm, 2nd ed..

Barrett, Scott (2006) “Climate Treaties and ‘Breakthrough’ Technologies,” American Economic Review,
Papers and Proceedings, vol. 96, no. 2, May, 22-25.

Baumert, Kevin and Donald Goldberg, 2006, “Action targets: A new approach to international greenhouse
gas controls,“ Climate Policy, 5, pp. 561-81.

Bosetti, V., C. Carraro, M. Galeotti, E. Massetti and M. Tavoni, (2006). “WITCH: A World Induced
Technical Change Hybrid Model.” The Energy Journal, Special Issue on Hybrid Modeling of Energy-
Environment Policies: Reconciling Bottom-up and Top-down, 13-38.

Bosetti, V., C. Carraro, A. Sgobbi, M. Tavoni, 2008, "The 2008 WITCH model: new model features and
baseline," Mimeo, August. Forthcoming as a FEEM Working paper,

Bosetti, V., E. Massetti and M. Tavoni, “The WITCH Model. Structure, Baseline, Solutions”. Working
Paper 10. Milan: Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei. 2007.

the most useful logic in practice, because of uncertainty about key model parameters, such as the discount
rate, and uncertainty about the credibility of such announcements.


                                                                                                         32
Cao, Jing. 2008, "Reconciling Human Development and Climate Protection: Perspectives from Developing
Countries on Post-2012 International Climate Change Policy." Discussion Paper 08-25, Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard Project on International Climate Agreements, December.

Council of Economic Advisers, 1998, The Kyoto Protocol and the President’s Policies to Address Climate
Change: Administration Economic Analysis, White House, July.

Edmonds, J.A., H.M. Pitcher, D.Barns, R.Baron, and M.A. Wise (1992), “Modeling Future Greenhouse
Gas Emissions: The Second Generation Model,” in Modeling Global Climate Change, Lawrence Klein and
Fu-chen Lo, eds., United Nations University Press: Tokyo, pp. 295-340.

Edmonds, J.A., S.H. Kim, C.N.McCracken, R.D. Sands, and M.A. Wise, 1997, “Return to 1990: The Cost
of Mitigating United States Carbon Emission in the Post-2000 Period,” October, Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory, Operated by Battelle Memorial Institute.

Ellerman, Danny, and Barbara Buchner, 2007, "Over-Allocation or Abatement? A Prelminary Analyusis
of the EU ETS Based on the 2005-06 Emissions Data." Forthcoming, Environmental and Resource
Economics.

Frankel, Jeffrey (1998) “Economic Analysis of the Kyoto Protocol,” After Kyoto: Are There Rational
Pathways to a Sustainable Global Energy System? Aspen Energy Forum, Aspen, Colorado, July 6.

Frankel, Jeffrey (1999), “Greenhouse Gas Emissions,” Policy Brief no.52, Brookings Institution,
Washington, DC.

Frankel, Jeffrey (2005) “You’re Getting Warmer: The Most Feasible Path for Addressing Global Climate
Change Does Run Through Kyoto,” in Trade and Environment: Theory and Policy in the Context of EU
Enlargement and Transition Economies, edited J.Maxwell and R.Reuveny, Edward Elgar Publishers, UK.

Frankel, Jeffrey (2007), “Formulas for Quantitative Emission Targets,” in Architectures for Agreement:
Addressing Global Climate Change in the Post Kyoto World, Joe Aldy and Robert Stavins, eds., Cambridge
University Press.

Frankel, Jeffrey (2009) “Global Environment and Trade Policy,” for the Harvard Project on International
Climate Agreements (forthcoming, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK), edited by Joe Aldy and
Rob Stavins. Research Working Paper 08-058, Harvard Kennedy School.

Gore, Al (1993), Earth in the Balance (Penguin Books, New York).

Hammett, James (1999) “Evaluation Endpoints and Climate Policy: Atmospheric Stabilization, Benefit-
Cost Analysis, and Near-Term Greenhouse Gas Emissions, Harvard Univ. Climatic Change 41: 447-468.

Hufbauer, Gary, Daniel Esty, Diana Orejas, Luis Rubio, and Jeffrey Schott, 2000, NAFTA and the
Environment: Seven Years Later, Policy Analyses in International Economics No.61, Institute for
International Economics: Washington DC.

Keohane, Robert, and Kal Raustiala, 2008, “Toward a Post-Kyoto Cliamte Change Architecture: A
Political Analysis,” HPICA Discussion Paper No. 08-01, July.

Lutter, Randy (2000) Developing Countries’ Greenhouse Emissions: Uncertainty and Implications for
Participation in the Kyoto Protocol. Energy Journal 21(4): 93-120.

Manne, Alan, Robert Mendelsohn, Richard Richels (1995), "MERGE: A Model for Evaluating Regional
and Global Effects of GHG Reduction Policies." Energy Policy 23:17.



                                                                                                     33
Manne, Alan, and Richard Richels (1997), “On Stabilizing CO2 Concentrations – Cost-Effective Emission
Reduction Strategies,” Stanford University and Electric Power Research Institute, April.

McKibbin, Warwick, Adele Morris and Peter Wilcoxen (2008) “Expecting the Unexpected:
Macroeconomic Volatility and Climate Policy,” HPICA Discussion Zpaper No. 08-16, November.

McKibbin, Warwick, and Peter Wilcoxen (2007), “A Credible Foundation for Long Term International
Cooperation on Climate Change,” in Architectures for Agreement: Addressing Global Climate Change in
the Post-Kyoto World, edited by Joseph Aldy and Robert Stavins, Cambridge University Press.

Nordhaus, William, 1994, Managing the Global Commons: The Economics of Climate Change, MIT Press:
Cambridge.

Nordhaus, William (2006), “Life After Kyoto: Alternative Approaches Global Warming Policies,”
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, vol. 96, no. 2, May: 31-34.

Nordhaus, William (2008), A Question of Balance: Weighing the Options on Global Warming Policies
(Yale University Press).

Olmstead, Sheila, and Robert Stavins (2006), “An International Policy Architecture for the Post-Kyoto
Era,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, vol. 96, no. 2, May: 35-38.

Pizer, William (2006), “The Evolution of a Global Climate Change Agreement,” American Economic
Review, Papers and Proceedings, May, 26-30.

Seidman, Laurence, and Kenneth Lewis, 2009, “Compensations and Contributions Under an International
Carbon Treaty,” Journal of Policy Modeling,

Stewart, Richard, and Jonathan Weiner (2003), Reconstructing Climate Policy: Beyond Kyoto (American
Enterprise Institute Press, Washington DC).

Victor, David (2004), Climate Change: Debating America’s Policy Options, Council on Foreign Relations,
New York .

Wagner, Gernot, James Wang, Stanislas de Margerie and Daniel Dudek, 2008, “The CLEAR path: How to
ensure that if devleoping nations adopt carbon limits, their early actions will be rewarded,” Environmental
Defense Fund Working Paper, October 30.

Weyant, John P. (2001). "Economic Models: How They Work & Why Their Results Differ." In Climate
Change: Science, Strategies, & Solutions. Eileen Claussen, Vicki Arroyo Cochran, and Debra Davis, (eds.).
The Pew Center on Global Climate Change. Brill Academic Press, Leiden, pp. 193-208.

Zhang, Yongsheng, 2008, “An analytical framework and proposal to succeed Kyoto Protocol: a Chinese
perspective, “ Development Research Center of the State Council, China, Dec 8.




                                                                                                         34
                                               Tables
EUROPE = Old Europe + New Europe            KOSAU = Korea, South Africa + Australia (all coal-users)
CAJAZ = Canada, Japan + New Zealand         TE = Russia and other Transition Economies
MENA = Middle East + North Africa           SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa
SASIA= India and the rest of South Asia     CHINA = PRC
EASIA = Smaller countries of East Asia      LACA = Latin America + the Caribbean

 Table 1: Emission Targets for each of 11 regions, according to the formulas
       (version in which developing countries take on sub-BAU targets somewhat earlier)
   Target
   Absolute
   (tons C,
   thousand                               WESTERN      EASTERN
   millions)              USA             EUROPE       EUROPE         KOSAU        CAJAZ          TE
            2005     1    unlimited       unlimited    unlimited      unlimited    unlimited      Unlimited
            2010     2    1.87591         0.88556      0.22849        0.39768      0.57841        0.83501
            2015     3    1.94157         0.83051      0.20819        0.42442      0.55573        0.91841
            2020     4    1.30761         0.77407      0.18929        0.44852      0.37796        0.86844
            2025     5    1.20331         0.69464      0.16579        0.39051      0.33085        0.81847
            2030     6    1.16946         0.62428      0.14504        0.34938      0.28811        0.78070
            2035     7    0.99089         0.55197      0.12448        0.30825      0.24575        0.74293
            2040     8    0.87106         0.47851      0.10454        0.29015      0.20451        0.70293
            2045     9    0.70636         0.40449      0.08551        0.27206      0.16478        0.66294
            2050 10       0.61066         0.32972      0.06741        0.23973      0.12656        0.61993
            2055 11       0.47577         0.26596      0.06289        0.20776      0.09307        0.57693
            2060 12       0.36873         0.21539      0.05837        0.17718      0.06799        0.53787
            2065 13       0.28016         0.17425      0.05385        0.14718      0.04866        0.49881
            2070 14       0.21128         0.14247      0.04933        0.11754      0.03470        0.45995
            2075 15       0.15125         0.11573      0.04481        0.10556      0.02353        0.42109
            2080 16       0.14177         0.11158      0.04029        0.10221      0.02185        0.38258
            2085 17       0.13229         0.10742      0.03577        0.09887      0.02017        0.34407
            2090 18       0.12280         0.10327      0.03125        0.09552      0.01849        0.32559
            2095 19       0.11332         0.09911      0.02673        0.09218      0.01681        0.30711
            2100 20       0.10384         0.09496      0.02221        0.08883      0.01513        0.25166
   Target per capita
   EMI/cap (ton C)        USA             EUROPE                      KOSAU        CAJAZ          TE
            2005
            2010          5.95988         1.74333                     1.91504      2.39863        1.63613
            2015          5.90006         1.62641                     1.70965      2.55284        1.56933
            2020          3.81659         1.51259                     1.52749      2.70695        1.06864
            2025          3.38963         1.35800                     1.31882      2.37698        0.93998
            2030          3.19303         1.22401                     1.14260      2.15334        0.82547
            2035          2.63145         1.08789                     0.97673      1.92996        0.71156
            2040          2.25701         0.94989                     0.82086      1.85037        0.59959
            2045          1.79058         0.81016                     0.67433      1.77042        0.49047
            2050          1.51726         0.66735                     0.53520      1.59314        0.38363
            2055          1.16172         0.54424                     0.50273      1.40777        0.28689
            2060          0.88719         0.44588                     0.47000      1.22254        0.21299
            2065          0.66602         0.36517                     0.43706      1.03310        0.15485
            2070          0.49756         0.30246                     0.40392      0.83854        0.11212
            2075          0.35381         0.24910                     0.37053      0.76486        0.07719
            2080          0.33028         0.24366                     0.33680      0.75175        0.07275


                                                                                                       35
          2085       0.30776   0.23819             0.30265   0.73761   0.06815
          2090       0.28606   0.23266             0.26792   0.72246   0.06339
          2095       0.26502   0.22702             0.23247   0.70622   0.05847
          2100       0.24445   0.22126             0.19615   0.68884   0.05338

Target relative to
1990                 USA       EUROPE              KOSAU     CAJAZ     TE
          2005
          2010       1.29911   0.73379             0.98322   0.89166   0.61078
          2015       1.34458   0.68817             0.89587   0.95161   0.58683
          2020       0.90555   0.64141             0.81453   1.00565   0.39911
          2025       0.83331   0.57559             0.71343   0.87559   0.34937
          2030       0.80987   0.51729             0.62411   0.78337   0.30423
          2035       0.68621   0.45737             0.53567   0.69115   0.25950
          2040       0.60322   0.39650             0.44985   0.65057   0.21595
          2045       0.48917   0.33517             0.36795   0.60999   0.17400
          2050       0.42290   0.27321             0.29009   0.53751   0.13364
          2055       0.32948   0.22038             0.27064   0.46583   0.09828
          2060       0.25535   0.17847             0.25118   0.39726   0.07179
          2065       0.19402   0.14439             0.23173   0.33001   0.05139
          2070       0.14632   0.11805             0.21228   0.26354   0.03664
          2075       0.10475   0.09590             0.19283   0.23668   0.02485
          2080       0.09818   0.09246             0.17338   0.22918   0.02308
          2085       0.09161   0.08901             0.15393   0.22168   0.02130
          2090       0.08504   0.08557             0.13447   0.21418   0.01953
          2095       0.07848   0.08213             0.11502   0.20668   0.01775
          2100       0.07191   0.07868             0.09557   0.19918   0.01598

Target relative to             WESTERN   EASTERN
BAU                  USA       EUROPE    EUROPE    KOSAU     CAJAZ     TE
          2005
          2010       1         0.82136   1.07575   1         1         1
          2015       0.93718   0.72218   0.90219   1         0.90573   0.97
          2020       0.58125   0.64149   0.75724   1         0.59071   0.9047
          2025       0.49896   0.55440   0.61868   0.83061   0.50236   0.81418
          2030       0.45683   0.48348   0.51106   0.71465   0.42927   0.7498
          2035       0.36735   0.41717   0.41911   0.61113   0.36202   0.69396
          2040       0.30826   0.35443   0.33976   0.5613    0.29957   0.64211
          2045       0.23974   0.29457   0.27063   0.51626   0.24096   0.59511
          2050       0.19949   0.23665   0.20943   0.44799   0.18517   0.54942
          2055       0.15017   0.18851   0.19233   0.38312   0.13622   0.50533
          2060       0.1121    0.15067   0.17483   0.32055   0.09942   0.4618
          2065       0.0824    0.12053   0.15835   0.26209   0.0711    0.42076
          2070       0.06037   0.09764   0.14270   0.20668   0.05067   0.38221
          2075       0.04218   0.07874   0.12774   0.18386   0.03436   0.34573
          2080       0.03874   0.07550   0.11333   0.17688   0.03191   0.3113
          2085       0.03557   0.07241   0.09937   0.17042   0.02947   0.27831
          2090       0.03266   0.06960   0.08588   0.16462   0.02708   0.26278
          2095       0.0302    0.06766   0.07314   0.16046   0.02494   0.24922
          2100       0.02781   0.06572   0.06049   0.15639   0.02273   0.20576




                                                                        36
     Table 1 continued

Target Absolute
(tons C, thousand
millions)                MENA        SSA         SASIA       CHINA       EASIA            LACA
           2005      1   unlimited   unlimited   unlimited   unlimited   unlimited        unlimited
           2010      2   0.51177     unlimited   0.41288     1.83009     0.39464          0.49779
           2015      3   0.58766     unlimited   0.51088     2.08354     0.48358          0.58216
           2020      4   0.65678     unlimited   0.63579     2.41191     0.57966          0.67417
           2025      5   0.72000     0.11618     0.78210     2.78142     0.67840          0.77043
           2030      6   0.65952     0.13962     0.94549     2.57781     0.77640          0.86843
           2035      7   0.60771     0.16584     1.12277     2.27298     0.87116          0.75977
           2040      8   0.60473     0.19496     1.31222     2.11931     0.96049          0.71027
           2045      9   0.60176     0.22704     1.50976     1.94741     1.04308          0.66078
           2050     10   0.59414     0.25983     1.40956     1.85137     0.86258          0.63716
           2055     11   0.58653     0.26227     1.38141     1.79709     0.72852          0.57931
           2060     12   0.57226     0.26470     1.35326     1.74282     0.66888          0.51555
           2065     13   0.55800     0.26714     1.28759     1.68854     0.61368          0.42716
           2070     14   0.52633     0.26957     1.21498     1.63427     0.55429          0.37107
           2075     15   0.49466     0.26753     1.11969     1.58000     0.51749          0.36319
           2080     16   0.47001     0.24386     0.94502     1.52572     0.48068          0.35531
           2085     17   0.44535     0.23956     0.87403     1.47145     0.45211          0.34742
           2090     18   0.40085     0.22707     0.73042     1.41717     0.42353          0.33954
           2095     19   0.35634     0.22707     0.73042     1.36290     0.38115          0.33166
           2100     20   0.35634     0.22707     0.73042     1.30863     0.33877          0.32377

Target per capita
EMI/cap (ton C)          MENA        SSA         SASIA       CHINA       EASIA            LACA
           2005
           2010          2.36325                 unlimited   0.30372     2.65865          0.70466
           2015          2.39601                 unlimited   0.36574     2.86261          0.81691
           2020          2.10619                 unlimited   0.44466     3.15812          0.93292
           2025          1.86509     0.61237     0.05850     0.53767     3.49364          1.04729
           2030          1.68639     0.50976     0.06711     0.64429     3.12618          1.15753
           2035          1.53171     0.43006     0.07666     0.76506     2.67853          1.26318
           2040          1.39177     0.39474     0.08710     0.90017     2.44300          1.36319
           2045          1.26822     0.36505     0.09856     1.04778     2.20932          1.45799
           2050          1.15372     0.33747     0.11028     0.99380     2.07893          1.19443
           2055          1.05095     0.31442     0.10931     0.98961     2.00366          1.00215
           2060          0.96373     0.29188     0.10881     0.98516     1.93479          0.91666
           2065          0.88344     0.27300     0.10879     0.95269     1.87182          0.84028
           2070          0.80924     0.24903     0.10925     0.91379     1.81427          0.76053
           2075          0.73967     0.22822     0.10839     0.85613     1.76170          0.71361
           2080          0.67432     0.21319     0.09923     0.73469     1.71366          0.66818
           2085          0.61160     0.20025     0.09834     0.69100     1.66976          0.63538
           2090          0.58662     0.18015     0.09448     0.58731     1.62959          0.60358
           2095          0.56369     0.16138     0.09621     0.59741     1.59275          0.55244
           2100          0.47295     0.16396     0.09843     0.60776     1.55886          0.50085




                                                                                     37
Target relative to
1990                 MENA      SSA        SASIA       CHINA     EASIA          LACA
         2005
         2010        2.67631   14.41159   unlimited   0.49685   14.52452       1.33324
         2015        2.94363   16.54868   unlimited   0.61478   16.53603       1.63372
         2020        2.78346   18.49511   unlimited   0.76509   19.14214       1.95831
         2025        2.62330   20.27541   0.57515     0.94116   22.07476       2.29189
         2030        2.50224   18.57228   0.69119     1.13777   20.45881       2.62297
         2035        2.38119   17.11319   0.82099     1.35111   18.03953       2.94311
         2040        2.25299   17.02942   0.96515     1.57909   16.81995       3.24490
         2045        2.12480   16.94566   1.12396     1.81680   15.45561       3.52392
         2050        1.98697   16.73121   1.28630     1.69622   14.69338       2.91413
         2055        1.84914   16.51675   1.29836     1.66234   14.26264       2.46123
         2060        1.72395   16.11511   1.31041     1.62847   13.83189       2.25973
         2065        1.59877   15.71346   1.32247     1.54945   13.40114       2.07324
         2070        1.47421   14.82157   1.33452     1.46207   12.97040       1.87260
         2075        1.34965   13.92968   1.32442     1.34740   12.53965       1.74826
         2080        1.22622   13.23548   1.20724     1.13720   12.10891       1.62393
         2085        1.10279   12.54129   1.18594     1.05178   11.67816       1.52738
         2090        1.04355   11.28795   1.12410     0.87897   11.24742       1.43084
         2095        0.98431   10.03461   1.12410     0.87897   10.81667       1.28767
         2100        0.80660   10.03461   1.12410     0.87897   10.38592       1.14451

Target relative to
BAU                  MENA      SSA        SASIA       CHINA     EASIA          LACA
         2005        1         1          1           1         1              1
         2010        1         1          1           1         1              1
         2015        1         1          1           1         1              1
         2020        1         1          1           1         1              1
         2025        1         1          1           1         1              1
         2030        0.84599   1          1           0.81467   1              1
         2035        0.72519   1          1           0.64230   1              0.78628
         2040        0.67434   1          1           0.54438   1              0.66805
         2045        0.62911   1          1           0.46150   1              0.57042
         2050        0.58430   0.99135    0.82410     0.41023   0.77162        0.50921
         2055        0.54408   0.87452    0.72261     0.37592   0.61422        0.43097
         2060        0.49920   0.77259    0.63130     0.34285   0.53174        0.35762
         2065        0.45884   0.68832    0.54289     0.31506   0.46395        0.2777
         2070        0.40912   0.61854    0.46904     0.29151   0.40179        0.22726
         2075        0.36464   0.55153    0.40073     0.27137   0.36249        0.21065
         2080        0.32977   0.45580    0.31732     0.25398   0.32782        0.1962
         2085        0.29861   0.40966    0.27847     0.23879   0.30230        0.18365
         2090        0.25850   0.35937    0.22346     0.22562   0.28003        0.17309
         2095        0.22461   0.33996    0.21831     0.21508   0.25333        0.16574
         2100        0.22041   0.32412    0.21513     0.20550   0.22748        0.15933




                                                                          38
                                                             Table 2 :
                              Years when countries are to commit to targets at BAU and then below BAU

July 2008 Version (a)-
Harvard (500 ppm CO2) --
with later targets for
developing countries        USA       EUROPE      KOSAU      CAJAZ      TE          MENA       SSA          SASIA      CHINA      EASIA         LACA
year when they are
assumed to commit to
TARGET or BAU                 2010        2010       2010       2010         2010      2010          2040      2010       2010          2010       2010
year when they are
assumed to commit to
TARGET (PCF & LCF)
never above BAU               2015        2010       2025       2015         2015      2030    -               2050       2040    -                2035
year when GEF kicks in        2055        2055       2055       2055         2055      2055    -               2055       2055    -                2055
year when PCF and LCF
drop out                      2055        2055       2075       2055         2090      2100    -               2095       2095    -                2080
per cap GDP 2010 K$
per person (2005 USD)      46.67889    32.57178   17.12039   40.11022   4.833032    4.490123   0.635535     0.891818   2.490698       1.93462   5.606108
per cap GDP year of 1st
cut, K$ (2005 $)           51.60516    32.57178   23.52091   44.76398   5.995228    8.103633                6.095896    12.9065                 14.67883
per cap GDP 2100 (with
policy) K$ (2005 $)        146.6341    125.8841   71.33147   125.4985   39.33137    38.16667   7.960843     22.07702   52.04833   21.56599      63.75807
per cap GDP 2100 (with-
out policy) K$ (2005 $)    149.4399    126.6184   72.33748    126.707   39.63715     39.0211   7.447119     22.01989    54.2875   18.06219      65.41224
per capita emissions
2010                       5.959875    2.540625    3.33309   3.488708   2.361965    1.448415   0.072677     0.251596   1.346227   0.573311      0.888837
per cap emissions,
year of first cut          6.295571    2.540625   3.739874   3.690558   2.551435    1.683975                 0.72597   2.670631                 1.401099
per cap emissions 2100
(with policy)              0.775217    0.641313   0.772061   0.941758   1.284856     0.73267   0.100678     0.235541   0.889086   0.289966      0.672001
per cap emissions 2100
(without policy)           8.789477    4.222235    5.01663   5.161716   4.315193    3.038271   0.322343     1.471802   5.298569   1.773993      3.004225




                                                                                                                                                       39
                                                                     Table 2:
                              Years when countries are to commit to targets at BAU and then below BAU (continued)
January 2009 Version (b)-
Poznan (500 ppm CO2 only)
-- with earlier targets for
developing countries          USA          EUROPE     KOSAU      CAJAZ    TE       MENA       SSA      SASIA      CHINA      EASIA          LACA
year when they are
assumed to commit to
TARGET or BAU                       2010      2010       2010     2010     2010       2010     2040       2010       2010            2010      2010
year when they are
assumed to commit to
TARGET (PCF & LCF)
never above BAU                     2015      2010       2025     2015     2015       2025     2050       2050       2030            2050      2035
year when GEF kicks in              2055      2055       2055     2055     2055       2055     2055       2055       2055            2055      2055
year when PCF
and LCF drop out                    2055      2055       2075      2055     2090      2100      2100      2095       2070            2100      2080
per capita GDP 2010 K$                                           40.110   4.8330              0.6355
per (2005 USD)                 46.67889    32.57178   17.12039       22       32   4.490123       35   0.891818   2.490698     1.93462      5.606108
per capita GDP year of                                           44.763   5.9952              2.1294
first cut                      51.60516    32.57178   23.52091       98       28   7.061138       87   6.095896   8.242312    9.356524      14.67883
per capita GDP 2100 (with                                        125.39   39.085              7.4242
policy)                        146.2625    125.9363   72.18055       94       82   38.34169       05   22.06178   53.39906    18.25157      64.29782
per capita GDP 2100                                              126.70   39.637              7.4471
(without policy)               149.4399    126.6184   72.33748        7       15    39.0211       19   22.01989    54.2875    18.06219      65.41224
                                                                 3.4887   2.3619              0.0726
per capita Emissions 2010      5.959875    2.540625    3.33309       08       65   1.448415       77   0.251596   1.346227    0.573311      0.888837
per capita Emissions year                                        3.6905   2.5514              0.1488
of first cut                   6.295571    2.540625   3.739874       58       35   1.640705       71    0.72597   2.156224    1.255288      1.401099
per capita emissions 2100                                        0.9216   1.2456              0.0945
(with policy)                  0.716597    0.615706    0.75325       74       94   0.669224       17   0.218605   0.840643     0.27635      0.633104
per capita emissions 2100                                        5.1617   4.3151              0.3223
(without policy)               8.789477    4.222235    5.01663       16       93   3.038271       43   1.471802   5.298569    1.773993      3.004225




                                                                                                                                                       40
Table 3a: Implied Economic Cost of Emission Targets for each of 11 regions
with later targets for developing countries
PDV at discount rate = 5%. Expressed as per cent of GDP
  USA      OLDEURO      NEWEURO        KOSAU     CAJAZ        TE       MENA         SSA         SASIA       CHINA
 0.55%       0.18%        0.77%        0.22%     0.31%      0.98%      0.62%       -1.33%       -0.35%      0.50%


Table 3b: Implied Economic Cost of Emission Targets for each of 11 regions
with earlier targets for developing countries
PDV at discount rate = 5%. Expressed as per cent of GDP
 USA     WEURO      EEURO      KOSAU     CAJAZ      TE     MENA      SSA       SASIA    CHINA      EASIA     LACA
0.69%     0.26%      0.84%     0.26%     0.46%     0.57%   0.62%    -0.32%     -0.74%   1.14%      -0.47%    0.57%




                                                                                                  41
