                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE VALUE OF INTERMEDIATE TARGETS IN
                   IMPLEMENTING MONETARY POLICY



                       Benjamin M. Friedman



                      Working Paper No. i18T




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November 1984




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the T1ational
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                            NBER Working Paper t1487
                                            November 1984




                 The Value of Intermediate Targets in
                     Implementing Monetary Policy


                                ABSTRACT




       This   paper reports empirical results indicating that there is no
compelling evidence in favor of singling out any one variable as "the
intermediate target" of monetary policy. Of the variables considered
here    including money (Ml), credit, a long—term interest rate, and
whichever of either reserves or a short—term interest rate the Federal
Reserve System does not set directly by open market operations — most
do contain at least some statistically significant information about the
future growth of nominal income, real income, or prices. In most cases,
however, this information is significant statistically but not economically.
In other words, the reduction in forecasting error gained from using this
infoxmation is typically too small to be of great moment in a policy context.

       The papers principal conclusion, therefore, is to cast doubt on the
practice of designating specific financial variables as intermediate targets
of monetary policy. To the extent that such targets are necessary for
independent reasons, however, the strength of this conclusion varies from
one potential intermediate target to another. Among the variables considered
here, credit growth and the long—term interest rate appear to offer the
best prospects of providing information that would be useful in formulating
and implementing monetary policy.

        Although the empirical results reported here rely on an econometric
model that is extremely compact and simple, the method of analysis suggested
in this paper is more general. Its key contribution is to use a structural
model to address questions for which the previous literature has relied on
nonstructural methods. The application of this method of analysis to one
small, simple model here need be no more than an illustration. Applying it
to a larger and more complex model would be a straightforward extension of
this research.

                                      Benjamin M. Friedman
                                      Harvard University
                                      Littauer Center 127
                                      Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
                                      (617) 495—4246
                                                                    Revised
                                                                    September, 1984


                        THE VILUE OF INTERMEDIATE TARGETS

                         IN IMPLEMENTING MONETARY POLICY



                               Benjamin M. Friedman*
                                Harvard University



          Despite the growing experience with their use, both in the United

States and abroad, the role of intermediate targets of monetary policy

remains a source of confusion and controversy. Although some advocates

apparently regard stable growth of one or another monetary aggregate as

an end in itself, by far the more typical view in favor of such intermediate

targets is that they somehow enable the central bank to achieve more

effectively its objectives for the nonfinancial economy, usually including

price   stability or real growth,   or both. It is in making that !somehowu

more   precise,    and thereby making the appropriate role (if any) of

intermediate targets operational, that the difficulty lies.

          The ambiguity stems from the fact that measures like money or credit

are not under the immediate     control of the central bank.   In the United

States,    the   deposits that constitute the main bulk of any of the familiar

monetary    aggregates are created by over forty thousand financial institutions,
and how much money there is at any time depends on the decisions not only
of these   institutions but of millions of individuals and businesses that

own deposits. Broader asset aggregates like total liquid assets depend on

the decisions of an even wider range of institutions, as do liability aggregates

like domestic nonfinancial credit. The Federal Reserve can       influence   any

of   these measures, to be sure, but it cannot directly control them in the
sense that it can control, for example, the nonborrowed reserve base or
                                          —2—




the   federal funds rate. Hence these measures are at most targets, not

instruments, of monetary policy, "intermediate" steps between the

instruments that the central bank can control directly and       its   ultimate

nonfinancial policy targets.

          The object   of this paper is   to assess quantitatively the potential

value   of   specific intermediate targets for monetary policy in the United

States.      The basic premise   motivating this analysis is that a financial

variable     like   money or credit —or, for that matter, a market interest

rate    — has potential value as an intermediate monetary policy target
only to the extent that movements in that variable convey information about
the    nonfinancial economic developments which constitute the reason for

having    a monetary policy   in the first place. Moreover, to warrant     such
a variable's use as an intermediate target, the pertinent information its
movements contain must not be readily available elsewhere. The questions
addressed in this paper are whether any familiar financial variables in
fact    contain such potentially valuable information, and, if so, which ones

and how much.

          In addition to the specific conclusions provided as answers to these

questions, a key contribution of this paper is the method of analysis it

introduces. In particular, the paper suggests and implements a method for

using structural economic models, restricted } the relevant economic

theory, to answer questions that the previous literature has addressed

primarily with nonstructural, unrestricted representations of economic

behavior. The specific quantitative conclusions reached in this paper about

the potential value of intermediate targets in the monetary policy process

result from the application of this method to one rnacroeconometric model that

is especially small and simple. The method of analysis suggested here, however,
                                         —3—




is applicable more generally to models small and large, simple and     complex.
          Section   I outlines the basic concept of the intermediate target as
a way    of gathering and processing relevant information in implementing

monetary policy. Section II presents the small macroeconometric im.de1 of

the United States to be used in the quantitative analysis. Section III

applies this model to evaluate the potential usefulness of familiar

financial variables as intermediate targets when the chief nonfinancial

focus   of monetary policy is the growth of nominal income. Section IV
undertakes an analogous evaluation focused separately on real income
growth     price inflation. Section V briefly summarizes the principal
         and

conclusions of this analysis and re—emphasizes some of its limitations.
                                       —4—




I. Intermediate Targets as Information Variables1
         Why should a central bank, in conducting monetary policy, take
account of the movements of money or credit?
         After   nearly a decade of formal reliance on monetary aggregate

targets for monetary policy by the Federal Pserve System, and the adoption

of analogous targets by an increasing number of central banks around the

world,   even   to pose such a question may at first seem like so much inspecting

the interstices of the obvious (hardly an unknown    activity   in the social

sciences). Yet the question is a serious one. In the circumstances under

which most central banks today actually conduct monetary policy, the relevance

of movements in money or credit is far from self—evident. Still less

self—evident is why central banks should elevate measures like money or

credit to the level of intermediate policy targets, thereby creating the

presumption that, in implementing monetary policy, they not only may but

indeed will respond to the movements of these variables.

         At least part of the reason why this issue receives relatively little

serious attention in current discussions of monetary policy is probably

the fault of the professional economics literature, which more often than

not relies on hypothetical constructs that either rule the question out

altogether or in the end make the answer       within those constructs —

genuinely self—evident. At the theoretical level, for example, most models
simply treat the money stock as an "exogenous" variable, directly subject

to control by the central bank. In such models there can be no question

of the central bank's responding to movements of the money stock, because

by assumption the central bank initiates all such movements. Similarly, most

theoretical models include only one monetary asset, and in some models

that asset is the only available form of wealth holding.2 Such models, of
                                         —5—




course, cannot address the question of to which movements the central bank
may    want   to respond when there are two or more monetary aggregates that

covary imperfectly. At the empirical level, much of the current discussion

simply assumes away the great body of evidence documenting the instability

of any simple specification of the relationship between nonfinancial

economic activity and any measure of "money."

          The circumstances under which the Federal Reserve actually conducts

U.S. monetary policy are quite different. No monetary or credit aggregate

is directly subject to central bank control. Instead, the Federal

Reserve controls the growth of nonborrowed reserves, or perhaps a short--

term    interest rate like that on federal funds. There        is not just a single

monetary asset. Instead, the market offers a great variety of forms of
deposits (and, similarly, an enormous variety of forms of borrowing), and
the number of potentially definable monetary (or credit) aggregates is
limited only by imagination and data collection machinery. No simple
money—income or credit-income relationship is consistently reliable over

short   time horizons. Moreover, given the pace and         extent of changes in
patterns of U.S. financial intermediation, there is little ground for
strong confidence in such relationships over longer horizons either.
         why, then, under these circumstances radically different from those
so   often    either explicitly assumed in   the   professional economics literature
or casually assumed in discussions of current policy, should         the Federal

Reserve take account of the movement of money or credit in implementing monetary

policy? The potential role of such variables in the policy process stems

from the possibility that their movements may provide information, which

is otherwise either unavailable or difficult to process, about the nonfinancial
                                       —6—




targets    that the central bank seeks ultimately to affect.

          The starting place for making monetary policy is a set of objectives

for the nonfinancial economy. In part because of the targeting and reporting

requirements imposed on the Federal Reserve by the Congress, but also

because much other planning takes an annual form, the typical procedure

in the United States involves the tentative identification each year

of a desired rate of economic growth for the year ahead, in both real and

nominal terms.3 The Federal Reserve then determine; and publicly reports

to the cbngress, the "target" rates of money and credit growth that are

likely — as seen in advance of the fact — to be consistent with that

economic growth. Finally, the Federal Reserve determines, and implements

via open market operations, the growth of nonborrowed reserves (or the

federal funds rate level) that is likely — again, as seen in advance of the

fact — to be consistent with the targeted growth of money and credit.4

          As of the beginning of the year, therefore, the Federal Peserve in

principle outlines a mutually consistent set of growth rates for real

income, prices, money, credit    and nonborrowed reserves, and it uses open
market operations to implement the one element in this package under its
direct control. The question at issue here is what further usefulness —
if any     — the money and credit aggregates possess. If actual money or
credit growth deviates from the corresponding targeted pace, should the

Federal Peserve respond? And, if so, why, since the ultimate policy

objective is to affect not money or credit growth but real economic growth

and   price inflation?
          Responding to aberrant movements in money or credit growth is a
useful policy under these conditions only if such movements forewarn
                                         —7—




 subsequent     (or contemporaneous but as yet unobservable) movements of real
output or prices. For example, money growth greater than targeted —
that is, greater than expected in advance to be consistent with the
desired   growth of income and prices — may indicate that later on either

real income or prices (or both) will advance more strongly than expected.

If so, responding to this excessive money growth by reducing the growth

of nonborrowed reserves will set in motion forces of adjustment —      involving
in the first instance higher short-term interest rates, but in addition

much broader aspects of asset yield and price relationships — to help

restrain the excessive nonfinancial economic activity. Similarly, if

money growth less than targeted forewarns coming economic weakness, responding

by increaaing reserve growth will set in motion forces acting to bolster

activity levels. The rationale for responding to either faster or slower

than targeted credit growth is analogous,

         This   familiar monetary policy procedure, based on targeted growth
rates for money and credit (or, more commonly, money only) suffers
from two potential drawbacks. The first, of course, is that aberrant
movements of the targeted aggregate may not indicate future economic strength
or   weakness after all. Instead, they may merely reflect shifts in the

portfolio preferences of either financial institutions or the general deposit—

holding and liability-issuing public. In that case, policy responses in

the form of changes in reserve growth (or in short—term interest rate levels)

will be counter—productive, pushing nonfinancial activity away from, rather

than toward, its intended course. Whether or not the Federal Reserve should

respond to such unexpected movements of money or credit therefore depends,

in the first instance, on what information about future economic activity
these movements convey. A large and long—standing empirical literature
has examined this question, primarily using "nonstructural" methods that
rely on no specific economic model.5
          The second potential shortcoming in the use of monetary and credit
aggregates as intermediate policy targets is    that   whatever information about
future    activity levels these aggregates do convey may simply duplicate

information readily available from other convenient sources. Given the

large element of inertia in short—run fluctuations of economic activity,

surely the first place to look for information about income growth in

the near future is in the recent movements of income itself. In other

words, the relevant question is not just whether a potential intermediate

target provides information about future income growth but whether it

provides information not already contained in recent movements of income

itself. A large empirical literature has addressed this question too,

again primarily using nonstructural methods.6 It is also possible to

frame this question in a much broader way by asking whether yet other

readily available data may   also   contain the same information that movements

of money or credit convey, but the policy implications of empirical

findings in this broader context are less straightforward because of the

difficulty inherent in strategies explicitly relating monetary policy

respsesto large numbers of different variables.

          The task undertaken in this paper is to address these questions

about the information contained in potential intermediate targets of

monetary policy, using a small tstructuraltt macroeconometric model of

the United States. The key advantage of basing the analysis on a

structural model, in comparison to the more    prevalent use of nonstructural
methods   in the recent literature, lies in the presumably superior representation
                                      -9




of   "expected" economic behavior, and hence the superior division of the

respective movements of variables like income, money and credit into

corresponding expected and "surprise" components, that the structural

model provides. The answer to any question about the information contained

in unexpected movements in money or credit can be only as valid as the underlying

distinction of expected versus unexpected movements on which it relies.

3y relying on nonstructural (usually vector autoregression) models for this

purpose, the recent literature irpiicitiy assumes that the best available
representation of the expected movement of any variable is an unrestricted
linear projection from past values of itself and other variables, and
identifies any difference between this projection and the corresponding

actual movement as unexpected. A structural model instead uses the relevant

economic theory to restrict the representation of a variable's expected

movement, and hence also to identify the unexpected part of its actual

movement.

        A further advantage of basing the analysis on a structural model

is that structural models typically make clear the relationships among

the operating instruments, potential intermediate targets, and nonfinancial

objectives of monetary policy. Empirical findings therefore have a ready

interpretation in terms of the policy process, and specific results correspond

in a straightforward way to rules for central bank response. By contrast,

evidence generated without using any structural model is at best difficult

to translate into policy implications.

        The countervailing disadvantage of the structural approach, of

course, is that the particular structural model used may rely on theory

that is irrelevant or invalid. In that case the restrictions imposed may
                                       —10—




make the model's representation of expected economic behavior, and hence

the   corresponding distinction of expected versus unexpected movements in
any given variable, not superior but inferior to their unrestricted
nonstructural analogs. Similarly, if a model does not adequately represent
the relevant macroeconomic behavior, policy rules suggested by its properties
may be misdirected and even counterproductive. Given its compactness and

simplicity, the model used here is clearly illustrative rather than definitive.

        Section II presents a small   macroeconometric   model, and Sections III

and IV go on to analyze its implications for the information value of potential

monetary policy targets. Pn important caveat is in order, however, before

proceeding to that task. Even the     finding   that aberrant movements of nney

or credit contain information about future economic activity, and that that

information    is not readily available elsewhere, does not warrant taking
account of this information by establishing money or credit as an intermediate
target in any strict sense. The Federal Reserve should respond to such
information,    to be sure, and it may even be useful to establish a form of
"targeting"    procedure to institutionalize the presumption that it will do

so. In general, however, the appropriate policy response is different —

under most realistic circumstances, more modest — than that required to

return money or credit fully to the corresponding targeted path.7
                                       —11—




 II.    A Macroeconorretic Model

          Table 1 shows estimates, based on U.S. quarterly data spanning

1961:1-1979:111, for the six-equation Pirandello Model first presented

in Friedman (1977) and subsequently updated in Clarida and Friedman

 (1983). The model includes empirical estimates for relationships describing

aggregate   demand, aggregate supply, money demand, money supply and the
term structure of interest rates, plus a nominal income identity.8 For
convenience,   all equations are linear in logarithms, and no variable is

lagged more than once. Hence the model is a simple linear first—order

difference equation system.

         The reason for limiting the model's estimation to data through

1979:111 is that there is evidence of a break after that date in all

five of the estimated relationships.      To the extent that   the conditions
newly   characterizing the immediate post-1979:III period continue to

prevail, the model is therefore a description of historical behavior

only. More recently, however, the Federal Reserve System appears to

have moved away from the new policy procedures adopted in October 1979.10

The model may therefore be applicable to current behavior as well, even

though not to that of the few years immediately following 1979:111.

         The model 's aggregate demand equation includes an interest rate, or

IS curve, effect (here based simply on a nominal long-term interest rate),

as well as a fiscal policy effect and a terms—of—trade effect. The

aggregate supply equation relates price setting to real economic activity

and also to the terms of trade. The money demand equation has the

standard   real LM   curve specification. The money supply equation combines

a   nonborrowed reserves multiplier effect with a borrowed reserves response
                                                               TABLE 1

                                      EQUATIONS OF THE PIRANDELLO MODEL



(1)   Aggregate Demand

Ax =           .0064   -    .1026 ArL + .1024 AEt — .0688 Al
                                                             t—].
                                                                  + .4397 Ax
               (4.8)        (-2.9)           (2.0)                 (-2.2)          (5.0)


          SE = .00780                                          =   49                      p =       4


(2)   Aggregate Supply

AP =           .0895 AX —i + .0542 AI —i + .8700 AP —i
               (3.4)                 (3.9)                (25.2)

          SE =    .00347                                  2 = .88                          P=     —.1


(3) Money Demand
A(M_P) =              .1192 Ax
                      (1.9)
                                       .0406 ArS
                                       (39)
                                                      + .8703 A(M—P)
                                                                             t-1
                                                          —2 =
          SE = .00676                                                                      p = —.5



(4)   Money Supply

      =        .0034   + .2118 AR + .0097 ArSt                 —   .0234 Ar + .7627 AMt
AM             (2.3)        (2.1)            (0.6)                 (-1.3) Dt (8.6)
                                                                                             —   1



          SE   = .00481                                   2 =                              p = —.2


(5) Term Structure
rLt   =        .0472   + .1441 r St      —   .0579    r            + .1376 A(L_S)t —1 + .9100 rL         't 1
                                                                                                          —

               (1.4)        (1.1)            (—0.5)                  (2.3)                 (37.0)

                                                          —2
          SE.=       .020                                 R = .98                          p=

(6)       Nominal Incon Identity
      =          +
                     APt

                                                                                   (continued on next page)
                                                           Table 1, page   2




Notes: Equations are estimated using Fair's method for simultaneous equations
               with lagged dependent variables and serially correlated
               disturbances.
        Sample period is 1961:1—1979:111.
        Numbers in parentheses are t—statistics.
        All variables are in logarithms.
        Predetermined variables are E, I, L, R, rD and S.

Definitions of Symbols: E = high—employment federal expenditures
                       I = import price deflator
                       L = outstanding long—term federal debt
                        M=    money   stock (Ml)
                        P=    GNP price deflator
                        R = stock of nonborroved reserves
                        rD = discount rate
                        rL = Baa corporate bond rate
                        rs = three—month Treasury bill rate
                        S = outstanding short-term federal debt
                        X = real GNP
                        Y = nominal    GNP
                                     —12—




associated   with the discount rate and an excess reserves response

associated with the short—term market interest rate.     The term

structure equation, which provides a link between the long—term interest

rate in the aggregate demand equation and the short—term interest rate in

the money demand and money supply equations, combines a form of the

standard expectations hypothesis with a debt management policy effect.12

The nominal income identity is straightforward.

       As estimated here, these six relationships determine six

variables: the growth rate of nominal and real income, prices and money,

and short— and long—term interest rates. Exogenous variables include

monetary policy (nonborrowed reserves and the discount rate), fiscal

policy (high-employment government expenditures), debt management

policy (the maturity composition of outstanding government debt), and

the dollar price of imports.

       P.n alternative way of specifying the stochastic structure of the

model is to assume that the direct instrument set by the Federal Peserve's

open market operations is not the growth of nonborrowed reserves but

the short-term interest rate. In that case, the short-term rate would be

an exogenous condition variable, while nonborrowed reserves would be one

of the six variables jointly determined by the model. Because the Federal

Reserve is free to choose either nonborrowed reserves or the short—term

interest rate as its operating instrument, and because there is some

ambiguity about how Federal Reserve policy has actually operated in the

past, it is interesting to know the model's implications for key

policy questions under either specification. Sections III   and   IV   below
therefore   report parellel sets of results along just these lines. anging
                                      -13-




the assurrd stochastic structure of the relationships among the model's

variables in general changes the corresponding estimated coefficients,

however, so that the alternative sets of results based on an interest rate

instrument rely on a different set of coefficient estimates (not shown)

than the ones based on a reserves instrunnt shown in Table 1.13

         The pirandello Model's compactness and simplicity result, of course,

from   the imposition of many restrictions on the data. Those restrictions
necessarily limit — although, apparently, to a surprisingly small degree —
the   model's ability to represent actual macroeconomic behavior.14 The

corresponding advantage purchased by those restrictions is not just

convenience but the facility that the resulting model's form provides for

explicitly   analyzing policy questions like the ones addressed here.
                                   —14—




iii. Intermediate Targets for Nominal Income

      A familiar, albeit simplified, representation of the process of

choosing and implementing monetary policy targets begins by positing a

desired growth rate for nominal income for some period ahead, then

translates that desired income growth into the isplied growth of the

money stock, and in turn translates that money growth into the implied

growth of nonborrowed reserves. The two translation steps involved could

be as simple (simple—minded?) as merely allowing for average trend

movements, first in monetary "velocity" and then in the "money multiplier,"

or they could incorporate sophisticated econometric and/or judgmental

predictions of the dynamic money—income and   money—reserves relationships.
Carrying out this task using the model shown in Table 1 would stand

somewhere in between.

       Given such a model, and given the values of the four exogenous

variables other than nonborrowed reserves over the relevant time period,

it is straightforward to determine what rate of reserves growth the

Federal Peserve System should implement in order to make the conditionally

expected nominal income growth over this period equal to any chosen rate.

The model also indicates what rate of money growth to expect over

this period, given the implemented reserves growth as well as the

assumed values of all other "predetermined" variables — including,

irtportantly, the serially correlated disturbances to the model's five

stochastic relationships -

       As the first entry in the left—hand column of Table 2 shows, the

standard deviation of the model's forecasting error for nominal income

growth an indefinite number of quarters ahead (that is, the final-form

residual corresponding to a forecast for a period sufficiently far    in the
                              TABLE 2

    STANDARD ERRORS FOR NOMINAL INCOME RESIDUAL AUTOREGRESSIONS



Included Lag                      Model   from   Table 1      Model with Credit

None                                       .0119                   .0122

1                                          .0104                   .0108

1,2                                        .0102                   .0107

1,2,3                                      .0101                   .0106

1,2,3,4                                    .0100                   .0104

2,3,4                                     .0105                    .0109

3,4                                       .0106                    .0110

4                                         .0109                    .0112
                                      —15—




future to eliminate altogether the role of information about the model's

endogenous variables) is l.l9%.15 In the absence of any other information

external to the model, therefore, nominal income growth at a long horizon

out would be within about a      1/4% range of the forecast value two—thirds

of the time. The remaining entries in the column also show that the availability

of observations on recent income growth helps somewhat in predicting future

income   growth. Making the forecast of future income growth conditional
also on observations of recent income growth reduces this range to about
    for periods up to four quarters ahead. In other words, the model's
final—form residuals are serially correlated, so that taking account of whether
income growth has been higher or lower than expected in the recent past
(that is, allowing for previous final—form residuals) reduces the model's
forecasting error in comparison with the corresponding "uninformed"
forecast.     Because allowing for this additional information in general

changes the model's conditional forecast of income growth, it also in

general changes the reserves growth necessary to make the conditional

expectation   of income growth equal the same chosen rate as before.
         What, then, is the potential role for the rate of money growth
— or any other intermediate policy target — in the policy process?
If observed money growth different from prior expectations also provides
information    that bears on future income growth, then a forecast cf

future income growth conditional on recent money growth will likewise

be superior to the corresponding uninformed forecast. In addition, as

in the case of information contained in recent income growth, allowing

for the information contained in recent money growth in general changes
                                             —16—




 the   reserves growth necessary to make the conditional expectation of future

 incou     growth equal the same chosen rate as before, and hence in general
 warrants a policy response in the form of a different rate of reserves
 growth.
        The initial question to ask, therefore, is whether money growth
in fact contains such potentially useful information. Moreover, as
the    discussion in Section I explains, establishing a presumption that the

Federal 1serve will respond to whatever information is contained in

money growth, rather than simply responding to observed income growth,

makes sense only if the information contained in money growth is not

also contained in income growth itself.

          The first column of     Table 3   reports standard errors for a series of

equations relating      the   model's final—form income growth residuals to
lagged values of the corresponding final—form residuals for money growth
and, in all but the first t equations,              lagged values   of the income
growth    residual itself. For a model as sirrple as the one used here, it

would be possible to infer these standard errors (or their equivalents)

directly from the properties of the model's estimated coefficients, but the

point of instead using        regressions   like those underlying     Table 3   is to
illustrate a      method of   analysis that is readily applicable to more coxrp1ex

models as well. The first two values shown indicate, in couarison to the

standard error of 1.19% reported for the uninformed forecast in Table 2,

that movements of money growth do contain information about future income

growth.    Even so, couarison with the other standard errors reported in
Table 2   shows   that this information is little greater than that contained in
recent movements of income growth.

          The issue, however, is not whether money growth contains more or less

information than income growth, but whether money growth contains additional
                                                                             TABLE 3

                                                     STANDARD ERRORS FOR NOMINAL INCOME RESIDUAL REGRESSIONS

                                            WITH INFORMATION      FROM ENDOGENOUS   FINANCIAL VARIABLES (RESERVES EXOGENOUS)



                                                                                              Information Variable    (Z)

 Variables                  in    Regression                                — AM                   Ars                An         AC

                                                                             .0l0.2**            0l17                .Olo.3**   .oo92**
     1
                                                                             .0O97**             .0117*              .0101k*    .0092**
     1'             2


                                                                              QI9**              .0104               .009S      •QQ93**
 Z1; y
                                                                              0094**             .009.8              oo96*      .o091**
 Z, Z2, z3, Z4;                              y_1,        y3,     Y4
 Z             Z                                                             .0096*              .0109               O099**     Q091**
     1'             2'        2
 Z        ,    Z        ,   Z ;    Y                                          00.96**            0l09                .0097**    0092**
     —1            —2        —3        —3

 Z1, Z2, Z3, Z4; Y3, Y4                                                      QQ94**              .0133               .Q095**    .0092**




 *    Z       variables significant at                   .05   level.
** Z variables                    significant       at   .01 level.
                                         —17—




information not contained in income growth. The next two values shown

in the first column of Table 3 are standard errors for equations relating

nominal income residuals to lagged values of the money growth residual

and the income growth residual itself, entered with comparable timing.

Comparison   with the corresponding standard errors based on lagged income
growth alone, shown in Table 2, indicates that the additional information
contained in   money growth is significant statistically but not economically.16

A reduction    in the standard   error of the "informed" forecast from 1.04%

to   0.98% (or from 1.02% to 0.94%) is hardly ground for establishing money
growth as an intermediate policy target.
         These comparisons are not necessarily apt, however, if data on money
growth become available before data on income growth. It may      still   be
useful for the   Federal   Reserve to react to the information contained
in   money growth if the information contained in income growth, which

it duplicates, is unavailable. Even with a further one— or two—quarter

lag imposed on the income growth residuals but not the money growth

residuals, however, there is still apparently little additional information

contained in money growth. The last three values shown in the first

column of Table 3 are standard errors for regressions relating nominal

income growth to lagged money growth and to lagged income growth itself

with just such differential lags. Once again, the additional information

contained in money growth is statistically significant, but hardly enough

to matter economically.

        Money growth is not the only financial variable that may contain

potentially useful information in this context, of course, and in

principle the Federal Reserve may instead choose to alter the growth of

nonborrowed reserves in an analogous way in response to soii other readily
                                       —18—




observable   financial variable. The model used here, with nonlorrowed reserves

taken to be the direct operating instrument of rronetary policy, generates

forecast values (and hence, after the fact, final—form residuals) not just for

money growth but also for short— and long—term interest rates. The second and

third columns of Table 3 present results, analogous to those based on money

growth in the first column, for tests of the information about future nominal

income growth contained in either of the two interest rates.

        These   results provide no ground at all for the Federal Reserve s
responding to movements in short—term interest rates, and they suggest
that the case for responding to long—term rates is about comparable to that
for responding to money. The standard errors for the equations including
the   short—term rate residuals, shown in the second column, are uniformly

larger than those of the corresponding equations    including the money growth
residuals, and the information contained in short-term rates is typically
not statistically significant. The standard errors for the equations
including    the long-term interest rate residuals are only marginally larger

than those of the corresponding equations including money growth, and the

information contained in long-term rates is always statistically significant.

The reuction i.n standard error, however, is again never sizeable enough to

make the indicated responses. very interesting in a   policy   context

         The three financial variables that are endogenous in this model

money growth and short— and long—term interest rates       do not constitute

the entire universe of potentially useful intermediate target variables

for monetary policy. The final column of Table 3 reports analogous results

for tests of the information about future nominal income growth contained

in movements of aggregate credit growth. These results are based on a model

identical to that shown in Table 1, except that the financial quantity used
                                            —19—




in the third and fourth equations is total domestic nonfinancial credit,

so that these equations become,        in   effect, "credit demand" and 'credit supply"

equations.17 The resulting model is highly similar to that shown in Table 1,

as   the properties of the final-form income growth residuals reported in
the right—hand column of Table 2 indicate. In addition, the results (not
shown) of regression tests for the information content of the short—

and   long—term interest     rate   residuals in this altered model are very similar
to the corresponding results shown in the second and third columns of Table 3.
         The results based on this altered irodel, reported in the final
column of Table 3, indicate that the credit aggregate apparently offers
the best prospect of any of the candidates considered here as a potential
interemediate   target for rrvnetary policy. The standard errors for the

equations including credit growth residuals are uniformly smaller than

those   for the corresponding equations including the residuals for any
of the other three variables, despite the slightly larger bases of comparison
shown in the right—hand column of Table 2. Moreover, the additional
information contained in recent movements of credit, beyond what is already
ntained in nominal income itself, is typically greater than that contained
in any of the other three variables. With a single parallel lag on both
credit and   income,   for example, the reduction in      standard error is from

1.08% to 0.93%. WIth foir       lags and    a   two-quarter delay on the receipt of
income data, the comparable reduction is from 1.10% to 0.92%.

         Finally, it   is   also interesting to consider the value of potential

intermediate    targets for monetary policy when the Federal Reserve conducts
open market operations by setting the shot-'term interest rate rather than
the   growth of nonborrowed reserves. The first three columns of Table 4

present results, analogous to those shown in Table 3,. based on an alternative
                                                      TABLE    4


                                  STANDARD ERRORS FOR NOMINAL INCOME RESIDUAL REGRESSIONS

                        WITH INFORMATION FROM ENDOGENOUS FINANCIAL VARIABLES (sHoRT RATE EXOGENOUS)



                                                                      Information Variable    (Z)

 Variables in Y                                         AM                AR                 Arl        Ac

 Z1                                                   OJ,Q9             M1O9                 .0090**   .0106*

 Z1, Z2                                               O10.6.            ¶010.7               O09l      ,0l0O

Z1; Y]                                                .0lQS             OlQ9                 .0089**   .0107
                                                      .0102              Q105                .0092**   .0103
zi, Z2,      Z3   Z4;   Y1 Z,     Y3, Y4

                                                      .0.105            ¶0106                .0092**   oio5**
 Z1, Z2; Y2
 Z1, Z2, z3; Y3                                       01O3              .0105                002**     ,oloi*
                                                      0lQ2              .0.104               ,0092**   .0102
 Z1, Z2, Z3, Z4;        Y3, Y4


 * Z   variables significant at .05 level.
** Z   variables significant at .01 level.
                                    —20—




version of the Pirandello Model estimated with the short-term interest rate

taken as exogenous and reserves growth, along with money growth and the

long—term interest rate, endogenous. The final column of Table 4 presents

further analogous results based on this alternative model estimated with

credit in place of money. The results show that, if the Federal Peserve's

direct operating instrument is the short-term interest rate, only the

long—term interest rate (among the four variables considered here)

consistently exhibits potentially useful information about future movennts

of nominal income.
                                                  —21—




Iv.     Intermediate       Targets for Peal Income and Prices

           The analysis in Section III proceeds from the simplifying

assumption that it is possible to summarize the Federal Reserve Systems

objectives for the nonfinancial economy in terms of desired growth

of nominal income. This practice is broadly familiar, both because it

sidesteps the arbitrariness inevitably involved in weighting two or

more ultimate policy objectives, and also because some economists have

       _iLD -   ,1 4-4 4— - ,- 4— -,
                    '_4.'_.            .- 1 -   '..GU
                                                         1 ..     . -4-
                                                                aL. L''..
                                                                                 .-.. - 1
                                                                             L WJLLL1cLI_
                                                                          -.-l—
                                                                                            J..LLLLflLLt   Wi. 4-l-  .4—
                                                                                                               LLIL) UL


affecting       the division of nominal income between real and price elements.

          Familiar as it is, however, focusing only on nominal income is not

fully satisfactory for purposes of a discussion of intermediate targets for

monetary policy. The most immediate reason is that the choice of an

appropriate growth rate for the money stock, the most traditional

intermediate target variable, is not invariant to the real-price composition

of the associated nominal income growth. Although it is standard to

assume a unit price elasticity of the demand for money, empirical

evidence consistently indicates an income elasticity of (Ml) money

demand well below unity)8 Hence the money growth that would be consistent

with any chosen nominal income growth is greater as the underlying rate

of price inflation is greater and the corresponding real growth smaller.

More fundamentally in the policy context considered here, the appropriate

central bank response to information about future price inflation in

general differs from the appropriate response to information about future

growth of real economic activity.

          It is also interesting, therefore, to look beyond the information

that   potential monetary policy target variables contain about nominal income
                                       —22--




to see what information they contain about, at the least, real income and

prices. Table 5 provides a basis for the relevant comparisons by showing

standard errors of the Pirandello Model's final—form residuals for real

income growth and price inflation (and the corresponding residuals of the

model with credit) analogous to those shown in Table 2 for the model's

nominal income residuals.19 The residuals for price inflation exhibit

substantial serial correlation, but the real income residuals. do not..

          The upper panel of Table 6 presents standard errors, analogous to

those   in Table 3, for equations relating the model's final—form real growth
residuals to lagged values of the final-form residuals for the model's
endogenous financial variables and, in most cases, to lagged values of the
real growth residual itself. The results show that movements in both
money growth and   credit   growth, and especially   in the long—term interest

rate, consistently provide statistically significant information about future

real income growth beyond that contained in recent values of real income

growth.    Conarison to Table 5 shows, however that the      associated reduction

of   the real growth forecasting error due to observed money growth or
credit growth is too small to warrant much attention in a policy context.
By contrast, that due to observed long—term interest rates — for example,
from 1.00% to 0.82% with a two—quarter lag on real income data — is small but
perhaps worth a policy response.
       The lower panel of Table 6 presents standard errors for equations
analogously relating the model's final—form residuals for price inflation to
lagged    values of the other residuals and lagged values of the inflation

residual itself. These results show that movements in both money growth and

credit growth, and in the short—term interest rate, consistently provide

statistically significant information about future inflation beyond that
                                 TABLE 5

      STANDARD ERRORS FOR REAL INCOME AND PRICE RESIDUAL AUTOREGRESSIONS

                                 Model from Table 1       Model with Credit
Included Lags                      AX          AP           Ax        AP

None                               .0093      .0059         .0101     .0054

1                                  .0091      .0039         .0098     .0038

1,2                                .0091      .0037         .0099     .0037

1,2,3                              .0091      .0036         .0099     .0036

1,2,3,4                            .0091      .0036         .0099     .0036

2,3,4                              .0092      .0040         .0100     .0039

3,4                                .0092      .0041         .0100     .0040

4                                  .0093      .0044         .0100     .0043
                                                       TABLE 6

                          STANDARD    ERRORS FOR REAL INCOME AND PRICE RESIDUAL REGRESSIONS

                      WITH INFORMATION FROM ENDOGENOUS FINANCIAL VARIABLES (RESERVES EXOGENOUS)




                                                                       Information   Variable    (z)


Variables   in Real Incou Regressions                     AM                Ars                  An       Ac

                                                        0087**           0093                   .0082**   QQ94**

                                                        00B6**           .0094                Q08O**      .0094**
z1, z2
                                                        .00S7**           0092                  QQ33**    .0094*
Z1; X1
                                                        .0088*            .0092                 .0083**   .0096*
z,  z2, z3, z4; x1, x2, x3, x4
                                                        .0087*            .0094                 .0081**   QQ95*
Z1, Z2; X2
                                                        .0087*            .0094                 .0082**   .0096*
Z1, Z2, Z3; X3
                                                        .0087*            .0092                 .0082**   .0095*
Z1, Z2, Z3, Z; X3, X4


Variables in Price Regressions

                                                        .0053**           .0057*                .0056*     QQ35**
Z1
                                                        .0051**           .0056*                .0057      QQ35**
Z1 Z2
                                                        .0038*            .0037**               .0039     .0033**
 Z1; P1
                                                         QQ34**           .0033**               .0036      QQ33**
zl, z2F z3, Z;          p_1,         p_3, p_4

                                                        .0038**           ..0038**              .0042     .0034**
Z1, Z; -2
                                                        .0036**           .0035**               .0041     •QQ33**
Z1, Z2, Z3; P3
                                                        .0035**           .0034**               .0039     .0034**
Z1, Z2, Z3, Z4; P3, P4

 * Z   variables   significant at    .05 level.
** Z   variables   significant at    .01 level.
                                      —23—




contained in recent inflation. Here it is questionable, however, whether

the resulting reduction of the model's inflation forecasting error

due to the information in any of these financial variables — at most,

from   0.41% to 0. 34% for the short-term interest rate and with a two—quarter
lag on inflation data — is o value in a policy context,
       Finally, Table 7 presents standard errors for both real incon
growth and price inflation residuals that are analogous to those   shown

in Table 6 but based on the alternative version of the Pirandello Model
estimated under the assumption that the direct operating instrument of
nonetary policy is the short-term interest rate. Here the long-term

interest   rate stands out in consistently providing statistically significant
information about future real income growth. Credit growth, and,to a
slightly   lesser extent, money growth and reserves growth all provide

statistically significant information about future price inflation.
                                                              TABLE 7

                               STANDARD ERRORS FOR REAL INCOME AND PRICE RESIDUAL REGRESSIONS

                        WITh INFORMATION   FROM ENDOGENOUS   FINANCIAL VARIABLES (SHORT RATE EXOGENOUS)



                                                                             Information Variable (z)
Variables in Real Income Regressions                            AM                AR                An        Ac

                                                               0l0i             0102              0079**    ,0095**

 Z1, Z2                                                        03..02           .0100             ,0079**   .0094**


Z1; X1                                                         OÜ96             QQ96              .0079**    QQ93*
Z1, Z2, Z3, Z4; X1, X2, X3, X4                                 ,cJQ5            O095              .0079**   .0094


Z1, Z2; X2                                                     0l00             .,0103            ,0079**   .0095*
Z1, Z2, Z3; X3                                                 .0099            .0099             .0080**   .0094*
Z1, Z2, Z3, Z; X3, X4                                          QQ97             .0097             .0079**   .0095



Variables in Price Regressions

 Z                                                             .0043
     i                                                                          .0042**           .0044     .004l**
 Z1, Z2                                                        ,0039**          ,0038**           .0044     .0034**


Z1; P_1                                                        0037             .0036*            .0037     .0035**
Z1, Z2, Z3, Z4; P1, P2, 1_3 P_4                                .0032**          .0,035*           .0037     .0032**


 Z1, Z2; P_2                                                   .0039            .00.38*           .0040     .0034**

 Z1, Z,  Z3; P3                                                00,34**         ,0035**            .0040     .0032**

 Z1, Z2, Z3, Z4; _3,                                           .0032**         .0036*             .0040     .0033**



 * Z     variables significant at .05 level.
** Z     variables significant at .01 level.
                                           —24—




v. Conclusions and Caveats
           The basic premise underlying the analysis in this paper is that
any financial variable has potential value as an intermediate target
for monetary policy only if observed movements of that variable contain
information about the likely future movements of whatever aspects of
nonfinancial economic activity the central bank seeks ultimately to
affect. Further, keying monetary policy responses to observed movements
of   any   such   variable is sensible only if the relevant information it

contains is not also contained in other readily available sources —

in   the first instance, from observed movements of nonfinancial activity

itself.

           The exrirical results presented in this paper, based on a small

quarterly inacroeconometric model of the United States, indicate the

absence of compelling evidence in favor of singling out any single variable

as "the intermediate targett' of monetary policy. Of the variables

considered here —        including   money (Ml), credit, a long—term interest

rate, and whichever of either reserves or a short—term interest rate the

Federal     Peserve $ystem does not et directly      by open market Qperatlons. —

most   do contain at least some statistically significant information about
the future growth of nominal income, real income, or prices. In most
cases, however, this information is significant statistically but not
economically.        In other words, the reduction in forecasting error gained

from using it is typically too small to be of great moment in a policy

context.

           The paper's principal conclusion, therefore, is to cast doubt on the

practice of designating specific financial variables as intermediate targets
                                           —25—




of    monetary policy. To the extent that such targets are necessary for

other reasons, however —-     for   example, to facilitate Congressional oversight

of the Federal Fserve's policy decisions — the strength of this conclusion

varies from one potential intermediate target to another. 1mong the

variables considered here, credit growth and the long—term interest rate

appear to offer the best prospects of providing information that would be

useful in formulating and implementing monetary policy. For example, when

the direct operating instrument is growth of nonborrowed reserves and the

ultimate policy objective is stated in terms of nominal income, the reduction

in forecast standard error associated with the information contained in credit

growth is 0.18%. Even so, specific results like this one for credit growth

are   not   invariant to the assumed operating instrument and ultimate nonfinancial

objective, nor to the assumed pattern of data availability, so that any

positive irrlications for the use of intermediate targets for monetary

policy are at best highly conditional.

         Several   further caveats about the findings reported here are also worth
repeating. First, the analysis in this paper focuses only on the question of
information contained in single financial variables. It therefore omits
entirely the possibility that the movements of two (or more) such
variables, in conjunction, may provide potentially valuable information
not contained in either alone. Because the Federal Reserve currently
specifies either "target ranges" or "monitoring ranges" for four financial
aggregates, this possibility certainly bears investigation. Empirical
findings along such    lines would also have implications for the difficult

question    of how the Federal Reserve should respond when two of its
designated    target variables give conflicting signals.
                                          —26—




         Second,   it is irrortant to re-emphasize that the appropriate ircnetary
policy   response to the information contained in unexpected movements of any

designated financial variable is in general not to take actions that would

return   that variable to   its previously expected path —   that   is, to treat

it as an intermediate target in the traditional sense. Unless there is a

one—for—one   relationship between   observed movements in the financial variable

and   likely future movements of the relevant aspects of nonfinancial economic
activity, the appropriate policy response is instead     to use the information

that the financial variable provides by taking action expected to return

not it but nonfinancial activity to the previously targeted path.

         Finally, the analysis reported here relies on an econometric model

that is extremely     compact and sisple. The rrodel apparently does a surprisingly
good job at capturing some of the main features of macroeconomic behavior,
but   it necessarily omits many   more.   The method of analysis suggested in

this paper for using a structural model to address questions for which the

previous   literature   has relied on nonstructural models, however, is more

general. The application here to one small, simple model need be no more than

an illustration. A      parallel analysis based on a more powerful, and presumably
more trustworthy model would be a staghtfoward extension of this research.
                                      Footnotes

*This paper was prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City seminar
 on Price tabi1ity and Public Policy, held in Jackson, Wyoming, August, 1984.
 I am greateful to Diane cbyle for research assistance and helpful discussions;
 to Andrew Abel, Mark Watson and participants in the Federal Reserve Bank
 seminar, including especially Stephen Goldfeld, for helpful comments on an
 earlier draft; and to the National Science Foundation and the Alfred P. Sloan
 Foundation   for research support.

 1. This section relies in part on arguments developed at a formal level in
     Brunner and rltzer (1967), Tobin (1970), Poole (1970), Kareken et al.
     (1973), and Friedman (1975).

 2. It is astonishing that some economists, having hypothesized models including
     a single form of wealth holding, proceed to label that single asset
     "money" and then draw logical inferences on which they then base
     recommendations about actual monetary policy.

 3. Because of lags (inertia), of course, not all desired growth rates of
     either prices or real income are feasible. The discussion here assumes
     a choice from within the feasible range.
4. Before October 1979, the Federal Reserve's operating instrument was
    typically   the federal funds rate. Thereafter it
                                                    was the growth of
    nonborrowed reserves. Wallich (1984) has stated that, beginning from
    late 1982 on, it was borrowed reserves.

5.    Thaditional references include Friedman and Schwartz (1963)   and Andersen
      and Jordan (1968).

6. See, for example, Sims (1972, 1980) and Friedman (1983, and forthcoming).

 7. One reason for the more modest response, analyzed by Poole (1970), and
     Friedman (1975), is that in general such an aberrant movement reflects
     some combination of unexpected economic strength or weakness and
     unexpected shifts in portfolio preferences. A second reason, analyzed
     by Brainard (1967), is that policy makers do not know with certainty
     the correct values of the parameters describing the economic effects of
     policy actions.

8. The only change in specification from the original 1977 model is due
    to the use of Ml rather than M2 as the monetary variable. The estimates
    shown in Table 1 are from the Appendix to Clarida and Friedman (1983)

9.    By contrast, there is no evidence of a break after 1976:11, the endpoint
      of the sample originally used in Friedman (1977). See the comparison of
      F—statistics in Table 5 of Clarida and Friedman (1983).
10. See again Wallich (1984).

11. The coefficients of the two interest rate terms in the money supply
     equation are not significant individually but are highly significant
     jointly. The test statistic for the null hypothesis that both coefficients
     are zero is x2(2) = 16.2.
12. The coefficients on the two short—term interest rate terms in the
     term structure equation are not significant individually but are
     highly significant jointly. The test statistic for the null
     hypothesis that both coefficients are zero is x2(2) = 10.4.

13. As an historical matter, of course, only one (at most) of these two
     descriptions of the monetary policy process can be correct for the
     model's estimating period. It is in general not valid to draw inferences
     from a model estimated assuming a stochastic structure different than that
     which characterized actual behavior during the estimation period. The
     relevant question here is which of the two policy instruments was
     exogenous during that period.

14. See the discussion in Clarida and Friedman (1983). For a comparative
     analysis of the model's predictive behavior see Mahoney et al. (1983).

15. The final form of the simple model used here is just its solved—out
     autoregressive representation. If the structural model is written as

                          +By         +Cx +u
                   t     t-l     t    t
     where y and x are vectors of endogenous and exogenous variables,
     respectively, and u is a vector of disturbances to the structural
     relationships, then the model's final form is
                                                         CO            —1   —l
                                    —l         1
            y =               [(I-A) B]'(I-A) Cx + i=0 [(I-A) B]1(I-A) u

     The final—form forecast (the expected movement in y) for any period is
     then

                     .
                     1—
                                                    _t
     and the corresponding final—form residual (the unexpected movement) is

                 =        -          Co

                                   = i0
                                               —l    i
                                          [(I—A) B] (I-A) u
                                                              —1
             t        t        t                                   t

     Because estimation of the model provides values of uonly from 1961:1
     on, the calculation of E (and therefore all results based on C reported
     in Tables 2-7 below) beginsin 1964 :1, thereby avoiding possible problems
     associated with truncation of the infinite sum. (An alternative procedure
     would be to calculate C from x values extending back before 1961 :1, but
     data are not available for all of the exogenous variables for enough prior
     quarters.) Analogous results for calculations beginning in 1966:1 show
     no essential difference.

16. The significance levels reported in Table 3 (and in Tables 4,6 and 7
     below) are for the t- or F-statistics pertaining to the information
     variables (for example, unexpected money growth) in the regressions
     indicated. These significance levels strictly rest on the assumption
     that the remaining unexplained residual variation in these regressions
     is not serially correlated. This assumption is apparently plausible in
     most cases. For example, of the Durbin—Watson values for the seven
     regressions in the first column of Table 3 (the seven regressions based
                                                     serial correlation that is
     on unexpected money growth), only one indicates
      statistically significant at the .05 level. The significance levels
      reported in Tables 3,4, 6 and 7 also strictly rest on the assumption
      that the model's exogenous variables, including policy variables, are
      not affected by feedback from the endogenous variables. This assumption,
      of course, is more dubious.

17.   This procedure is clearly inferior to the more ambitious undertaking of
      respecifying these equations to represent the demand for and supply of
      credit more appropriately. It does, however, render the results more
      directly comparable with those based on the model including money.
18. For recent years only, there is also some evidence of a non—unit price
      elasticity.
19. The final—form residuals used as the basis for these calculations are
      again   for the model estimated with reserves exogenous.
                                References

Andersen, Leonall C., and Jordan, Jerry L. "Monetary and Fiscal Actions:
       A Test of Their Relative Importance in Economic Stabilization."
       Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review, 50 (November, 1968), 11—24.

Brainard, William C. "Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy.."
       Axrrican Economic Review, 57 (May, 1967), 411—425.

Brunner, Karl, and Meltzer, Allan H. "The Meaning of Monetary Indicators."
       Horwich (ed.), Monetary Process and Policy. Horrewood: Richard D.
       Irwin, Inc., 1967.

Clarida, Richard H., and Friedman, Benjamin M. "Why Have Short-Term
       Interest Pates Been So High?!! Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
       (No. 2, 1983), 553—578.

Fair, Hay C. "The Estimation of Simultaneous Equations Models with Lagged
       Endogenous Variables and First Order Serially Correlated Errors."
       Econometrica, 38 (May 1970), 507—516.

Friedman,   Benjamin M. "Targets, Instruments and Indicators of Money Policy."
       Journal of   Monetary Economics, 1 (October, 1975), 443-473.

Friedman,   Benjamin M. "The Inefficiency of Short-Run Monetary Targets for
       Monetary Policy." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (No. 2,
       1977), 293—335.

Friedman,   Benjamin M. "The Roles of   Money   and Credit in Macroeconomic
       Analysis." Tobin (ed.) , Macroeconomics, Prices and Quantities:
       Essays in Memory of Arthur M. Okun. Washington: The Brookings
       Institution, 1983.
Friedman, Benjamin M. "Money, Credit and Interest Rates in the Business
      Cycle." Gordon (ed.) , Business Cycles. Chicago: University of
      Chicago Press, forthcoming.

Friedman, Milton, and Schwartz, Anna Jacobson. A Monetary History of
      the United States 1867-1960. Princeton: Princeton University
       Press, 1963.

Kareken, John H., Muench, Thomas, and Wallace, Neil. "Optimal Open Market
       Strategy: The Use of Information Variables." American Economic
       Review, 63 (March 1973), 156—172.

Mahoney, Kevin, Meyer, Lawrence H., and Smirlock, Michael. "A
       Cortparison of Small Income Expenditure and Monetarist Econometric
       Models." Meyer (ed.), A Comparison of the predictive Performance
       of Small Macroeconometric Models, vol. 2. Mimeo: Washington
       University, 1983.

Poole, William. "Optimal choice of Monetary Policy Instruments in a
       Simple Stochastic Macro Model. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
       84 (May, 1970) , 197—216.
Sims, christopher A. Money, Income and Causality.!! American Economic
       Review, 62 (September, 1972), 540—552.
Sims,   christopher A. "Corrparison of Interwar and Postwar Business Cycles:
         Monetarism Reconsidered.' American Economic Review, 70 (May, 1980),
        250—257.

Tobin, James. "Money and Income: Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc?" Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 84 (May, 1970), 301-317.
Wallich, Henry C. "Recent Techniques of Monetary Policy." Federal Reserve
        Bank of Kansas City, Economic Review (May, 1984), 21-30.
