                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE GENERAL BASIS OF ARBITRATOR
                BEHAVIOR: AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS
                      OF CONVENTIONAL AND
                    FINAL-OFFER ARBITRATION


                        Henry S. Farber

                        Max H. Bazerrnan




                     Working Paper No. i.88




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                         November 1984




This paper was written while Farber was a fellow at the Center For
Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences. Farber received support
for this research from the National Science Foundation under grants
Nos. SES—82OT103 and BNS 16—22943 and from the Sloan Foundation as
an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellow. Bazerman received support for
this research from the National Science Foundation under grant No.
BNS 8l—OT331. Useful comments were received from participants in
workshops at U.C. Berkeley, U.C. Irvine, U.C. Los Angeles, M.I.T.
and Stanford University. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                            NBER Working Paper *1488
                                           November 1984


                  The General Basis of Arbitrator Behavior:
      An Empirical Analysis of Conventional and Final—Offer Arbitration

                                     ABSTRACT



     A general model of arbitrator behavior in conventional and final—offer

arbitration is developed that is based on an underlying notion of an

appropriate award in a particular case. This appropriate award is defined as

a function of the facts of the case independently of the offers of the

parties.     In conventional arbitration the arbitration award is argued to be a

function of both the offers of the parties and the appropriate award. The

weight that the arbitrator puts on the appropriate award relative to the

offers is hypothesized to be a function of the quality of the offers as

measured by the difference between the offers.    In final—offer arbitration it

is argued that the arbitrator chooses the offer that is closest to the

appropriate award.

     The model is implemented empirically using data gathered from practicing

arbitrators regarding their decisions in twenty—five hypothetical cases. The

estimates of the general model strongly support the characterizations of

arbitrator behavior in the two schemes. No substantial differences were found

in the determination of the appropriate award implicit in the conventional

arbitration decisions and the determination of the appropriate award implicit

in the final—offer decisions.



HenryS. Farber                             Max H. Bazerman
Department of Economics                    Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute cf Technology      Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge,   MA 02139                      Cambridqe MA 02139
 I. Introduction

      Of central importance in the process of collective bargaining is the

mechanism for settling disputes that arise when the parties fail to reach

agreement when negotiating a labor contract.   It determines not only the terms

of agreement in all cases but also the probability of reaching agreement

without resort to the dispute settlement mechanism.1 While the strike is the

dominant mode for settling disputes that arise in the course of negotiating

labor contracts, arbitration procedures have become particularly important in

areas, such as the public sector, where strikes are deemed to be too

disruptive. These procedures are characterized by a third party making a

binding decision. In addition, arbitration procedures, though called by

different names, are used to settle disputes in a wide range of areas For

example, litigation of civil disputes is analogous to bargaining with

arbitration as the dispute settlement mechanism. 1n out—of—court settlement

is simply a negotiated settlement while an award by a judge or jury is

essentially an arbitration award2

      The willingness of the parties to make concessions in order to reach a

negotiated settlement is based largely on what they expect to receive if they

do not reach agreement. In the case of arbitration, the parties' expectations

regarding the outcome in the event of failure to reach a negotiated settlement

depend heavily on their expectations regarding the behavior of the arbitrator.



    1. Farber and Katz (1979) and Farber (1900) deveiop models of the
negotiation process under the threat of arbitration that highlight the role of
the expected arbitration award.
    2 Of course, the details of the process are quite different. For
example, in most labor arbitration schemes the offers made by the parties in
an attempt to reach settlement are admissible as evidence before the
arbitrator, However, in civil litigation, pretrial offers to settle are not
admissible as evidence. This difference can have profound effects on the
bargaining process. See, for example, Wheeler (1977) and Farber (1981).
 Thus, our ability to understand the effects of an   arbitration   scheme on the

collective barnaining process without understanding the decision processes of

the arbitrators themselves is quite limited. However, there has been little

in the way of systematic analysis of how arbitrators actually decide.

      In this study two types of arbitration schemes are considered.     The

first is called conventional arbitration where arbitrators are free to impose

any settlement they see fit. The second is called final—offer arbitration

where arbitrators are constrained to make an award that is equal to either the

union final offer or the management final offer.4 While the use of

conventional arbitration arbitration has been increasing, critics have argued

that arbitrators tend to "split the difference" between the offers of the

parties resulting in a "chilling" of bargaining and excessive reliance on the

arbitrator to reach agreement.5 This may occur as the parties maintain polar

positions in order to influence the arbitration award most favorably.6 Final—




    3. Exceptions to this are Ashenfelter and Bloom (1984), Bazerman (in
press), and Bazerman and Farber (in press).
    4. There are many variants of final offer arbitration. For example, where
there is more than one issue in dispute, the arbitrator may be constrained to
award the entire package of one party or the other or the arbitrator may be
free to choose final offers on an issue by issue basis. Another variant of
final—offer arbitration, used for public employees in Iowa, gives the
arbitrator the third option of awarding the recommendation of a "neutral"
third party (Gallagher and Chaubey, 1982).  In this study we consider only the
case where there is a single issue in dispute, and we use the simple
conception of final—offer arbitration where the arbitrator has two discrete
options.
    5. Wheeler (1978) and Kochan and Baderschneider (1978) present evidence
regarding the diffusion of conventional arbitration schemes. Feigenbaum
(1975), Feuille (1975), Northrup (1966), Stevens (1966), Starke and Notz
(1981), Bonn (1972), and Anderson and Kochan (1977) present arguments that
arbitrators split the difference in conventional arbitration resulting in a
"chilling" of bargaining.
    6. Farber (1981) presents a theoretical model of arbitrator and negotiator
behavior in conventional arbitration with implications for the pure split—the--
difference model. Bazerman and Farber (in press) present an empirical
analysis of arbitrator behavior that addresses the issue of spiitting—the
 offer arbitration was developed in response to this criticism of conventional

 arbitration.

       Careful analysis of the relative merits of alternative arbitration

 schemes requires comparisons in at least two dimensions. The first is the

 frequency with which the procedures induce the parties to reach a negotiated

 settlement without resort to an arbitrator. The second is the quality of both

negotiated and arbotrated settlements. Virtually all existing work comparing

conventional and final—offer arbitration has focused on settlement frequency,

probably because the driving force behind the adoption of final—offer

arbitration was the arguement that it is more conducive than conventional

arbitration to negotiated settlemets.7 Another important reason for this

focus is that there has been no clear standard, constant across different

forms of arbitration, that can serve as a basis for Judging the quality of

settlements.

      It is argued in this study that there is a construct, called the

1appropriate award1 implicit in the behavior of arbitrators that is

independent of the particular type of arbitration and that is a natural

standard for judging the quality of settlements. The central hypothesis is

that arbitrators make decisions in the different types of arbitration schemes

based on the same underlying appropriate award. The appropriate award is

argued to be a function of the facts of a given situation independent o-f the

offers of the parties.8 It is a representation of what the arbitrator would



difference directly.
    7. See, for example1 Kochan and Baderschenider (1978), Neale and Bazerman
(1983), and Notz and Starke (197B)
    8. Throughout this study the "facts of the case' refer to all
considerations with the exception of the positions of the parties. In
general, the facts can be considered to be exogenous to the bargaining process
while the offers of the parties clearly cannot be considered exogenous.
                                         4




award based on an unbiased" examination of the facts without any knowledge of

or consideration of the offers. is such to the extent that the appropriate

award is a stable and qeneralizable construct across different arbitration

schemes, it can serve an important role as a basis for evaluating outcomes

(both neqotiated and arbitrated) that are reached under the threat of

arbitration of various types. The plan of this study is to devlop a model of

arbitrator behavior n conventional and final—offer arbitration based on the

appropriate award and to implement this model empirically in order to

determine whether the construct of an appropriate award, in fact, generalizes

across types of arbitration.

      The next section contains the development of a simple model of

arbitrator decision making in conventional arbitration where it is argued that

the arbitration award is a weighted average of the appropriate award and the

offers of the parties. The weights are argued to be systematically related to

the quality of the offers as measured by how close to agreement the parties

are.9 Section III    contains   the development of a simple model of arbitrator

decision making in final—offer arbitration where it is argued that the

arbitrator chooses the offer that is closest to the arbitrator's notion of an

appropriate award.

      The key to the empirical analysis is the investigation of how close the

appropriate award implicit in the conventional arbitration award is to the

appropriate award implicit in the final offer arbitration decision. Of

course, only the actual arbitration awards are observable. The appropriate



    9. This model has as a special case the pure split—the—difference model of
arbitrator behavior that serves as the basis of the critique of conventional
arbitration. The empirical implementation of this model will shed light on
the extent to which the arbitrator splits—the—difference as opposed to
fashioning an award based on the facts of the case.
                                       C




 award is directly observable in neither type of arbitration so that the

 investiatjon must be based on a structural model that relates the actual

arbitration award in each type of arbitration both to the facts of the case as

they are hypothesized to affect the appropriate award and to the offers of the

parties. The empirical test is based on the deqree of correspondence between

the observed and unobserved determinants of the appropriate awards in the two

types of arbitration.

      What are needed are data on the decisions of arbitrators in both

conventional and final—offer settings along with the facts of the particular

case and the offers of the parties. However, data related to arbitrators'

decisions in actual cases of the sort generally analyzed have serious

limitations for the problem at hand. First it is rare that explicit last

offers are recorded in situations where conventional arbitration is utilized.

Second, actual cases do not include both conventional and final—offer awards

in the same situations. Finally, the facts available to the arbitrator are

generally incompletely observed by the investigator. This is crucial because

all facts available to the arbitrator, including those the investigator does

not observe, will affect the offers of the parties as they attempt to

influence the arbitration award favorably.10 These shortcomings are critical

because the analysis relies fundamentally on identifying the role of the facts

available to the arbitrator from the role of the offers in the determination

of the arbitration award.

     In light of these shortcomings, the models of arbitrator behavior are

implemented empirically using data gathered from practicing arbitrators who



    10. Farber (1930, 1961) develops models of strategic behavior in
conventional and final—offer arbitration where the offers are manipulated by
the parties as they attempt to maximize the value of the outcome.
                                      6



were each asked to decide the same set of twenty—five   hypothetical   cases.

Eoth conventional and final—offer arbitration awards were recorded from each

arbitrator for each case.   In the simulation exercise used here, the

arbitrators were qiven a precisely controlled set of information regarding the

facts of each case along with information regarding the offers of the parties.

All of the variation in the facts is measured in the data. Thus, the

information set of the arbitrator is completely characterized by the observed

facts of the case, and the last offers are available for use in analyzing the

conventional as well as the final—offer arbitration awards. The fact that

each arbitrator provided both conventional and final—offer awards in all

situations is another advantage of these data because it facilitates the

estimation of the correlation between unobservable factors that affect the

determination of an appropriate award by a given arbitrator in a particular

case. This correlation will prove to be an important part of the empirical

analysis given that the facts and the offers do not explain all of the

variation in arbitration awards.

     In section IV the design of the simulation exercise is discussed and the

resulting sample is described. Section V contains the empirical

specifications of the models of arbitrator choice along with a discussion of

some conceptual issues that have implications for the econometric

specification. An unconstrained model that allows for completely different

determinants of the appropriate award in the two types of arbitration is

proposed. At the same time it allows for correlation between unobserved

factors that affect the appropriate awards in the two types of arbitration.     A


fully constrained model is also proposed where it is assumed that the

appropriate award is determined in exactly the same way in both types of

arbitration is also proposed. Finally, two partially constrained models are
                                       7




 proposed, the estimates of which will shed additional liQht on how the

appropriate awards might differ across arbitration schemes.

       In section VI the various models are estimated using the data from the

simulated arbatratians.   It is found that the determinants of the apprbpriate

awards are remarkably similar. All of the parameters determining the

appropriate award in conventional arbitration are very close to the parameters

determining the appropriate award in final—offer arbitration..   At the same

time the unobserved factors affecting the appropriate awards are very highly

correlated. While it is possible to reject the hypothesis that the

appropriate awards are identical, there seems to be no substantive difference

across types of arbitration.

      The final section contains a brief summary of the findings as well as a

discussion of their implications for the evaluation of arbitration schemes and

the role of arbitration in the collective bargaining process.




II. Arbitrator Behavior in Conventional Arbitration

     Consider an arbitrator who must make a decision regarding a single issue

such as the wage change to prevail in a collective bargaining agreement.11

While it is not possible to characterize completely the objectives of the

arbitrator, one possible motivation far arbitrators is that they attempt to

make awards that maximize the probability they will be hired in subsequent

cases, either by the same parties or by others who are aware of their

performance. The process by which arbitrators are selected +or cases varies



    11. Where there is mare than one issue to be decided, the details of the
analysis become mare complicated but its qualitative nature is unchanged for
the purposes of this study.
                                         8




across settinqs, but it is qenerally true that both parties have a limited

veto power. For example, New Jersey's statutory procedure for selection of
                                                                 that the New
arbitrators in disputes involving police and firemen requires

Jersey Public Employment Relation Commission present a list of seven potential

arbitrators to the parties, each of whom is instructed to veto three names and

indicate their preference ranking over the remaining four.12 Clearly,

selection procedures such as this provide the incentive for the arbitrator to

avoid making awards are that are unacceptable to either party. Naintaining

acceptability with both parties affects the arbitrator's general professional

reputation and the frequency with which he or she will be hired in the future.

          The arbitrator who is attempting to establish a general professional

reputation will want to maintain acceptability both in terms of the offers of

the parties and the facts of the case. Such a reputation cannot be

established by making an award that simply avoids a settlement that is too far

away from either party's final offer. The arbitrator's professional

reputation is also affected by the degree to which his/her settlements are

known to be consistent with the facts of the case. Evidence consistent with

this view is provided by Bloom and Cavanaugh (1984), who find that the

preferences of the union and the employer regarding appropriate arbitrators in

specific cases are not in direct opposition.      The interpretation of this is

that certain arbitrators are successful at being perceived as fair and are

more likely to be ranked highly by both union and management in particular

 cases.

          A behavioral rule for the arbitrator consistent with the preceding




     12. This procedure is described by Bloom and Cavanaugh (1984), who present
 an analysis of the preferences of the parties across arbitrators.
                                                        9




arquinent is that the arbitrator makes an award that ninimizes                         the   sue of

squared deviations of the award from each partys last offer (V and V for
                                                                                        U        m

union and management respectively) and each partys notion of an appropriate

award (V    and 'em for union and management respectively). These appropriate

awards are assumed to be determined by a set of economic and political factors

(the facts) that are not influenced directly by the parties' behavior,. The

lonc function (V) associated with this decision rule is

      (1)   y = [LX(Y -Y )+(1-LX) (V -V )LJ
                     s  em          s eu
                                                               + (1-)l(Y 5 -Y   in
                                                                                     )L+(1_&) (V _y )L)
                                                                                                s u
where V represents the arbitration award. The parameters LX and & are fixed

weights. The parameter )'                represents the weight put on deviations from the
parties notions of an appropriate award relative to deviations from the

offers.

      It seems reasonable to argue that the weight (1) on the facts relative

to the offers is a function of the quality of the offers.                       If the offers are

close together, the indication is that the parties are close to agreement and

the offers become of primary importance (1 is small) in determining what

outcomes are acceptable. On the other hand, if the offers are farther apart,

the penalty to the arbitrator for deviation from the offers is likely to be

smaller so that the facts become of primary importance ( is large). More

formally,

      (2)         =       q(Y       —   V)
where g(4) is a monotonically increasing function of its argument.

      The optimal (loss minimizing) arbitration award based on these

considerations is

      ()
              s
                      =    y    e
                                    +   ()-) (Y
                                              in
                                                   + (1-)Y u
where V is the weighted average of the management and union notions of an

appropriate award. This is
                                                       1 ()




      (4)         Y       cY        +   (l—c)Y eu
                      e        em

This quantity (Y) is called here the arbitrator's notion of an appropriate

award. The value of V has normative appeal to the extent that it summarizes

the arbitrators interpretation and synthesis of the needs of the parties as a

function of the economic and political environment.                          In a limited sense it

represents the ideal award.

                                is      that   the opti mal award      for the arbitrator   to make is   a
      The key result
                                                                       based on the facts and the
weighted average of the appropriate award 'e'

offers of the parties where the weight () depends on the quality of the

offers. This characterization of the arbitration award is intuitively
                                                                          parameterization of the
plausible, and it need not depend on the specific

optimization process outlined here.

         The optimal arbitration award defined in equation (3) has a number of

interesting special cases. First, if                          '1   then only the facts are important

and the arbitrator ignores the offers. Second, if 10 and 6=1/2 then the

arbitrator simply splits the difference between the offers of the parties
                                                                                                    model
without regard to the facts. Third, a more general split—the--difference

is the special case where 10 but 6 is unconstrained. Finally, the notion

that the weight on V relative to the offers is a function of the quality of

the offers can be tested by assuming an appropriately general specification

for '.      All   of these special cases are tested using the estimates of the model

presented below.
                                      11




III. Arbitrator Behavior in Final—Offer Arbitration

      In final—offer arbitration the arbitrator is constrained to make an

award that is equal to the union final offer or the management final offer.

No compromise is allowed. Suppose that the arbitrator must choose between

final offers specifying a single issue, such as the wage change to prevail in

a collective bargaining agreement.1 Assume that the underlying motivation of

the arbitrator in final offer arbitration is identical to the motivation in

conventional arbitration: to maximize the probability of being hired in the

future. However, the arbitrator must signal the quality of the award simply

by the choice of one offer or the other. The problem for the arbitrator is to

decide which offer is more likely to be deemed acceptable. This requires an

evaluation of the offers in the context of the relevant facts regarding the

economic and political environment.   In more formal terms, the arbitrator in

final—offer arbitration can be conceived of as selecting the offer that

minimizes the value of some loss function. However, there is no reason to

believe that the appropriate loss function in final—offer arbitration is the

same loss function that is appropriate in conventional arbitration. The

structure of the process is quite different, and the offers play very

different roles in the two types of arbitration.

      Assume that the loss function of the arbitrator in final—offer

arbitration is a weighted sum of squared deviations of the selected offer only

from the appropriate outcomes of the parties (Y        and Y   ) and not from the
                                                  em



    13. As discussed in the introduction, where there is more than one issue
in dispute, final—offer arbitration can take on a number of different forms.
By assuming that a single issue is in dispute, the definition and analysis of
final—offer arbitration is simplified without losing the central features of
the process. See Crawford (1979) for an interestinq analysis of negotiation
under the threat of arbitration where there is more than one issue in dispute.
                                                 1')




the offers.'4 This loss function is

       (5)   V =    (V s —V em   )
                                     2
                                         +(1—c(Ys —Y
                                                   eu ).
Since the arbitrator is constrained to impose one or the other of the offers

as the award, the optimal award from the arbitrator's point of view is the

offer that yields the lower value for the loss function defined in equation

(5).   It is straightforward to derive the result that the management's offer

will be selected if and only if

       (6)    (V +V )/2 < V
                u    in              a

where V is defined in equation (4) as the arbitrator's notion of an
       e
appropriate award. This result has the intuitively appealing interpretation
                                                              15,16
that the arbitrator selects the offer that is closest to Ye

       In summary1 arbitration awards in both conventional and final—offer

arbitration depend on the offers a common underlying variable called the



     14. It would be odd for the squared deviations of the award from the
offers to enter directly in the loss function in final—offer arbitration
because the arbitrator must select one offer or the other. The contribution
to the loss function would always be zero from the offer selected and the
weighted square of the difference between the offers for the offer not
selected. Indeed, if the weights are equal (i.e., &1/2 in equation 3) then
the contribution to the loss function from this source would be independent of
the arbitration award.
     15. A more general characterization of arbitrator choice in final—offer
arbitration is that the arbitrator does not weight deviations from V by the
management and union equally. This is equivalent to assuming that te
arbitrator compares V to an arbitrary weighted average of the offers. While
not presented in this study, estimates of such a model yield virtually no
improvement in the fit, and the hypothesis that the weights are equal (1/2)
cannot be rejected at any reasonable level of significance. This is
equivalent to the result reported by Ashen-Felter and Bloom (1984).
     16. If it is assumed that in final—offer arbitration the arbitrator
minimizes the same loss function that was minimized in conventional
arbitration, the optimal award in final—offer arbitration is the offer that is
closest to the optimal award in conventional arbitration defined in equation
 (3). Empirical implementation of this alternative formulation leads to the
conclusion that the relationship in (6) is an adequate characterization of the
 arbitrator's decision rule in final—offer arbitration.   Indeed, for specific
 values of ' and 6 (Y=1 or 61/2) it can be shown that the alternative
 formulation collapses to the decision rule defined in (6).
                                            13




appropriate award (Y). In conventional arbitration the award is a weighted

average of          and the offers where the weiahts depend on the quality of the

offers while in final—offer arbitration the award is the offer that is

closest to V
                e




IV. The Data: Desian of       the Simulation and Characteristics of the Sample

          The models developed in this study are implemented empirically using

data collected from a set of simulations administered to practicing

arbitrators. The simulation materials were sent out to the entire membership

of the National Academy of Arbitrators (NAA) and the participants in a

regional meeting of the American Arbitration Association (AAA). Each

arbitrator was asked to judge twenty—five hypothetical interest arbitration

cases where the only remaining unresolved issue was wages. They were asked to

provide the wage award for a contract of one year duration that they would

make under a conventional arbitration scheme. They were also asked to provide

the offer that they would select in a final—offer arbitration scheme. Along

with their judgments in the twenty—five cases each arbitrator was asked to

supply information regarding his or her background and experience.

Arbitrators were required to supply their names and addresses with their

response only if they wished to receive a copy of the results. Anonymity was

guaranteed, and responses were sent back in a provided business reply

envelope.

          Of 584    sets of materials mailed, sixty—four arbitrators provided usable
responses. A total of 1522 usable arbitration decisions from the sixty—four

arbitrators were obtained and are used in the subsequent analysis.17 The mean



    17.             j n .vprr cc     7,7   (nut n+ 2 ooEabi) vaid rnnn,          ner
                                     14




age of the response group was 59 years, and all but two of the respondents

were male)8 The mean number of interest arbitration cases that had been

heard by members of the response group was 29, while the the mean number of

arbitration cases of all sorts that had been heard was 886. Unfortunately,

there exists no comprehensive survey of members of the NAA that could be used

to determine if the response group is representative of the population of

arbitrators as a whole However, some ongoing research by Helburn and Rogers

(personal communication, 1983), who obtained 286 responses to a survey of NAA

members (a response rate in excess of 50 percent) that required far less time

from participants, presents an interesting contrast. Their sample had an

average age of 60.5 years. The mean number of interest arbitration cases

heard by their respondents was 13.1, and the mean number of total arbitration

cases heard by their respondents was 295.3. Thus, the smaller number of

respondents to the survey used in the current study had a very similar mean

age to this large sample. At the same time, the current sample possesses

significantly more experience in arbitration of both types. This is

consistent with the notion that arbitrators self—selected at least in part on

the basis of interest arbitration experience. It is also likely that those

who responded were those who felt most comfortable making an award on the

basis of the information provided and who believe that the salient features of

a real collective bargaining situation can be captured in a simulation. It is

difficult to speculate about the effect that these selection criteria might




arbitrator. Some arbitrators responded only to some of the scenarios, and
some responses were deleted due to obvious errors on the part of the
respondents in writing their award.
    18. The mean characteristics of the respondents are based on the sixty of
the sixty—four arbitrators who provided their personal characteristics along
with their judgments.
                                       15




have on the results.

      The simulations are cast in the private sector despite the fact that

most experience in the United States with interest arbitration is in the

public sector. One important reason is that there is more room for presenting

cases to the arbitrators that are diverse in the sense that they are located

in different settings while at the same time controlling the relevant factors

in a precise manner. For example, in the private sector there are a large

variety of industries and occupations that can be incorporated into the

scenarios. In the public sector there is only one industry by definition, and

the number of occupations is quite limited. The scenarios used here are much

more likely to be effective in manipulating the facts from the arbitratars

perspective if the industrial and occupational settings differ sharply from

case to case. Arbitrators may be more prone within an industry or the public

sector to make comparisons (implicit or explicit) between scenarios that are

unintended from the researcher's point of view and destructive of the

analysis. Overall, we would further argue that the sort of decision processes

that are the focus of this analysis generalize beyond the particular sector.

The forces that influence arbitrator behavior are likely to be similar, and

much can be learned about arbitrator behavior in general from examination of

the particular scenarios used here.

      In order to maintain parallelism between cases while providing necessary

diversity, twenty—five industries were identified that had varying average

national wages in 1980. These national wages were adjusted very slightly to

create a systematic pattern of twenty—five national wages that varied from

.40 ,.45,.50,... 1.55,     1.60   times $8.66, where $8.66 was the mean of all

twenty—five actual national industry average wages.     These adjusted national

wages were used as a basis for the computation of some of the factors as
                                                 16




described below.         Two additional criteria were used in selecting the

particular values for each factor. First, it was desired that the scenarios

develop wage increases rather than wage declines. Second, it was necessary

for the union's final offer exceed that of the management for obvious reasons

in all scenarios.

          Along with information on the national wage, each scenario contained

iiITL'I   HID.UU WI YII
   — The inflation rate was stated to be 77., 97., 117.,   137.,   or   157..


   — The    average wage increase of other contracts in the industry was stated to

       be 6'!., 6%,   10%, 127., or 147.,

   — The    average local wage for similarly qualified employees was stated to be

       equal to the average national wage in the industry times 87%, 94%, 101%,

       108%, or 115%.

       The present wage was stated to be equal to the average national wage times

       96.5%, 98%, 99.5%, 1017.,      or    102.5%.

   — The    financial health of the firm was stated to be terrible, poor, fair,

       good, or excellent.19

   —   Management's final offer was stated to be equal to the average national

       wage in the industry times 1047., 105.5%, 107%, 108.5%, or 110%.

   —   Union's   final offer was stated to be equal to the average national wage in

       the industry times 111.5%, 113%, 114.5%, 116%, or 117.5%.

          Each of the twenty—five hypothetical cases was described in a paragraph




    19. This is the only one of the factors that is qualitative rather than
quantitative. The reason is that there is no clear measure of financial
health that could generalize across industries and would be familiar to
arbitrators. For example, a 'good" rate of profit varies considerably across
industries. The empirical specification takes account of the ordinal nature
of this measure.
                                       17




in terms of the seven criterion factors. The scenarios were designed to

ensure orthogonality between factors with regard to the underlying ordinal

rankings.      In the total set of twenty—five cases there were 'five cases for

each of the five levels of each factor.21 While the cases were presented to

each arbitrator in the same sequence, this sequence was chosen randomly with

respect to the factors that were manipulated. This was done in order to

minimi,c    +h nnih1iv fh.+- fh rrdr n fh             wruild ,r 1&inr fh
decisions.    The following is an example of a simulated case.

                               Situation 18

        In a town of 102,000 people, workers with similar skills and
        backgrounds to the employees of this radio and broadcasting
        company were paid $8.31/hr., while the national wage in this
        industry was $8.23/hr. The financial outlook for this company
        is fair in light of the 117. inflation rate. The present
        average wage for this company's union is $8.44/hr. Contract
        negotiations have reached an impasse. Both sides, however,
        have agreed to submit final offers to you, the arbitrator, and
        to be bound by your decision for a period of one year.
        Comparable pay increases from collective bargaining agreements
        in the industry are running about 87. this year. Management's
        final offer is $6.56 (a 1.47. increase) and the union's final
        offer is $9.55 (a 13.27. increase>.

      There is considerable variation in the responses of the arbitrators

within particular cases. The standard deviation of the percent wage increase

awarded by the arbitrator in conventional arbitration in a particular case is

never below 1.1 percentage points and it is generally much larger. The

maximum is approximately 2.7 percentage points. The average standard



    20. This design was selected for the purposes of other research using the
same data. See Bazerman (in press). This design does not imply exact
orthogonality with regard to the actual levels of the factors. Interested
readers can contact the authors for more information.
    21. Of course, this does not exhaust all of he possible interactions
between factors. There are a total of 78125 (5 ) possible combinations of
the five levels of seven factors, and there are many sets of twenty—five cases
with the desired properties. The set selected is arbitrary in this regard.
                                         18



deviation across the twenty—five cases is approximately 1.75 percentage

points.     Similarly, there is   considerable variation in the final offer awards
within    particular cases. There was ar average of 61 responses per scenario

(1522/25), and in only two scenarios did all of the responding arbitrators

select the same final offer.       In only eleven of the twenty—five scenarios did

fewer than five arbitrators select a particular offer. Thus, arbitrators

differ substantially in their evaluation of any particular scenario in both

types of arbitration, and these differences may be a major source of the

uncertainty that has been argued to drive collective bargaining where

arbitration is the dispute settlement mechanism (Farber and Katz, 1979;

Farber, 1980, 1981).

          The empirical analysis of arbitration awards is based on the

proportional wage increase awarded by the arbitrators. This can be

approximated by the difference between the logarithm of the wage level awarded

and the logarithm of the present wage.        On this basis the relevant form for

the explanatory variables that measure wages are as log differences from the

present wage. The only variables that do not measure wages or proportional

changes are the variables measuring the financial condition of the company.

Two dichotomous variables were created to measure variation in this dimension.

The first (CONDB) equals one if the financial condition of the firm was

terrible or poor, and it equals zero otherwise. The second (CONDO) equals one

if the financial condition of the firm was good or excellent, and it equals

 zero otherwise. The omitted category is a firm financial condition of fair,

 The definitions, means, and standard deviations of the variables used in the

 empirical analysis are contained in Table 1.

          Preliminary examination of the arbitrators responses uncovered ar

 interesting phenomena that is not apparent from the information in table 1 and
                                      19




that fundamentally affects the empirical &nalysis. Of the 122 conventional

arbitration awards that were analyzed, fully 389 (25.67.) were exactly equal to

either the union's or the management's last offer.   All but 8 of the 64

arbitrators had at least one award that was equal to one of the offers. A

reasonable explanation for this is based on the property of the scenarios that

they were designed arbitrarily without regard for the plausibility of the
                            '1
offers   vis a vis the facts."' In those situations where the offers were

skewed relative to the facts (both very low or both very high), the

arbitrators often seemed to feel constrained not to stray outside the

boundaries set by the offers though they were free to do so.23 In some cases

the arbitrators did not feel so constrained.   In 196 cases (for 31

arbitrators) the award lay outside the boundaries. While not analyzed in

detail, the pattern of awards within arbitrators suggests that some

arbitrators are very reluctant to make an award outside the boundary. These

arbitrators had a relatively large number of cases on the boundary. Other

arbitrators felt relatively free to make awards outside the boundaries, and

they had few cases on the boundaries. Only two arbitrators were never on a

boundary or outside the boundaries.

      With regard to the analysis of arbitrator decision making, the issue of

why some arbitrators are more likely to make awards outside the range of the

offers is a complicating factor that will not be addressed in any detail here.

Indeed, such extreme cases are likely to occur only rarely if at all in actual



    22. If actual data were used it is unlikely that offers that were so
pathological' relative to the facts would be observed. They only occur here
because of the independent variation of the facts and the offers. This
independent variation is an important strength of the data used here.
    23. In terms of the loss function, this suggests that there are
discontinuities at the boundaries that make it more costly to venture outside
in some situations
                                             2 t:




              The approach taken is to develop an appropriate econometric
practice.
specification that accounts for when arbitrators in conventional arbitration
                                                     the boundary without specifying which
will be either on a boundary or outside
                                                       discussed in detail in the next
of these conditions hold. This approach,
                                           the analysis of the decision processes of
section, allows us to proceed with
                                                    configuration of the facts and offers
arbitrators where there is a "normal'

without confounding the analysis with the boundary problem.




 V. The Empirical Specifct9P
                                                      of arbitrator choice outlined in
        In order to implement the models
                                               of the arbitrator's notion of an
 sections II and III, a specification
                                                                               Denote the
 appropriate settlement in each form of arbitration is required.
                                                                      and
 appropriate awards in conventional and final—offer arbitration by ec
                                                                 and not on
 respectively. These must be based only on the facts of the case

 the offers of the parties. Convenient specifications are

        (7)      Y        =       +C
                     ec       c        c


 and

                          =       + Cf
                                                                  and
 where X represents a vector of variables reflecting the facts, c

 represents vectors of parameters, and Cc and Cf are stochastic components
                                                                                    The
 representing unmeasured factors affecting ec and Yf respectively.
                                           variables measuring 1) the rate of inflation;
  vector X includes a constant and
                                                       situations 3) the differential
  2) negotiated settlements in comparable
                                                     work and the present wage; 4) the
  between the local wage for comparable

  differential between the national wage in the industry and the present wage;

  5) the logarithm of the present wage and 6) the financial condition of the
                                                                                 21




Co (Ti p an y

           The Criterion function for choosing the management offer in final—offer

arbitration, Contained in equation (6), can be written after substituting from

equation (8) for V                          as
                                   ef
                           =       (V +y )/2 —                           —
           (9)
                                                            Xf               Cf.
The management's offer is selected if

           (10)        C. < (V ÷Y )12 —
                                        u        in
                                                             X.
and the union's offer is selected otherwise. Assuming a normal distribution

with zero mean for €f the analysis of final offer arbitration awards is a

simple probit Note that, unlike the usual probit analysis, the variance of

     is identified due to the fact that the average offer enters the criterion

function with a known coefficient (=1).

          The empirical analysis of conventional arbitration awards is more

complicated due to the boundary problem. assuming an additive error, the

general model that relates V and the offers to the optimal conventional

arbitration award, contained in equation (3), can be rewritten as

           (11)                =
                                   ''ec          +    (l—)[&V                +   (1—&)V]      +   i.
where V           is the value of V in conventional arbitration and 11 is a stochastic

component representing unme:sured factors affecting                                                        After substitution

from equation (7) for Y                                   this relationship is
                                                 ec

           (12)
                       s
                               =
                                        c
                                              + (i-)EY m                     +   (1-&)Y u ]   +
                                                                                                       c

where '          and C refer to the values of P and C for conventional arbitration.
            C          C

A   final quantity that needs to be specified for the analysis of conventional

arbitration awards is the weighting function that determines )'.                                                   This   is

specified as the simple linear function

           (13)            =           + )F                —V        1
                                   0             1    U         in

where            and           are parameters to be estimated. The notion that the relative
weiQht on the facts is larger when the offers are farther apart is embodied in

this specification as a positive value for i.

            Specification of the optimal arbitration award as a continuous function

of Y        and the offers is not consistent with the bunching of arbitration
       ec

awards at the boundaries under standard assumptions renardinQ the

distributions of the random components ( and )).              It also seems clear that

the specification of the optimal arbitration award defined in equation (11) is

valid only for awards that lie between the offers. Where Y                  is on a boundary

or outside the range defined by the offers! a different process determining

may prevail. What is required is an empirical specification that accounts for

when an award will be on the boundary or outside and hence, determined by a

different (unspecified) process.

            n appropriate statistical model is based on the notion that the process

that determines          in equation (11) is censored in that the process is only

observed if 'ec is interior to the offers.24 In this context, the decision

process of arbitrators can be thought of as a sequential process. The

arbitrator formulates a notion of an appropriate settlement                    and compares

this to the offers.        If the offers surround V     (V <V <V ) then the
                                                   ec    in        ec U
arbitrator makes an award that is the function of V                and the offers defined
                                                              ec

in equation (11).        If the offers do not surround V           then the arbitrator makes
                                                         ec

an award on some basis that is not articulated here except that it is either

on a boundary or outside the boundaries defined by the offers This

alternative decision process does not have to be the same for all arbitrators




    24. This is only one of a number of potential censoring processes that
could be used. Other specifications were tried, and the results were
qualitatively similar. The approach presented here provided the best fit to
the data.
                                                       23




or all cases, The key is that little structure is iiTposed on the data for

these observations, The data on the actual arbitration award (Y c)                                is used for
these observations only to the extent that they have information about the

relationship between V                 and the offers.

         More formally, the quantity                   is observed only if                  is interior to

the offers, and in this case                    is equal to the actual arbitration award (V).

On the other hand, if Y__ is less than or equal to Y_ then the actual
                                                                              ill




arbitration      award is less than or equal to V. Similarly, if Y                               is greater

than or equal to Y then the actual arbitration award is greater than or equal

to V .
    u      Essentially,          the unobserved value of V
                                                                   ec
                                                                        is used in determining

whether an arbitration award corresponding to the process defined above is

observed. Thus, V is censored based on the value of V                                    relative to the
                            s                                                       ec

offers.

         The next step is to derive the probabilities associated with observing

V of a given value. The probability of observing an award that is less than

or equal to the management offer is

         (14)    Pr(Y            V )    Pr(V         V ) = Pr(S         V —X ),
                        s         m            ec                  c     ni         c

Similarly,      the probability of observing an award that is greater than or equal

to the union offer is

         (15)    Pr(V
                        s
                                V )
                                  u
                                        Pr(V
                                               ec
                                                    ? V )
                                                       u
                                                            Pr( c? Y u-X c).

Finally, the joint probability density of observing an award that is between

the offers and that has a value equal to                      is
                                              24



           (16)   Pr(Y<Y<Y, y5=y) = Pr(Y <Y <Y,

                    =   Pr(V —X <C <V —X
                           m    c c  u   c
                                                   ,M+'€
                                                           c
                                                               : —C1X
                                                                 s    C
                                                                        +(1—flE&V
                                                                                     m
                                                                                         +(1—&)Y ]}).
                                                                                                  u


In other words, for all observations it is known in what range the value of

          and hence C, falls. However, Y, and hence 4-€,                    is   observed only if

V        is between the offers.
    ec

           The key to the test of the model of arbitrator behavior is an analysis

of how close the arbitrator's notions of an appropriate award (V                               and V
                                                                                          ec           ef

are in the two types of arbitration.              It is assumed throughout this analysis

that the random components of the model (CcS CfS and )) are distributed as a

trivariate normal. Although V             and V        are not observed directly, their
                                    ec            ef

relationship with the facts can be estimated. More formally, the hypothesis

that P=Pf can be tested directly.            In addition, the correlation between the

unobserved components affecting VEr and Vef (C and                         can be estimated.
                                              c                        +

However, it is not possible to apply a standard test for the equality of these

random variables because equality implies equal variances along with unit

correlation5 and the latter is on the boundary of the parameter space.

          In order to examine the congruence between V                 and V
                                                                            ef   ,   four      versions of

a joint model of arbitrator choice are estimated. The most general

unconstrained model allows          and      to have distinct values while allowing

for correlation between the three unobservables in the model (C, E, and J).

The likelihood function for this model is derived from the joint probabilities

of four distinct events under the assumption of trivariate normality of the

errors.25 Letting Yf represent the arbitration award in final offer



    2. Note that there are a total of six conceptually possible events.
However, two of these events are clearly pathalogical in some way, and these
probabilities are not specified here, One is the case where the conventional
arbitration and Y represent the conventional arbitration award, the first is

the joint probability that the conventional award is less than or equal to the

management final offer and the final—offer award is equal to the management

final offer. This probability is

       (17)   Pr(Y Y ¶               Y        Y ) = Pr(C Y —X C <E'( +y )/2—Xp )
                  s         in           Si    in       c in  c  +   u  in    +

The joint probability that the conventional award is greater than or equal to

the union final offer and the final offer award is equal to the union offer is

              Pr(Y Y ,                        V ) = Pr(C Y
      (18)
                  s         u
                                     V
                                         s+ u                 c u —X c,   C
                                                                              I
                                                                                  >[Y 4-V ]I2—X ).
                                                                                      ii   in        I
Next, the joint probability that the conventional award lies between the

offers and is equal to V and the final—offer award is equal to the management

offer is




      (19)    Pr(V <\ <f
                  in        5U                SS   yV
                                                        si     in




              = Pr(V —X <C <V —XP ,
                        c c u c
                       in
                                                             )+' cVs —U'X         +(1—1)[&V +(1—&)YU H,
                                                                                  c             in




                            C       <CV +j ]I2—X ).
                                f        urn            +


Finally, the joint probability that the conventional award lies between the

offers and is equal to                    and the final—offer award is equal to the union

offer is




award is less than or equal to the management offer while the final—offer
award is equal to the union offer. The second is where the conventional award
is greater than or equal to the union offer while the final—offer award is
equal to the management offer. There were eight such cases in the original
sample, and it was decided that they were most likely the result of response
error.  These observations were deleted from the sample used for estimation.
                                                                   26




      (20)   Pr(Y <y y                 ys =y* y y
                  in    s     u            s' sf u

             =   Pr(Y —X <C <Y
                     m        C        C            U
                                                        —XP , C C YS _{1xs C +(1fl[óY in +(1—)YU H,
                                                           C




                            f >[yu +y          in
                                                    ]/2—X ).
                                                               f

In the next section, maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters of this

model are presented. These parameters include                                                    6, and the six
                                                                                         10
elements of the covariance matrix of the errors.

      The second version of the model to be estimated is a constrained model

(constrained *1) where V              in all                        respects Essentially, it is assumed
                                  ec ef   —Y


that PPf and that C E. Denote the constrained value of P and P by ,
and denote the constrained value of C                                   and Cf by C.   It is straightforward to

show that the probability of the first event, that the conventional award is

less than or equal to the management offer and the final-offer award is equal

to the management offer is

      (21)   Pr(Y Y ,         V        =Y ) =             Pr(CY         —XP).
                  s    in         Sf           in                   m


The probability of the second event, that the conventional award is greater

than or equal to the union offer and the final—offer award is equal to the

union offer is

      (22)   Pr(Y V ,        V         V )                Pr(€Y m—XP).
                  s u             sf u
Next, the joint probability that the conventional award lies between the

offers and is equal to             and the final—offer award is equal to the management

offer is
                                                           27




       (23)    Pr(Y <V <V           V =Y, y               _\I
                    m         s u       s s          st         in




               =   Pr(Y —XP<€<EY +Y ]/'—Xf, )4+'€&{ —{X+(1—)E&Y +(1—&)Y 3))
                         in     U in             S                     U               Ifl




Finally,   the joint probability that the conventional award lies between the

offers and is equal to              and the final—offer award is equal to the union

offer is




      (24)    Pr(V <V <V ,          V       =Y4, y         y
                    in        s u       s     s      sf u

              =                                                      p+'C=Y—X±(1—)')t&V+(1—&)YJ}),

Given the assumption of joint normality of the errors, the likelihood function

of this madel can be derived from these probabilities. The maximum likelihood

estimates of the parameters of this model (,
                                                                          1,    6, and the three

elements of the covariance matrix of                             and )4) are presented in the next

section.

      The third specification of the model is a constrained version

(constrained #2) of the general model, defined in equations (17) — (20)                              ,   where

no correlation is allowed between                         and either €c or IL.      However, c and

are allowed to differ. This is equivalent to estimating the models of

conventional and final—offer arbitration separately. In other words, these

estimates can be derived from a simple probit model of arbitrator choice in

final offer arbitration and the model of arbitrator decision making in

conventional arbitration that is defined in equations (14) —                           (16).   These can

be thought of as the models based on the marginal distributions of the

underlying random variables. The maximum likelihood estimates of the

parameters of this model (,
                                             , Y0,             1, 6 and the Four free components of
                                                 28



the covariance matrix of             the errors) are presented in the next section.
           The final specification of the model is a constrained version

(constrained $3) of the general model, defined in equations (17) —                (20), where
     =p but      where         is allowed to differ from      thouqh correlation is allowed
    cf                     c
                                                                  -



for. This             can be interpreted as assuming that the systematic determinants of

V        and V        are identical while the random components may differ. An
    ec           ef
alternative interpretation is that V                  Y   in all respects while there is an
                                                ec ef
additional error component in the final—offer decision rule that causes a

deviation from a strict comparison between the average offer and Y. The

maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters of this model (,                    '' 6,
and the six components of the covariance matrix of the errors) are presented

in the next section.

           Note that the sample design seems to be a natural for application of an

error components model of some sort. There are multiple observations for each

arbitrator, and it is known that the arbitrators differ systematically in

their awards (Bazerman, in press).              If these systematic differences are not

accounted for, the inferences based on the estimates will not be reliable due

to the correlation that is induced between the stochastic terms across cases

for a particular arbitrator. One approach to accounting for this correlation

in the likelihood function is to assume that arbitrators differ systematically

in their mean values of an appropriate award                    in both conventional and

final—offer arbitration. This is equivalent to an error components structure
         26
on C.         This structure can be accommodated by including a vector of



    26. In the conventional arbitration model there is more than one error (C
and J4) so that assuming systematic differences across arbitrators in V is not
the only possible solution. For example, another approach would be toBassume
that the mean value of ,ti varies systematically across arbitrators (an errors
components structure on ,U).  Yet a third approach would be to allow the
                                               29




                     specific dummy variables in the data vectors determining 'ec arid



              It is not likely that the introduction of fixed effects will change the

estimates or the inferences substantially. This is because each arbitrator

was given the same set of twenty—five cases so that the explanatory variables
                                                                     28
 (X, V          V ) are the same for all arbitrators in each case.        In this
         in      u

situation it can be shown for ordinary least squares (OLS) models that the

estimates derived without fixed effects are identical to those obtained when

fixed effects are included. In addition, it can be shown that the standard

errors derived from models including fixed effects must be smaller than those

derived from models without fixed effects.29 Thus, any hypothesis testing

done on the basis of OLS estimates without fixed effects will be conservative.

While these results are not precisely true for the nonlinear model proposed

here, they are likely to be approximately true.

              The results reported in the next section are for specifications which do

not include fixed arbitrator effects. With the exception of the fully

unconstrained model, all of the models have been estimated including fixed




decision processes of arbitrators to differ more generally. Bazerman (in
press) presents an analysis of the formulation of awards under conventional
arbitration that accounts for differences between arbitrators in a number of
di inensi ons.
    27. There are 25 observations for most arbitrators so that the standard
problem of inconsistency in nonlinear fixed effect models due to small numbers
of repeat observations is not likely to be a serious problem.    random
effects specification was considered. However, evaluations of very high order
normal CDFs would be required, and the computational burden was deemed
excessi ye.
    28. This is not precisely true due to the fact that there are some missing
observations.
    29. The analysis of errors components models in this context is formally
identical to the well known seeminqly—unrelated—regressjon problem. Note that
these considerations are independent of whether, in fact, the fixed effects
differ significantly across arbitrators.
                                       30



effects.0        While the hypothesis that the fixed effects are equal could be

rejected in all cases, the estimates of the parameters of interest and their

asymptotic standard errors were virtually identical to the estimates derived

without fixed effects.     In addition the qualitative nature of the outcomes of

the tests of the competing models were not affected by the inclusion of the
fixed effects.




VI. The Empirical Results

      The first two columns of table 2 contain the maximum likelihood

estimates of the unconstrained joint model of arbitrator decision making in

conventional and final—offer arbitration. The definitions of the relevant

variables are contained in table 1. ll of the estimates presented in this

section were derived using the optimization algorithm described by Berndt,

Hall, Hall, and Hausman (1974). The estimates of the model are plausible in

the sense that all of the parameters have the expected sign and are

asymptotically significantly different from zero at conventional levels. The

general framework of the conventional arbitration award process is supported

by the data.      The weight on ec relative to the offers U') is large so that

the arbitrator pays primary attention to the facts, but the weight is

sensitive to the quality of the offers in the sense that as the offers get




    30. Estimation of fixed effects in the fully general model would require
the estimation of an additional 126 parameters in a single model. The
computational burden proved to be excessive. Constrained model *2 also
required the estimation of 126 extra parameters, but the estimation could be
split into two pieces.
    31. Bazerman and Farber (in press> discuss a similar set of estimates in
detail with regard to their implications for arbitrator behavior in
conventional arbi tration.
 farther apart the weight on V        increases (Ii>O). The weight on the

management offer relative to the union offer is significantly larger than
 .5.3.,
     —

          The estimates of P and       are very similar so that their qualitative

properties can be discussed without making any distinction. The differential

between wages negotiated by workers in comparable situations and the present

wage (COMP) has a large positive effect on V. The differential between wages

in the local (occupationally defined) and national (industrially defined)

labor markets and the present wage (LW and NW respectively) have positive but

smaller statistically significant effects on Y. The effect of LW is larger

than that of NW.        It is interesting that the level of the present wage has a

small positive coefficient, although it is not significantly different from

zero at conventional levels. To the extent that this coefficient is positive,

the implication is that arbitrators act not only to ratify the existing

proportional wage structure but also to widen the existing differentials

somewhat. Finally, the financial condition of the company has an asymmetric

effect on the arbitration award. The omitted category for the dummy variables

are situations where the company is in Imiddlingu condition.       If the company

is in worse condition (CONDB), the arbitrators made awards which were 2 to 2—

1/2 percentage points lower on average. On the other hand, if the company

were in better condition, the arbitrators made awards which were about 1/2 of




    32. While there is no clear interpretation of this result, it may suggest
that a richer weighting scheme is needed where not only   but also & depends
on the quality of the offers. For example, it may be the case that & depends
on the relative distances of V and V from V . Some alternatives were
investigated, but the einpiricaT impliations g these variations are so
similar to the model estimated here that it was difficult to distinguish
between the different specifications with any precision. See Bazerman and
Farber (in press).
                                              —n




                                                              coefficients on
a percentage point higher on average. The hypothesis that the

CONDG is o equal magnitude but opposite sign to the coefficient on CONDB can

be rejected at any reasonable level of significance.3

      The central issue is how close Vec and V ef are. The first column of

table 3 contains estimates of constrained model *1 where it is assumed that

'ec'ef in all respects.       The specific constraints along with the log—

likelihood values of the unconstrained and all of the constrained models are

summarized in table 4.       It is not possible to perform a classical likelihood—

ratio test of constrained model *1 against the unconstrained model due to the

fact that one of the constraints is that cf=1 which is on the boundary of the

parameter space. Nonetheless, some feel can be gained for how well the

constrained model performs by noting that the log—likelihood value for this

model is 1536.6 as compared with 1617.3 in the unconstrained mode1.4 The

implication is that V        and V        differ in ways that degrade the fit   of the
                        ec           ef

constrained model substantially.

      it is useful to examine exactly how V and ef differ. One possibility

is that    and    differ substantially. The last column of table 2 contains

the estimated differences between c and               computed from the estimates of the

unconstrained model along with their asymptotic standard errors. All of these

differences are small when compared to the magnitude of the coefficients

themselves. Only the coefficients of CUNDB differ significantly at

conventional levels, and only one other difference (COND6) exceeds its




    33. This hypothesis is equivalent to the hypothesis the the two
coefficients sum to zero. Using the coefficients from conventional
arbitration this sum is —.0124 with an asymptotic standard error of .00338. A
similar result is derived using the coefficients from
    34. Were the likelihood-ratio test valid, the hypotLsis that Vec Ye
could be rejected at any reasonable level of significance.
 standard error. These results suqest
                                 --   that individual elements of                                          and
                                                                                                      c           f

 do not differ siqnificantly based on their marginal distributions. However,

 it is also important to examine the extent to which the joint hypothesis that

         is supported by the data. Constrained model 3, whose estimates are

contained in the last columns of table 3 differs from the unconstrained model

only in imposing                   A   likelihood—ratio test of the hypothesis that

suggests that the hypothesis can be rejected at the .05 level of significance

but not at the .02w level.

        Another diagnostic calculation for examining the degree of congruence

between         and        is to compute the difference between Y X and Y =XB for
            f          c                                                                  ef   f      ec      c
each scenario based on the estimates of                           and               from the unconstrained

model. Table 5 contains the estimates of V                             ,   V         and their difference for
                                                                  ef           ec
each of the twenty—five scenarios. The asymptotic standard errors are also

presented. The results are quite clear. For only four scenarios is the

difference between V             and V         siqnificantly
                                                 -           different from zero at
                            ef           ec
                            36
conventional levels.              Overall1 the evidence suggests that c and                                differ

to a minor and inconsequential extent.

        The other way in which V                   and V        could differ is with regard to the
                                              ec           ef

unobserved factors. The variance 6c differs from the variance of E by

.000103 with an asymptotic standard error of .0000434 so that the hypothesis

that the variances are equal can be rejected at conventional levels. At the

same time a very high correlation is estimated between E•c and                                      The

estimate of cf is 818 with a very small asymptotic standard error. The



    35. The teststatistic is —2(1617.3—1608.6)=17.4. This statistic is
distributed as X with 8 degrees of freedom. The critical values of this
distribution at the .05 and .025 levels are 15.5 and 17.5 respectively.
    36. Careful examination of these four cases (4181921) did not reveal
any pattern that could be viewed as a common cause of the difference.
                                         34




hypothesis that Pf equals zero can be rejected at any reasonable level of

siqnificance. Thus, the unobserved factors that affect 'ec are highly

correlated with the unobserved factors that affect Y           .   In order to see how
                                                          ef

important this correlation is, a constrained model (*2) was estimated where

and    are allowed to differ but where           and     are assumed to equal zero.

These are the estimates of the separate (marqinal) models of conventional and

final—offer choice, and they are contained in the second and third columns of

table 3.   The log—likelihood of this model, which has only two constraints on

the unconstrained model, is 1445,7. Thus, the constraints are soundly

rejected at any reasonable level.   Indeed, this model with two constraints

fits the data considerably more poorly than either constrained model *1 with

eleven constraints or constrained model *3 with 8 constraints. Of course, the

various constrained models, whose performances are summarized in table 4, are

nat nested appropriately, but this comparison does suggest that the

correlations between the unobserved factors are substantial.

      While there is important correlation between             and €f this correlation

is not perfect. It is not possible to test the hypothesis that fc1 directly

because of the boundary problem noted earlier, but we can pick a value

somewhat less than one and test that hypothesis. For example, the hypothesis

that fc95 can be rejected against the alternative that                     at any

reasonable level of significance. Note further that constrained model #1 is

nested in constrained model *3.   Model *1 embodies the assumption that

but in all other respects is identical to model *3. The log—likelihood value

of model #1 is 1536.6 while the log—likelhood value of model *3 is 1608.6.

This comparison suggests that the errors are not, in fact, identical,

      Overall it is clear that the unobserved factors affectinq
                                                              - V               and Y
                                                                           ec           ef
are correlated to an important extent.        In addition, the observed determinants
                                              35



 of Y        and V        have similar effects. The ability of the model to fit the
        ec           ef

 data is improved substantially by accounting for the correlation between the

 errors, and the performance does not degrade very much by imposing the

 constraint t*3) that




 VII. Implications of the Analysis

         The results presented in the previous section imply that there is a

 substantial amount of consistency between the decision models of arbitrators

 in conventional and final offer arbitration. In conventional arbitration it

 was argued that arbitrators make awards that are weighted averages of some

notion of what is appropriate based on the facts (Y) and the offers of the

parties where the weights depend on the quality of the offers. This behavior

is consistent with the arbitrator attempting to minimize a loss function that

is the weighted sum of squared deviations of the award from each party's

notion of an appropriate award and from the offers. In final—offer

arbitration it was argued that the arbitrators choose the offer that is

closest to some notion of an appropriate award based on the facts
                                                                          'ef This
behavior is consistent with the arbitrator attempting to minimize a loss

function that is the sum of squared deviations of the award from each party's

notion of an appropriate award.

        The results strongly support this framework. The conventional

arbitration awards do seem to be a weighted average of the facts and the

offers where the weights are dependent on the quality of the offers.         In

addition, the facts all influence V
                                          ec in a plausible and siqnificant fashion.

The final offer awards are determined by a comparison of the facts with the

average offer, and the value of            that is implicit in this process is
                                     36



determined in plausible and significant ways by the facts. More importantly,

the quantities V ec and V ef are affected virtually identically by the facts

         and the unobserved factors affecting      and     are highly

correlated. While it is not possible to conclude that the arbitrator uses

exactly the same notion of an appropriate award in making decisions in both

types of arbitration, the evidence is quite compelling that the arbitrators

are generally consistent in their behavior.

      This consistency in arbitrators views of an 'appropriate" award has a

number of implications for understanding arbitration and collective

bargaining. First, these results provide convincing evidence that arbitrators

determine an appropriate award without reference to the particular form of

arbitration in effect. The results further indicate that the appropriate

award can be defined based on the facts of the case, independent both of the

political and structural influences of the particular arbitration procedure

and of the final offers of the parties. Next, the validity of this model of

arbitrator behavior suggests a sound basis for comparing the quality of

agreements under alternative forms of arbitration against an independent

definition of quality. That is, the agreements reached under the threat of

conventional versus final—offer arbitration (whether negotiated or arbitrated)

can be compared to the appropriate award as defined by the facts of the case.

While critics of conventional arbitration argue that it chills bargaining,

critics of final—offer arbitration argue that it often results in unacceptable

arbitration awards. The model developed and tested in this study provides a

basis (the appropriate award) for judging the appropriateness of the outcomes

of the two systems.

        potential reservation relates to how qeneralizable these results are

given that they are based on awards in hypothetical cases. 0+ course, having
                                               37




actual arbitrators making the awards is an important factor militating in

favor of broader applicability.            In addition, the general advantages of using

data from simulations are important. The facts are controlled and measured

precisely, and the offers are observed even in cases of conventional

arbitration. On the other hand, the simulations suffer from the fact that the

situations are artificial by definition and that the arbitrator does not have

the same range of information available that is available in actual cases.               In


sum, it is impossible to be sure that the Judgments of arbitrators in

simulated cases are consistent with those they would make in actual cases.

Nonetheless, the internal consistency of the responses of the arbitrators

across types of arbitration demonstrated in the analysis contained in this

study suggests that there is a great deal of information in these simulations

that can make an important contribution to understanding the behavior of

arbitrators.

      Another potential reservation is related to the fact that arbitrators

were asked to render a final—offer iudgement immediately after making a

conventional award. This may imply that the final—offer awards are

"contaminated11 and the analysis will be biased in favor of finding

similarities between Y        and Y         While this might be worrisome, the
                         ef           ec

advantages of this approach must be weighed against the potential problems.

If in each case an arbitrator was only required to make either a conventional

or a final—offer award (but not both) as specified by the investigator, only a

limited version of the analysis here would be possible.            It would still be

possible to coapare c and ft'f but no estimates of the correlation between the

unobservabies affectinq V         in conventional and final—offer arbitration (C
                              e                                                     c

and tf)   would be possible. Identification of this correlation requires

observation of awards in the same case by           the same arbitrator for both types
                                     38




of arbitration.

       Overall, substantial proQress has been made in arlalyzinQ the decision

processes of arbitrators. Not only were distinct models of arbitrator

behavior in conventional and final—offer arbitration identified, but a

substantial deqree of underlying consistency was found in the constructs

arbitrators use to make decisions in different settings. In addition, the

study has demonstrated the value of using data derived from carefully designed

simulations in analyzing the behavior of arbitrators. A number of areas for

further research are apparent. For example, since the arbitrator decision

process is likely to be central to the process of collective bargaining where

arbitration is the dispute settlement mechanism it would be useful to

integrate the results of studies such as this into theoretical and empirical

analysis of bargaining in an environment that includes arbitration. Finally,

it is clear that arbitrators differ in their decision processes, and it would

be useful to investigate both the degree to which there are such differences

and how these differences affect the bargaining process.
                                           39



                                    REFERENCES

 Anderson, John C. and Thomas A. Kochan. "Impasse Procedures in the Canadian
       Federal Service," Industrial and Labor Relations Review 30 (April 1977):
          282—301.

 Ashenfelter, Orley and David E. Bloom. 'Models of Arbitrator Behavior: Theory
       and Evidence,' Aericar, Econoic RevieN 74 (March 1984): 111—124.

Bazerman, Max H. and Henry S. Farber, "Arbitrator Decision Making: When are
      Final Offers Important?" industrial and Labor Relations Review, in
          press,
Bazersnan, Max H. "Norms of Distributive Justice in Interest Arbitration,"
      Industrial and Labor Relations Review, in press.

Berndt, Ernst K., Bronwyn H. Hall, and Robert E. Hall.    "Estimation and
      Inference in Nonlinear Structural Models," Annals    of Economic arid Social
      Measurement 3/4 (1974):   653—665.

Bloom, David E. and Christopher L. Cavanaugh. 1'An Analysis of the Selection of
      Arbitrators," Harvard University, Department of Economics. rnimeo (June
      1984).

Bonn, R. L. "Arbitration: An Alternative System for Handling Contract Related
      Disputes," Administrative Science Quarterly 17 (1972): 254—264.

Crawford, Vincent P. On Compulsory Arbitration Schemes," Journal of     Political
      Economy 87 (February 1979): 131—159.

Farber, Henry S. "An Analysis of Final—Offer Arbitration," Journal of    Conflict
      Resolution (December 1980).

Farber, Henry S. "Splitting—the—Difference in Interest Arbitration,"
      Industrial and Labor Relations Review 35 (April 1981); 70—77.

Farber, Henry S. and Harry C. Katz. "Interest Arbitration, Outcomes, and the
      Incentive to Bargain." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 33 (October
      1979): 55—63.

Feigenbaum, Charles. "Final Offer Arbitration: Better Theory Than Practice,"
      industrial Relations 14 (October 1975): 311—317.

Feuille, Peter. "Final Offer Arbitration and the Chilling Effect," Industrial
      Relations 14 (October 1975): 302 —310.
Sallagher, Daniel and N. D. Chaubey. "Impasse resolution and Tn—Offer
      Arbitration in Iowa,' industrial Relations 21 (Spring 1982): 129—148.
Kochan, Thomas A. and Jean Baderschneider. "Determinants of Reliance on
     Impasse Procedures: Police and Firefighters in New York State."
     Industrial and Labor Relations Review 31 (July 1978): 431—440.
                                              40




Neale, Maraaret A. arid Max H. Bazerman. "The Role of Perspective Taking
      Ability    in Neqotiating Under Different Farms of Arbitration," Industrial
      arid   Labor Relations Rei'ie 36 (April 1903): 378—3GB.

Northrup, Herbert R. Copulsory         Arbitration arid Governpent Intervention   in

      Labor Disputes. Washington,          D.C. Labor Policy Association, 1966.

Notz, William W. and Frederick A. Starke. Final Offer versus Convnetional
      Arbitration as Means of Confilct Management," Administrative Science
      quarterly 23 (June 1978): 189—203.
Starke, Frederick A. and William W. Notz. "Pre— and Post—Intervention Effects
      of Conventional vs. Final Offer Arbitration," Academy ol Hanaqeent
      Journal    24   (1981):   832—850.


Stevens,     Carl M. "Is Compulsory Arbitration Compatible with Bargaining?"
      Industrial      Relations 5 (1966): 38—50.

Wheeler, Hoyt N. "Closed Offer; An alternative to Final—Offer Selection,"
      Industrial Relations 16 (1977); 298—3(15.
Wheeler,     Hoyt N. "How Compulsory Arbitration Affects Compromise Activity,"
      Industrial      Relations 17 (1978); 80—84.
            Table 1.   Means and Standard Deviations of Data


                   Description                              Mean
                (Dichotomous variables                     (s.d.)
 Variable          =0 otherwise)

 PW             log of present waae                         2,08
                                                             (.392)

 Y             loq- diff between award and                     .0966
     S
                                                             (.0242)
 FDA           proportion of FOA cases for Nanagenment         .644

 INF           inflation rate                                .110
                                                            (.0285)

COMP           comparable arbitrated settlements             .100
                                                            (.0281)

LW             log diff between local wage and PW              .00960
                                                            (.101)

NW             log diff between national wage and PW           .00520
                                                            (.0214)

CONDB           1 if company in terrible or poor shape         .405


COND6          =1 if company in good or excellent shape        .398


MED            log diff between man. final offer and PW        .0729
                                                            (.0289)

UFO            log diff between union final offer and PW     .140
                                                            (.0282)

AFO            log diff between ave. final offer and PW      .107
                                                            (.0252)

DFD           log difference between final offers            .0673
                                                            (.0271)

N=1522
                                                  Table 2:
     Estimates of   Explicit    Models of     Arbitrator       Decisions: Unconstrained Model

                               Conventional              Final—offer
Determinants of V ()

Constant                         .0263                          0300            —.00366
                                     00575)                  ( .00755)          ( . 00690)

INF                              .194                         .216              —.0241
                                (.0243)                      (.0311)            (.0296)

COMP                             .434                         .416               .0180
                                (.0225)                      (.0341)            (.0329)

LW                               .0246                        .0291             —.00455
                                (.00650)                     (.00822)           (.00799)

NW                               .266                         .279              —.0134
                                (.0311)                      (.0504)            (.0477)

PW                               .00306                       .00328            —.000196
                                (.00191)                     (.00256)           (.00241)

CONDB                           —.0190                       —.0256              .00660
                                (.00182)                     (.00280)           (.00246)

CONDG                            .   00664                    .00370             . 00294
                                (.00184)                     (.00224)           (.00190)

Weight on V     U')
                                 .750
                                (.0515)
                                1.69
                                (.673)
Relative    weight on   the management offer
&                                .673
                                (.0441)

Covariance matrix

                                 • 000449                     .000346
                                (. 0000229)                  (.0000412)

                                 • 00000898
                                (.00000372)

                                 .0107                       —.421
                                (.127)                       (.155)

p                                .818
 cf                             (.0329)
ln(L)                             1617.3
Note: The numbers in parentheses are asymptotic standard errors. P                           is the
correlation between 8 and
either C or
                                              p
                                   refers to the correlation betwen )4 and
                 depending on the column. N1522
                                                     Table 3;
              Estimates of Explicit Models of Arbitrator Decisions; Constrained Models
                     Constrajnd *1       Constrained #2            Constrained *3
                    CONY           FDA        CONY         FDA           CONY              FDA
        Determinants of V ()
                              -e

        Constant        .0280              .0273          .0279                 .0277
                       (.00538            (.00554        (.00812)             (.00543)

        INF            .196                .189           .237                  .201
                      (.0226)             (.0234)        (.0342)              (.0228)

        CONP            .425               .422          .448                   .430
                      (.0212)             (.0216)       (.0411)               (.0214)

    LW                 .0256               .0231         .0391                  .0260
                      (.00617)            (.00623)      (.00947)             (.00604)

    NW                 .239                .286          .268                 .263
                      (.0294)             (.0298)       (.0605)              (.0296)

    PW                 .00334              .00318        .00179                 .00308
                      (.00179)            (.00186)      (.00279)             (.00180)

    CONDB             —.0214             —.0186         —.0274               —.0212
                      (.00172)            (.00173)      (.00342)             (.00175)

    CONDG              .00620             .00624         .00370               .00574
                      (.00174)           (.00175)       (.00245)             (.00175)

    Weight on V        (i')
    I                 .276                .827                                .741
                      (.0974)            (.0352)                             (.0504)

                     5.28                1.47                                1.53
                    (1.11)               (.433)                              (.603)

Relative weight on the manaqement offer
6                     .588                .618                               .703
                     (.0200)             (.0615)                             (.0372)

Covariance matrix

                      .000404             .000426       .000362      . 000449          . 000344
                     (.0000188)          (.0000192) (.0000556)      (.0000228) (.0000243)
                      .000113             .00000151                  .0000114
                     (.00000470)         (.000000825)               (.00000395)
p                    —.223                 270             0         .0593        —.408
                     (.0408)             (.164)                     (.114)         (.157)
p                      1                  0
    cf
                                                                    (.04)
    lntL)             16.6                    l44.i                          l6UBô
Note: The numbers in parentheses are asymptotic standard errors. P
                                                                   is the
correlation between  and €f      refers to the correlation betwen L( and
either    or €, depeding on the column. N1522
                                              Table 4.
                                    Summary of Model Performance
    MODEL                        CONSTRAINTS

                                      ————                                     1617.3
unconstrained

                                      P1                  P    P
                                                                     ,)   14   1536.6
constrained *1   P
                     c
                         P
                             c            cf                  c)1f   c
                                                      0                   23   1445.7
constrained %2                   P
                                     cf
                                           P
                                               fJ.t


                                                                          17   1608.6
constrained #3                        P =P
                                          cf
 Table 5 Predicted values of Y                           ,       Y        and their Differences for Each Scenario
                                                    ec               ef


 Case          V                        (V
                                             ef
                                                  -Y ec      )               Case      V
                                                                                           ef
                                                                                                     V        (V        -Y
                                                                                                         ec        ef


     1     .   0922            0931          — .000935                        14     . 0938      .   0942          — 000413
               00166)    (     00138)        (.00155)                               ( 00242)    ( 00173)           (.00239)
 2             0569            0595          — 00260                          15     .0968           101           —.00207
         (.00269)        (.00160)            (.00272)                               (.00242)    (.00150)           (.00210)
 3         .0623          .0652          —.00291                              16     .0865       .0835              .00299
         (.00200)        (.00143)            (.00207)                               (.00229)    (.00179)           (.00212)
 4        . 122               . 116           .00564                          17     . 0604          0611       —.000762
         (.00213)        (.00191)            (.00181)                               (.00330)    (.00197)           (.00324)
 5        .0996           .101           —.00117                              18     .0868       .0819              .00490
         (.00225)        (.00202)            (.00196)                               (.00246)    (.00189)           (.00210)

 6        .0946           .0926              .00194                           19     .0791       .0740              .00509
         (.00209)        (.00157)            (.00215)                               (.00256)    (.00190)           (.00212)
 7        .0789               .0793      —.000421                            20      .113        .111               .00224
           00335)       (.00192)         (.00335)                                   (.00233)    (.00170)           (.00231)

 8        .124               .124            .000750                         21      .115        .109              .00592
           00225)       (.00165)         (.00202)                                   (.00246)    (.00203)        (.00207)
 9        .0989          .0973               .00153                          22      .116        .114              .00180
         (.00204)       (.00164)         (.00213)                                   (.00239)    (.00181)        (.00225)

10        .0932           .0950          —.00174                             23      .123        .121              .00156
         (.00307)       (.00148)         (.00285)                                   (.002S7)    (.00175)       (.00249)

11        .117            .113            .00369                             24      .0891       .0868             .00228
         (.00243)       (.00200)         C .00224)                                  (.00276)    (.00176)       (.00278)
12        .0765          .0764               .0000704                        25      .119        .114              .00420
         (.00451)       (.00225)         (.00459)                                   (.00263)    (.00175)       (.00272)

13        .0888           .0893          —. 000473                         AVE.      .0954       .0942          . 00124
         C. 00267)      ( .00176)        C. 00259)                                  C. 00101)   C. 000667)     C. 00104)



Computed from the estimates of fi and c for the unconstrained model whose
estimates are in table 2. The numbers in parentheses are asymptotic standard
errors.
