                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      INFORMATION ASYMMETRY, INFORMATION PRECISION, AND THE COST
                             OF CAPITAL

                                       Richard A. Lambert
                                         Christian Leuz
                                       Robert E. Verrecchia

                                       Working Paper 14881
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14881


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2009




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Richard A. Lambert, Christian Leuz, and Robert E. Verrecchia. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Information Asymmetry, Information Precision, and the Cost of Capital
Richard A. Lambert, Christian Leuz, and Robert E. Verrecchia
NBER Working Paper No. 14881
April 2009
JEL No. G12,G14,G31,M41

                                               ABSTRACT

The consequences of information differences across investors in capital markets are still much debated.
This paper examines the relation between information differences across investors and the cost of
capital, and makes three points. First, in models of perfect competition, information differences across
investors affect a firm’s cost of capital through investors’ average information precision, and not information
asymmetry per se. Second, the average precision effect of information that is heterogeneously distributed
across investors is unlikely to diversify away when there exist many firms whose cash flows covary.
Thus, better disclosure can reduce a firm’s cost of capital. Third, the precision effect does not give
rise to a separate information-risk factor. These points are important to empirical research in accounting
and finance, as well as to regulators who debate future disclosure requirements and the consequences
of prior requirements such as Regulation Fair Disclosure.


Richard A. Lambert                                     Robert E. Verrecchia
Wharton School - University of Pennsylvania            Wharton School - University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk                                       Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Steinberg-Dietrich Hall                                3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104                                 Philadelphia, PA 19104
lambertr@wharton.upenn.edu                             verrecch@wharton.upenn.edu

Christian Leuz
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637-1610
and NBER
cleuz@chicagobooth.edu
1     Introduction

Information diﬀerences across investors (or groups of investors) have been a long-
standing concern to securities regulators and at the core of U.S. disclosure regulation
(e.g., Loss, 1983; Loss and Seligman, 2001). For example, the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) recently enacted Regulation Fair Disclosure (Reg FD), which
intends to equalize information across investors by preventing companies from making
disclosures to select groups of investors and analysts. The SEC (2000) argued that
selective disclosure allows “those who were privy to the information beforehand...to
make a profit or avoid a loss at the expense of those kept in the dark,” and that this
practice leads to a loss in investor confidence (see also Levitt, 1998). Particularly,
small investors might be unwilling to invest if they fear that insiders gain at their
expense; this, in turn, increases firms’ cost of capital to the extent that the risk in
the economy has to be borne by fewer investors. Similarly, investors might demand a
return premium for investing in the capital markets or stocks that exhibit substantial
information asymmetry.1 Critics of Reg FD argued, however, that it could stifle
corporate disclosure and, in turn, increase firms’ cost of capital (AIMR, 2001). For
example, SEC Commissioner Unger (2000) voted against the proposed regulation
because of concerns that it would “most likely reduce the amount of information
available to investors...and the quality of the information that would be produced.” As
this example shows, the consequences of information asymmetry in capital markets,
and, in particular, its relation to the amount and precision of information available
to investors and the cost of capital, are still much debated.
    The issues of whether and how information diﬀerences across investors aﬀects
1 For evidence consistent with this notion see, e.g., Amihud and Mendelson (1986), Chordia, et al.
(2000), and Easley, et al. (2002).



                                                1
prices and the cost of capital cannot be addressed in models of asset pricing that
assume that investors have homogeneous beliefs. Examples of such models are the
Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), but also a recent model by Lambert, et al.
(2007) used to study the eﬀect of accounting disclosure on the cost of capital. Stud-
ies that have developed models of capital market equilibria where investors have
heterogeneous information have reached diﬀerent conclusions regarding the eﬀects of
information on the cost of capital. For example, Leland (1992) finds that allowing
insider trading will, on average, increase stock prices despite the fact that the pres-
ence of insiders increases information asymmetry in the economy. Although he does
not couch his analysis in terms of cost of capital, higher stock prices on average are
tantamount to a decrease in firms’ cost of capital. In contrast, O’Hara (2003), Easley
and O’Hara (2004) and Hughes, et al. (2007) conclude that information asymmetry
increases firms’ cost of capital. Specifically, Easley and O’Hara (2004) analyze dif-
ferences in the composition of information between public and private information.
They argue that less informed traders recognize they are at an information disadvan-
tage, and hold fewer assets as a consequence. This drives down the price of securities
with high degrees of private information and hence information asymmetry, thereby
increasing the cost of capital for these firms. They conclude that “private information
thus induces a new form of systematic risk, and in equilibrium investors require com-
pensation for it.” Hughes, et al. (2007) argue that information asymmetries increase
cost of capital by increasing factor risk premiums. Wang (1993) finds that increasing
the percentage of informed investors in the economy lowers the cost of capital. As
Wang notes, the information structures he analyzes aﬀects both information asymme-
try and average precision. As such, Wang concludes that his results are attributable
to the joint eﬀect of both.


                                          2
   Our paper explores the relation between information diﬀerences across investors,
information precision, and the cost of capital. Similar to Admati (1985), and in con-
trast to models of trade commonly found in the literature, we conduct our analysis
in an economy with multiple firms whose cash flows covary. We define cost of capital
as the diﬀerence between beginning-of-period stock price and the expected end-of-
period cash flow. We define average precision as the quality of investors’ information
about firms’ cash flows on average, and measure information asymmetry based on
the diﬀerences in the quality, or precision, in information across investors.
   We show that when capital markets are characterized by perfect competition
among investors (as all of the aforementioned models and many others assume),
equilibrium prices are a function of two features of the economy’s information struc-
ture only: 1) individual investors’ precision-weighted-average assessment of firms’
expected end-of-period cash flows; and 2) their average, equilibrium precision matrix
(i.e., the inverse of the covariance matrix) of the distribution of firms’ end-of-period
cash flows. The latter feature is the key determinant of the discount in prices relative
to the expected value of cash flows. In other words, the expected return on a firm’s
stock price, and therefore its cost of capital, is directly related to investors’ average
precision matrix. The extent to which investors’ precision matrices deviate from this
average, however, does not matter. In particular, information asymmetry does not
aﬀect the discount for risk, holding average precision constant. This is true whether
information asymmetry is defined in terms of investors’ equilibrium precisions (which
includes any inference they make from price) or in terms of their exogenous informa-
tion (i.e., their priors, public information, and private information).
   Thus, we show that, in perfect competition models, there is no separate, system-
atic risk factor in price that stems from private information. Less informed investors


                                           3
choose to hold fewer shares in firms where their uncertainty is greatest, not where
information asymmetry is greatest. In fact, an investor’s degree of uncertainty de-
creases when other investors acquire more information (even when it is private),
because this information gets communicated (partially) through price when investors
condition their expectations over price in determining their demand (e.g., Grossman
and Stiglitz, 1980; Leland, 1992). We show that, as a result, increasing information
asymmetry actually decreases the firm’s cost of capital, as long as the change in
information structure increases average precision.
   Another contribution of our paper is that it extends the analysis of informa-
tion diﬀerences on the cost of capital to a multiple-firm economy where firms’ cash
flows covary. This allows us to make the distinction between diversifiable and non-
diversifiable risk, and to ask the important question of whether a firm can aﬀect its
cost of capital by disclosing additional information in large economies where investors
hold diversified portfolios. We extend two commonly used non-homogeneous infor-
mation structures in the extant rational expectations (RE) literature to a multi-firm
economy: one where investors have diverse information, as in Grossman (1976) and
Kim and Verrecchia (1991), and one where one group of investors has superior in-
formation to another group, as in Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), Easley and O’Hara
(2004) and Hughes, et al. (2007). We show that what matters in determining the
cost of capital in a multi-firm economy is the average precision matrix of information
across investors. Analogous to the CAPM, information diﬀerences across investors
that depend solely on the variance of a firm’s cash flows diversify away as the econ-
omy gets large. Thus, the oﬀ-diagonal elements of investors’ precision matrices play
a critical role toward ensuring that a firm’s cost of capital does not reduce to the
risk-free rate. We show that, with non-zero oﬀ-diagonal elements in the precision


                                          4
matrices, information disclosure by a firm reduces the discount for risk that investors
associate with holding shares in that firm. These results extend the estimation risk
literature (e.g., Brown, 1979; Barry and Brown, 1984, 1985) as well as recent work by
Lambert, et al. (2007), which assumes all investors have homogeneous information.
    Aside from its theoretical contributions, our paper also has several important
implications for empirical studies. First, the paper shows that it is important to
distinguish between information asymmetry and information precision. A shift in
information asymmetry can appear to aﬀect the cost of capital, but this eﬀect may
occur because the average precision of information is changing simultaneously. Thus,
to isolate the eﬀect of information asymmetry, one has to control for changes in
information precision. That said, many changes to a firm’s information environment
(e.g., improved accounting standards, better disclosure, more analyst following, etc.)
that aﬀect the average precision in the economy are likely also to change the degree
of information asymmetry and vice versa. As a result, it is diﬃcult to diﬀerentiate
the eﬀects empirically. Thus, empirical studies should exercise care in choosing their
information constructs. It may also be interesting to explore the empirical relations
among various information proxies.2
    Related to this point, our paper underscores the need to better understand the
potential trade-oﬀs between information-asymmetry eﬀects and precision eﬀects, for
instance, when mandating disclosure. As the debate about Reg FD illustrates, a
policy designed to decrease information asymmetry may result, as an unintended
consequence, in a decrease in the precision of publicly available information (or vice
versa). The presence of both eﬀects in real capital markets could explain why several
2 Along these lines, Verdi (2005) shows that many commonly used information proxies load onto
distinct factors in a principal factor analysis; this provides evidence consistent with the notion that
information asymmetry and average precision are distinct constructs.



                                                  5
empirical studies point to an increase in firms’ cost of capital subsequent to Reg
FD (e.g., Duarte et al., 2006; Gomes et al., 2006), while others find evidence for
a decrease (e.g., Dhaliwal et al., 2006). Similarly, the presence of precision and
information asymmetry eﬀects can explain the mixed eﬀects of various information
attributes on the cost of capital (e.g., Botosan and Plumlee, 2003; Botosan et al.,
2004; Francis et al., 2005; Verdi, 2005; Ogneva, 2008).
   Finally, our paper contributes more broadly to the growing empirical literature on
the link between disclosure and the cost of capital, which is of considerable importance
to accounting and finance (see, e.g., surveys by Healy and Palepu, 2001, and Leuz
and Wysocki, 2008). Many of the studies in this literature implicitly or explicitly
treat information attributes (e.g., information asymmetry, information quality, etc.)
as a separate risk factor (e.g., Easley et al., 2002; Francis et al., 2005; Barth et al.,
2006; Duarte et al., 2006, Nichols 2006; Chen et al., 2007, Kravet and Shevlin, 2007;
Ogneva 2008). In doing so, these studies often refer to Easley and O’Hara (2004) as a
conceptual underpinning for their empirical analysis. Our paper shows that the eﬀects
in Easley and O’Hara (2004) do not give rise to an information risk factor and that
they are not attributable to information asymmetry. This result should be important
for the recent debates over whether accruals quality or the probability of informed
trade (or PIN), which is a commonly used measure for information asymmetry, are
priced in expected returns (e.g., Cohen, 2008; Core et al., 2008; Liu and Wysocki,
2007; Mohanram and Rajgopal, 2008). That said, our analysis does not preclude the
existence of information asymmetry eﬀects on firms’ cost of capital or the existence of
an information risk factor. For instance, such eﬀects could exist in models of imperfect
competition. Thus, empirical results that suggest or at least are consistent with a
factor interpretation ultimately call for more research on the eﬀects of information


                                           6
asymmetry on expected returns and the existence of an information risk factor (see
also O’Hara, 2003).
    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we develop
the model and derive pricing equations as a function of investors’ information struc-
tures. In section 3, we analyze specific information structures commonly used in the
literature to derive closed-form, pricing equations. Section 4 examines the issue of
diversifiabilty. We conclude with a brief summary.


2     Market prices in a multi-firm economy

In this section we introduce a classical, one-period capital market setting in which N
investors, indexed by i = 1, 2, ...., N, allocate their wealth over the shares of J firms
and a risk-free asset (e.g., bonds). These settings have a long tradition in finance,
and include traditional asset pricing models such as the CAPM (see Fama, 1976), as
well as RE-models (which we discuss in more detail below). Let Ṽ denote the J × 1
vector of end-of-period cash flows generated by the firms, and Ṽj its j-th element,
and P the J × 1 vector of beginning-of-period market values, or prices, associated
with those firms, and Pj its j-th element.3 Each investor has information, represented
by Φi , upon which he forms beliefs about firms’ end-of-period cash flows. We allow
for the possibility that Φi includes both public and private information, as well as
information inferred from the vector of market (equilibrium) prices, P. We assume
that investors assess the joint distribution of firms’ cash flows to have a multivariate
normal distribution based on Φi . Specifically, let Ei Ṽ|Φi represent investor i’s J ×1
vector of firms’ expected values, and Covi investor i’s J × J covariance matrix of
3 Throughout our analysis we denote a random variable by a tilde (~), and the realization of a
random variable and/or a fixed parameter with no tilde. In addition, we put vectors and matrices
in bold.


                                               7
firms’ end-of-period cash flows, conditional on investor i’s information, Φi . Below, we
discuss in greater detail the specific information that underlies investors’ beliefs. For
convenience, we represent the precision matrix for investor i’s beliefs by Πi , where
Πi is the inverse of covariance matrix investor i associates with firms’ end-of-period
cash flows: that is, Πi = Cov−1
                             i . Finally, let Π0 =
                                                                  N
                                                                  i=1   Πi represent the sum of
investors’ precision matrices.
    We assume that each of the N investors has a negative exponential utility func-
tion with a risk tolerance of parameter τ , and chooses his portfolio to maximize the
expected utility of his end-of-period wealth. Let X̂i represent the J × 1 vector of
investor i’s endowment of firm shares, and X̂ij its j-th element, and B̂i his endow-
ment of a risk-free asset (e.g., bonds). Similarly, let Xi represent the J × 1 vector
of investor i’s demand for firm shares, and Xij its j-th element, and Bi the units
of the risk-free asset he chooses to hold. We assume that the risk-free asset has an
initial price of $1, and yields 1 + Rf at the end of the period. Finally, for convenience
let X̃0 represent the J × 1 random vector of total supply of firm shares in the econ-
omy, and X̃0j its j-th element, where the realization X̃0j = X0j has the feature that
          N                N
X0j =     i=1   Xij =      i=1   X̂ij .
    Conditional on a realization of the random supply vector, X̃0 = X0 , we can
characterize investor i’s objective function for choosing Xi and Bi as follows:4

                                                              1
                        max Ei Bi (1 + Rf ) + Xi Ṽ|Φi −        Xi Covi Xi ,
                        Xi ,Bi                               2τ

subject to Xi P +Bi = X̂i P +B̂i . Solving the budget constraint for the risk-free asset
implies setting Bi = X̂i P +B̂i − Xi P ; substituting this expression into the objective
4 While we explicitly include the dependence of investor i’s expected cash flow on his information,
Φi , to save space we suppress this dependence in the expressions for the covariance and precision
matrices, Covi and Πi , respectively. We also suppress the dependency of price on the information
sets of all investors.

                                                8
function above implies

                                                                    1
          max Xi Ei Ṽ|Φi + X̂i P +B̂i − Xi P (1 + Rf ) −             Xi Covi Xi .           (1)
           Xi                                                      2τ

Computing the first-order condition for investor i’s demand for firms shares, Xi , yields

                          Xi = τ Πi Ei Ṽ|Φi − P (1 + Rf ) .                                 (2)

   To derive an equilibrium set of prices, we sum the demands of all investors as
expressed in eqn. (2), and set them equal to the aggregate supply of shares in each
firm. This yields the following expression for the vector of equilibrium prices.
Proposition 1. The vector of market prices depend on investors’ information through
the following equation:
                                    N
                          (Π0 )−1   i=1   Πi Ei Ṽ|Φi − ( N1 Π0 )−1 Nτ
                                                                    X0
                    P=                                                   .                   (3)
                                             1 + Rf

Eqn. (3) illustrates the aggregation property of price. Specifically, the vector of
market prices, P, is equal to: the vector of investors’ precision-weighted, average
                                                                         N
assessment of firms’ expected end-of-period cash flows, (Π0 )−1          i=1   Πi Ei Ṽ|Φi ; mi-
nus a discount that results from the risk the market associates with holding firms’
shares, ( N1 Π0 )−1 Nτ
                    X0
                       ; where both the average assessment of expected values and risk
are discounted back to the beginning-of-the-period at the risk-free rate, 1 + Rf . In-
vestors’ expected values are weighted by their precisions, Πi , because investors’ de-
mands are proportionate to their precisions, ceteris paribus. The risk associated with
holding firms’ shares, ( N1 Π0 )−1 Nτ
                                   X0
                                      , is a function of three elements: 1) the inverse of
investors’ average precision matrix for the distribution of firms’ end-of-period cash
flows, ( N1 Π0 )−1 , as an expression of the (average) uncertainty associated with holding
firms’ shares; 2) the total supply of firm shares, X0 , that investors are required to

                                              9
hold; and 3) the inverse of investors’ total tolerance for bearing risk, Nτ .5 Taking
expected values of eqn. (3) implies that the deviation of prices from the expected
                                                               1            E [X̃0 ]
end-of-period cash flows discounted at the risk free rate is 1+R  ( 1 Π0 )−1 Nτ .6 We
                                                                 f N

define firm j’s cost of capital as the deviation of Pj from its ex-ante expected value;
                                                                1     1     −1 E [X̃0 ]
that is, the cost of capital is equal to the j-th element of 1+R  f
                                                                    ( N
                                                                        Π0 )    Nτ
                                                                                        . This
definition comports with the definition of others (e.g., Easley and O’Hara, 2004).
    The salient feature of eqn. (3) is that the economy’s information structure aﬀects
the cost of capital of firms solely through its eﬀect on the inverse of investors’ average
                     1
precision matrix,    N
                       Π0 .   The precision matrix for investor i is simply the inverse of
the covariance matrix he associates with the cash flows of all firms based on his infor-
mation Φi . Inverting each investor’s covariance matrix, averaging these inverses, and
then inverting the average results in a matrix that is analogous to a covariance matrix.
Because of the non-linearities involved in matrix inversion, however, this covariance
matrix is not the simple average of investors’ individual covariance matrices.
    Intuitively, a measure of information asymmetry should be related to the extent
to which investors’ precision matrices diﬀer from each other. But irrespective of how
information asymmetry is measured, eqn. (3) shows that the degree of information
asymmetry is irrelevant for pricing and the cost of capital, provided that one controls
for or holds investors’ average precision constant.
    Note that the relevant metric for pricing is investors’ equilibrium precision ma-
trices; these matrices are conditional upon all available information, including any
information investors infer from prices. The notion that investors condition their
5 This last eﬀect is analogous to the one discussed in Merton (1987).
6 While each investor assesses the expected end-of-period cash flows diﬀerently, their ex-ante ex-
pected values (prior to anyone receiving information) are equal to their prior, which we assume is
identical across investors. Similarly, we assume that investors have an identical distribution for the
liquidity shock, X̃0 .



                                                 10
expectations over price, and thereby glean additional information about firms’ cash
flows through the price aggregation process, is the central tenet of the RE-literature
(e.g., Grossman and Stiglitz, 1980; Hellwig, 1980; Diamond and Verrecchia 1981;
Admati, 1985; etc.). When this is the case, price is also on the right-hand-side of
eqn. (3) as part of Φi , e.g., it is one of the conditioning variable in the expecta-
tion and precision terms. In general, to solve the pricing equation in closed-form, a
RE-analysis requires that eqns. (1) and (3) be solved simultaneously, along with the
market-clearing condition that investors’ demand for firm shares equals the aggregate
supply of those shares.7 In section 3, we impose more structure on investors’ infor-
mation so as to solve the pricing equation in closed form. This also enables us to
relate parameters in the information structure to the average equilibrium precision
matrix, and therefore to the cost of capital.
    One application of Proposition 1 that results in a closed-form solution occurs when
investors have homogeneous information. We represent homogeneous information by
ΦH : that is, Φi = ΦH for all i. Let ΠH represent investors’ homogeneous precision
matrix, and CovH its inverse: that is, Πi = ΠH and CovH = Π−1
                                                           H for all i.

Corollary 1. When investors have homogeneous information, market prices are as
follows:
                     E Ṽ|ΦH − Π−1 X0
                                H Nτ
                                                                        X0
                                                         E Ṽ|ΦH − CovH Nτ
               P=                            , or P =                              .
                             1 + Rf                               1 + Rf
When all investors have the same information, their beliefs are homogeneous and
hence there is no additional information to glean from price. Thus, Corollary 1 is a
closed-form solution for prices. The expression for prices in Corollary 1 is identical
7 If one were to ignore the possibility of investors conditioning their expectations on price by as-
suming that prices contained too much “noise,” then Proposition 1 oﬀers a representation for prices
that is analogous to the Lintner’s (1969) heterogeneous information version of the CAPM.




                                                11
to that in the CAPM (e.g., Sharpe, 1964; Lintner, 1965).8 Specifically, the price of
each firm is equal to its expected end-of-period cash flow, minus a discount for the
risk associated with holding that firm’s shares.9


3       Market prices with heterogeneous information

In this section we extend our analysis to heterogeneous information across investors in
conjunction with investors conditioning their expectations over price to study two in-
formation structures in the RE-literature: diverse information, as in Grossman (1976)
and Kim and Verrecchia (1991), and superior/inferior information, as in Grossman
and Stiglitz (1980), Easley and O’Hara (2004), and Hughes, et al. (2007). To be
able to solve for prices in closed-form, we assume the following information structure.
First, investors have a common prior over the distribution of the vector of end-of-
period cash flows, Ṽ. Let m represent the J × 1 vector of common prior beliefs about
the expected value of Ṽ, and mj its j-th element, and Ψ the J × J common prior
precision matrix of Ṽ. Note that in this formulation we allow for the cash flows to
be correlated across firms. Each firm has associated with it a public announcement.
Let ỹ represent the J × 1 vector of announcements, and ỹj its j-th element. We as-
sume that announcements have a normal distribution, where η represents the J × J
precision matrix of ỹ.10 We assume that announcements are unbiased, but impose
no structure on η. For example, neither the variances across announcements, nor
8 The CAPM assumes that the supply vector, X0 , is deterministic, and expresses investors’ demands
in terms of the percentage of firms’ shares held, so that the total supply sums Nto 1.
9 For example, the discount for holding firm j’s shares is proportional to
                                                                                k=1 Cov Ṽj , Ṽk |ΦH ,
         N
where    k=1   Cov Ṽj , Ṽk |ΦH represents firm j’s contribution to the aggregate uncertainty investors
                                                     N
associate with the cash flows of all firms, V ar    k=1 Ṽk |ΦH .
10 It is straightforward to extend the model to allow for a vector of announcements about each firm,
or for each investor to observe a vector of private information about each firm.



                                                   12
the covariances across pairs of announcements, need be identical. Each investor has
private information about each firm. Let z̃i represent the J × 1 vector of information
available to investor i, and z̃ij its j-th element. As with public announcements, we
assume that private information is unbiased and has a normal distribution. Let Si
represent investor i’s J × J precision matrix for z̃i conditional on Ṽ = V. As is stan-
dard practice in the literature, we assume that ỹ and z̃i are independent conditional
on Ṽ = V.
   We impose no structure on the precision matrix of private information Si : for
each investor the variance in private information can be diﬀerent across firms, and
Si can diﬀer across investors. In particular, this implies that investors need not
receive private information of equal quality. For example, some investors might not
be endowed with any private information, in which case Si is a J ×J matrix of 0’s. In
fact, it is precisely this feature - how the quality of information diﬀers across investors
- that we are interested in examining. As discussed above, information (both public
and private) is useful in investors’ demands for all firms. That is, public information
(say, earnings) for firm j will, in general, be useful for both revising the assessment
of expected end-of-period cash flow for firm j and for other firms whose cash flows
covary with firm j.
   As is standard in the RE-literature, we prevent prices from being fully revealing
by assuming that the aggregate supply of firm shares is uncertain. Specifically, we
assume that the aggregate supply vector, X̃0 , has a normal distribution. This implies
that prices, as information sources, incorporate noise in the form of an aggregate
supply shock. As is also the convention in the RE-literature, we couch our analysis
in the context of the distribution of the supply shock per-capita: that is, in terms of
                                                                                       X̃0j
x̃0 , where x̃0 represents the J × 1 vector of per-capita supply shocks, and x̃0j =     N



                                            13
represents its j-th element. Note that the vector of per-capita supply shocks, x̃0 , also
has a normal distribution. Let x̄0 represent the J × 1 vector of expected values of x̃0 ,
where x̄0j represents its j-th element, and W the J × J precision matrix of x̃0 . We
assume that the distribution of x̃0 is independent of all other variables.

3.1    Diverse information

In Kim and Verrecchia (1991), the distribution of the private information, z̃i , con-
ditional on Ṽ = V, is independent across investors. In other words, each investor
observes a vector of information whose error terms can be correlated across firms,
but uncorrelated across investors. To start, as described above, each investor receives
a vector of private information, z̃i , where each vector has associated with it a con-
ditional precision matrix Si . As is standard in solving a RE-equilibrium, we assume
investors conjecture that the vector of prices has the following linear functional form:
P̃ = a + bṼ + cỹ − dx̃0 + ex̄0 . That is, investors conjecture that the price vector is a
linear function of vectors of true cash flows, Ṽ, public announcements, ỹ, and supply
shocks, x̃0 and x̄0 , where a is a J × 1 vector of intercepts, and b, c, d, and e are
J × J matrices of coeﬃcients. Note that in this formulation the price of each firm is
allowed to be a function of the information about all other firms in the market. For
this same reason, the price of one firm also conveys information about other firms.
In particular, we describe the additional information investors infer by conditioning
their expectations over price as the “orthogonal” information in price. We represent
the orthogonal information in price with a variable ũ, where ũ is defined by

             ũ = b−1 P̃ − a − cỹ + (d − e) x̄0 = Ṽ − b−1 d (x̃0 − x̄0 ) .

Note that b−1 d is a J × J matrix. Conditional on Ṽ = V, the covariance ma-
trix for orthogonal information is b−1 d · W−1 · (b−1 d) . Finally, let θ represent

                                            14
the precision matrix for orthogonal information conditional on Ṽ = V: that is,
                               −1
θ = b−1 d · W−1 · (b−1 d)           . Note that even though investors have diverse pri-
vate information, the precision of the orthogonal information (i.e., the incremental
information investors glean from price) is the same across investors.
   In the context of this information structure, investor i’s expected value of firms’
cash flows becomes Ei Ṽ = Π−1
                            i (Ψm + ηy + Si zi + θu), where Πi = Ψ+η+Si +θ

is the total equilibrium precision matrix of investor i. The total equilibrium precision
matrix consists of an investor’s prior, Ψ, the public announcements, η, his private
information, Si , and the orthogonal information from price, θ. The key insight here
is that when investor i conditions his expectations on his priors, public information,
private information, and price, the total precision of his information is simply the
sum of the precision matrices of his priors, the public announcements, his private
information, and the precision matrix of the orthogonalized price vector.
                   1   N
   Let Avg [·] =   N   i=1   [·] represent an averaging function across investors: for ex-
                                                                                    1
ample, recalling the definition of Π0 in Section 2, this implies that Avg [Πi ] =   N
                                                                                      Π0 .
Eqn. (3) identifies the average precision of information across investors as the key
variable in determining the discount in prices; here, Avg [Πi ] = Ψ + η + Avg [Si ] + θ.
The only remaining task is to solve for θ, the precision matrix of the information
conveyed by price. To do this, we solve for the parameters b and d in the conjec-
tured functional form for price. Substituting the expected cash flows and precisions
into the pricing eqn. (3) and summing across all investors gives us an equation for
prices. We equate the coeﬃcients from this equation with those from the conjectured
functional form to solve for the parameters b and d.
   Recall that we define cost of capital as the deviation of prices from the expected
end-of-period cash flows


                                              15
Proposition 2. Information aﬀects cost of capital through the average precision of
investors’ information,

                                           1              1
                    E Ṽ − E P̃ =              Avg [Πi ]−1 E [x̃0 ] ,
                                        1 + Rf            τ

where
                          Avg [Πi ] = Ψ + η + Avg [Si ] + θ,

and the precision of the information conveyed by price is

                          θ = τ 2 (Avg [Si ]) · W · (Avg [Si ]) .

The contribution of Proposition 2 is that now we can solve in closed form the discount
in price relative to the expected end-of-period cash flow that we first characterized
in Proposition 1. Specifically, Proposition 2 confirms that the discount in price is
governed by the average precision of information across investors. Moreover, note
that increasing the precision of private information for any subgroup of investors
(including groups who already possess above average precision) lowers cost of capital
because it aﬀects the average total precision in two mutually reinforcing ways: a direct
eﬀect and an indirect eﬀect through θ, the precision of the information conveyed
by price. When cash flows, information, and liquidity shocks are all independently
distributed across firms, each firm is priced independently, and Proposition 2 reduces
to the same result found in Kim and Verrecchia’s (1991) single-firm analysis.

3.2     Superior information

In this section, we turn to the issue of information asymmetry and examine infor-
mation structures in which all investors are classified into two groups: those who get
private information and those who do not. The less-informed group consists of N1

                                            16
investors who only observe public information signals and price. We assume there
are Q1 public signals ỹh , h = 1, ..., Q1 , where each public signal is a J × 1 vector
of information announcements about the firms’ cash flows, ỹh = Ṽ + ẽh . For each
public signal, the vector of error terms ẽh has expected value of zero and a J × J
precision matrix denoted η. The individual precisions can diﬀer across firms and the
covariances of the error terms can be non-zero. The more informed group consists
of N2 = N − N1 investors who observe the Q1 vectors of public signals and also Q2
vectors of private signals, z̃k = Ṽ + ζ̃ k , k = 1, ..., Q2 . In contrast to the prior sec-
tion, all investors in the more informed group observe exactly the same realization of
private signals. As with the public signals, we allow the precisions of the signals to
diﬀer across firms and the covariances in their error terms to be non-zero. Therefore a
public or private signal about one firm can convey information about the future cash
flow of other firms. We assume that each of the vectors of public signals ỹh and each
of the vectors of private signals z̃k are conditionally independent of each other. Also
as before, each investor has a common prior on the distribution of the end-of-period
cash flow, Ṽ; specifically, investors believe that Ṽ has a normal distribution with
mean m and precision Ψ.
   The more informed group observes all public and private information available in
the economy. Hence, the more informed group cannot learn any additional informa-
tion from price. In eﬀect, for the more informed group, price is a redundant source
                             Q1                   Q2
of information. Let Ỹ =     h=1   ỹh and Z̃ =   k=1   z̃k represent summary statistics for
the vectors of public and private signals, respectively. Conditional upon the realiza-
tion of public and private information (i.e., conditional on Ỹ = Y and Z̃ = Z), the
conditional expectation of end-of-period cash flow of more informed investors is

        E Ṽ|y1 , ..., yQ1 , z1 , ..., zQ2 = [Ψ + Q1 η + Q2 S]−1 [Ψm + ηY + SZ] ,

                                             17
where the total precision matrix of their information is Π2 = Ψ + Q1 η + Q2 S. Note
that the total precision is increasing in the prior precision, Ψ, the precision matrices
per public and private signal, η and S, and the number of each type of signal, Q1
and Q2 .
   Members of the less informed group base their investment decisions on the Q1
public signals and price. As before, to ensure that price is not fully revealing, we
assume the shock to the aggregate supply creates noise. Specifically, we assume that
the aggregate per-capita supply for the firms can be represented by the J × 1 vector
x̃0 . Let x̄0 represent the J × 1 vector of expected values of x̃0 , where x̄0j represents
its j-th element, and W the J × J precision matrix of x̃0 . We assume that the
distribution of x̃0 is independent of all other variables.
   As in the previous subsection, a solution to a RE-equilibrium starts by requiring
that less informed investors conjecture that price is in the form P̃ = a + bZ̃ + cỸ −
dx̃0 + ex̄0 . Here we represent the orthogonal information in price with a variable ũ,
where ũ is defined by
                                                                        Q2
     b−1                              Z̃ b−1 d                          k=1   ζ̃ k       b−1 d
ũ =     P̃ − a − cỸ + x̄0 (d − e) =    −     (x̃0 − x̄0 ) = Ṽ+                    −         (x̃0 − x̄0 ) .
     Q2                               Q2   Q2                            Q2               Q2

As before, the orthogonal information in price represents the incremental information
less informed investors infer by conditioning their expectations on price. In our multi-
firm setting, the price of one firm can convey information not only about that firm’s
cash flow, but also about the cash flows of other firms. The presence of an aggregate
supply shock makes orthogonal information in price a noisy measure of the private
information available to more informed investors, Z̃.
   Let θ denote the precision matrix that characterizes the error in ũ as a measure of
Ṽ. As a consequence of conditioning their expectations on price, the total precision


                                           18
of investors in the less informed group is Π1 = Ψ + Q1 η + θ. As above, Ψ represents
investors’ common prior precision matrix; similarly, Q1 η is the precision matrix of the
public signals. While less informed investors have no private information, they glean
the private information of more informed investors (with noise) when they condition
their expectations on price. Here, θ represents the precision matrix of the additional
information less informed investors infer from price.
   To solve the pricing equation in closed form and be able to calculate the average
equilibrium precision, we must calculate the precision of the information obtained
from price. This then allows the following characterization of the cost of capital.
Proposition 3. When cash flows are cross-sectionally correlated, information aﬀects
cost of capital through the average precision of investors’ information,
                                           1              1
                    E Ṽ − E P̃ =              Avg [Πi ]−1 E [x̃0 ] ,
                                        1 + Rf            τ
where
                             N1                  N2
               Avg [Πi ] =      (Ψ + Q1 η + θ) +    (Ψ + Q1 η + Q2 S) ,               (4)
                             N                   N
and the precision of information that less informed investors infer from price is
                      ⎡                                                    ⎤−1
                                                   2
                      1      1N 1
                 θ = ⎣ S−1 −                           S−1 · W−1 · (S−1 ) ⎦      .
                      Q2     τ N2 Q2
The first term in eqn. (4) is the precision of less informed investors, weighted by their
                                      N1
relative population in the economy,   N
                                         ,   and the second term is the precision of more
                                                                    N2
informed investors, weighted by their relative population,          N
                                                                       .
   The significance of Proposition 3 is that it shows how our average precision result
extends to a superior-information structure with multiple firms. Average precision
governs the discount in price associated with the market holding firms’ shares. Thus,
as the expression for average precision in eqn. (4) goes up or down, cost of capital
correspondingly decreases or increases.

                                              19
        To help analyze the determinants of average precision and to compare our results
to those in the literature, we consider the special case where all firms’ cash flows,
information signals, and liquidity shocks are distributed independently across firms.
In this case, the average precision matrix is diagonal, and all firms are priced indepen-
dently.11 Therefore, our analysis becomes comparable to work that analyzes informa-
tion issues in a single-firm economy. In particular, we compare our results to those in
Easley and O’Hara (2004) (henceforth EOH), who also analyze the implications for
the cost of capital when some investors possess superior (private) information, but
emphasize the role of private information and information diﬀerences across investors
for their results. Thus, in the remainder of the section, we discusses the relation
between average information precision and information asymmetry.
        To facilitate a comparison with EOH, we further specialize our results so that the
public and private signals have identical information properties. Let the precision of
the error terms in each of the private and public signals be denoted s (we drop the bold
notation to indicate we are now dealing with scalars). Moreover, to keep the notation
from getting too cumbersome, we do not include a subscript j to distinguish among
firms. Finally, we define the following terms to replicate notation used in EOH. Let
Q be the total number of information signals observed by more informed investors,
where Q ≡ Q1 + Q2 , and α be the percentage of all signals that are private (i.e.,
           Q2                                                                              N2
α=       Q1 +Q2
                ).   The fraction of investors in the informed group is μ, where μ =     N1 +N2
                                                                                                .
        Under these additional assumptions, the average precision of investors’ informa-
tion becomes:

                                    N1                  N2
                      Avg [Πi ] =      (Ψ + Q1 s + θ) +    (Ψ + (Q1 + Q2 ) s)
                                    N                   N
11 Inthe next section we consider the aﬀect of non-zero correlations across firms and non-zero oﬀ-
diagonal elements of the average precision matrix.


                                                20
                         = Ψ + (1 − α) Qs + μαQs + (1 − μ) θ,                        (5a)

where the precision of the information conveyed by price reduces to
                                 ⎛                        ⎞−1
                                                   2
                                1            1          1 ⎠
                           θ=⎝      +      N2                   .                    (5b)
                               Q2 s        N
                                              τs       Q22 w

Eqns. (5a) and (5b) are identical to the cost of capital equations in EOH. The
closed-form solution for the cost of capital shows that it depends on the average
precision of the two groups. The weights are the percentage of investors in each
group: μ for the informed group, and 1 − μ for the less informed group. The relevant
metric for pricing is investors’ total average equilibrium precision, which includes
the inference the less informed group makes from price, and not the diﬀerences in
investors’ precision matrices.
   Next we turn to comparative statics on the cost of capital.
Corollary 2. The cost of capital is decreasing in the following:
   a) 1−α, the percentage of signals that are public (holding constant the total number
of signals);
   b) μ, the percentage of investors that are informed;
   c) Q1 s, the total precision of the public signals available to both groups (holding
Q2 constant);
   d) Q2 s, the total precision of the private signals available only to the more informed
group (holding Q1 constant).
Each of these parameter changes results in an increase in the average equilibrium
precision of investors in the economy; hence, cost of capital decreases. In cases (a),
(c), and (d), the precision of information for at least one group increases, and no
group has their precision decrease. In case (b), investors are transferred from the
lower precision group to the higher precision group. This obviously increases the

                                           21
precision of their information, leaves unchanged the precision of the investors already
in the informed group, and increases the precision of the investors remaining in the
less informed group. The latter result occurs because price becomes more informative.
    EOH derive results analogous to the first two results in Corollary 2, but interpret
the cause as arising from changes in the composition of private and public informa-
tion and hence the asymmetry of signals across investors.12 To illustrate why these
interpretations are diﬀerent, we oﬀer a measure of information asymmetry and then
revisit our comparative statics in light of this measure. Because there are only two
groups, and each investor within each group observes identical information-signal re-
alizations, informed asymmetry could be measured simply as the diﬀerence between
the two groups’ precisions of information, Π2 −Π1 . A shortcoming with this approach,
however, is that it fails to reflect changes that occur to the composition of the two
groups, such as in result (b) above. Thus, we measure information asymmetry as the
variance of the precisions across the investors in the economy. Specifically, let IA (·)
be a computation of the variance in investors’ precisions; when there are only two
groups, it can be shown that IA (·) reduces to a simple form:

                                N1 N2
                    IA(Π) =           (Π2 − Π1 )2 = μ(1 − μ)(αQs − θ)2 .
                                N N

In short, our measure of information asymmetry is the product of the proportions of
investors in each group and the square of the diﬀerence in their precisions.
    Employing this measure of information asymmetry, it is a straightforward exercise
to show that as the percentage of signals that are public increases as in case (a) above,
information asymmetry and average precision move in concert. For the remaining
12 Yet,the second expression for the average precision in eqn. (5a) is identical to the expression that
appears in EOH’s pricing equation in their Proposition 2. EOH choose a parameterization where
the total information content of the signals is held constant but the composition changes. Despite
this parameterization, the average equilibrium precision changes and this is what drives the results.

                                                  22
three results in Corollary 2, however, information asymmetry and average precision
do not move in concert, making it easier to distinguish their eﬀects. In case (b),
information asymmetry is a non-monotonic function of μ, the percentage of investors
in the informed group. Information asymmetry is zero at the two extremes, when
all investors are in either the informed group or the uninformed group. In case (d),
providing more information to the informed group obviously increases their precision.
This also indirectly increases the precision of the information of the uninformed group
because prices are more informative. Despite the fact that prices transmit information
with noise, the precision of information for the less informed group does not increase
as quickly as the precision of information for the more informed group. As a result,
information asymmetry between the two groups increases.
   These cases illustrate that it is not information asymmetry, but the average pre-
cision that determines the eﬀect on the cost of capital. Once one controls for average
precision, information asymmetry has no eﬀect on the cost of capital. There are some
circumstances where reducing information asymmetry can appear to reduce cost of
capital, e.g., case (a). Note, however, that the reason why providing less informed
investors access to information previously available only to more informed investors
reduces cost of capital is because the average precision of investors’ information in-
creases, not because information asymmetry decreases. In contrast, an attempt to
reduce information asymmetry by limiting informed investors’ access to more informa-
tion increases cost of capital because investors’ average precision is lower. Therefore,
attempts at “level the playing field” by providing all investors with the same informa-
tion have an ambiguous eﬀect on the cost of capital. If the playing field is “leveled”
by increasing the information available to the less informed group, cost of capital goes
down. If the playing field is leveled by restricting the ability of informed investors to


                                           23
acquire additional private signals, then cost of capital will rise. In summary, the com-
munication of more information to more investors, not the reduction of information
asymmetry per se, lowers cost of capital.


4     Disclosure and diversification

Section 3 establishes that the discount the market associates with holding firms’
shares relies on investors’ average precision matrix for the distribution of firms’ end-
of-period cash flows. In this section we address whether an individual firm can aﬀect
its discount by disclosing additional information about its cash flow. Recall that
                               1            E [X̃0 ]
we define cost of capital as 1+R  ( 1 Π0 )−1 N τ . It is straightforward to show that
                                 f N

when there are only a finite number of investors in the economy (i.e., N is finite),
additional disclosure by firm j will reduce its discount by increasing the average
                                       1
precision in investors’ information,   N
                                         Π0 .   Such an eﬀect will occur even if firms’ cash
flows are viewed to be independently distributed. Nonetheless, it could be argued
that the finite-N case is uninteresting in the context of the CAPM in that it fails
to capture the eﬀect of diversification. Thus, in this section we study the eﬀect of
disclosure by firm j on its discount in the presence of diversification.
    Diversification is achieved typically by appealing to the notion of a large economy.
So as to avoid cases as uninteresting as the finite-N case, however, some consideration
should be given to how one defines a “large economy.” For example, if by “large econ-
omy” one means that the number of investors in the economy gets large (i.e., N gets
large), while all other features of the economy remain finite, then diversification alone
                                     E [X̃0 ]
eliminates any discount because N τ approaches 0. Therefore, to be economically
interesting, we define a “large economy” as one in which both the number of investors,
N, and the number of firms, J, become large (see also Hughes et al., 2007; Lambert

                                                24
et al., 2007). That is, each firm remains finite, but the number of firms increases.
    To illustrate how an individual firm can aﬀect its discount, we consider the case
where all investors have the same precision of information, but the information itself
is diverse: that is, we assume Πi = ΠΩ and Covi = CovΩ for all i. Here, it is
                                                                           E [X̃0 ]
straightforward to show that firms’ cost of capital is proportional to CovΩ Nτ .
This expression, in turn, implies that firm j’s cost of capital is proportional to
                                              ⎛                                     ⎞
                J                                           J
           1                            1 ⎝
                     Covj,k E X̃0k   =     Covj,j E X̃0j +     Covj,k E X̃0k ⎠ ,              (6)
          Nτ   k=1
                                       Nτ                  k=j

where Covj,k represents the j-th, k-th element of the matrix CovΩ . The right-hand-
side of eqn. (6) is analogous to the discount for risk in the traditional CAPM, except
in our analysis the covariances are multiplied by the expected supply of firms’ shares;
in the CAPM, the expected supply of firms’ shares (in percentage terms) is 1. If
the oﬀ-diagonal elements of the covariance matrix CovΩ are zero, the left-hand-side
                              1
of eqn. (6) reduces to       Nτ
                                Covj,j E   X̃0j . This expression approaches 0 as N gets
large. This is consistent with the concept of “diversifiable risk.” Thus, here the
average precision of investors’ information is irrelevant; as such, any disclosure by
firm j intended to aﬀect the average precision is also irrelevant.13 If the oﬀ-diagonal
                                        J
elements are non-zero, however,         k=j   Covj,k E X̃0k will grow as the number of firms
                                                    1   J
in the economy, J, grows; this implies that        Nτ   k=j   Covj,k E X̃0k will not approach
0. In short, for firm j’s cost of capital to remain positive in a large economy (as we
have defined it), firms’ cash flows must covary.
    When firms’ cash flows covary and the error in firm j’s disclosure is independent
of all other variables, the following result holds.
13 Thisimplies that the information eﬀects in EOH are diversifiable. Hughes, et al. (2007) raise a
similar point about EOH. However, like EOH, they cast the eﬀects in their model as being driven
by information asymmetry, when in fact they are precision eﬀects.Thus, our results on the role of
information precision apply equally to Hughes, et al. (2007).

                                                  25
Proposition 4. When all investors have the same precision of information, but the
information itself is diverse, and the error in firm j’s disclosure is independent of
all other variables, firm j’s cost of capital moves closer to the risk free rate as the
precision in its disclosure about its cash flow increases.
Proposition 4 demonstrates that disclosure by a firm attenuates the discount for the
risk the market associates with holding shares of that firm, even when the quality
of its disclosure is idiosyncratic (i.e., independent of all other variables). This result
extends the estimation risk literature (e.g., Brown, 1979; Barry and Brown, 1984 and
1985), which analyzes information structures that are identical across investors based
on the historical time-series of returns from a stationary process, but has diﬃculty in
signing the eﬀects of information diﬀerences across firms. It also extends recent work
on the role of accounting information for firms’ estimation risk by Lambert, et al.
(2007), which is confined to a CAPM setting with homogeneous information among
investors.
   Similarly, in the superior information scenario, if the oﬀ-diagonal terms of the in-
vestors’ covariance matrices are zero, this will also be true in their precision matrices,
and in the average precision matrix. As a result, the cost of capital for firm j will be
will equal to the average precision for that firm times the expected supply of firm j
shares per-capita. Because the expected number of shares for firm j remains constant
as the economy as a whole grows, the expected supply per-capita goes to zero. Since
the average precision will be bounded, this implies the cost of capital will approach
zero. Again, this shows that it is the oﬀ-diagonal terms in investors’ covariance and
precision matrices that are critical in determining the firm’s cost of capital.




                                           26
5     Conclusion

This paper examines how the distribution of information across investors aﬀects firms’
cost of capital in a rational expectations (RE) economy with perfect competition. In
contrast to models commonly found in the RE-literature, we consider an economy
with multiple firms whose cash flows are correlated. We find that when investors
have diﬀerent information, prices are a function of two features of the economy’s
information structure: 1) the precision-weighted average of individual investors’ vec-
tor of expected end-of-period cash flows; and 2) the average of investors’ precision
matrices of the distribution of firms’ end-of-period cash flows.
    The latter feature determines the discount in prices relative to firms’ expected
cash flows. That is, the average of investors’ precisions (including any inferences they
glean from price) is a primary determinant of cost of capital. No other attribute
of investors’ information is relevant to firms’ cost of capital. In particular, once one
controls for average precision, the extent of information asymmetry in the economy
(which we measure by the diﬀerence in individual investors’ precision matrices rela-
tive to the average precision matrix) has no eﬀect on the cost of capital. Reducing
information asymmetry can appear to lower cost of capital in some situations by pro-
viding less informed investors access to information previously available only to better
informed investors. In this case, however, the cost of capital decreases because the
average precision of investors’ information increases, not because information asym-
metry decreases. In other words, the communication of more information to more
investors, not the reduction of information asymmetry, lowers cost of capital. Con-
versely, attempts at “level the playing field” by restricting the ability of informed
investors to acquire additional information will increase firms’ cost of capital. This



                                          27
contrasts with the leveling eﬀect on the cost of capital by increasing the information
available to the less-informed group described earlier.
   Why are prices not lower for firms where less informed investors face greater in-
formation disadvantages? We believe the critical feature of the model that drives
this result is that the markets are characterized by perfect competition across in-
vestors. Perfect competition is a standard feature of many asset pricing models,
including those commonly found in the RE-literature. Under perfect competition,
each investor’s demand for the shares of firm is decreasing in his assessed degree of
uncertainty (increasing in his assessed precision) about that firm’s future cash flow.
While less informed investors demand fewer shares when they perceive uncertainty to
be high, more informed investors demand more shares. Because demand is linear in
each investor’s precision, the relevant metric when investors’ demands are aggregated
to clear the market is the average precision.
   Moreover, the assessed uncertainty about a firm’s cash flow (or the discount for
risk) is not greater when the investor perceives that other investors possess more
precise information. In fact, an investor’s degree of uncertainty decreases when other
investors acquire more information, because this information becomes (partially) com-
municated through price when investors condition their expectations over price in
determining their demand. As each investor determines his demand for firm shares
based on a conjecture that his demand cannot aﬀect price, more informed investors
do not reduce their demand strategically for fear of revealing their information to
others. More importantly, no trading takes place until an equilibrium price is set.
Less informed investors can transact any quantity at this market clearing price. In
addition, they are able to use price as a conditioning variable in setting their expec-
tations and assessing risk when they submit their demand order. Thus, with perfect


                                          28
competition, information asymmetry does not result in adverse selection and there is
no compensation for being less informed.
    The fact that the average of investors’ precisions is a primary determinant of cost
of capital should not be interpreted as suggesting that information asymmetry’s role
in welfare is benign. It should be clear that when better informed investors participate
in the economy, they will achieve a higher expected utility than less well informed
investors (ceteris paribus ). But cost of capital and welfare are distinct phenomena;
as such they need not comport with one another (see, e.g., Gao, 2008).
    In addition, the fact that the average of investors’ precisions is a primary determi-
nant of cost of capital in a setting of perfect competition should not be interpreted as
suggesting that information asymmetry cannot play a role in other economic settings.
In particular, a natural avenue for future research is to examine the role of informa-
tion asymmetry in imperfect competition settings. For example, Copeland and Galai
(1983) and Glosten and Milgrom (1985) point out that asymmetric information can
exacerbate adverse selection, thereby leading to higher bid-ask spreads.14 Closer in
spirit to our analysis, Diamond and Verrecchia (1991) examine a single-firm, imper-
fect competition setting comprised of informed traders, uninformed market makers
(or investors), and liquidity traders. They find that large, risk neutral traders are
unwilling to all hold shares in the economy because they anticipate an adverse selec-
tion problem in secondary-share markets: in other words, if they are required to sell
their shares in response to a liquidity shock, they risk being confused with informed
traders who sell in response to unfavorable information. As information asymmetry
in the secondary market increases, large traders choose to hold fewer shares; this,
in turn, increases the risk that must be borne by small investors, and hence lowers
14 See   also Kyle (1985, 1989) and Admati and Pfleiderer (1988).



                                                  29
the equilibrium price of the firm. Equivalently, the firm’s cost of capital rises. This
suggests a path for future research: combining the variety of information structures
analyzed here with imperfect competition settings to study how (or whether) average
precision and information asymmetry interact in determining a firm’s cost of capital.




                                          30
                                           APPENDIX

Proof of Proposition 1
From eqn. (2), investor i’s demand for shares of firms (in vector format) is

                            Xi = τ Πi Ei Ṽ − P (1 + Rf ) .                                       (A1)

Summing the demand function across investors yields
                             N             N
                   X0 =           Xi = τ         Πi Ei Ṽ − P (1 + Rf ) ;
                            i=1            i=1

recall that X0 is the aggregate supply vector. Solving for P, the vector of firm share
prices, yields
                                           N
                             (Π0 )−1       i=1   Πi Ei Ṽ − ( N1 Π0 )−1 Nτ
                                                                        X0
                     P=                                                              .
                                                     1 + Rf
Q.E.D.


Proof of Proposition 2
First, we re-express P as characterized in Proposition 1 as follows:
                                                 1    N                     X0
                               1       N              i=1     Πi Ei Ṽ −    Nτ
                          P = ( Π0 )−1                                           .
                               N                              1 + Rf

Next, substitute into this expression for P the characterization of Ei Ṽ :
                       1 N        −1                                                         X0
               1    −1 N i=1 Πi Πi (Ψm + ηy + Si zi + θu) −                                  Nτ
          P = ( Π0 )
               N                          1 + Rf
                                 1    N                X0
               1    −1 Ψm + ηy + N    i=1 Si zi + θu − Nτ
            = ( Π0 )                                      .
               N                   1 + Rf

Thus, when investors condition their expectations over P, they interpret P as a
random variable characterized as
                                                          1     N
                          1        Ψm + ηỹ +                   i=1Si z̃i + θũ − τ1 x̃0
                 P̃ = (     Π0 )−1                        N
                                                                                         ,        (A2)
                          N                                   1 + Rf

                                                     31
where for convenience we now express the aggregate supply on a per-capita basis:
                 X̃0                                                                            1   N
that is, x̃0 =    N
                     .   The law of large numbers implies that                                  N   i=1   Si z̃i converges to
1   N
N   i=1   Si Ṽ because the idiosyncratic elements in z̃i average out. Thus, we substitute
this into eqn. (A2), along with the expression for ũ:
                                          1         N
          1       Ψm + ηỹ +              N         i=1   Si Ṽ + θ Ṽ − b−1 d (x̃0 − x̄0 ) − τ1 x̃0
    P̃ = ( Π0 )−1
          N                                                        1 + Rf
            1       Ψm + ηỹ +             θ+ N1             N
                                                             i=1   Si Ṽ − θb−1 d+ τI x̃0 + θb−1 dx̄0
         = ( Π0 )−1                                                                                                     .
            N                                                          1 + Rf

Now recall that investors conjecture that P̃ is of the form P̃ = a+bṼ+cỹ−dx̃0 +ex̄0 .
For this conjecture to be self-fulfilling, it must be the case that

                                 ( N1 Π0 )−1      1                         N
                             b =             ((θ+                                S), and
                                   1 + Rf         N                     i=1
                                      ( N1 Π0 )−1         1
                             d =                  (θb−1 d+ I).
                                        1 + Rf            τ

Thus,
                                      N             −1
                                1                            1      1              1
                 −1
               b d =         θ+            Si            (     Π0 )( Π0 )−1 θb−1 d+ I
                                N    i=1                     N      N              τ
                                     N
                                 1                      1
                         = (θ+           Si )−1 (θb−1 d+ I).
                                 N   i=1                τ

Hence, we can solve to get
                                                                   N            −1
                                      −1  1                  1
                                     b d=                              Si            .
                                          τ                  N   i=1

Substituting this expression for b−1 d back into the expression for the precision of the
orthogonal information in price, θ, yields
                                                N                                N
                                          1                             1
                             θ = τ2                  Si · W·                             Si .
                                          N   i=1                       N       i=1

Q.E.D.

                                                          32
Proof of Proposition 3
                                                       N1
The average precision of investors’ information is     N
                                                            (Ψ + Q1 η + θ)+ NN2 (Ψ + Q1 η + Q2 S).
It remains to solve for θ, the precision of the incremental information provided by
price, ũ. Re-arranging eqn. (3) gives

                              Π−1
                                0
                                         N
                                                                  N
                          P=                 Πi Ei Ṽ|Φi −          x̃0 .
                             1 + Rf    i=1                        τ

For the less informed group, Π1 E1 Ṽ = Π1 [Π1 ]−1 [Ψm + ηY + θu] = [Ψm + ηY + θu].
Similarly, for the informed group, Π2 E2 Ṽ = Π2 [Π2 ]−1 [Ψm + ηY + SZ] = [Ψm + ηY + SZ].
Substituting into the price equation yields

              Π−1
                0                                             N
       P =          N1 [Ψm + ηY + θu] + N2 [Ψm + ηY + SZ] − x̃0
             1 + Rf                                            τ
                −1
              Π0                                          N
           =        (N1 + N2 ) [Ψm + ηY] + N1 θu + N2 SZ − x̃0 .
             1 + Rf                                       τ
                    b−1                                     Z̃       b−1 d
Substituting ũ =   Q2
                          P̃ − a − cỸ + x̄0 (d − e) =      Q2
                                                                 −    Q2
                                                                             (x̃0 − x̄0 ) implies

     Π−1
       0                                Z̃   b−1 d                         N
P =        (N1 + N2 ) [Ψm + ηY] + N1 θ     −       (x̃0 − x̄0 ) + N2 SZ − x̃0
    1 + Rf                              Q2    Q2                           τ
       −1                                                   −1
     Π0                            N1 θ                   b d NI                  b−1 d
  =        (N1 + N2 ) [Ψm + ηY] +       + N2 S Z− N1 θ          −      x̃0 + N1 θ       x̄0 .
    1 + Rf                         Q2                       Q2     τ               Q2

But recall once again that price is also equal to P = a + bZ̃ + cỸ + dx0 − ex̄0 .

                                       Π−1   N1 θ                             Π−1          −1       NI
Equating coeﬃcients yields b =          0
                                      1+Rf   Q2
                                                    + N2 S and d =             0
                                                                             1+Rf
                                                                                    N1 θ bQ2d −     τ
                                                                                                         .
Together these imply
                                                N −1
                                     b−1 d =        S ,
                                               N2 τ
where N ≡ N1 + N2 . This implies that the covariance matrix of ũ, the error in the
estimate of the vector of cash flows Ṽ, is
                                                                        2
      Q2 S−1   1 −1      −1           S−1   1                     N
          2
             +  2
                  (b d)W    (b−1
                                 d) =     + 2                               (S−1 )W−1 (S−1 ) .
       Q2      Q2                     Q2   Q2                    N2 τ

                                              33
The precision matrix θ is the inverse of this expression. Q.E.D.


Proof of Corollary 2.
Recall that the cost of capital is decreasing in Avg [Π] , where

                                 N1    N2
       Avg [Π] = Ψ + Q1 s +         θ+    Q2 s = Ψ + (1 − α) Qs + μαQs + (1 − μ) θ,
                                 N     N

and                ⎛                           ⎞−1
                                        2                                       −1
                    1             1          1 ⎠          1    1     1
               θ=⎝      +       N2                   =      + 2 2 2 2 2              .
                   Q2 s         N
                                   τs       Q22 w        αQs μ τ s α Q w
a. To prove a) note first that

          ∂θ                    1
             = Qs                                  1 + 2Q−1 s−1 w−1 α−1 τ −2 μ−2 ;
          ∂α      (1 + Q−1 s−1 w−1 α−1 τ −2 μ−2 )2
this implies that

∂Avg [Π]                 ∂θ
         = (1 − μ)(−Qs +    )
  ∂α                     ∂α
                                                        1                   −1 −1 −1 −1 −2 −2
                = (1 − μ)(−Qs + Qs                −1 −1 −1 −1 −2 −2 2 1 + 2Q s w α τ      μ )
                                            (1 + Q s w α τ μ )
                           (1 − μ)Qs
                = −                       < 0.
                        (Qswατ 2 μ2 + 1)2
Therefore, Avg [Π] is decreasing in α, which makes it increasing in (1 − α).
b. The fact that the private information of informed investors is more precise than the
less informed investors’ imperfect inference of their information through price implies
                                                         ∂θ
αQs − θ > 0. It is also straightforward to show          ∂μ
                                                              > 0. Together these imply

                             ∂Avg [Π]                     ∂θ
                                      = αQs − θ + (1 − μ)    > 0.
                               ∂μ                         ∂μ
     ∂Avg[Π]
c.    ∂Q1
               = s > 0.
                   ∂θ
d. Note that      ∂Q2
                        > 0; thus

                                 ∂Avg [Π] N1 ∂θ    N2
                                         =       +    s > 0.
                                   ∂Q2     N ∂Q2   N

                                                    34
Q.E.D.


Proof of Proposition 4.
Let Π represent investors’ homogeneous, total precision matrix. From the proof to
Proposition 2, we know that investors’ precision is additive in the precision of public
information about firms’ cash flows (additive in η). Without loss of generality, assume
that firm 1 discloses additional information about its cash flow with error δ̃, and δ̃
is independent of all other variables. Let Π∗ represent investors’ homogeneous, total
precision matrix that results from firm 1’s additional disclosure, and Cov∗ its inverse:
that is, Cov∗ = Π∗−1 . With firm 1’s additional disclosure, investors’ precision matrix
about firms’ cash flows becomes
             ⎛                                ⎞−1       ⎛                                             ⎞
                                                                               −1
            ⎜    V ar δ̃ j    0 ... 0 ⎟                 ⎜   Π1,1 + V ar δ̃ j         Π1,2 ... Π1,J ⎟
            ⎜                         ⎟                 ⎜                                          ⎟
            ⎜                                 ⎟         ⎜                                          ⎟
            ⎜    0            0 ... 0 ⎟                 ⎜   Π2,1                     Π2,2 ... Π2,J ⎟
    ∗
  Π =    Π+ ⎜
            ⎜
            ⎜
                                      ⎟
                                      ⎟
                                              ⎟
                                                    =   ⎜
                                                        ⎜
                                                        ⎜
                                                                                                   ⎟
                                                                                                      ⎟,
                                                                                                      ⎟
            ⎜    .            .       .   .   ⎟         ⎜   .                        .        .   .   ⎟
            ⎜                                 ⎟         ⎜                                             ⎟
            ⎝                                 ⎠         ⎝                                             ⎠
                 0            0 ... 0                       ΠJ,1                     ΠJ,2 ... ΠJ,J

where Πj,k represents the j-th, k-th element of the matrix Π, and
                              ⎛                                                     ⎞−1
                                                        −1
                              ⎜   Π1,1 + V ar δ̃ j              Π1,2 ... Π1,J ⎟
                              ⎜                                               ⎟
                              ⎜                                               ⎟
                              ⎜   Π2,1                          Π2,2 ... Π2,J ⎟
                              ⎜                                               ⎟
                     Cov∗ =   ⎜
                              ⎜
                                                                                    ⎟
                                                                                    ⎟
                                                                                          .
                              ⎜   .                             .    .    .         ⎟
                              ⎜                                                     ⎟
                              ⎝                                                     ⎠
                                  ΠJ,1                          ΠJ,2 ... ΠJ,J
       ∗
Let Covj,k and Π∗j,k represent the j-th, k-th element of the matrices Cov∗ and Π∗ ,
respectively. Then

   ∗        Cofactorj,1 of Π∗ matrix
Cov1,j =
           Determinant of Π∗ matrix
                 Cofactorj,1 of Π∗ matrix
         =   J    ∗                     ∗
             k=1 Π1,k · Cofactor1,k of Π matrix


                                                    35
                                            Cofactorj,1 of Π matrix
         =
             Π∗1,1   · Cofactor1,1      of Π∗ matrix + Jk=2 Π∗1,k · Cofactor1,k of Π∗ matrix
                                               Cofactorj,1 of Π matrix
         =                 −1                                     J
             V ar δ̃ j          · Cofactor1,1 of Π matrix +       k=1   Π1,k · Cofactor1,k of Π matrix
                          Cofactorj,1 of Π     matrix
                     J
                           Π ·Cofactor1,k
                     k=1 1,k
                                               of Π matrix
         =                −1
              V ar[    ]
                     δ̃ j    ·Cofactor1,1 of   Π matrix
                J                                         +1
                k=1
                      Π1,k ·Cofactor1,k of Π matrix

                      V ar δ̃ j
         =                               Cov1,j
             Cov1,1 + V ar δ̃ j
                       V ar δ̃ j
         =                                     Cov1,j .
             V ar Ṽ1 + V ar δ̃ j

Q.E.D.




                                                             36
Admati, A., 1985, A Noisy Rational Expectations Equilibrium for Multi-Asset Secu-
rity Markets, Econometrica 53, 629-658.

Admati, A., and P. Pfleiderer, 1988, A Theory of Intraday Patterns: Volume and
Price Variability, Review of Financial Studies 1, 3-40.

Amihud, Y., and H. Mendelson, 1986, The Eﬀects of Beta, Bid-Ask Spread, Residual
Risk and Size on Stock Returns, Journal of Finance, 479-486.

Association for Investment Management and Research (AIMR), 2001, Analysts, Port-
folio Managers say Volume, Quality of information have fallen under Regulation FD
AIMR member survey shows, http://www.aimr.org/pressroom/01releases/regFD_survey.html.

Barry, C., and S. Brown, 1984, Diﬀerential information and the Small Firm Eﬀect,
Journal of Financial Economics 13, 283-294.

Barry, C., and S. Brown, 1985, Diﬀerential Information and Security Market Equi-
librium, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 20, 407-422.

Barth, M., Y. Konchitchki, and W. Landsman, 2006, Cost of capital and financial
statement transparency, Working paper, Stanford University and University of North
Carolina.

Botosan, C., and M. Plumlee, 2003, Are Information Attributes Priced? Working
paper, University of Utah.

Botosan, C., M. Plumlee, and Y. Xie, 2004, The Role of Information Precision in
Determining Cost-of-equity-capital, Review of Accounting Studies 9, 197-228.

Brown, S., 1979, The Eﬀect of Estimation Risk on Capital Market Equilibrium, Jour-
nal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 15, 215-220.



                                          37
Chen, S., T. Shevlin, and Y. Tong. 2007, Does the pricing of financial reporting
quality change around dividend changes? Journal of Accounting Research 45, 1—40.

Chordia, T., R. Roll, and A. Subrahmanyam, 2000, Commonality in Liquidity, Jour-
nal of Financial Economics 56, 3-28.

Cohen, D., 2008, Does Information Risk Really Matter? An Analysis of the Deter-
minants and Economic Consequences of Financial Reporting Quality, Asia Pacific
Journal of Accounting and Economics 15, 69-90.

Copeland, T., and D. Galai, 1983, Information Eﬀects on the Bid-Ask Spread, Journal
of Finance 38, 1457-1469.

Core, J., W. Guay, and R. Verdi, 2008, Is Accruals Quality a Priced Risk Factor?,
Journal of Accounting and Economics 46, 2-22.

Diamond, D., and R. Verrecchia, 1981, Information Aggregation in a Noisy Rational
Expectations Economy, Journal of Financial Economics 9, 221-235.

Diamond, D., and R. Verrecchia, 1991, Disclosure, Liquidity and the Cost of Capital,
Journal of Finance 46, 1325-1359.

Dhaliwal, D., Z. Chen, and H. Xie, 2006, Regulation Fair Disclosure and the Cost of
Equity Capital, Working paper.

Duarte, J., X. Han, J. Harford, and L. Young, 2006, Information Asymmetry, In-
formation Dissemination and the Eﬀect of Regulation FD on the Cost of Capital,
Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Easley, D., and M. O’Hara, 2004, Information and the Cost of Capital, Journal of
Finance 59, 1553-1583.



                                        38
Easley, D, S. Hvidkjaer, and M. O’Hara, 2002, Is information risk a determinant of
asset returns?, Journal of Finance 57, 2185-2222.

Fama, E., 1976, Foundations of Finance, Basic Books, New York.

Francis, J., LaFond, R., Olsson, P., and Schipper, K., 2005, The Market Pricing of
Accruals Quality, Journal of Accounting and Economics 39, 295-327.

Gao, P., 2008, Disclosure Quality, Cost of Capital, and Investor Welfare, Working
paper, University of Chicago.

Glosten, L. and P. Milgrom, 1985, Bid, Ask, and Transaction Prices in a Specialist
Market with Hetergeneously Informed Traders, Journal of Financial Economics 14,
71-100.

Gomes, A., G. Gorton, and L. Madureira, 2006, SEC Regulation Fair Disclosure,
Information, and the Cost of Capital, Working Paper: Washington University; Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania; Case Western Reserve University.

Grossman, S., 1976, Eﬃciency of Competitive Stock Markets Where Traders Have
Diverse Information, Journal of Finance 31, 573-585.

Grossman, S., and J. Stiglitz, 1980, On the impossibility of informationally eﬃcient
markets, American Economic Review 70, 393-408.

Healy, P., and K. Palepu, 2001, Information Asymmetry, Corporate Disclosure, and
the Capital Markets: A Review of the Empirical Disclosure Literature, Journal of
Accounting and Economics 31, 405-440.

Hellwig, M., 1980, On the Aggregation of Information in Competitive Markets, Jour-
nal of Economic Theory 22, 477-498.



                                         39
Hughes, J., J. Liu, and J. Liu, 2007, Information, Diversification and the Cost of
Capital, The Accounting Review 82, 705-729.

Kim, O., and R. Verrecchia, 1991, Market Reactions to Anticipated Announcements,
Journal of Financial Economics 30, 273-309.

Kravet, T. D., and T. J. Shevlin, 2007, Accounting restatements and information
risk, Working Paper, University of Washington.

Kyle, A., 1985, Continuous Auctions and Insider Trade, Econometrica 53, 1315-1335.

Kyle, A., 1989, Informed Speculation with Imperfect Competition, Review of Eco-
nomic Studies 56, 317-356.

Lambert, R., Leuz, C., and R. Verrecchia, 2007, Accounting Information, Disclosure,
and the Cost of Capital, Journal of Accounting Research 45, 385-420.

Leland, H., 1992, Insider Trading: Should It Be Prohibited?, The Journal of Political
Economy 100, 859-887.

Leuz, C., and P. Wysocki, 2008, Economic Consequences of Financial Reporting
and Disclosure Regulation: A Review and Suggestions for Future Research, Working
paper.

Levitt, A., 1998, The Importance of High Quality Accounting Standards, Accounting
Horizons 12, 79-82.

Lintner, J., 1965, The Valuation of Risk Assets and the Selection of Risky Investments
in Stock Portfolios and Capital Budgets, Review of Economics & Statistics 65, 13-37.

Lintner, J., 1969, The Aggregation of Investors’ Diverse Judgments and Preferences in
Purely Competitive Security Markets, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis


                                         40
4, 347-400.

Loss, L., 1983, Fundamentals of Securities Regulation (Little Brown and Company;
Boston).

Liu, M., and P. Wysocki, 2007, Cross-sectional Determinants of Information Quality
Proxies and Cost of Capital, Working Paper.

Loss, L., and Seligman, J., 2001, Fundamentals of Securities Regulation, 4th edition.
Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen Law & Business, 2001.

Merton, R., 1987, A Simple Model of Capital Market Equilibrium With Incomplete
Information, Journal of Finance 43, 483-510.

Mohanram, P., and S. Rajgopal, 2008, Is PIN priced risk?, Journal of Accounting
and Economics, forthcoming.

Nichols, D., 2006, Fundamental risk or information risk? An analysis of the residual
accrual volatility factor, Working Paper, Cornell University.

Ogneva, M., 2008, Accrual Quality and Expected Returns: The Importance of Con-
trolling for Cash Flow Shocks, Working Paper, Stanford University.

O’Hara, M., 2003, Presidential Address: Liquidity and Price Discovery, Journal of
Finance 58, 1335-1354.

Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 2000, Final Rule: Selective Disclo-
sure and Insider Trading, Exchange Act Release No. 33-7881 (Oct. 23, 2000),
htt://www.sec.gov/rules/final/33-7881.htm.

Sharpe, W., 1964, Capital Asset Prices, A Theory of Market Equilibrium Under
Conditions of Risk, Journal of Finance 19, 425-442.


                                         41
Unger, L., 2000, Speech by SEC Commissioner: Fallout from Regulation FD — Has
the SEC Finally Cut the Tightrope?

Verdi, R., 2005, Information Environment and the Cost of Capital, Working paper,
MIT.

Wang, J., 1993, A Model of Intertemporal Asset Pricing under Asymmetric Informa-
tion, The Review of Economic Studies 60, 249-282.




                                       42
