NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOPHISTICATED MONETARY POLICIES
Andrew Atkeson
V. V. Chari
Patrick Kehoe
Working Paper 14883
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14883

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2009

Atkeson, Chari, and Kehoe thank the National Science Foundation for financial support and Kathleen
Rolfe for excellent editorial assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Andrew Atkeson, V. V. Chari, and Patrick Kehoe. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Sophisticated Monetary Policies
Andrew Atkeson, V. V. Chari, and Patrick Kehoe
NBER Working Paper No. 14883
April 2009
JEL No. E5,E52,E58,E6,E61
ABSTRACT
In standard approaches to monetary policy, interest rate rules often lead to indeterminacy. Sophisticated
policies, which depend on the history of private actions and can differ on and off the equilibrium path,
can eliminate indeterminacy and uniquely implement any desired competitive equilibrium. Two types
of sophisticated policies illustrate our approach. Both use interest rates as the policy instrument along
the equilibrium path. But when agents deviate from that path, the regime switches, in one example
to money; in the other, to a hybrid rule. Both lead to unique implementation, while pure interest rate
rules do not. We argue that adherence to the Taylor principle is neither necessary nor sufficient for
unique implementation with pure interest rate rules but is sufficient with hybrid rules. Our results are
robust to imperfect information and may provide a rationale for empirical work on monetary policy
rules and determinacy.

Andrew Atkeson
Bunche Hall 9381
Department of Economics
UCLA
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
andy@atkeson.net
V. V. Chari
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
1035 Heller Hall
271 - 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
chari@res.mpls.frb.fed.us

Patrick Kehoe
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55480-0291
and NBER
pkehoe@res.mpls.frb.fed.us

The now-classic Ramsey (1927) approach to policy analysis under commitment specifies the set of instruments available to policymakers and finds the best competitive equilibrium
outcomes given those instruments. This approach has been adapted to situations with uncertainty, by Barro (1979) and Lucas and Stokey (1983), among others, by specifying the policy
instruments as functions of exogenous events.1
While the Ramsey approach has been useful in identifying the best outcomes, this
approach needs to be extended before it can be used to guide policy. Such an extension
would describe what would happen for every history of private agent actions, government
policies, and exogenous events. It would also be desirable to structure policy in such a way
that policymakers can ensure that their desired outcomes occur.
Here, we provide such an extended approach. To construct it, we adapt the language
of Chari and Kehoe (1990) by describing private agent actions and policies as functions of
the history of private agent actions, policies, and exogenous events. The key to our approach
is our requirement that for all histories, including those in which private agents deviate from
the equilibrium path, the continuation outcomes constitute a competitive equilibrium. We
label such policy functions sophisticated policies and the resulting equilibrium a sophisticated
equilibrium. If policies can be structured so as to ensure that the desired outcomes occur,
then we say that the policies uniquely implement the desired outcome.
We use this approach to analyze an important outstanding question in monetary economics: How should we design policy in order to avoid indeterminacy and to achieve unique
implementation? It has been known, at least since the work of Sargent and Wallace (1975),
that when interest rates are the policy instrument, many ways of specifying policy lead to
indeterminate outcomes. Indeterminacy is risky because some of those outcomes can be bad,
including hyperinflation. Researchers thus agree that designing policies which achieve unique
implementation is desirable. Here, we demonstrate that our sophisticated policy approach
does that for monetary policy.
We illustrate our approach in two standard monetary economies: a simple sticky price
model with one-period price-setting and a sticky price model with staggered price-setting. For
both, we show that, under suﬃcient conditions, any outcome of a competitive equilibrium can
be uniquely implemented by appropriately constructed sophisticated policies. In particular,

the Ramsey equilibrium can be uniquely implemented.
We construct central bank policies that uniquely implement a desired competitive
equilibrium in the same basic way in both models. Along the equilibrium path, we choose
the policies to be those given by the desired competitive equilibrium. We structure the policies
oﬀ the equilibrium path, the reversion policies, to discourage deviations. Specifically, if the
average choice of private agents deviates from that in the desired equilibrium, we choose the
reversion policies so that the optimal choice, or best response, of each individual agent is
diﬀerent from the average choice.
When such reversion policies can be found, we say that the best responses are controllable. A suﬃcient condition for controllability is that policies can be found so that after
a deviation the continuation equilibrium is unique and varies with policy. Variation with
policy typically holds, so if policies can be found under which the continuation equilibrium
is unique (somewhere), then we have unique implementation (everywhere). This suﬃcient
condition suggests a simple way to state our message in a general way: uniqueness somewhere
generates uniqueness everywhere.
One concern with our construction is that it apparently relies on the idea that the
central bank perfectly observes private agents’ actions and thus can detect any deviation.
We show that this concern is unwarranted: our results are robust to imperfect information
about private agents’ actions.
The approach proposed here suggests an operational guide to policymaking. First use
the Ramsey approach to determine the best competitive equilibrium, and then check whether
in that situation, best responses are controllable. If they are, then sophisticated policies of
the kind we have constructed can uniquely implement the Ramsey outcome. If best responses
are not controllable, then the only option is to accept indeterminacy.
Our work here is related to previous work on the problem of indeterminacy in monetary
economies (Wallace 1981; Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ 1983; King 2000; Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé,
and Uribe 2001; Christiano and Rostagno 2001; and Svensson and Woodford 2005). The
previous work pursues an approach diﬀerent from ours (and from that in the microeconomic
literature on implementation); we call it unsophisticated implementation. The basic idea of
that approach is to specify policies as functions of the history and check only to see if the
2

period 0 competitive equilibrium is unique.
Unsophisticated implementation has been criticized in the macroeconomic and the
microeconomic literature. For example, in the macroeconomic literature, Kocherlakota and
Phelan (1999), Buiter (2002), Ljungqvist and Sargent (2004), and Bassetto (2005) criticize
this general idea in the context of the fiscal theory of the price level, and Cochrane (2007)
criticizes it in the context of the literature on monetary policy rules. In the microeconomic
literature, Jackson (2001) criticizes a related approach to implementation.
In our view, unsophisticated implementation is deficient because it does not describe
how the economy will behave after a deviation by private agents from the desired outcome.
This deficiency leaves open the possibility that the approach achieves implementation via
nonexistence. By implementation via nonexistence, we mean an approach that specifies policy
actions under which no continuation equilibrium exists after private agent deviations.
We agree with those who argue that implementation via nonexistence trivializes the
implementation problem. To see why it does, consider the following policy rule: If private
agents choose the desired outcome, then continue with the desired policy; if private agents
deviate from the desired outcome, then forever after set government spending at a high level
and taxes at zero. Clearly, under this policy rule, any deviation from the desired outcome leads
to nonexistence of equilibrium, and hence, we trivially have implementation via nonexistence.
We find this way of achieving implementation unpalatable.
Our approach, in contrast, insists that policies be specified so that a competitive
equilibrium exists after any deviation. We achieve implementation in the traditional microeconomic sense by discouraging deviations, not by nonexistence. In our approach, policies
are specified so that even if an individual agent believes that all other agents will deviate
to some specific action, that individual agent finds it optimal to choose a diﬀerent action.
Our approach not only ensures that the continuation equilibria always exist, but also has the
desirable property that the reversion policies are not extreme in any sense. That is, after
deviations, our reversion policies do not threaten the private economy with dire outcomes
like hyperinflation; they simply bring inflation back to the desired path.
Despite the shortcomings of the unsophisticated implementation approach, this literature has made two contributions that we find useful. One is the idea of regime-switching.
3

This idea dates back to at least Wallace (1981) and has been used by Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ
(1983), Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé, and Uribe (2001), and Christiano and Rostagno (2001).
The basic idea in, say, Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé, and Uribe (2001) is that if the economy
embarks on an undesirable path, then the monetary and fiscal policy regime switches in such
a way that the government’s budget constraint is violated, and the undesirable path is not
an equilibrium.
The other useful contribution of the literature on unsophisticated implementation is
what Cochrane (2007) calls the King rule. This rule seeks to implement a desired equilibrium
through an interest rate policy that makes the diﬀerence between the interest rate and its
desired equilibrium level a linear function of the diﬀerence between inflation and its desired
equilibrium level, with a coeﬃcient greater than 1. This idea dates back to at least King
(2000) and has been used by Svensson and Woodford (2005). As we show here, the King
rule, like other pure interest rate rules, always leads to indeterminacy in our simple model
and does so for a large class of parameters in the staggered price-setting model as well.
We build on these two contributions by considering a King-money hybrid rule: when
private agents deviate from the equilibrium path, the central bank uses the King rule for
small deviations and switches regimes (from interest rates to money) for large deviations. Interestingly, with this rule, under our definition of equilibrium, outcomes return to the desired
outcome path after deviations. In this sense, this hybrid rule achieves unique implementation
after deviations, again without threatening agents with dire outcomes.
Our work here is also related to another substantial literature that aims to find monetary policy rules which eliminate indeterminacy. (See, for example, McCallum 1981 and, more
recently, Woodford 2003.) The recent literature argues that to achieve a unique outcome,
interest rate rules should follow the Taylor principle: interest rates relative to some exogenously specified levels should rise more than one-for-one when inflation rates rise relative to
their exogenously specified levels.
We show here that adherence to the Taylor principle is neither necessary nor suﬃcient
for unique implementation. It is not necessary because the sophisticated policy approach
can uniquely implement any desired competitive equilibrium outcome, including outcomes in
which along the equilibrium path the central bank follows an interest rate rule that violates
4

the Taylor principle. It is not suﬃcient because pure interest rate rules, which use interest
rates for all histories, may lead to indeterminacy even if they satisfy the Taylor principle.
Notwithstanding these considerations, our analysis of the King-money hybrid rule does
lend support to the idea that adherence to the Taylor principle can sometimes help achieve
unique implementation. Specifically, this is true within the class of King-money hybrid rules
when the Taylor principle is used in the region where the King part of the rules applies.
We also show that a version of our model with measurement error provides a basis
for empirical strategies which attempt to uncover whether in the data central bank policies
ensure determinacy or allow for indeterminacy.
Here, we propose one way to eliminate indeterminacy when setting monetary policy.
For some other proposed resolutions to that issue, see the work of Bassetto (2002) and Adão,
Correia, and Teles (2007).

1. A Simple Model with One-Period Price-Setting
We begin by illustrating the basic idea of our construction of sophisticated policies
using a simple model with one-period price-setting. The dynamical system associated with
the competitive equilibrium of this model is straightforward, which lets us focus on the
strategic aspects of sophisticated policies. With this model, we demonstrate that any desired
outcome of a competitive equilibrium can be uniquely implemented by sophisticated policies
with reversion to a money regime. We show that pure interest rate rules, which exclusively
use interest rates as the policy instrument, cannot achieve unique implementation. Finally,
we show that reversion to a hybrid rule, which uses interest rates as the policy instrument
for small deviations and money for large deviations, can achieve unique implementation.
The model we analyze here is a modified version of the basic sticky price model with a
New Classical Phillips curve (as in Woodford 2003, Chap. 3, Sec. 1.3). In order to make our
results comparable to those in the literature, we here describe a simple, linearized version of
the model. In Appendix A, we describe the general equilibrium version that, when linearized,
produces the equilibrium conditions studied here.

5

A. The Determinants of Output and Inflation
Consider a monetary economy populated by a large number of identical, infinitely
lived consumers, a continuum of producers, and a central bank. Each producer uses labor
to produce a diﬀerentiated good on the unit interval. A fraction of producers  ∈ [0 ) are
flexible price producers, and a fraction  ∈ [ 1] are sticky price producers.
In this economy, the timing within a period  is as follows. At the beginning of
the period, sticky price producers set their prices, after which the central bank chooses its
monetary policy by setting one of its instruments, either interest rates or the quantity of
money. Two shocks  and   are then realized. We interpret the shock   as a flight to
quality shock that aﬀects the attractiveness of government debt relative to private claims
and the shock   as a velocity shock. At the end of the period, flexible price producers set
their prices, and consumers make their decisions.
Now we develop necessary conditions for a competitive equilibrium in this economy and
then, in the next subsection, formally define a competitive equilibrium. Here and throughout,
we express all variables in log-deviation form. This way of expressing variables implies that
none of our equations will have constant terms.
Consumer behavior in this model is summarized by an intertemporal Euler equation
and a cash-in-advance constraint. We can write the linearized Euler equation as
(1)

 =  [+1 ] −  ( −  [ +1 ]) +  

where  is aggregate output,  is the nominal interest rate,  (the flight to quality shock) is
an i.i.d. mean zero shock with variance var(), and  +1 = +1 −  is the inflation rate from
time period  to  + 1 , where  is the aggregate price level. The parameter  determines the
intertemporal elasticity, and  denotes the expectations of a representative consumer given
that consumer’s information in period , which includes the shock   
The cash-in-advance constraint, when first-diﬀerenced, implies that the relationships
among inflation    money growth   and output growth  − −1 are given by a quantity
equation of the form
(2)

  =  − ( − −1 ) +   

where   (the velocity shock) is an i.i.d. mean zero shock with variance var()
6

We turn now to producer behavior. The optimal price set by an individual flexible
price producer  satisfies
(3)

  () =  +  

where the parameter  is the elasticity of the equilibrium real wage with respect to output
(often referred to in the literature as Taylor’s ). The optimal price set by a sticky price
producer  satisfies
(4)

 () = −1 [ +  ] 

where −1 denotes expectations at the beginning of period  before the shocks   and  
are realized. The aggregate price level  is a linear combination of the prices   set by the
flexible price producers and the prices  set by the sticky price producers and is given by
(5)

 =

Z


0

  ()  +

Z

1



 () 

Using language from game theory, we can think of equations (3) and (4) as akin to the best
responses of the flexible and sticky price producers given their beliefs about the aggregate
price level and aggregate output.
In this model, the flexible price producers are strategically uninteresting. Their expectations about the future have no influence on their decisions; their prices are set mechanically
according to the static considerations reflected in (3). Thus, in all that follows, equation
(3) will hold on and oﬀ the equilibrium path, and we can think of   () as being residually
determined by (3) and substitute out for   (). To do so, substitute (3) into (5) and solve
for  to get
(6)

1 Z1
 =  +
 () 
1− 

where  = (1 − )
We follow the literature and express the sticky price producers’ decisions in terms of
inflation rates rather than price levels. To do so, let  () =  () − −1 , and rewrite (4) as
(7)

 () = −1 [  +  ] 

7

For convenience, we define
(8)

 =

1 Z1
 () 
1− 

to be the average price set by the sticky price producers relative to the aggregate price level
in period  − 1 so that we can rewrite (7) as
(9)

 = −1 [  +  ] 

We can also rewrite (6) as
(10)

  =  +  
Consider now the setting of monetary policy in this model. When the central bank

sets its policy, it has to choose to operate under either a money regime or an interest rate
regime. In the money regime, the central bank’s policy instrument is money growth  ; it
sets  , and the nominal interest rate  is residually determined from the Euler equation (1)
after the realization of the shock    In the interest rate regime, the central bank’s instrument
is the interest rate; it sets  , and money growth  is residually determined from the cash-inadvance constraint (2) after the realization of the shock    Of course, in both regimes, the
Euler equation and the cash-in-advance constraint both hold.
B. Competitive Equilibrium
Now we define a notion of competitive equilibrium for the simple model in the spirit
of the work of Barro (1979) and Lucas and Stokey (1983). In this equilibrium, allocations,
prices, and policies are all defined as functions of the history of exogenous events, or shocks,
 = (0       ), where  = (     )
Sticky price producer decisions and aggregate inflation and output levels can be summarized by { (−1 )   ( )  ( )} In terms of the policies, we let the regime choice as well

as the policy choice within the regime be   (−1 ) =

(1 (−1) 2 (−1 )), where the first

argument  1 (−1 ) ∈ { } denotes the regime choice, either money ( ) or the interest
rate (), and the second argument denotes the policy choice within the regime, either money
growth  (−1 ) or the interest rate  (−1 ) If the money regime is chosen in , then the
interest rate is determined residually at the end of that period, whereas if the interest rate
8

regime is chosen in , then the money growth rate is determined residually at the end of
the period. Let { ( )} = { (−1 )   (−1 )   ( )  ( )} denote a collection of allocations,
prices, and policies in this competitive equilibrium.
Such a collection is a competitive equilibrium given −1 if it satisfies () consumer
optimality, namely, (1) and (2) for all  ; () optimality by sticky price producers, namely,
(9) for all −1 ; and () optimality by flexible price producers, namely, (10) for all  .
We also define a continuation competitive equilibrium starting from any point in time.
For example, consider the beginning of period  with state variables −1 and −1  A collection
of allocations, prices, and policies {(−1  −1 )}≥ =
{ (−1 |−1  −1 )   (−1 |−1  −1 )   ( |−1  −1 )  ( |−1  −1 )}≥
is a continuation competitive equilibrium from (−1  −1 ) if it satisfies the three conditions
of a competitive equilibrium above for all periods starting from (−1  −1 ) We define a continuation competitive equilibrium that starts at the end of period  from (−1  −1        )
in a similar way. This latter definition requires optimality by consumers and flexible price
producers from  onward and optimality by sticky price producers from +1 onward. Obviously, a continuation competitive equilibrium starting in period 0 is simply a competitive
equilibrium.
The following lemma proves that any competitive equilibrium gives rise to a New
Classical Phillips curve along with some other useful properties of such an equilibrium.
Lemma 1 (New Classical Phillips Curve and Other Useful Properties) Any competitive
equilibrium must satisfy
(11)

  ( ) =  ( ) + [  ( )|−1 ]

which is often referred to as the New Classical Phillips curve;
h

i

h

i

(12)

  ( )|−1 = 0 and  (−1 ) =    ( )|−1 ; and

(13)

 +1 ( )|−1 =   +1 (+1 )|−1 =  

h

i

h

i

where  =  (−1 ) if the central bank uses an interest rate regime in period  and  =  ( )
if the central bank uses a money regime in period .
9

Proof. To see that [ ( )|−1 ] = 0, take expectations of (10) as of −1 and substitute
into (9). Using this result in (10), we obtain  (−1 ) =  [ ( )|−1 ]. Substituting this result
into (10) yields (11). To show (13), take expectations of the Euler equation (1) with respect
to −1 and use [ ( )|−1 ] = 0 along with the law of iterated expectations to get (13).

A similar argument establishes that (11)—(13) hold for any continuation competitive
equilibrium.
C. Sophisticated Equilibrium
We now turn to what we call sophisticated equilibrium. The definition of this concept
is very similar to that for competitive equilibrium, except that here we allow allocations,
prices, and policies to be functions of more than just the history of exogenous events; they
are also functions of the history of both aggregate private actions and central bank policies.
For sophisticated equilibrium, we require as well that for every history, the continuation of allocations, prices, and policies from that history onward constitute a continuation competitive
equilibrium.
Setup and Definition
Before we turn to our formal definition, we note that our definition of sophisticated
equilibrium simply specifies policy rules that the central bank must follow; it does not require
that the policy rules be optimal. We specify sophisticated policies in this way in order to
show that our unique implementation result does not depend on the objectives of the central
bank. We think of sophisticated policies as being specified at the beginning of period 0 and
of the central bank as being committed to following them.
We turn now to defining the histories that private agents and the central bank confront
when they make their decisions. The public events that occur in a period are, in chronological
order,  = ( ;   ;  ;     ). Letting  denote the history of these events from period −1 up
to and including period , we have that  = (−1   ) for  ≥ 0. The history −1 = −1 is
given. For notational convenience, we focus on perfect public equilibria in which the central
bank’s strategy (choice of regime and policy) is a function of only the public history.

10

The public history faced by the sticky price producers at the beginning of period 
when they set their prices is −1  A strategy for the sticky price producers is a sequence of
rules   = { (−1 )} for choosing prices for every possible public history.
The public history faced by the central bank when it chooses its regime and sets either
its money growth or interest rate policy is  = (−1   ) A strategy for the central bank
{  ( )} is a sequence of rules for choosing the regime as well as the policy within the regime,
either  ( ) or  ( ). Let   denote that policy.
At the end of period , then, output and inflation are determined as functions of the
relevant history  according to the rules  ( ) and   ( ) We let   ={ ( )} and
  ={  ( )} denote the sequence of output and inflation rules.
Notice that for any history, the strategies  induce continuation outcomes in the
natural way. For example, starting at some history −1  these strategies recursively induce
outcomes { ( |−1 ; )}. We illustrate this recursion for period  The sticky price producer’s

decision in  is given by  ( −1 |−1 ; ) =  (−1 ) where  (−1 ) is obtained from    The

central bank’s decision in  is given by   (−1 |−1 ; ) =   ( ) where  = (−1   (−1 ))

and   ( ) is obtained from    The consumer and flexible price producer decisions in  are
given by  ( |−1 ; ) =  ( ) and  ( |−1 ; ) =   ( ) where  = (−1   (−1 )

  (−1   (−1 ))) and  ( ) and   ( ) are obtained from   and    Continuing in a
similar way, we can recursively define continuation outcomes for subsequent periods. We can
likewise define continuation outcomes { ( | ; )} and { ( | ; )} following histories
 and   respectively.
We now use these strategies and continuation outcomes to define our notion of equilibrium. A sophisticated equilibrium given the policies here is a collection of strategies (     )
and allocation rules (     ) such that () given any history −1  the continuation outcomes
{ ( |−1 ; )} induced by  constitute a continuation competitive equilibrium and () given
any history   so do the continuation outcomes { ( | ; )}.2

Associated with each sophisticated equilibrium  = (           ) are the particular stochastic processes for outcomes that occur along the equilibrium path, which we call
sophisticated outcomes. These outcomes are competitive equilibrium outcomes.
We will say a policy  ∗ uniquely implements a desired competitive equilibrium {∗ ( )}
11

if the sophisticated outcome associated with any sophisticated equilibrium of the form ( ∗    
     ) coincides with the desired competitive equilibrium.
A central feature of our definition of sophisticated equilibrium is our requirement
that for all histories, including deviation histories, the continuation outcomes constitute a
competitive equilibrium. This requirement constitutes the most important diﬀerence between
our approach and that in the literature. Technically, one way of casting the literature’s
approach into our language of strategies and allocation rules is to consider the following
notion of equilibrium. An unsophisticated equilibrium is a strategy for the central bank  
and allocations, policies, and prices
{ ( )} = { (−1 )   (−1 )   ( )  ( )}
such that { ( )} is a period 0 competitive equilibrium and the policies induced by   from
{ ( )} coincide with {  (−1 )}.
In our view, unsophisticated equilibrium is a deficient guide to policy. While an unsophisticated equilibrium does tell policymakers what to do for every history, it does not specify
what will happen under their policies for every history, in particular, for deviation histories.
Achieving implementation using the notion of unsophisticated equilibrium is, in general, trivial. As we explained earlier, one way of achieving implementation is via nonexistence: simply
specify policies so that no competitive equilibrium exists after deviation histories. We find
this way of achieving implementation unpalatable.
Implementation with Sophisticated Policies
We focus on implementing competitive equilibria in which the central bank uses interest rates along the equilibrium path. This focus is motivated in part by the observation that
most central banks seem to use interest rates as their policy instrument. Another motivation
is that if the variance of the money shock   is large, then all of the outcomes under the
money regime are undesirable.
To set up our construction of sophisticated policies, recall that in our economy the
only strategically interesting agents are the sticky price producers. Their choices must satisfy
a key property, that
(14)

 (−1 ) =  [ ( ) +  ( )] 
12

where  =

(−1  (−1 ) (−1 (−1)) ) Notice that (−1 ) shows up on both

sides of equation (14), so we require that the optimal choice  (−1 ) satisfy a fixed point
property. To get some intuition for this property, suppose that each sticky price producer
believes that all other sticky price producers will choose some value, say, ̂  This choice,
together with the central bank’s strategy and the inflation and output rules, induces the
outcomes   (̂ ) and  (̂ ) where ̂ =

(−1 ̂  (−1 ̂ ) ) The fixed point property

requires that in order for ̂ to be part of an equilibrium, each sticky price producer’s best
response must coincide with ̂ .
The basic idea behind our sophisticated policy construction is that the central bank
starts by picking any desired competitive equilibrium allocations and sets its policy on the
equilibrium path consistent with them. The central bank then constructs its policy oﬀ the
equilibrium path so that even if an individual agent believes that all other agents will deviate
to some specific action, that individual agent finds it optimal to choose a diﬀerent action. In
this sense, the policies are specified so that the fixed point property is satisfied at only the
desired allocations.
With Reversion to a Money Regime We now show that in the simple sticky price
model, any competitive equilibrium in which the central bank uses the interest rate as its
instrument in all periods can be uniquely implemented with sophisticated policies which
involve reversion to a money regime for one period.
To do so, we consider sophisticated policies with one-period reversion to money. Under
these policies, after a deviation, the central bank switches to a money regime for one period.
More precisely, fix a desired competitive equilibrium outcome path (∗ (−1 )  ∗ ( )
∗ ( )) together with central bank policies ∗ (−1 ). Consider the following trigger-type policy:
If sticky price producers choose  in period  to coincide with the desired outcomes ∗ (−1 ),
then let central bank policy in  be ∗ (−1 ) If not, and these producers deviate to some
̂ 6= ∗ (−1 ) then for that period  let the central bank switch to a money regime with a
suitably chosen level of money growth. This level of money growth makes it not optimal for
any individual sticky price-setter to cooperate with the deviation. If such a level of money
growth exists, we say that best responses of the sticky price setters are controllable. The

13

following lemma shows that this property holds for our model.
Lemma 2 (Controllability of Best Responses with One-Period Price-Setting) For any
history (−1  ̂ ) if the central bank chooses the money regime, then there exists a choice for
money growth  such that
(15)

h

i

̂ 6=    (̂ ) +  (̂ ) 

where  = (−1  ̂    )
Proof. Substituting (2) into (10), we have that if the central bank chooses the money
regime with money growth   then output  and inflation   are uniquely determined and
given by
 +   + −1 − ̂
1+

(16)

 =

(17)

  =  + ̂ 

Hence,
h

i

  (̂ ) +  (̂ ) =

+
( + −1 − ̂ ) + ̂ 
1+ 

Clearly, then, any choice of  6= ̂ − −1 will ensure that (15) holds. 
We use this lemma to guide our choice of the suitable money growth rate after deviations. We choose this growth rate to generate the same expected inflation as in the original
equilibrium. (Of course, we could have chosen many other values that also would discourage
deviations, but we found this value to be the most intuitive.3 ) In particular, if the producers
deviate to some ̂ 6= ∗ (−1 ) then for that period  let the central bank switch to a money
regime with money growth set so that
(18)

 = ̂ − −1 +

i
1 +  h ∗ −1
 ( ) − ̂ ) 


Note that  6= ̂ − −1  With such a money growth rate, expected inflation is the same in
the reversion period as it would have been in the desired outcome. From Lemma 1, such a
choice of ̂ cannot be part of an equilibrium. It is also easy to see that if a deviation occurs
14

in period , the economy returns to the desired outcomes in period  + 1. We have established
the following proposition.
Proposition 1. Unique Implementation with Money Reversion. Any competitive equilibrium outcome in which the central bank uses interest rates as its instrument
can be implemented as a unique equilibrium with sophisticated policies with one-period reversion to a money regime. Moreover, under this rule, after any deviation in period , the
equilibrium outcomes from period  + 1 are the desired outcomes.
A simple way to describe our unique implementation result is that controllability of
best responses under some regime guarantees unique implementation of any desired outcome.
We obtain controllability by reversion to a money regime. Note that even though the money
regime is not used on the equilibrium path, it is useful as an oﬀ-equilibrium commitment
that helps support desired outcomes in which the central bank uses interest rates on the
equilibrium path.
Notice also that the proposition implies that deviations lead to only very transitory
departures from desired outcomes. In particular, we do not achieve implementation by threatening the economy with dire outcomes after deviations. (Note that the particular result, that
the economy returns exactly to the desired outcomes in the period after the deviation, would
not hold in a version of this model with state variables, like capital.)
So far we have focused on uniquely implementing competitive outcomes when the
central bank uses interest rates as its instrument. Equations (16) and (17) imply that the
equilibrium outcome under a money regime is unique, so that implementing desired outcomes
is trivial when the central bank uses money as its instrument. Clearly, we can use a simple
generalization of Proposition 1 to uniquely implement a competitive equilibrium in which the
central bank uses interest rates in some periods and money in others.
With Pure Interest Rate Rules Here, we show that pure interest rate rules cannot
achieve unique implementation.
We begin with a pure interest rate rule of the form
(19)

 (−1 ) = ∗ (−1 ) + ( (−1 ) − ∗ (−1 ))
15

where ∗ (−1 ) and ∗ (−1 ) are the interest rates and the sticky price producer choices associated with a competitive equilibrium which the central bank wants to implement uniquely.
Notice that this rule specifies policy both on and oﬀ the equilibrium path. On the equilibrium
path,  (−1 ) = ∗ (−1 ), and the rule yields  (−1 ) = ∗ (−1 ). Oﬀ the equilibrium path,
the rule specifies how  (−1 ) should diﬀer from ∗ (−1 ) when  (−1 ) diﬀers from ∗ (−1 ).
Pure interest rate rules of the form (19) have been discussed by King (2000) and Svensson
and Woodford (2005).
Note from Lemma 1 that  (−1 ) =  [  ( )|−1 ], so that the King rule can be
thought of as targeting expected inflation in the sense that (19) is equivalent to
(20)

h

i

h

i

 (−1 ) = ∗ (−1 ) + (   ( )|−1 −   ∗ ( )|−1 )
We now show that if the central bank follows the King rule (19), it cannot ensure

unique implementation of the desired outcome. Indeed, under this rule, the economy has a
continuum of equilibria. More formally:
Proposition 2. Indeterminacy of Equilibrium under the King Rule. Suppose the central bank sets interest rates  according to the King rule (19). Then any of the
continuum of sequences indexed by 0 and  that satisfies
(21)

+1 =  +      =  + (1 + )   and  = (1 + ) 

is a sophisticated outcome.
Proof. In order to verify that the multiple outcomes which satisfy (21) are part of a
period 0 competitive equilibrium, we need to check that they satisfy (1), (9), and (10). That
they satisfy (9) follows by taking expectations of the second and third equations in (21).
Substituting for  from (19) and for +1 from (21) into (1), we obtain that  = (1 + ) ,
as required by (21). Inspecting the expressions for   and  in (21) shows that they satisfy
(10). Clearly, any such period 0 competitive equilibrium can be supported by a strategy by
the government,   , of the King rule form and appropriately chosen       and   . 
The intuitive idea behind the multiplicity of equilibria associated with the initial condition 0 is that interest rate rules, including the King rule, induce nominal indeterminacy
16

and do not pin down the initial price level. The intuitive idea behind the multiplicity of stochastic equilibria associated with  6= 0 is that interest rates pin down only expected inflation
and not the state-by-state realizations indexed by the parameter .
Note that Proposition 2 implies that even if   1, the economy has a continuum of
equilibria. In that case, all but one of the equilibria has exploding inflation, in the sense that
inflation eventually becomes unbounded. In the literature, researchers often restrict attention
to bounded equilibria. We argue that, in this model, equilibria with exploding inflation cannot
be dismissed on logical grounds. Indeed, these equilibria are perfectly reasonable because the
inflation explosion is associated with a money supply explosion.
To see this association, suppose that the economy has no stochastic shocks and the
desired outcomes are   = 0 and  = 0 in all periods. Then, from the cash-in-advance
constraint (2), we know that the growth of the money supply is given by
(22)

 =  =  0 

Thus, in these equilibria, inflation explodes because money growth explodes. Each equilibrium is indexed by a diﬀerent initial value of the endogenous variable 0  This endogenous
variable depends solely on expectations of future policy and is not pinned down by any initial
condition or transversality condition.
Such equilibria are reasonable because at the core of most monetary models is the idea
that the central bank’s printing of money at an ever-increasing rate leads to a hyperinflation.
In these equilibria, inflation does not arise from the speculative reasons analyzed by Obstfeld
and Rogoﬀ (1983), but from the conventional money-printing reasons analyzed by Cagan
(1956). In this sense, our model predicts, for perfectly standard and sensible reasons, that
the economy can suﬀer from any one of a continuum of very undesirable paths for inflation.
(Cochrane 2007 makes a similar point for a flexible price model.)
It is immediate to see that the same proposition applies to more general interest rate
rules that are restricted to be the same on and oﬀ the equilibrium path. For example,
Proposition 2 applies to linear feedback rules of the form
(23)

 = ̄ +

∞
X

=0

 − +

∞
X

=1

 − +

∞
X

  − 

=1

where the intercept term ̄ can depend on the history of stochastic events.
17

With Reversion to Hybrid Rules In Proposition 1 we have shown how reversion to
a money regime can achieve unique implementation. In Proposition 2 and the subsequent
discussion, we have shown that pure interest rate rules cannot achieve unique implementation.
In our money reversion policies, even tiny deviations trigger a reversion to a money regime. A
natural question then arises: Is it possible to achieve unique implementation by using hybrid
rules which specify that the central bank continue to use interest rates unless the deviations
are very large and then revert to a money regime for very large deviations? The answer is
yes.
Consider a hybrid rule which is intended to implement a bounded competitive equilibrium {∗ (−1 )  ∗ ( ) ∗ ( )} with an associated interest rate ∗ (−1 ). Fix some ̄ and 
which satisfy ̄  max ∗ (−1 ) and   min ∗ (−1 ) The King-money hybrid rule specifies
that if  (−1 ) is within the interest rate interval [ ̄], then the central bank follows a King
rule of the form (19). If  (−1 ) falls outside this interval, then the central bank reverts to a
money regime and chooses the money growth rate that produces an expected inflation rate
̄ ∈ [ ̄]. That the money growth rate can be so chosen follows from (16) and (17).
We show that an attractive feature of outcomes under this hybrid rule is that deviations
from the desired path lead to only very transitory movements away from the desired path.
More precisely, after any deviation in period , even though inflation and output in period 
may diﬀer from the desired outcomes, those in subsequent periods coincide with the desired
outcomes. More formally:
Proposition 3. Unique Implementation with Hybrid Rules.

The King-

money hybrid rule with   1 uniquely implements any bounded competitive equilibrium.
Moreover, under this rule, after any deviation in period , the equilibrium outcomes from
period  + 1 are the desired outcomes.
We prove this proposition in Appendix B. Here, we sketch the argument for a deterministic version of the model. The key to the proof is a preliminary result that shows that no
equilibrium outcome  can be outside the interval [ ̄]. To see that this is true, suppose that
in some period   is outside that interval. But when this is true, the hybrid rule specifies
a money growth rate in that period which yields expected inflation inside the interval. Since
18

 equals expected inflation, this gives a contradiction and proves the preliminary result.
To establish uniqueness, suppose that there is some sophisticated equilibrium with
̂ 6= ∗ for some . From the preliminary result, ̂ must be in the interval [ ̄] where the
King rule is operative. From Lemma 1, we know that in any equilibrium,  = +1 , so that
the King rule implies that
̂+1 − ∗+1 =  (̂ − ∗ ) = − (̂ − ∗ ).
Since   1 and ∗ is bounded, eventually ̂+1 must leave the interval [ ̄], which is a
contradiction.
Extension to Interest-Elastic Money Demand
So far, to keep the exposition simple, we have assumed a cash-in-advance setup in
which money demand is interest-inelastic. This feature of the model implies that if a money
regime is adopted in some period , then the equilibrium outcomes in that period are uniquely
determined by the money growth rate in that period. This uniqueness under a money regime
is what allows us to switch to a one-period money regime in order to support any desired
competitive equilibrium. Now we consider economies with interest-elastic money demand.
We argue that under appropriate conditions, our unique implementation result extends to
such economies.
For such economies, sophisticated policies which specify reversion to money or to
hybrid rules can uniquely implement any desired outcome if best responses are controllable.
A suﬃcient condition for such controllability is that competitive equilibria are unique under a
suitably chosen money regime. Here, as with inelastic money demand, the uniqueness under
a money regime is what allows us to achieve unique implementation.
A sizable literature has analyzed the uniqueness of competitive equilibria under money
growth policies with interest-elastic money demand. Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1983) and Woodford (1994) provide suﬃcient conditions for this uniqueness. For example, Obstfeld and
Rogoﬀ (1983) consider a money-in-the-utility-function model with preferences of the form
() + (), where  is real money balances, and show that a suﬃcient condition for uniqueness under a money regime is for
lim  0 ()  0

→0

19

Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1983) focus attention on flexible price models, but their results
can be readily extended to our simple sticky price model. Indeed, their suﬃcient conditions
apply unchanged to a deterministic version of that model because our model without shocks
is eﬀectively identical to a flexible price model. Hence, under appropriate suﬃcient conditions, our unique implementation result extends to environments with interest-elastic money
demand.

2. A Model with Staggered Price-Setting
We turn now to a version of our simple model with staggered price-setting, often
referred to as the New Keynesian model. We show that, along the lines of the argument developed above, policies with infinite reversion to either a money regime or to hybrid rules can
uniquely implement any desired outcome under an interest rate regime. We also show that for
a large class of economies, pure interest rate rules of the King form still lead to indeterminacy.
To make our points in the simplest way, we abstract from aggregate uncertainty.
A. Setup and Competitive Equilibrium
We begin by setting up the model with staggered price-setting. The model has no
aggregate uncertainty, and in it, prices are set in a staggered fashion as in the work of Calvo
(1983). At the beginning of each period, a fraction 1 −  of producers are randomly chosen
and allowed to reset their prices. After that, the central bank makes its decisions, and then,
finally, consumers make theirs. This economy has no flexible price producers.
The linearized equations in this model are similar to those in the simple model. The
Euler equation (1) and the money growth equation (2) are unchanged, except that here they
have no shocks. The price set by a producer that is permitted to reset its price is given by
the analog of (4), which is
(24)

 () = (1 − )

"

∞
X

−

()

#

( +  ) 

=0

where  is the discount factor. Here, again, Taylor’s  is the elasticity of the equilibrium real
wage with respect to output Letting  denote the average price set by producers that are
permitted to reset their prices in period  we can recursively rewrite this equation as
(25)

 () = (1 − ) ( +  ) + +1 
20

together with a type of transversality condition lim →∞ ()  () = 0 The aggregate price
level can then be written as
(26)

 = −1 + (1 − ) 
To make our analysis parallel to the literature, we again translate the decisions of the

sticky price producers from price levels to inflation rates. Letting  () =  () − −1 and
letting  denote the average of  () with some manipulation we can rewrite (25) as
(27)

 = (1 − ) +   + +1 

We can also rewrite (26) as
(28)

  = (1 − ) 

and the transversality condition as lim →∞ ()  () = 0 Using (28) and that  is the
average of  (), this restriction is equivalent to
(29)

lim ()   = 0

→∞

In addition to these conditions, we now argue that in this staggered price-setting model,
a competitive equilibrium must satisfy two boundedness conditions. In general, boundedness
conditions are controversial in the literature. Standard analyses of New Keynesian models
impose strict boundedness conditions: in any reasonable equilibrium, both output and inflation must be bounded both above and below. Cochrane (2007) has forcefully criticized this
practice, arguing that any boundedness condition must have a solid economic rationale.
Here, we provide rationales for two such conditions. We think there are solid arguments
for requiring that output  be bounded above, so that
(30)

 ≤ ̄ for some ̄

and interest rates be bounded below, so that
(31)

 ≥  for some 

The rationale for output being bounded above is that the economy has a finite amount of
labor to produce the output. The rationale for requiring that interest rates be bounded
21

below comes from the restriction that the nominal interest rate must be nonnegative.4 These
bounds allow for outcomes in which   (the log of) output, falls without bound (so that the
level of output converges to zero). The bounds also allow for outcomes in which inflation
rates explode upward without limit.
Here, then, a collection of allocations, prices, and policies  = {         } is a competitive equilibrium if it satisfies () consumer optimality, namely, the deterministic versions
of (1) and (2); () sticky price producer optimality, (27)—(29); and () the boundedness
conditions, (30) and (31).
Note that any allocations that satisfy (27)—(29) also satisfy the New Keynesian Phillips
curve:
(32)

  =  + +1 

where now  = (1 − )(1 − ) To see this result, use (28) to substitute for  and +1
in (27) and collect terms.
Here, as we did in the simple sticky price model, we define continuation competitive
equilibria. For example, consider the beginning of period  with a state variable −1  A
collection of allocations (−1 ) = { (−1 )   (−1 )   (−1 )  (−1 )}≥ is a continuation
competitive equilibrium with −1 if it satisfies the three conditions of a competitive equilibrium above in all periods  ≥  A continuation competitive equilibrium that starts at the
end of period  given (−1      ) is defined similarly. This definition requires optimality by
consumers from  onward and optimality by sticky price producers from  + 1 onward.
B. Sophisticated Equilibrium
We turn now to sophisticated equilibrium in the staggered price-setting model.
Definition
The definition of a sophisticated equilibrium in the staggered price-setting model parallels that in the simple sticky price model. The elements needed for that definition are
basically the same. The public events that occur in a period are, in chronological order,
 = ( ;   ;     ). We let −1 denote the history of these events up until the beginning of
period  A strategy for the sticky price producers is a sequence of rules   = { (−1 )}. The
22

public history faced by the central bank is  = (−1   ) and its strategy, {  ( )} The

public history faced by consumers in period  is  = (−1      ) We let   ={ ( )} and
  ={ ( )} denote the sequences of output and inflation rules. Strategies and allocation
rules induce continuation outcomes written as { (−1 ; )}≥ or {( ; )}≥ in the obvious
recursive fashion.
Formally, then, a sophisticated equilibrium given the policies here is a collection of
strategies (     ) and allocation rules (     ) such that () given any history −1  the
continuation outcomes { (−1 ; )}≥ induced by  constitute a continuation competitive
equilibrium and () given any history   so do the continuation outcomes { ( ; )}≥ .
In this model, as in the simple sticky price model, the choices of the sticky price
producers must satisfy a key fixed point property, that
(33)

 (−1 ) = (1 − ) ( ) +   ( ) + +1 ( )

where  = (−1   (−1 )   (−1   (−1 ))) and  = (    ( )  ( )). Here, as in the
simple sticky price model,  (−1 ) shows up on both sides of the fixed point equation–on
the right side, through its eﬀect on the histories  and  .
Implementation with Sophisticated Policies
We now show that in the staggered price-setting model, any competitive equilibrium
can be uniquely implemented with sophisticated policies.
The basic idea behind our construction is, again, that the central bank starts by picking
any competitive equilibrium allocations and sets its policy on the equilibrium path consistent
with those allocations. The central bank then constructs its policy oﬀ the equilibrium path so
that any deviations from these allocations would never be a best response for any individual
price-setter. In so doing, the constructed sophisticated policies support the chosen allocations
as the unique equilibrium allocations.
We show that, under suﬃcient conditions, policies that specify infinite reversion to a
money regime can achieve unique implementation, a pure interest rate rule of the King rule
form cannot, and a King-money hybrid rule can.

23

With Reversion to a Money Regime We start with sophisticated policies that specify
reversion to a money regime after deviations. In our construction of sophisticated policies,
we assume that the best responses of sticky price producers are controllable in that if they
deviate by setting ̂ 6= ∗  then by infinitely reverting to the money regime, the central bank
can set money growth rate policies so that the profit-maximizing value of  () is such that
 () 6= ̂ .
The sophisticated policy that supports a desired outcome is to follow the chosen monetary policy as long as private agents have not deviated from the desired outcome. If sticky
price producers ever deviate to some choice ̂  the central bank switches to a money regime
set so that  () 6= ̂ . The following proposition follows immediately:
Proposition 4. Unique Implementation with Money Reversion. If the best
responses of the sticky price producers are controllable, then any competitive equilibrium
outcome in which the central bank uses interest rates as its instrument can be implemented
as a unique equilibrium by sophisticated policies which specify reversion to a money regime.
A suﬃcient condition for best responses to be controllable is that in the nonlinear
economy, preferences are given by  ( ) = log  + (1 − ) where  is consumption and 
is labor supply, so that in the linearized economy, Taylor’s  equals one. To demonstrate
controllability, suppose that after a deviation, the central bank reverts to a constant money
supply  = log  With a constant money supply, it is convenient to use the original formulation of the economy with price levels rather than inflation rates. With that translation,
the cash-in-advance constraint implies that  +  =  for all , so that (24) implies that
the producer’s price is simply to set
(34)

 () = (1 − )

"

∞
X

−

()

=0

#

 = 

That is, if after a deviation the central bank chooses a constant level of the money supply
 then sticky price producers optimally choose their prices to be  Clearly, (34) implies
that the best responses of these producers are controllable. For example, consider a history
in which price-setters in period  deviate from ∗ to ̂  Obviously, the central bank can
choose the level of the money supply so that the optimal choice for an individual price-setter
becomes  () 6= ̂ , so that  () =  − −1 6= ̂ 
24

With Pure Interest Rate Rules Here we ask, can King rules uniquely implement bounded
competitive equilibrium? We find that for a large class of parameter values, the answer is no.
We arrive at this answer by first showing that under the King rule, the economy has
a continuum of period 0 competitive equilibria. We then argue that associated with each
competitive equilibrium is a sophisticated equilibrium.
Here, we write the King rule as
(35)

 = ∗ + (1 − )( − ∗ )

where ∗ and  ∗ are the interest rates and the inflation rates associated with the desired
(bounded) competitive equilibrium. From (28), it follows that in all periods, inflation and
the aggregate price-setting choice are mechanically linked by   = (1 − ) . This mechanical
link means that we can equally well think of policy as feeding back on inflation or on the
price-setting choice so that (35) is equivalent to
(36)

 = ∗ + (  −  ∗ )
We show that the economy has a continuum of competitive equilibria by showing that

there is a continuum of solutions to (1), (32), and (36) and that these solutions do not violate
the transversality and boundedness conditions (29), (30), and (31).
It is convenient to express the variables as deviations from the desired equilibrium. To
that end, let ̃  =   −  ∗ and ̃ =  − ∗ . Subtracting the equations governing {∗  ∗ }

from those governing {    } gives a system governing {̃   ̃ } which satisfies (1), (32), and
(36). Substituting for ̃ in (1), using (36), we get that
(37)

̃+1 + ̃ +1 = ̃ + ̃  

and from (32) we have that
(38)

̃  = ̃ +  ̃+1 

Equations (37) and (38) define a dynamical system. Letting  = (̃  ̃  )0  with some manipulation we can stack these equations to give +1 =   where
⎡

=⎢
⎣


−


⎤

 ⎥

1


⎦

25

and where  = 1 +  and  = ( − 1) This system has a continuum of solutions of
the form
(39)

̃ = 1  1 + 2 2 and
Ã
!
Ã
!
1 − 
2 − 


 1 + 2
2
̃  = 1



where 1  2  the eigenvalues of , are given by
(40)

1
1  2 =
2

and  1 =

h³

2 −


Ã

´

!

vÃ
u
1u
t 1 + 

1 + 
+1 ±

2
i

̃0 − ̃ 0 ∆ and 2 =

!2

−1



h³

−1


´

− 4( − 1)




i

̃0 + ̃ 0 ∆ where ∆ is the determinant of

.5 This continuum of solutions is indexed by ̃0 and ̃0 .
In Appendix B, we show that for a class of economies that satisfy the restriction
(41)

1 −    and (1 + )  1

equilibrium is indeterminate under the King rule. We can think of (41) as requiring that the
period length is suﬃciently short, in the sense that  is close enough to 1, and that the price
stickiness is not too large, in the sense that  is suﬃciently small. In Appendix B, we prove
the following proposition:
Proposition 5. Indeterminacy of Equilibrium under the King Rule. Suppose that the central bank sets interest rates  according to the King rule (35) with   1 and
that (41) is satisfied. Then the economy has a continuum of competitive equilibria indexed
by 0 ≤ 0∗ :
(42)

 = ∗ + 2 (0 − 0∗ ) and  =  ∗ + 2 (0 − 0∗ )

where 2  1 and  = (2 − )  0 are constants.
It is immediate to construct a sophisticated equilibrium for each of the continuum of
competitive equilibria in (42).
Notice that under the King rule, there is one equilibrium with  = ∗ and   =  ∗
for all , and in the rest,  goes to minus infinity and   goes to plus infinity. All of these
26

equilibria satisfy the boundedness conditions (30) and (31) and, under (41), the transversality
condition (29).
It turns out that if the inequality in the second part of (41) is reversed, then the set
of solutions to the New Keynesian dynamical system, (1), (32), (28), and (44), have the form
(42), but the transversality condition rules out all solutions except the one with  = ∗ and
  = ∗ for all . We find this way of ruling out solutions unappealing because it hinges
critically on the idea that sticky price producers may be unable to change their prices for
extremely long periods, even in the face of exploding inflation.
With Reversion to Hybrid Rules We now show that in the staggered price-setting
model, as in the simple model, a King-money hybrid rule can uniquely implement any
bounded competitive equilibrium.
To do so, we will assume boundedness under money, namely, that for any state variable
−1 there exists a money regime from period  onward such that a continuation competitive
equilibrium exists, and for all such equilibria, inflation in period     is uniformly bounded.
Here uniformly bounded means that there exist constants  and ̄ such that for all −1 ,
  ∈ [ ̄]. It is immediate that a suﬃcient condition for boundedness under money is that
preferences in the nonlinear economy are given by  ( ) = log  + (1 − ).
In an economy that satisfies boundedness under money, the King-money hybrid rule
which implements a competitive equilibrium {∗   ∗  ∗ } with an associated interest rate ∗
is defined as follows. Set ̄ to be greater than both max ∗ and ̄, and set  to be lower
than both min ∗ and . This rule specifies that if  ∈ [ ̄], then the central bank follows
a King rule of the form (35) with   1 If  falls outside the interval [ ̄], then the central
bank reverts to a money regime forever.
Proposition 6. Unique Implementation with Hybrid Rules. Suppose the
economy satisfies boundedness under money. Then the King-money hybrid rule implements
any desired bounded competitive equilibrium. Moreover, under this rule, after any deviation
in period , the equilibrium outcomes from period  + 1 are the desired outcomes.
The formal proof of this proposition is in Appendix B. The key idea of the proof is the
27

same as in that for the proof of Proposition 3. The idea is that under the King rule, any ̂
which does not equal ∗ leads subsequent price-setting choices to eventually leave the interval
[ ̄]. But given boundedness under money, price-setting choices outside of the interval [ ̄]
cannot be part of an equilibrium.
Notice that here, as in the simple model, under hybrid rules, deviations lead to only
very transitory departures from desired outcomes.

3. Trembles and Imperfect Information
We have shown that in a simple one-period price-setting model and in a staggered
price-setting model, any equilibrium outcome can be implemented as a unique equilibrium
with sophisticated policies. In our equilibria, deviations in private actions lead to changes in
the regime. This observation leads to the question of how to construct sophisticated policies
if trembles in private actions occur or if deviations in private actions can be detected only
imperfectly. We show that our results are robust to these considerations.
A. Trembles
Consider first allowing for trembles in private decisions by supposing that the actual
price chosen by a price-setter,  () diﬀers from the intended price, ̃ () by an additive error
 () so that  () = ̃ () +  ()
Trembles are clearly a trivial consideration. If  () is independently distributed across
agents, then it simply washes out in the aggregate; it is irrelevant. Even if  () is correlated
across agents, say, because it has both aggregate and idiosyncratic components, our argument goes through unchanged if the central bank can observe the aggregate component, for
example, with a random sample of prices.
B. Imperfect Information
Not as trivial is a situation in which the central bank has imperfect information about
prices. We consider a formulation in which the central bank observes the actions of pricesetters with measurement error. Of course, if the central bank could see some other variable
perfectly, such as output or interest rates on private debt, then it could infer what the private
agents did. We think of this formulation as giving the central bank minimal amounts of

28

information relative to what actual central banks have.
We show here that with imperfect information, we can implement outcomes which are
close to the desired outcomes when the measurement error is small.
Here, the central bank observes the price-setters’ choices with error, so that
(43)

̂ =  +  

where  is i.i.d. over time and has mean zero and bounded support [,̄]. Consider using
the King-money hybrid rule to support some desired competitive equilibrium. Choose the
interest rate interval [, ̄], so that ∗ +  is contained in this interval for all  Here, the
King rule is of the form
(44)

 ( ) = ∗ + (1 − )(̂ − ∗ )

with   1.
In this economy with measurement error, the best response of any individual pricesetter is identical to that in the economy without measurement error. This result follows
because the best response depends on only the expected values of future variables. Since the
measurement error  has mean zero, these expected values are unchanged. Therefore, the
unique equilibrium in this economy with measurement error has  = ∗ . The realized value
of output  , however, fluctuates around the desired value ∗ . From the Euler equation, the
realized value of output is given by
(45)

 = ∗ − (1 − ) 

Clearly, as the size of the measurement error  goes to zero, the outcomes converge to the
desired outcomes. We have thus established a proposition:
Proposition 7. Approximate Implementation with Measurement Error.
Suppose the sophisticated policy is described by a King-money hybrid rule described above.
Then the economy has a unique equilibrium with  = ∗ and  given by (45). As the
variance of the measurement error approaches zero, the economy’s outcomes converge to the
desired outcomes.

29

Note that although the central bank never reverts to a money regime when it is on
the equilibrium path, the possibility that it will do so oﬀ the equilibrium path plays a critical
role in this implementation.

4. Implications for the Taylor Principle
Our findings have implications for use of the Taylor principle as a device to ensure
determinacy and to guide inferences from empirical investigations about whether central bank
policy has led the economy into a determinate or indeterminate region. Recall that the Taylor
principle is the notion that interest rates should rise more than one-for-one with inflation rates
(both compared to some exogenous, possibly stochastic, levels).
In terms of determinacy, many economists have argued that central banks should
adhere to the Taylor principle in order to ensure unique implementation. Our results imply
that if the central bank is following a pure interest rate rule, adherence to the Taylor principle
is neither necessary nor suﬃcient for unique implementation. If, however, the central bank is
following a hybrid rule, adherence to the Taylor principle after deviations between observed
outcomes and desired outcomes can help ensure unique implementation.
In terms of empirical investigations, many economists have estimated policy rules and
inferred that central bank policy has led the economy to be in the determinate region if
and only if these rules satisfy the Taylor principle. Our results imply that, given the set of
assumptions made explicit in the literature, inferences regarding determinacy from existing
estimation procedures should be treated with caution. We provide a set of assumptions under
which it is possible to make inferences regarding determinacy.
A. Setup
In order to set up our discussion of the Taylor principle, we consider a popular specification of the Taylor rule of the form
(46)

 = ̄ + −1   + −1  

where ̄ is an exogenously given, possibly stochastic, sequence. (See Taylor 1993 for a similar
specification.) In our simple model, from (12), policies of the Taylor rule form (46) can be

30

written as
(47)

 = ̄ + ( − ̄ )

When the parameter   1, such policies are said to satisfy the Taylor principle: The central
bank should raise its interest rate more than one-for-one with increases in inflation. When
  1, such policies are said to violate that principle. Notice that when ̄ and ̄ coincide
with the desired competitive equilibrium outcomes ∗ and ∗ for all periods, then the Taylor
rule (47) reduces to the King rule (19).
B. Implications for Determinacy
Policies of the Taylor rule form (47) are linear feedback rules of the form (23) and
lead to indeterminacy, regardless of the value of . In this sense, if the central bank is
following a pure interest rate rule, then adherence to the Taylor principle is not suﬃcient for
unique implementation. A similar argument implies that, under (41), it is not suﬃcient in
the staggered price-setting model either.
Clearly, under pure interest rate rules, adherence to the Taylor principle is also not
necessary for unique implementation. Propositions 1 and 4 imply that, in both models,
the central bank can uniquely implement any competitive equilibrium, including those that
violate the Taylor principle along the equilibrium path.
In sum, if the central bank follows a pure interest rate rule, then adherence to the
Taylor principle is neither necessary nor suﬃcient for unique implementation.
Notwithstanding these observations, as we have shown, if the central bank is following
the King-money hybrid rule, then adherence to the Taylor principle ensures determinacy in
both models.
C. Implications for Estimation
An extensive literature estimates monetary policy rules using variants of the Taylor
rule form and tries to use these estimates to infer whether policy adheres to or violates the
Taylor principle. Adherence to the principle is thought to imply that the economy is in the
determinate region, and violation to imply that it is not. One branch of this literature argues
that the undesirable inflation experiences of the 1970s in the United States occurred in part
31

because monetary policy led the economy to be in the indeterminate region. (See, for example,
Clarida, Galí, and Gertler 2000.) Our results imply that, given the set of assumptions made
explicit in the literature, such inferences should be treated with great caution. We provide a
set of assumptions under which such inferences can be made more confidently.
Perfect Information
In economies with perfect information, observations of variables along the equilibrium
path shed no light on the properties of policies oﬀ that path, and it is oﬀ-equilibrium properties
that govern the determinacy of equilibrium. Of course, any estimation procedure can rely
only on data along the equilibrium path; it cannot uncover the properties of policies oﬀ that
path. In this sense, estimation procedures in economies with perfect information cannot
determine whether monetary policy is leading the economy to be in the determinate or the
indeterminate region. (See Cochrane 2007 for a related point.)
To see this general point in the context of our models, suppose that along the equilibrium path, interest rates satisfy
(48)

∗ = ̄ + ∗ (∗ − ̄ )

where ∗ and ∗ are the equilibrium outcomes and ̄ and ̄ are some exogenously given,
possibly stochastic, sequences. This equilibrium can be supported in many ways, including
reversion after deviations to a money regime or some sort of hybrid rule. Notice that in (48)
the parameter ∗ simply describes the relation between the equilibrium outcomes ∗ and ∗
and has no connection to the behavior of policy after deviations.
Obviously, with a policy that specifies reversion to a money regime, the size of ∗
(whether it is smaller or larger than one) has no bearing on the determinacy of equilibrium.
That is also true with a policy that reverts to a hybrid rule after deviations, though
perhaps not as obviously. Suppose that for small deviations, the hybrid rule specifies the King
rule (20) with   1 The parameter  of the King rule has no connection to the parameter
∗ in (48). The parameter  governs the behavior of policies after deviations, whereas the
parameter ∗ simply describes a relationship that holds along the equilibrium path. Notice
that while   1 ensures determinacy, whether ∗ is smaller or larger than one has no bearing
on determinacy.
32

We interpret most of the current estimation procedures of the Taylor rule variety as
estimating ∗ , the parameter governing desired outcomes. In order to use these estimates to
draw inferences about determinacy, researchers implicitly make two key assumptions: that the
central bank is following a pure interest rate rule and that the parameter  (the parameter
describing oﬀ-equilibrium path behavior) is the same as ∗ (the parameter describing onequilibrium path behavior). As we have discussed, with perfect information, theory imposes
no connection between  and ∗ , so the second assumption is not compelling. In any event, as
we have seen in the two models we have studied, pure interest rate rules lead to indeterminacy,
so that even if  = ∗ , the size of  is irrelevant for determinacy.
Imperfect Information
In economies with perfect information, we can draw a sharp distinction between behavior on and oﬀ the equilibrium path. In economies with imperfect information, such as
those with measurement error, we cannot draw such a sharp distinction. Here, we spell out
a set of assumptions under which inferences about determinacy can be drawn.
To develop the set of assumptions, consider our staggered price-setting economy with
measurement error. In that economy, if the central bank follows the King-money hybrid rule
with   1 then the observed outcomes for ̂    and  are
(49)

̂ = ∗ +  

(50)

 = ∗ + (1 − )  and

(51)

 = ∗ − (1 − ) 

where the desired outcomes are denoted by ∗  ∗  and ∗ . Clearly, researchers can estimate
the parameter  using standard techniques if they know the desired outcomes ∗  ∗  and ∗
and that   1. If the parameter   1, then (49)—(51) characterize only one of the continuum
of possible equilibria. In such a case, one could, using advanced techniques, parametrically
characterize the class of possible equilibria and estimate the parameter  as well as the
parameters that index the continuum of equilibria.

33

Even if researchers do not know the desired outcomes, they can estimate the parameter
. To do so, they can posit a model of those outcomes and then jointly estimate the parameter
 and the parameters of the posited model.
In sum, we can draw inferences regarding determinacy if we make two key assumptions
and posit a model of desired outcomes. The key assumptions are that the central bank is
following the King-money hybrid rule (and not just the King rule) and that the central bank
observes private decisions with measurement error. To make this strategy operational, we
obviously need to have an explicit model of the desired outcomes  ∗ , ∗ , and ∗ . (Note that
by desired outcomes, we mean competitive equilibria of the given sticky price model, not
equilibria of, say, the related flexible price model.)

5. Conclusion
We have here described our sophisticated policy approach and illustrated its use as
an operational guide to policy which achieves unique implementation of any competitive
equilibrium outcome. We have demonstrated that using a pure interest rate rule leads to
indeterminacy. We have also constructed policies that involve regime switching to ensure
determinacy: Use interest rates until private agents deviate, and then revert to a money
regime or to a hybrid rule.
Our work implies that if a central bank follows a pure interest rate rule, adherence to
the Taylor principle is neither necessary nor suﬃcient for unique implementation. Adherence
to that principle may ensure determinacy, however, if monetary policy includes a reversion
to the King-money hybrid rule after deviations.
We have argued that existing empirical procedures to draw inferences about the relationship between adherence to the Taylor principle and determinacy should be treated with
caution. We have provided a set of assumptions that can be more confidently used in applied work to draw inferences regarding the relationship between central bank policy and
determinacy.
Finally, while we have here focused exclusively on monetary policy, the use of our operational guide is not necessarily limited to that application. The logic behind the construction
of the guide should be applicable as well to other governmental policies–for example, to

34

fiscal policy and to policy responses to financial crises–or to any application that aims to
uniquely implement a desired outcome.

35

References
Adão, Bernardino; Isabel Correia; and Pedro Teles, “Unique Monetary Equilibria with Interest Rate Rules,” Manuscript, Bank of Portugal, 2007.
Barro, Robert J., “On the Determination of the Public Debt,” Journal of Political Economy,
87 (October 1979), 940—71.
Bassetto, Marco, “A Game-Theoretic View of the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level,” Econometrica, 70 (November 2002), 2167—95.
Bassetto, Marco, “Equilibrium and Government Commitment,” Journal of Economic Theory,
124 (September 2005), 79—105.
Benhabib, Jess; Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé; and Martín Uribe, “Monetary Policy and Multiple
Equilibria,” American Economic Review, 91 (March 2001), 167—86.
Buiter, Willem H., “The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level: A Critique,” Economic Journal,
112 (July 2002), 459—80.
Cagan, Phillip, “The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation,” in Studies in the Quantity
Theory of Money, ed. Milton Friedman, 25—117, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1956.
Calvo, Guillermo A., “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 12 (September 1983), 383—98.
Chari, V. V.; Lawrence J. Christiano; and Patrick J. Kehoe, “Optimality of the Friedman
Rule in Economies with Distorting Taxes,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 37 (April
1996), 203—23.
Chari, V. V., and Patrick J. Kehoe, “Sustainable Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, 98
(August 1990), 783—802.
Christiano, Lawrence J., and Massimo Rostagno, “Money Growth Monitoring and the Taylor
Rule,” Working Paper 8539, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2001.
Clarida, Richard; Jordi Galí; and Mark Gertler, “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic
Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115 (February 2000), 147—80.
Cochrane, John H., “Inflation Determination with Taylor Rules: A Critical Review,” Working
Paper 13409, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2007.
36

Correia, Isabel; Juan Pablo Nicolini; and Pedro Teles, “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy:
Equivalence Results,” Journal of Political Economy, 116 (February 2008), 141—70.
Jackson, Matthew O., “A Crash Course in Implementation Theory,” Social Choice and Welfare, 18 (October 2001), 655—708.
King, Robert G., “The New IS-LM Model: Language, Logic, and Limits,” Federal Reserve
Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, 86 (Summer 2000), 45—103.
Kocherlakota, Narayana, and Christopher Phelan, “Explaining the Fiscal Theory of the Price
Level,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 23 (Fall 1999), 14—23.
Ljungqvist, Lars, and Thomas J. Sargent, Recursive Macroeconomic Theory, 2nd edition,
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2004.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr., “Equilibrium in a Pure Currency Economy,” Economic Inquiry, 18
(April 1980), 203—20.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr., and Nancy L. Stokey, “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in an
Economy without Capital,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 12 (July 1983), 55—93.
McCallum, Bennett T., “Price Level Determinacy with an Interest Rate Policy Rule and
Rational Expectations,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 8 (November 1981), 319—29.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, “Speculative Hyperinflations in Maximizing Models:
Can We Rule Them Out?” Journal of Political Economy, 91 (August 1983), 675—87.
Ramsey, Frank P., “A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation,” Economic Journal, 37 (March
1927), 47—61.
Sargent, Thomas J., and Neil Wallace, “‘Rational’ Expectations, the Optimal Monetary
Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule,” Journal of Political Economy, 83
(April 1975), 241—54.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martin Uribe, “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy under
Sticky Prices,” Journal of Economic Theory, 114 (February 2004), 198—230.
Siu, Henry E., “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy with Sticky Prices,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 51 (April 2004), 575—607.
Svensson, Lars E. O., and Michael Woodford, “Implementing Optimal Policy through InflationForecast Targeting,” in The Inflation Targeting Debate, ed. Ben S. Bernanke and
Michael Woodford, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005.
37

Taylor, John B., “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy, 39 (December 1993), 195—214.
Wallace, Neil, “A Hybrid Fiat-Commodity Monetary System,” Journal of Economic Theory,
25 (December 1981), 421—30.
Woodford, Michael, “Monetary Policy and Price Level Determinacy in a Cash-in-Advance
Economy,” Economic Theory, 4 (May 1994), 345—80.
Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2003.

38

Notes
1

An extensive literature has used the Ramsey approach to discuss optimal monetary

policy. See, among others, the work of Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe (1996); Schmitt-Grohé
and Uribe (2004); Siu (2004); and Correia, Nicolini, and Teles (2008).
2

In general, a sophisticated equilibrium would require that for every history (including

histories in which the government acts,  ), the continuation outcomes from that history
onward constitute a competitive equilibrium. Here, that requirement would be redundant
since the conditions for a competitive equilibrium for  are the same as those for  
3

We choose this part of the policy as a clear demonstration that after a deviation, the

central bank is not doing anything exotic, such as producing a hyperinflation. Rather, in an
intuitive sense, the central bank is simply getting the economy back on the track it had been
on before the deviation threatened to shift it in another direction.
4

Note that even though the real value of consumer holdings of bonds must satisfy a

transversality condition, this condition does not impose any restrictions on the paths of  and
   The reason is that in our nonlinear model, the government has access to lump-sum taxes,
so that government debt can be arbitrarily chosen to satisfy any transversality condition.
5

Here and throughout, we restrict attention to values of  ∈ [0 max ] where max is

the largest value of  that yields real eigenvalues. That is, at max , the discriminant in (40)
is zero.

39

6. Appendix A: The Nonlinear Economies
Here, we describe the nonlinear economies that, when linearized, give the equilibrium
conditions described in the body of this work.
A. The Simple Model with One-Period Price-Setting
The nonlinear simple model with one-period price-setting is a monetary economy populated by a large number of identical, infinitely lived consumers, flexible price and sticky
price intermediate good producers, final good producers, and a government.
In each period , the economy experiences one of finitely many events  We denote
by  = (0       ) the history of events up through and including period . The probability,
as of period 0, of any particular history  is ( ). The initial realization 0 is given.
The timing within a period is as follows. At the beginning of the period, sticky price
producers set their prices, and the government chooses its monetary policy, either by setting
interest rates or by choosing the quantity of money. The event  is then realized. At the end
of the period, flexible price producers set their prices, and consumers and final good producers
make their decisions. The event  is associated with a flight to quality shock (1 −  ( )) that
aﬀects the attractiveness of government debt relative to private claims.
In each period  the commodities in this economy are labor, a consumption good,
money, and a continuum of intermediate goods indexed by  ∈ [0 1]. The technology for
producing final goods from intermediate goods at history  is
(52)

( ) =

∙Z

¸1

(  ) 





where ( ) is the final good, (  ) is an intermediate good of type , and  governs the
elasticity of substitution between goods. The technology for producing each intermediate
good  is simply
(53)

(  ) = (  )

where (  ) is the input of labor.
Intermediate good producers behave as imperfect competitors. A fraction  of intermediate good producers have flexible prices; they set their prices in period  after the
realization of the shock  . A fraction 1 −  have sticky prices; they set their prices in period
40

 before the realization of the shock   Let  (  ) denote the price set by a flexible price
producer  ∈ [0 ] and  (  ), the price set by a sticky price producer  ∈ [ 1]
Final good producers behave competitively. In each period  they choose inputs
(  ), for all  ∈ [0 1], and output ( ) in order to maximize profits given by
(54)

max  ( )( ) −

Z



0

 (  )(  )  −

Z

1



 ( −1 )(  ) 

subject to (52); in (54),  ( ) is the price of the final good in period . Solving the problem
in (54) gives the input demand functions
(55)

"

 ( )
 (  ) =
 ()




#

1
1−

( )

where  () is the price charged by the intermediate good producer . The zero profit condition
implies that
(56)



 ( ) =

∙Z

0





 (  )


−1

 +

Z

1



−1

 ( 

)


−1

¸ −1






Using (53), we can see that the problem faced by the flexible price producers is to choose
1 (  ) in order to maximize
(57)

h

i

 ( −1 ) −  ( )   (  )

subject to (55); in (57),  ( ) is the nominal wage rate. The resulting optimal price is given
as a markup over the nominal wage rate
1
 (  ) =  ( )

The problem faced by the sticky price producers is to choose  ( −1 ) in order to maximize
(58)

X


h

i

( |−1 )  ( −1 ) −  ( )   (  )

subject to (55); in (58), ( |−1 ) is the price of a dollar at  in units of a dollar at −1 .
The resulting optimal price for these producers is given as a markup over weighted expected
marginal costs:
−1

 ( 

1
)=


P

1



( |−1 ) ( ) 1−  ( )( )

P



1

( |−1 ) ( ) 1− ( )
41



The consumer side of the economy is a variant of the standard cash-in-advance formulation, as in the 1980 work of Lucas, with two modifications. One is that we assume that
the government pays interest on wages at the private market interest rate. This modification
ensures that the consumer’s first-order condition for labor supply is undistorted, as in the
cashless economies of Woodford (2003). Our other modification is that we allow for flight to
quality shocks which aﬀect the value of government debt relative to private debt.
Consumer preferences are given by
∞ X
X

  ( )  (( ) ( ))

=0 

where ( ) and ( ) are aggregate consumption and labor. In each period  = 0 1    ,
consumers face a cash-in-advance constraint in which purchases of consumption goods are
constrained by their aggregate holdings of nominal money balances  ( ) according to
 ( )( ) =  ( )
as well as by a sequence of budget constraints
(59)

( )+

h
i
( )
−1
−1
−1
−1
=

(
)(1+
)
(
)(
)+
1
−

(
)
(−1 )+ ( )+Π( )



( )

where ( ) is government debt with price 1( )  ( ) is the rate of return on private
debt, Π( ) is the nominal profits of the intermediate good producers,   is a subsidy to labor
income, and  ( ) is nominal transfers and where the right side of (59) is given in period 0
The subsidy   is set, as is standard in the literature, to undo the ineﬃciency in a steady
state due to monopoly power. Specifically, 1 +   = 1 Note that we have imposed that the
cash-in-advance constraint holds with equality.
The consumer’s problem is to maximize utility, subject to the cash-in-advance constraint, the budget constraint, and borrowing constraints, (+1 ) ≥ ̄ for some large negative number ̄ For notational simplicity, we have suppressed decisions on holdings of private
state-contingent debt with the price ( |−1 ) and private state-uncontingent debt with the
private market interest rate  ( ) Clearly, 1[ ( )] =
³

´

 +1 | = (+1 | )

 (+1 ) ( )

 ( ) (+1 )

42

P

+1

 (+1 | ) and

The first-order conditions for the consumer’s problem imply that
−

(1 +   ) ( )
 ( )
=
 ( )
 ( )

+1
h
iX
1
)  ( )

+1   (
= 1 −  ( )

( | )
( )
 ( )  (+1 )
+1

If we log-linearize this economy, then we can obtain the equations in the body for the simple
model.
B. The Model with Staggered Price-Setting
The nonlinear model with staggered price-setting is nearly identical to the simple
model above. The main diﬀerences are that this new model has no flexible price producers,
and each sticky price producer can reset prices in each period with probability 1 − 
In this model, the problem of a producer who is allowed to reset prices is to
max

∞ X
X

 ( ) = 

h

i

− ( | )  ( ) ( ) −  ( ) ( )

subject to aggregate consumption of


 ( ) =

Ã

 ( )
 ( )

!−

( )

The first-order conditions imply that

 ( ) =
−1

´−−1
1
( )

 ( )

³
´−
P∞ P
1
− ( | )
)

(


=
 ( )

P∞ P
=





( )
− ( | ) 
 ( )

³

The consumer side of this model is identical to that in the simple model. When linearized,
this staggered price-setting model gives the equilibrium conditions described in the body.

7. Appendix B: The Proofs of Propositions 3, 5, and 6
A. Proof of Proposition 3
Given that the central bank follows the King-money hybrid rule, say,  ∗  we will show
that there are unique strategies   ,    and   for private agents which together with  ∗
constitute a sophisticated equilibrium. We then show that this sophisticated equilibrium
implements the desired outcomes.
43

The strategies   ,    and   are as follows. The strategy   specifies  (−1 ) =
∗ (−1 ) for all histories. The strategies   and   specify  ( ) and   ( ) that are the
unique solutions to conditions defining consumer optimality, (1) and (2), that defining flexible
∗
price producer optimality, (10), and the King-money hybrid rule with +1 (+1 ) = +1
(+1 )

and +1 (+1 ) = ∗+1 (+1 ) Note that the value of  in the history  = (−1        ) determines the regime in the current period and, hence, determines whether the Euler equation
(1) or the cash-in-advance constraint (2) is used to solve for  ( ) and   ( ).
We now show that ( ∗          ) is a sophisticated equilibrium. Given that {∗ (−1 )
 ∗ ( ) ∗ ( )} is a period 0 competitive equilibrium and that ∗ (−1 ) ∈ [ ̄], so that the
central bank is following an interest rate regime, it follows that any tail of these outcomes

{∗ (−1) ∗ () ∗ ( )}≥ is a continuation competitive equilibrium starting in period 
regardless of the history −1 . On the equilibrium path, this claim follows immediately
because the continuation of any competitive equilibrium is also a competitive equilibrium.
Oﬀ the equilibrium path, for histories −1 , the tail is a period 0 competitive equilibrium (with
periods suitably relabeled) and is therefore a continuation competitive equilibrium. A similar
argument shows that the tail of the outcomes starting from the end of period , namely,
  ( ) and  ( ) together with the outcomes {∗ (−1 )  ∗ ( ) ∗ ( )}≥+1 , constitutes a
continuation competitive equilibrium.
Note that our construction implies that after any deviation in period , the equilibrium
outcomes from period  + 1 are the desired outcomes.
We now establish uniqueness of the sophisticated equilibrium of the form ( ∗          ).
We begin with a preliminary result that shows that for any −1 in any equilibrium,  (−1 ) ∈
[ ̄]. This argument is by contradiction. Suppose that at −1   (−1 ) ∈
 [ ̄] Under the
hybrid rule, the central bank reverts to a money regime with expected inflation equal to
̄ ∈ [ ̄]. From Lemma 1,  (−1 ) = ̄ ∈ [ ̄], which contradicts  (−1 ) ∈
 [ ̄]. This
result implies that along the equilibrium path, the central bank never reverts to money, so
that interest rates are given by the King rule (19).
With this preliminary result, we establish uniqueness by another contradiction argument. Suppose that the economy has a sophisticated equilibrium in which in some history
−1   (−1 ) = ̂ , which diﬀers from ∗ (−1 ). Without loss of generality, suppose that
44

̂ − ∗ (−1 ) =   0. Let {̂ (−1 ) ̂  ( ) ̂ ( )}≥ denote the associated continuation
competitive equilibrium outcomes. Our preliminary result implies that the central bank follows the King rule in all periods. Let {̂ (−1 )}≥ denote the associated interest rates. From
(13), using the law of iterated expectations we have that
(60)

h

i

h

i

h

i

h

i

 ∗ (−1 )|−1 =  ∗+1 ( )|−1 and  ̂ (−1 )|−1 =  ̂+1 ( )|−1 .

Substituting (60) into the King rule (19) gives that
h

i

 ̂+1 ( ) − ∗+1 ( )|−1 = − 
Since   1 and ∗+1 ( ) is bounded, for every  there exists some  such that
h

i

 ̂ +1 ( )| −1  ̄
But this contradicts our preliminary result that  (−1 ) ≤ ̄ for all  and −1  
B. Proof of Proposition 5
Given our construction, we need only verify the transversality and boundedness conditions.
Consider first the transversality condition. From (40) it follows that the larger eigenvalue 2 () is a decreasing function of  and that 2 (1) = (1 + ). Under (41) it then
follows that 2 ()  1 for all  ≥ 1. Hence, lim→∞ () ̃  = 0. Since  ∗ is bounded, it
follows that  satisfies the transversality condition (29).
Consider next the boundedness conditions. We first show that [2 () − ]   0 for
all  ≥ 1. To do so, we show that 2 () −  is positive for  ∈ [1 1), zero at  = 1, and
negative for  ∈ (1 max ]. Note that from (40) we have that
(61)

1
1
2 ( ) =

2

Ã

!

vÃÃ
u
1
1u
t

1 + 
+1 +

2

!


−1 +



!2

− 4(


1
− 1) .



Noticing that the term in the radical is a perfect square and using the first part of (41) gives
that
2

Ã !

1


=1+


= 


45

Since 2 () is decreasing, it follows that 2 () −  has the desired sign pattern. Since
 = ( − 1), the numerator and the denominator of [2 () − ]  have opposite signs for
all  ≥ 1, so that [2 () − ]  is negative. Thus, the boundedness conditions are satisfied
for all 2 ≤ 0. In the resulting equilibria, inflation goes to plus infinity and output goes to
minus infinity (so that the level of output goes to zero). 
C. Proof of Proposition 6
Let {∗   ∗  ∗ } be the desired bounded competitive equilibrium. The strategies that
implement this competitive equilibrium are as follows. The strategy  ∗ is the King-money
hybrid rule. The strategy   specifies  (−1 ) = ∗ for all histories. The strategies   and
  specify  ( ) and   ( ) that are the unique solutions to the deterministic versions of
the conditions defining consumer optimality, (1), (2), (28), (32), and the King-money hybrid
∗
and +1 = ∗+1 
rule with +1 = +1

The proof that ( ∗          ) is a sophisticated equilibrium closely parallels that of
Proposition 3.
We now establish uniqueness of the sophisticated equilibrium of the form ( ∗          ).
We begin by showing that given  ∗   (−1 ) = ∗ for all histories. (Clearly, given  ∗ and
  ,   and   are unique.) For reasons similar to those underlying the preliminary result in
Proposition 3, for any history −1 ,  (−1 ) must be in the interval [ ̄], so that for any
history interest rates are given by the King rule (44). Under an interest rate rule, the state
−1 is irrelevant; therefore, a continuation competitive equilibrium starting at the beginning
of any period  solves the same equations as a competitive equilibrium (starting from period
0). For notational simplicity, we focus on a competitive equilibrium starting from period 0.
Suppose by way of contradiction that

{̂  ̂  ̂ } is an equilibrium that does not

coincide with {∗   ∗  ∗ }. Let ̃ = ̂ − ∗ and use similar notation for ̃  and ̃ . Then
subtracting the equations governing the systems denoted with an asterisk from those denoted
with a caret, we have a system governing {̃  ̃   ̃ } which satisfies (the analogs of) (1), (32),
and (35). The resulting system, given by (37) and (38), coincides with that in the proof of
Proposition 5. Hence, the solution is given by (39) with eigenvalues given by (40).
It is easy to check that   1 implies that both eigenvalues 1 and 2 are greater than

46

one. Furthermore, at least one of (1 − ) and (2 − ) is nonzero. Since both of the
eigenvalues are greater than one, (39) implies that if the two equilibria ever diﬀer, then ̃ 
becomes unbounded, so that ̃ does as well. Since ∗ is bounded, then ̂ must eventually
leave the interval [ ̄], which cannot happen in equilibrium. So we have a contradiction.
Note that our construction implies that after any deviation in period , the equilibrium
outcomes from period  + 1 are the desired outcomes. Thus, we have established the second
part of the proposition. 

47

