                                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




FINANCIAL REGULATION, FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION AND THE SYNCHRONIZATION
                         OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITY

                                           Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
                                             Elias Papaioannou
                                              José Luis Peydró

                                            Working Paper 14887
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w14887


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         April 2009




 This paper was previously circulated under the title, "Financial Integration and Business Cycle Synchronization."
 Essential parts of the paper were prepared while Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan was visiting the European
 Central Bank as 2008 Duisenberg Fellow. She thanks the economists at the Bank for providing a stimulating
 research environment. We thank two anonymous referees and the associate editor, John Campbell,
 Harris Dellas, Domenico Giannone, Cam Harvey, Jean Imbs, Simone Manganelli, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti,
 Bent Sørensen, Marco Pagano, Fabrizio Perri, Andrei Shleifer, Aaron Tornell, Francis Warnock, Axel
 Weber and seminar participants at UCLA, Brown, Dartmouth College, the ECB, the Oesterreichische
 Nationalbank, ALBA, the 5th ECB Central Banking Conference, the BIS-CGFS Workshop on Global
 Financial Stability, CRETE, the CEPR-EUI workshop on Globalization, the NBER Summer Institute,
 the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, and the 2010 AEA Meetings for helpful comments and suggestions.
 Dimitrios Rakitzis provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are those
 of the authors and do not reflect those of the ECB, the Eurosystem, or the National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2009 by Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Elias Papaioannou, and José Luis Peydró. All rights reserved.
 Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
 that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Regulation, Financial Globalization and the Synchronization of Economic Activity
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Elias Papaioannou, and José Luis Peydró
NBER Working Paper No. 14887
April 2009, Revised May 2011
JEL No. E32,F15,F36,G21,O16

                                              ABSTRACT

We analyze the impact of financial globalization on business cycle synchronization utilizing a proprietary
database on banks' international exposure for industrialized countries during 1978- 2006. Theory makes
ambiguous predictions and identification has been elusive due to lack of bilateral time-varying financial
linkages data. In contrast to conventional wisdom and previous empirical studies, we identify a strong
negative effect of banking integration on output synchronization, conditional on global shocks and
country-pair heterogeneity. Similarly, we show divergent economic activity as a result of higher integration
using an exogenous de-jure measure of integration based on financial regulations that harmonized
segmented EU markets.


Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan                                 José Luis Peydró
University of Houston                                European Central Bank
Department of Economics                              29 Kaiserstrasse
Houston, TX 77204                                    Frankfurt am Main,
and NBER                                             D60311, Germany
sebnem.kalemli-ozcan@mail.uh.edu                     jose.peydro@gmail.com

Elias Papaioannou
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
papaioannou.elias@gmail.com
1    Introduction

What is the role of global financial markets in the international propagation of country-specific
shocks? This question is at the center of the current academic and policy debate involving global
financial stability, new financial architecture, and monetary policy coordination. The 2007 − 2008
crisis lead to heated debates on whether it was the outcome of a common shock to industrial
countries’ asset markets or whether financial globalization, banking integration in particular, has
been the catalyst for amplifying and transmitting a moderate shock from a corner of the U.S. capital
markets to the rest of the world. Although we still lack direct evidence on these arguments, both
find support in the observation that synchronization of economic activity and financial globalization
go in tandem.

    We argue that the fundamental problem with this view is the lack of systematic evidence for
the benchmark: the co-movement of output and financial integration during periods of financial
stability — i.e., how financial globalization affects output co-movement during normal times. If
two financially integrated countries show a high degree of output and equity return synchroniza-
tion during tranquil times, then a high correlation after one country experiences a financial shock
does not constitute contagion. Contagion would emerge only if the synchronization of economic
activity between financially integrated countries is higher after the shock relative to the benchmark,
conditional on the common shock and other factors that may simultaneously affect world market in-
tegration and business cycle synchronization. A key question is then whether output co-movement
across markets increased as a result of financial globalization during the last decades. In this paper
we show that – in contrast to the current conventional wisdom and previous empirical studies– this
is not the case.

    Theoretically the correlation between financial integration and business cycle synchronization
is ambiguous. Both finance/banking and macroeconomic theoretical models make opposing predic-
tions on the association between financial integration and the synchronization of economic activity,
depending on whether financial shocks to the banking sector or collateral/productivity shocks to
firms dominate. The commonality in both set of models is as follows. In a financially integrated
world, if firms in certain countries are hit by negative (positive) shocks to their collateral or to
their productivity, both domestic and foreign banks decrease (increase) lending in these countries
and increase (decrease) lending in the non-affected countries, thereby causing a further divergence
of output growth. In contrast, if the negative (positive) shock is to the banking sector, glob-
ally operating banks pull out funds from all countries, transmitting the domestic banking shock


                                                  1
internationally, making business cycles of the two countries more alike.1

       Given these theoretical ambiguities and related empirical issues, the identification of the one-way
effect of financial integration on business cycle synchronization entails various challenges. First, a
positive association between cross-border financial linkages and output co-movement may reflect a
spurious correlation arising from commonalities between countries. Proximate countries that have
strong economic ties and are similar in other sociopolitical dimensions tend to have both more
synchronized output fluctuations and stronger cross-border financial linkages. In fact, previous
empirical studies show that most of the robust correlates of both output co-movement and financial
integration are indeed factors related to proximity.2

       Second, the response of integrated economies to common shocks will be similar. There has
been a common trend in both financial globalization and synchronization of economic activity
over the past decades. Figures 1 and 2 illustrate these patterns in our data. Yet the coevolution of
financial integration and output synchronization does not necessarily imply a causal relationship, as
it can be driven by other features of globalization, such as trade integration, outsourcing, increased
coordination of monetary policy, etc.3

       Third, a significant negative association between banking linkages and business cycle synchro-
nization may be driven by the fact that capital flows to high return/high growth countries. These
return and growth differentials may also affect risk sharing/taking.4 International diversification
benefits become larger when stock returns are less correlated across countries, and thus financial
flows may increase among dissimilar economies.

       Fourth, measurement error in the bilateral data on international capital holdings might attenu-
ate the estimates or even lead to systematic biases. International capital holdings/flows data are far
from perfect as they tend to miss indirect links via financial centers, are usually based on surveys,
and are mostly available for the recent years.
   1
     See Holmstrom and Tirole (1997), Morgan, Rime, and Strahan (2004), Allen and Gale (2000), Perri and Quadrini
(2001), Mendoza and Quadrini (2010), and Enders, Kollman and Muller (2010) among others. In Section 2 we discuss
in detail the theoretical mechanisms.
   2
     Baxter and Kouparitsas (2005) show that geographic and cultural proximity variables are the most robust corre-
lates of output synchronization. Portes and Rey (2005), Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2009), Ekinci, Kalemli-Ozcan
and Sørensen (2008), Giannetti and Yafeh (2008), Mian (2006), and Papaioannou (2009), among others, show that
distance and cultural ties are strong correlates of international financial activities and banking in particular.
   3
     See Rose (2009) and Inklaar, Jong-A-Pin, and de Haan (2008) on the business cycle synchronization effects of
monetary policy and fiscal policy coordination, respectively.
   4
     For the effect of financial integration on international risk sharing and volatility see Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundbad
(2005, 2006, 2011), Bekaert, Harvey, Lundblad, Siegel (2007), Kose, Prasad, Rogoff, and Wei (2009), Kalemli-
Ozcan, Sørensen, and Yosha (2001, 2003), Kalemli-Ozcan, Sørensen and Volosovych (2010), and Kalemli-Ozcan,
Papaioannou, and Peydro (2010), among others.



                                                            2
    Our methodology for estimating the impact of financial integration on business cycle synchro-
nization focuses on changes over time for the country-pairs. We examine the dynamics of financial
integration and business cycle synchronization within more than 150 pairs of countries over the
period 1978 − 2006. Our panel estimates assess how the evolution of business cycle synchroniza-
tion is affected when bilateral financial linkages and financial sector regulation change within each
country pair conditional on common shocks. To the extent that this within country-pair compari-
son fully absorbs country-pair specific differences in synchronization and integration, the estimated
difference can be plausibly attributed to changes in the degree of financial integration over time.
To the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first that uses this methodology, combining panel
data on bilateral cross-border financial holdings with a structural index reflecting convergence in
the regulation of financial intermediation across country-pairs. This strategy allows us to account
for all the above mentioned identification challenges.

    In the first part of our empirical analysis we use a quantity-based measure of financial inte-
gration exploiting a proprietary database from the Bank of International Settlements (BIS) that
reports bilateral international bank assets and liabilities over the past three decades for a group
of developed countries.5 The extensive time dimension of the data allows us to account for fixed
country-pair factors and global shocks (the first and second identification challenge). Our results
show that accounting for these factors is fundamental. While between country-pairs there is a
significant positive correlation between banking integration and output synchronization, our panel
estimates show that (within country-pair) increases in cross-border banking activities are followed
by less synchronized, more divergent, output fluctuations. This result stands in contrast to previous
empirical works that lacked high quality time-series bilateral data. While in line with theory that
characterize the correlation between financial integration and output synchronization in tranquil
times, our findings contrast the conventional wisdom that financial globalization has lead to an
increased synchronicity of economic activity.

    While the supervisory BIS data reflect more than 99% of the international exposure of the local
banking system, they do not capture other forms of international investment (such as FDI and
portfolio investment) by non-banks. Moreover, the BIS data (as most international capital data)
miss investment channeled via small off-shore financial centers. To account for these caveats (related
   5
     The literature on cross-border financial integration employs either de-facto (quantity and price based) or de-jure
measures (see Adam, Jappelli, Menichini, Padula, and Pagano (2002) for a general discussion). De-facto indicators
are typically outcomes, such as quantity of international bank or equity holdings (Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007))
or return correlation (Bekaert and Harvey (1995)). De-jure measures are based on the timing of stock market
liberalization (Henry (2000); Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2002)) or the removal of capital account restrictions
(such as the widely used AREAER index of IMF).


                                                          3
to the fourth identification challenge), we construct a structural index of financial integration,
based on the adoption timing of financial sector legislation that aims to harmonize the regulatory
framework in financial intermediation across European Union (EU) financial markets. Compared to
outcome-based indicators (such as international capital holdings and return correlations), employing
a structural de jure measure of financial integration allows us to account for reverse causation arising
from the fact that international banking may react to the synchronization of output fluctuations
(the third identification challenge). Importantly, since the structural index of financial integration
varies over time for each pair of countries, we can still account for country-pair heterogeneity, global
shocks, and common trends.

      To construct the structural index of financial integration, we exploit in a quasi-natural exper-
imental setting the peculiar nature of adopting EU-wide legislation across EU member countries.
The Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP) was a package of financial reforms launched by the EU
in 1998 aiming to integrate the segmented EU financial markets and reduce the costs of cross-border
financial intermediation. The FSAP included 29 major pieces of legislation (27 EU Directives and
2 EU Regulations) in banking, capital markets, corporate law, payment systems, and corporate
governance. In contrast to EU Regulations that become immediately enforceable across EU mem-
ber countries, EU Directives are acts that become enforceable only after each EU member country
passes domestic legislation adopting the EU Directive. The legal adoption of the EU Directive (the
so-called “transposition” process) is notoriously slow, since it requires modifications of existing in-
stitutional structures, the removal of previous regulations and, in many cases, the establishment of
new agencies and infrastructure. The transposition of the EU Directives takes in practice several
years and differs considerably across EU member states. Using information from the EU Commis-
sion on the adoption timing of each of the Directives of the FSAP across EU countries, we construct
a bilateral time-varying index that reflects how similar are the legal/regulatory structures governing
the functioning of financial intermediation across each country-pair in each year.

      Our (reduced-form) panel estimates show that a higher degree of legislative/regulatory harmo-
nization in financial services is associated with less synchronized output cycles. After showing that
the simultaneous adoption of the EU-wide legislative acts by member countries are followed by
increases in cross-border banking activities, we combine these results into a bilateral panel instru-
mental variables method. Our identification scheme builds on the insights of the law and finance
literature showing that sound investor protection and legal quality lead to deep and efficient cap-
ital markets.6 It is also related to a new strand in corporate finance and law and economics that
  6
      See La Porta et al. (1997, 1998) and La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2008) in particular who examine


                                                          4
examines the effects of legal convergence on capital markets.7 Our identification method associates
changes in the legal/regulatory environment governing financial intermediation that aim to harmo-
nize segmented financial systems with changes in cross-border banking activities among countries
that adopt the same piece of legislation and, in turn, with changes in output synchronization. The
panel instrumental variable (IV) analysis reveals that the exogenous component of banking inte-
gration stemming from the harmonization of the regulatory environment in financial services makes
business cycles less alike.

    The paper is structured as follows. In the next section we detail the theoretical predictions of
finance/banking models and international macro models. We also discuss previous empirical works
that due to data limitations could not account for the various econometric challenges. Section
3 describes our data. Section 4 reports the cross-sectional and the panel estimates on the effect
of cross-border banking integration on business cycle synchronization. In Section 5 we report
panel estimates associating business cycle synchronization with the structural index of financial
integration. Section 6 presents instrumental variable estimates associating legal convergence in
financial services with banking integration (in the first-stage) and output synchronization (in the
second-stage). Section 7 concludes.



2     Related Literature

Theory makes opposing predictions about the effect of financial integration on international busi-
ness cycle synchronization depending on the nature of the underlying shocks. In this section, we
explain in detail the alternative theoretical channels modeled from the finance/banking and the
international macro/finance literature and then go over previous empirical works.


2.1    Theory: Financial Integration and Lower Synchronization

Morgan, Rime, and Strahan (2004) develop a multi-economy variant of the canonical banking model
of Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) and test it using cross-state banking exposure data across U.S.
states. They show theoretically that if firms in certain states are hit by positive shocks that increase
the value of their collateral, they receive more credit. Under financial integration, both local banks
and banks from other regions will provide credit to the borrowers hit by the positive shock due to
the effect of securities legislation on capital markets’ development.
   7
     See, among others, Balas, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2009) and Enriques and Volpin (2007).




                                                        5
the increased value of collateral. As a result, output will increase in the affected region relatively
more as compared to output in other regions, making cycles to further diverge. If a negative
collateral shock hits one region (because productivity falls), then both local and out-of-state banks
move away from the affected region, delivering the same asymmetry result for regional business
cycles.

   Working in an international context, Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2005) argue that if a
country that liberalizes its equity markets has better growth opportunities than others (because
for example its production is concentrated in high global demand sectors), following a financial
liberalization episode, capital will flow to that country and therefore output patterns between the
two countries will diverge (see also Bekaert, Harvey, Lundblad, and Siegel (2007)). By the same
token, negative shocks will lead to capital withdrawals and thus output differences among financially
integrated economies will get amplified.

   International real business cycle theories model a similar mechanism that also yields a negative
correlation between financial integration and output synchronization in a dynamic general equilib-
rium framework. In the workhorse model of Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1992) with complete
financial markets, the country hit by a positive productivity shock experiences an increase in the
marginal product of capital and labor, workers substitute leisure for labor, and the country receives
capital on net – a mechanism that leads to negative output correlations between the two countries.
A negative shock delivers the same effect, since the country that was not hit by the negative shock
has relatively better growth opportunities and thus capital will be directed there.

   In a dynamic general equilibrium set-up causality can also run in the other direction. Heathcote
and Perri (2004) show that a lower degree of synchronization due to changing nature of shocks
increases demand for diversification and hence increases bilateral financial integration via a higher
volume of asset trade. Kalemli-Ozcan, Reshef, Sørensen, and Yosha (2010) show that under full
diversification of capital income, investment patterns are solely determined by relative productivity.
Their model (and empirical results) suggests that capital will flow to the states with the highest
productivity growth, creating even more divergent growth patterns.

   A completely different mechanism linking financial integration and output synchronization based
on industrial specialization was studied by Obstfeld (1994). In his model, financial integration
shifts investment towards risky projects as it enables countries to specialize according to their
comparative advantage; this implies that output growth among financially integrated countries




                                                  6
should be negatively correlated.8


2.2      Theory: Financial Integration and Higher Synchronization

The model of Morgan, Rime, and Strahan (2004) predicts that banking integration may lead to
more, rather than less, synchronized output cycles. This will occur if the shock is not the banking
sector rather than firm’s productivity/collateral. If there is a negative shock to banks’ capital,
the induced contraction of credit supply may have negative real effects for the domestic economy.9
If the domestic credit supply reduction is significant, under banking integration, the business cy-
cles of the two inter-connected regions/economies will become more synchronized since banks that
operate in financially inter-connected regions pull out funds from the non-affected region to con-
tinue lending in the affected region. Allen and Gale (2000) model this contagion-type mechanism
through interconnected bank balance sheets; in their model shocks are transmitted through the
interbank markets by banks from affected countries pulling out their international deposits and
thus transmitting internationally the local shock.

       Dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models may also yield a positive relation between bank-
ing integration and business cycle synchronization stemming from the feedback from interest rates
to capital values. The early literature models this by introducing financial frictions into the stan-
dard model with productivity/technology shocks, where frictions stop or reverse the direction of
capital flows (Calvo and Mendoza (2000)), or leveraged and constrained firms liquidate and run
down asset prices when they got hit by a negative productivity shock to their capital (Devereux
and Yetman (2009)). The recent literature introduces banking shocks in addition to productivity
shocks (e.g. Perri and Quadrini (2010); Mendoza and Quadrini (2010); Enders, Kollmann, and
Muller (2010)). In these models, different mechanisms operate where banks and/or firms have col-
lateral constraints. When there is a negative shock to the banking sector in the domestic economy,
banks cut their lending globally since their net worth goes down and they have to shrink their
   8
      In line with this argument, Kalemli-Ozcan, Sørensen, and Yosha (2003) using regional-level data show that
financial integration leads higher industrial specialization. Using country-level data Imbs (2004) and Kalemli-Ozcan,
Sørensen, and Yosha (2001) show that higher industrial specialization leads to less synchronized cycles.
    9
      This potential reduction in firm borrowing does not seem to be the case for the firms in developed countries as
shown by Rice and Strahan (2010) for U.S. and Jimenez, Mian, Peydro and Saurina (2010) for Spain. In developing
countries, credit supply contractions may be more binding for firms, as shown, for example, by Paravisini (2008) for
Argentina; Khwaja and Mian (2008) for Pakistan, Paravisini, Rappoport, Schnabl, and Wolfenzon (2010) for Peru;
and Kalemli-Ozcan, Kamil, and Villegas-Sanchez for 6 Latin American countries. The last two papers show real
effects in terms of declining exports (Peru) and declining investment (6 Latin American countries) of firms. In a
global financial crisis, such as the 2007 − 2009 recession, even developed country firms may suffer from credit supply
shocks (see, for example, Ivashina and Scharfstein (2010) and Cornett, McNutt, and Tehranian (2011) for U.S. and
Maddaloni and Peydro (2011) for the euro area and U.S).


                                                          7
balance sheet. Foreign banks from non-affected countries stop lending to firms in the affected econ-
omy due to limited enforcement of debt contracts that increases the cost of default in bad times.
As a result of the drop in asset prices, the initial shock to domestic banks’ balance sheet spreads
internationally. Hence foreign banks’ net worth also falls and as such they also need to shrink their
balance sheet. This in turn leads to rising financing costs in both financially integrated countries.
All these mechanisms reinforce each other and lead to a higher synchronization of economic activity
between financially integrated countries.


2.3      Empirical Evidence

Most empirical studies document a positive correlation between financial integration and GDP
co-movement.10 Using cross-country data over a long period, Kose, Prasad, and Terrones (2004)
find that financially open countries without capital account restrictions have more synchronized
business cycles with world output. Imbs (2006) uses bilateral (country-pair) data on equity and debt
holdings constructed by the IMF on a large cross-section of countries and shows a significant positive
correlation between bilateral portfolio holdings and output synchronization. Similarly Otto, Voss
and Willard (2001) find that OECD countries with strong FDI linkages have more similar cycles.11
While examining the cross-sectional data patterns is the natural first thing to do, these type of
cross-sectional correlations though informative do not identify causal effects, as they might be
driven by common global shocks and/or unobserved country-pair heterogeneity. Another problem
with most previous works is that they pool developed, emerging, and under-developed countries
in the estimation. Theoretically this is far from ideal, as these countries experienced different
types of shocks in the past three decades (for example industrial countries did not experience
major financial crises till 2007, while emerging and underdeveloped economies experienced many
currency and banking crises); and the parallel work examining the effect of trade integration on
business cycle synchronization suggests that there are fundamental differences between advanced
and emerging/underdeveloped countries (Kraay and Ventura (2000, 2007); Calderon, Chong, and
Stein (2007)).

       Morgan, Rime, Strahan (2004) show that banking deregulation in the U.S. over late 1970s
  10
      For the broader literature that quantifies the effects of financial integration on economic growth, volatility, and
risk sharing, see Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2005, 2006, 2011); Bekaert, Lundblad, Siegel (2007); Henry (2000);
Prasad, Kose, Rogoff, and Wei (2009); Kalemli-Ozcan, Sørensen and Volosovych (2010).
   11
      The only study to our knowledge that documents a negative association between financial integration and syn-
chronization is Garcia-Herrero and Ruiz (2008). These authors use capital account data for Spain and document a
lower GDP synchronization of Spain with countries that Spain has strong financial linkages.



                                                           8
and early 1980s dampened economic volatility and made state business cycles more alike. They
interpret their findings as suggesting that bank capital supply shocks were the dominant source of
output fluctuations during this period in the U.S. Our results are in contrast with those of Morgan,
Rime, Strahan (2004). We think the difference is due to our sample of developed European countries
which under all accounts did not experience major credit shocks (with the exception of Scandinavian
banking crisis) during our period of study, 1978 − 2006.12



3     Data

3.1    BIS Data

Our dataset comes from the confidential version of BIS International Locational Banking Statistics
Database. This database reports asset and liability holdings of banks located in roughly forty
(mainly industrial) countries (“the reporting area”) in more than one hundred and fifty countries
(the “vis-a-vis area”) at a quarterly frequency since the end of 1977. Yet, half of these countries
started reporting only recently (mostly after 2000). Our panel dataset consists of annual bilateral
data from and to eighteen rich economies over the period 1978 − 2006.13 These countries are:
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Switzerland, Germany, Denmark, Spain, Finland, France,
United Kingdom, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Portugal, Sweden, and the United States.14

    The data is originally collected from domestic monetary authorities and local supervisory agen-
cies, which in turn pass the data to the BIS which then performs a series of cross-country and
consistency checks. The supervisory data include all of banks’ on-balance sheet exposure and re-
flect more than 99% of the overall international exposure of a country’s banking institutions. The
data captures mainly international bank to bank debt, such as inter-bank credit lines, loans and
deposits. Assets include mainly deposits and balances placed with non-resident banks, including
bank’s own related offices abroad. They also include holdings of securities and participations (i.e.
  12
     It is plausible that for American states during 1980s credit supply shocks did play a bigger role compared to
European countries throughout the last three decades. In fact preliminary analysis show that when we focus on the
banking crisis of Scandinavian countries in the late 1980s, we do get a positive relation between banking integration
and business cycles, consistent with the findings of Morgan, Rime, Strahan (2004).
  13
     We prefer to use annual data given the noisy nature of quarterly data (though this has no effect on our results).
Cross-border capital (or trade) flows data usually have gaps that make logarithmic transformations questionable.
This is not the case in our data. There are only a few missing observations, mainly in the initial years (as some
countries like Spain and Finland start reporting in 1983).
  14
     In the previous version of the paper we also included Luxemburg and Greece. We dropped Luxemburg because
the international position of banks in and from Luxemburg is extremely high. We also dropped Greece because data
become available only after 2003. Including these countries does not affect our results.



                                                          9
permanent holdings of financial interest in other undertakings) in non-resident entities. Data also
include trade-related credit, arrears of interest and principal that have not been written down and
holdings of banks own issues of international securities. The data also cover bank’s investment in
equity-like instruments as well as foreign corporate and government bonds.

       The BIS dataset does not distinguish between inter-bank debt activities and portfolio equity
investment of banks. Yet the data mainly reflect debt holdings and flows. BIS (2003a,b) and
Wooldridge (2002) argue that while FDI and equity have become more important after the late
nineties, their weight is still quite small as standard banking activities consist bulk of cross-border
holdings. International bank M&A activity and direct lending to foreign residents have been limited
overall (see Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008)). According to our calculations based on the unilateral
(at the country-time level) data of Lane and Milesi-Ferretti, debt flows reflect 67% of the total flows
between 1978 − 2006 for our group of countries; with equity and FDI jointly account for a third of
total foreign investment. Banking activities in particular account for half (48.5%) of total foreign
holdings and flows in 2006. For most of the 28 year period they accounted for around 60%.

       The BIS data is expressed originally in current USD. We convert the data into constant USD
by deflating the series with the U.S. CPI. Following previous works we use the total amount of
the stock of external assets and liabilities and construct two quantity-based measures of financial
integration. The first measure (BAN KIN T 1) is the average value of (the logs of) real bilateral
asset and liability holdings normalized with the sum of the population of the two countries. The
second measure (BAN KIN T 2) is the average of (the logs of) real bilateral asset and liability
holdings as a share of the two countries’ GDP.15


3.2      Measures of Synchronization

We construct three different measures of business cycle synchronization (SY N CHi,j,t ) using GDP
data from the latest update of World Bank’s World Development Indicator’s Database (WB WDI).
First, following Giannone, Lenza, and Reichlin (2008), we measure business cycle synchronization
with the negative of divergence, defined as the absolute value of real GDP growth differences
between country i and j in year t.
  15
    In the previous version of the paper we experiment with other proxy measures of financial integration, using
transactions data. The results are similar. We report data based on holdings (rather than flows/transactions)
because theory and previous empirical works focus on the outstanding stock of international investors (banks in our
application).




                                                        10
                    SY N CH1i,j,t ≡ − |(ln Yi,t − ln Yi,t−1 ) − (ln Yj,t − ln Yj,t−1 )|          (1)

   Second, we follow Morgan, Rime, and Strahan (2004) and construct SY N CH2i,j,t as follows.
First, we regress real GDP growth on country fixed-effects and year fixed-effects.


                                ln Yi,t − ln Yi,t−1 = γi + φt + vi,t ∀ i, j

   The residuals (vi,t and vj,t ) reflect how much GDP growth differs in each country and each year
compared to average growth in this year and the average growth of this country over the estimation
period. We then construct the business cycle synchronization proxy as the negative of the absolute
difference of residual GDP growth:


                                     SY N CH2i,j,t ≡ −|νi,t − νj,t |                             (2)

Intuitively this index measures how similar GDP growth rates are between two countries in any
given year, accounting for the average growth in each country and the average growth in each year.

   These two indicators are simple, intuitive, and easy-to-grasp. In contrast to the correlation
measures that cross-country studies mainly work with, the above indices are not sensitive to various
filtering methods that have been criticized on many grounds (e.g. Canova (1998, 1999)). They also
do not contain estimation error. Again differently from the correlation measure, these indices do
not directly reflect the volatility of output growth and, therefore, allows us to identify the impact
of banking integration on the covariation of output growth. Doyle and Faust (2005) underline
the importance of a synchronization measure that (ideally) does not include volatility. Isolating
the covariance part is desirable, because, over the past two decades, global output volatility has
fallen considerably in the industrial economies (e.g. Cecchetti, Flores-Lagunes, and Krause (2006)).
Nevertheless, for comparison purposes, we follow previous cross-country studies and also estimate
the 5-year correlation of the cyclical component of output as measured with Baxter and King (1999)
Band-Pass filter (2, 8; SY N CH3i,j,t ) (e.g. Imbs (2006); Baxter and Kouparitsas (2005)).


3.3   Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 gives descriptive statistics for the main variables employed in the empirical analysis. The
average divergence in real GDP growth rate is 1.78% (SY N CH1). Once we control for country


                                                    11
and year fixed-effects (SY N CH2) the differences are somewhat smaller (mean of 1.56%). Both
synchronization indicators exhibit significant variation both across country-pairs and over time
(the standard deviation is 1.56% and 1.42% respectively). The average correlation of the cyclical
component of GDP (SY N CH3) over this time period is 0.42 and has considerable variation (the
standard deviation is 0.50).

    Figure 1 gives a graphical illustration on the evolution of the average (across country-pairs) value
of the three measures of business cycle synchronization over the 28 years of our examination. Growth
divergence measures, SY N CH1 and SY N CH2, are plotted on the left y-axis; the correlation
measure, SY N CH3, is tabulated on the right y-axis. Clearly, there is a considerable degree of
short-term variability which is quite useful in our empirical exercise. Overall output synchronization
has been steadily increasing according to all measures since the mid-1980s (see also Kose, Otrok,
and Prasad (2008) and Rose (2009)). The average correlation of the cyclical component of GDP
(SY N CH3) was around 0.1 − 0.3 in the 1980s. In the 1990s the correlation increased on average
to 0.4, while in the 2000s the correlation reached 0.6 − 0.7, before falling to around 0.5 before the
recent crisis. Likewise, average differences in real GDP growth in the late 1970s and the 1980s were
in the range of 2.5% − 3.5%, while after the late 1990s the average difference fell to 1% − 1.5%.

    Figure 2 plots the evolution of cross-border banking holdings in the period 1978 − 2006. Cross-
border bank holdings have increased considerably over the past three decades. Lane and Milesi-
Ferretti (2007) document similar patterns for other types of cross-border investment flows, such as
FDI and equity. Yet international banking activities are by far the largest component of foreign
capital holdings/flows. Figure 2 shows that real international bilateral bank holdings (per capita)
have increased from an average value (across the 153 country-pairs of our sample) of roughly 170
dollars to almost 1, 600 dollars per person as of the end of 2006.



4     Banking Integration and Business Cycle Synchronization

4.1    Econometric Specification

We start our analysis estimating with OLS variants of the following specification:


                  SY N CHi,j,t = αi,j + αt + βBAN KIN Ti,j,t−1 + X0i,j,t−1 Ψ + εi,j,t               (3)




                                                  12
SY N CHi,j,t is one of the three synchronization indices that measures the co-movement of output
between countries i and j in year t. BAN KIN Ti,j,t−1 is one of our two measures of cross-border
banking integration between countries i and j in the previous year/period (t − 1).16 The specifica-
tion also includes year/time (αt ) and country pair fixed-effects (αi,j ). The year/time fixed-effects
account for the effect of global shocks and other common time-varying factors that affect both
business cycle patterns and banking integration. The year fixed-effects also account in a flexible
non-parametric way for the overall fall in output volatility over our sample period. The country-pair
effects account for hard-to-measure factors such as cultural ties, informational frictions, political
coordination and other time-invariant unobservable factors, all of which have been shown to have
an effect on both financial integration and business cycle patterns. Vector X0i,j,t−1 reflects other
country-pair time-varying factors, such as trade, specialization, etc.


4.2      Cross-Sectional Estimates

Table 2 presents cross-sectional and panel fixed-effects estimates on the effect of banking integration
on GDP synchronization. For comparability with previous studies analyzing the correlation between
financial integration and output synchronization, we start our analysis in Panel A by estimating
cross-sectional models that pool the time series observations across all country pairs. The “between”
estimator removes the time dimension by averaging the dependent and the explanatory variable
across country-pairs. Thus for these models we have a single observation for each country-pair.

       Columns (1)-(4) report cross-sectional estimates using synchronization in GDP growth rates
(SY N CH1 and SY N CH2) as the dependent variable. The cross-sectional coefficient on the two
banking integration measures is positive and significant at the 99% confidence level in all permuta-
tions, a result in line with previous cross-country empirical works. The estimates imply that across
the 153 pairs of industrial countries in our sample, there is higher covariation of GDP growth among
economies with stronger financial ties.

       The specifications in columns (5)-(8) report estimates using the cyclical component of GDP
(SY N CH3) estimated over a 5-year period as the dependent variable. These models are estimated
in six non-overlapping 5-year periods. The unconditional coefficient estimates on banking integra-
tion reported in (5) and (7) continue to be positive and significant, implying that countries with
stronger financial linkages have more correlated output cycles.
  16
    We use lagged values to partly account for reverse causation. We also estimated specifications using contempo-
raneous values of financial/banking integration finding similar (and if anything stronger) results. We formally deal
with reverse causation and other forms of endogeneity in the sections 5 and 6.


                                                        13
       In columns (6) and (8) we examine whether our results reflect differences on trade intensity and
industrial specialization. To control for differences in trade intensity, we use the log of bilateral
real (deflated with the U.S. price deflator) exports and imports as a share of the two countries’
GDP. Following Krugman (1991) and Kalemli-Ozcan, Sørensen and Yosha (2003), among others,
we measure specialization with an index that reflects how dissimilar industrial production is in
manufacturing (SP ECi,j,t ≡ N      n      n            n        n
                            P
                              n=1 si,t − sj,t , where si,t and sj,t denote the GDP share of manu-
facturing industry n in year t in country i and j respectively). A priori it looks important to account
for differences in bilateral trade when working with long-term data as trade in goods and financial
services tend to move in tandem (e.g. Rose and Spiegel (2004)) and previous studies show that
trade has a significantly positive effect on business cycle synchronization (e.g. Frankel and Rose
(1998)). Likewise accounting for specialization patterns seems important as financial integration
affects specialization patterns (e.g. Obstfeld (1994); Kalemli-Ozcan, Sørensen, and Yosha (2001)).
In line with previous studies, trade enters with a positive estimate. The regressions further show
that countries with dissimilar production structures have less synchronized cycles; yet this effect is
not statistically significant, most likely because of the limited variability of the specialization index
over a 5-year horizon. Most importantly for our focus, the estimate on BAN KIN T continues to
be at least two standard errors above zero in both permutations.17


4.3      Panel Fixed-Effect Estimates

In Table 2, Panel B we report otherwise identical specifications to Panel A, but we add country-
pair fixed-effects and time fixed-effects in the empirical model (as shown in equation (3)). Due to
serial correlation, standard errors in the panel models in Panel B (and all subsequent tables) are
clustered at the country-pair level (Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004)). This method allows
for arbitrary heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation for each country pair.18 The panel estimates in
Panel B stand in contrast to the cross-sectional coefficients in Panel A. In all perturbations with the
annual data reported in columns (1)-(4) the estimate on banking integration enters with the opposite
sign to the cross-sectional specifications. The panel fixed-effect models imply that a higher level of
international banking integration is associated with a lower degree of output synchronization. This
  17
      When we control for trade intensity and differences in industrial specialization we lose roughly 35% of our sample
due to data unavailability on the industrial statistics needed to construct SP EC. We thus also augmented the
empirical model with trade and specialization one at a time, obtaining similar results.
   18
      Newey-West standard errors that allow for common across country-pairs auto-correlation are similar (and if
anything somewhat smaller) compared to clustered at the country-pair dimension standard errors. We also estimated
standard errors with the multi-way clustering method of Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2006) clustering at the year
t, country i and country j, finding similar results.



                                                          14
result is present with both banking integration measures and both synchronization indicators.
In columns (5)-(8) we estimate panel fixed-effects models using the correlation of the cyclical
component of GDP estimated over 5 non-overlapping five-year periods as the dependent variable.
Again there is a sharp difference between the cross-sectional and the within country-pair estimates.
The estimates in columns (6) and (8) show that this result is not driven by changes on goods’ trade
and changes on industrial structure.

   As a result, while in the cross-section there is a positive association between output co-movement
and financial integration, as financial linkages become stronger within country-pairs over time out-
put growth rates diverge. (Appendix Figures 1 and 2 give a graphical illustration of the sharp
differences in the correlation between financial integration and output synchronicity). The striking
difference between the cross-sectional and the panel estimates suggests that omitted variable bias
arising from common global time-varying shocks and hard-to-account-for country-pair characteris-
tics was plaguing estimates in previous cross-sectional studies.


4.4   Further Evidence and Sensitivity Analysis

In Appendix Table 1 we explore further the underlying reasons behind the sharp difference in the
cross-sectional and the within country-pair correlation between financial integration and output
synchronization. In Panel A we report specifications with annual data adding only year constants.
In all permutations the coefficient on banking integration is positive and highly significant, implying
that solely accounting for common to all countries shocks does not suffice to switch the sign of the
estimate. Yet the coefficients on banking integration drop by half as compared to the analogous
estimates in Panel A of Table 2, where we were not accounting for common shocks. This shows that
accounting for common global factors is economically important. In Panel B we omit year fixed-
effects and add country-pair fixed-effects. To account for the upward trend in banking integration,
we also add country-specific time trends. The coefficient on banking integration turns negative and
is highly significant. This suggests that accounting for hard-to-observe country-pair fixed factors
is fundamental. In Panel C illustrates the robustness of the significantly negative within country-
pair correlation between financial integration and output synchronization. In these specifications
we include year fixed-effects and country-specific linear time trends on top of country-pair fixed-
effects. The coefficient on lagged banking integration continues to be statistically significant at
standard confidence levels.

   A potential drawback of the correlation measure (SY N CH3) is that it is estimated over a


                                                  15
short (five-year) period. Thus we re-estimated the panel specifications splitting the sample into
two periods and used as the dependent variable the correlation of the cyclical component of GDP
estimated over each 14-year period. Appendix Table 2 reports the results. Panel A gives cross-
sectional estimates while Panel B reports country-pair fixed effects estimates with a period constant.
The results are in line with columns (5)-(8) of Table 2 and, if anything, stronger. The estimate on
banking integration in the beginning of each of the two 14-year periods is statistically significant at
the 1% level. This suggests that increases in cross-border banking activities have been associated
with less synchronized output cycles.

   We performed additional sensitivity checks to investigate the stability of our OLS estimates
that reveal a striking difference between the cross-sectional and the over time within country-pair
correlation of banking integration and output synchronization. Among others, we checked whether
our results are driven by influential observations. The change in the sign of the coefficient on
banking integration is not due to any particular country-year observations. We also estimated a
weighted least square (WLS) by population and GDP regression to guard against the influence of
small country pairs, obtaining similar results. We also used unstandardized measures of banking
integration and controlled directly for population and/or GDP, again finding similar results. In the
previous version of the paper we also estimated auto-regressive specifications, controlling for inertia
in business cycle synchronization (though differences in GDP fluctuations are not particularly
persistent; the first auto-regressive coefficient is around 0.15). Again the results are similar.


4.5   Open Issues

Our results show a strong negative effect of banking integration on business cycle synchronization
in a panel of industrialized countries during tranquil times. Although this result is quite robust to
a variety of sensitivity checks, the OLS coefficients do not capture the one way effect of financial
integration on output synchronization.

   A first concern emerges from potential omitted variables. Most of the robust correlates of
business cycle synchronization identified previously are time-invariant and, hence, our country-pair
fixed-effects account for these factors (Baxter and Kouparitsas (2004)). Inclusion of time effects
also mitigates concerns that our estimates are driven from a common possibly trending omitted
variable. Nevertheless, we cannot completely rule out that an omitted time-varying country-pair
factor may affect both output synchronization and banking integration.

   Second, there is the possibility of reverse causation. This type of endogeneity may arise if


                                                  16
banking integration is the outcome rather than the cause of business cycle divergence. To partly
account for this possibility, in our panel estimates we have used lagged values of banking integration
(and the other controls). Given the low persistence of output co-movement, employing lagged values
is reasonable. Yet, clearly it is not ideal.

         Third, there are worries that measurement error may affect the LS. While the BIS statistics
capture all cross-border banking activities and thus classical error-in-variables is negligible, our
data does not include other types of international investment, such as portfolio investment by non-
banks and FDI. Since there is a high correlation between equity flows and debt flows, this concern
is not severe in our context.19 A probably more important problem is that our data (as all data on
cross-country investment) miss banking activities channeled via small off-shore financial centers.



5         Financial Sector Legislative-Regulatory Harmonization

In this section we construct a structural index of financial integration that reflects regulatory/legislative
harmonization reforms in financial services across Europe that allows to account for these concerns.


5.1        De-jure broad measure of financial integration

We construct a structural measure of financial integration using data on financial sector harmoniza-
tion policies across EU15 countries on the implementation of the legislative acts of the Financial
Services Action Plan. The FSAP was a major policy initiative launched in 1998 by the EU Com-
mission and the EU Council (the two main bodies of the European Union) that aimed to remove
regulatory and legislative barriers across European countries in financial intermediation. Besides
technical recommendations and communications, the FSAP included 29 major pieces of legislation,
27 EU Directives and 2 EU Regulations. The FSAP included legislation on securities markets (e.g.
the Prospectus Directive and the Directive on Insider Trading), corporate governance (e.g. the
Transparency Directive and the Takeover Bids Directive), banking (e.g. Directive on Capital Ade-
quacy), and insurance (e.g. the Solvency Directive), among others.20 Until the official completion
    19
      According to the latest vintage of the Lane and Milesi-Ferretti dataset of aggregate (at the country-level) foreign
holdings, the correlation of total debt, portfolio debt, banking, FDI and equity in levels (either expressed as a share of
total assets or as a share of GDP) is the range of 0.75 − 0.99. In first differences the correlation weakens, but is always
larger than 0.50. Country-pair datasets on foreign capital holdings also suggest a strong correlation of the various
types of international investment. For example, Kubelec and Sa (2009) document that the correlation between our
BIS data and CPIS bilateral debt data, which has a broader coverage of debt assets and liabilities, is 80%.
   20
      Malcom et al. (2009) and Enriques and Gatti (2008) give details on the FSAP and the transposition of EU
financial legislation into national law.


                                                            17
date at the end of 2003 the EU Commission had passed 21 of these measures. The remaining 6
Directives of the FSAP passed in the period 2004 − 2006.

   In contrast to EU Regulations that become immediately part of the legal order of all EU mem-
ber countries, EU Directives are legal acts that do not become immediately enforceable across the
EU. Instead, member countries are given time to adopt, modify, and eventually transpose the EU
Directives into domestic law. As with other pieces of EU-initiated legislation, there is a great deal
of heterogeneity on the speed with which European countries adopted the FSAP Directives (see
Supplementary Appendix Tables A and B). The time of the transposition/adoption of EU Direc-
tives takes many years, as EU member states delay the adaptation for various reasons, such as
parliamentary delays, because new agencies need to be established, existing laws be removed, and
due to many other technical obstacles. Moreover member states may delay to adopt the EU law to
shield domestic firms from foreign competition and other political considerations. For example, in
our context only four EU countries (Denmark, France, Finland and the UK) converted into the do-
mestic legal order the “Directive on the Supervision of Credit Institutions, Insurance Undertakings
and Investment Firms in a Financial Conglomerate” within the first two years since its circula-
tion (in November 2002) by the EU Commission. Instead, it took five years for the Netherlands
and Sweden to adopt this important financial legislation, while one country (Portugal) had not
transposed the Directive till the end of our sample period (end of 2006). We use the transposition
timing across member states to construct a time-varying structural measure of financial integration
for each country-pair.

   We construct the bilateral legislative-regulatory harmonization index as follows: First, we define
                           k , one for each FSAP Directive k) that equal one if at any given year
27 indicator variables (LEXi,j,t
both countries in each country-pair cell have transposed each EU Directive into national law, and
zero otherwise. Second, we create the country-pair time-varying legislative harmonization measure
                                                            k ). Since the variable is highly skewed
by summing the values of these 27 indicator variables (LEXi,j,t
                                                                 K=27          
                                                                             k
                                                                   P
in the regressions we use the log value, i.e., HARM ONi,j,t ≡ ln       LEXi,j,t .
                                                                    k=1
   The legislative/regulatory harmonization index reflects how similar are the structures governing
financial intermediation among EU member countries. Thus one could think of this measure as a
de-jure index of financial integration, similar in spirit to cross-country integration measures based
on the removal of capital account restrictions (e.g. Quinn (2003)) and the liberalization of equity
market investment (e.g. Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2002)). The harmonization index in
financial services is also similar in spirit to measures dating banking deregulation policies across


                                                 18
U.S. states (e.g. Jayarante and Strahan (1997)). Yet in contrast to these works that produce
country (or state) level indicators of financial integration, the harmonization index we construct
exhibits country-pair-time variation as it reflects the situation when two countries have adopted
the exact same regulatory legislation in financial intermediation.


5.2    Harmonization in Financial Intermediation and Business Cycle Synchro-
       nization

In Table 3 we examine the effect of legislative-regulatory harmonization policies in financial services
on output synchronization. The estimate on HARM ONi,j,t−1 in column (1) is negative and highly
significant. This suggests that conditional on time-invariant country-pair factors and common to
all countries time-varying factors, harmonization policies in financial services have lead to a lower
degree of output growth co-movement.

    In column (2) we control for differences in the exchange rate regime. This is important as there
is the possibility that the legislative/regulatory harmonization index in financial services captures
(partly at least) the effect of monetary unification that occurred around the same time as the
launch of the FSAP. To do so we exploit the recent update of the de-facto exchange rate regime
classification of Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) by Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2008). The Reinhart
and Rogoff “coarse” classification ranges from 1 to 5 where lower values suggest a more rigid regime.
For example, euro area countries get a score of 1 after 1999 and a score of 2 in the 1990s, when they
were participating in the European Exchange Rate Mechanism. Using this dataset we construct
a bilateral index by taking the sum of the log classification of countries i and j in the beginning
of each year t (ERC = ln(ERi,t ) + ln(ERj,t )). The exchange rate flexibility index enters with an
insignificant estimate, while the structural index of financial integration that reflects regulatory-
legislative harmonization policies in financial services continues to enter with a highly significant
coefficient.

    In column (3) we include the lagged log level of the product of GDP of countries i and j to
account for the possibility that our estimates are driven by countries receiving a lot of foreign bank
capital, while converging to a new steady state. Including the lagged log level of GDP also allows
us to account for the cyclical properties of international business cycle synchronization (there is an
increased degree of synchronization in turbulent times). This has little effect on our main result.
The coefficient on the structural index of financial integration continues to be negative and more
than four standard errors below zero.


                                                  19
    To further account for the potential confounding effect of European Monetary Union (EMU) in
column (4) we augment the specification with two dummy variables that take on the value one when
one of the two countries is a member of the EU or the euro area in each year and zero otherwise;
and two indicators that switch to one when both countries are members of the EU or the euro area
(and zero otherwise). The coefficient on legal-regulatory integration in financial services drops in
absolute value, but it retains significance at the 5% level.

    In column (5) we add country-specific linear trends so as to account for unobserved country
patterns in financial integration and output fluctuations. While these specifications may be too
restrictive, the bilateral regulatory/legislative harmonization index in financial services continues
to enter with a negative and significant estimate.

    The quantitative impact of these estimates is significant. For one standard deviation increase in
our harmonization index (corresponding to a simultaneous adoption of 4 laws), an estimate of −0.2
explains 30 percent of the actual change in synchronization over our sample period, conditional on
all the fixed effects.

    One may be worried that the highly significant effect of legislative/regulatory harmonization
policies on output synchronization is driven by hard-to-account-for factors distinguishing the recent
period of financial globalization with the eighties where cross-border capital flows were small. Thus,
in columns (6)-(10) we report otherwise similar to columns (1)-(5) specifications focusing only in
the period 1995 − 2006. While we lose efficiency, in all permutations the structural measure of
financial integration enters with a highly significant negative coefficient.

    The estimates in Table 3 advance on the causality front. So far most of the literature on in-
ternational financial integration has relied either on quantity, such as international holdings (e.g.
Imbs (2006)) or price-based measures, such as the correlation of equity returns (e.g. Bekaert and
Harvey (1995)). In contrast to these outcome measures, the legislative-regulatory harmonization
index reflects structural features of the regulatory and supervisory system that governs financial in-
termediation; as such, reverse causation is quite unlikely to drive the significant negative correlation
shown in Table 3. Moreover, since legislative transposition policies in converting the EU Directives
into the national legal order are unilateral (at the country level), while the harmonization index is
bilateral reflecting the situation when two countries have adopted the exact same piece of financial
legislation, these specifications are unlikely to be driven by other forms of endogeneity.

    In Appendix Table 3 we examine the robustness of the negative effect of legislative/regulatory
harmonization policies in financial services on output synchronization. The literature on the deter-


                                                  20
minants of world market segmentation (e.g. Kose et al. (2008); Bekaert et al. (2011)) has explored
the effect of various institutional and financial development indicators (such as creditor’s rights,
property rights institutions, private credit, etc.). Since most of the usual proxies of institutional
efficiency exhibit little within country variability, they will be captured by the country-pair fixed-
effects. Appendix Table 3, columns (1)-(2) show that it is the bilateral adoption of the various
legislative acts of the FSAP that correlate with output synchronization rather than the unilateral
(country-specific) transposition of Directives into national law. In columns (3)-(6) we control for
two usually employed measures of financial development, stock market turnover and stock market
capitalization in countries i and j. The negative effect of the structural index of financial integration
retains its economic and statistical significance.



6     Instrumental Variables Estimation

Having established a significant relationship between the structural measure of financial integration
and output synchronization (in Table 3) and a similarly negative association between the de-facto
quantity-based measure of banking integration and output synchronization (in Table 2), the next
natural step is to combine the two results in an instrumental variables setting.


6.1    Identification

We posit the following first-stage relationship between legislative-regulatory harmonization policies
in financial services (HARM ON ) and cross-border banking integration (BAN KIN T ):


                                                                             0
                    BAN KIN Ti,j,t = δi,j + δt + γHARM ONi,j,t + Xi,j,t Φ + νi,j,t                         (4)

    The index of legislative harmonization policies in financial services (HARM ON ) will serve as
a valid “excludable” instrument if: a) It is significantly correlated with banking integration, i.e.
there is a strong first-stage relationship. b) Conditional on other factors legislative/regulatory
harmonization policies in financial services affect business cycle synchronization through cross-
                                                                     0
border financial integration (i.e. COV (HARM ONi,j,t , εi,j,t |Xi,j,t , αi , δt ) = 0 where εi,j,t is the error
term in the second stage (equation 3)).

    Our identification scheme links policy changes in a particular aspect of law (financial inter-
mediation harmonization) with outcomes in exactly the same industry. Thus the key exclusion


                                                      21
restriction for instrument validity seems plausible, because legislative harmonization policy reforms
in financial services should affect the patterns of business cycle co-movement primarily by alter-
ing cross-border financial activities (see Angrist and Pischke (2008)). FSAP was designed to spur
cross-border financial linkages and develop a single market for financial services in Europe. Thus
conditional on other bilateral characteristics it seems reasonable that harmonization policies in
financial services affect output synchronization through increasing bilateral financial linkages.

    Conceptually our identification builds on insights of the law and finance literature. This body
of work shows that differences in the legal protection of shareholders and creditors have first-order
effects on the development of deep and efficient financial markets and intermediaries (see La Porta,
Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997, 1998)). Of most relevance is the study of La Porta,
Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2008), who compile a detailed cross-country dataset of securities
laws across countries and then examine the impact of such regulations on capital markets. Our
identification set-up is, however, more restrictive and thus stronger since we link country-pair
reforms in legal practices that aim to make the functioning of the financial system more alike with
bilateral changes in financial patterns.

    The country-pair dimension of the harmonization index further alleviates concerns of endogene-
ity, emerging either from reverse causation or because the instrument is correlated with omitted
variables. While the timing of the transposition of the EU Directives into the domestic law may be
related to hard-to-account-for unilateral (domestic) conditions, the outcomes we study—financial
integration in the first-stage and output synchronization in the second-stage—are bilateral (and
time-varying).21 Thus to challenge the exogeneity assumption one would require that countries
coordinate on the exact timing of each piece of legislation, something that does not seem to be the
case.

    Someone might be worried from anticipation of these regulatory reforms. Yet in practice antici-
pation effects are not particularly important in our context. First, even if investors have some idea
on the timing of the legal adoption of each EU Directive in their country, it is quite unlikely that
they can also foresee when another country will adopt the exact same Directive. Second, since most
Directives reduce the cost of cross-border financial intermediation after their adoption, it makes
sense for banks to wait for the transposition of the EU laws. Take for example the Settlements
Directive that introduced central party clearing, legal enforceability of netting and collateral secu-
rity. Transaction costs and counter-party risk reduce only when both countries transpose the EU
   21
      We investigated whether the legal adoption of the FSAP Directives correlates with country-level GDP growth,
finding insignificant estimates.



                                                       22
Directive into the domestic legal order. Third, if foreign banks increase their lending and borrowing
in anticipation of the legal adoption of the EU Directives, then we should not detect a significant
first-stage relationship, something we do (see below).


6.2      First-Stage: Legislative-Regulatory Harmonization in Financial Services
         and Banking Integration

In Panel B of Table 4 we examine whether the transposition of EU laws on financial intermediation
are relevant for cross-border banking activities (first-stage). We continue to include country-pair
fixed-effects and year fixed-effects, so the coefficient on the harmonization index measures how
much financial integration increased/decreased after countries adopt into the local legal order the
exact same pieces of financial laws. The coefficient on HARM ON in column (1) is positive (0.41)
and significant at the 99% confidence level. This suggests that countries that quickly incorporated
into domestic law the EU-wide regulatory-legislative harmonization policies in capital markets,
insurance, and banking became more financially integrated through international banking activities.

       Figure 3 illustrates this using as an example the evolution of banking activities and legisla-
tive/regulatory harmonization in financial services between Spain and Netherlands. Banking ac-
tivities between Spain and the Netherlands increase significantly after 1999 when alongside euro
membership both countries adopt at the same time the first Directive of the FSAP on Settlements.
Cross-border banking activities further increase in 2002, when both countries adopt at the same
time the EU Directives that harmonized insurance services and electronic payments (see Appendix
Tables A and B).

       In column (2) we control for differences in GDP. This has no effect on the coefficient on the
structural index of financial integration. In column (3) we add in the specification a time-varying
bilateral index capturing the flexibility of the exchange rate regime. This index enters with a
negative and significant estimate suggesting that banking activities have increased significantly
among pairs of countries that have adopted more rigid currency regimes.22 The coefficient on the
harmonization index falls somewhat, but retains significance at the 99% level. To further alleviate
concerns that the harmonization index in financial services captures other aspects of EU integration,
in column (4) we augment the specification with two indicator variables that switch to one if both
  22
    This finding fits with the evidence from the fear of floating literature (e.g. Calvo and Reinhart (2002); Gelos
and Wei (2005)). This research argues that to attract foreign capital, emerging economies are unwilling to let
their currencies float; and even when monetary authorities in developing countries argue that they do not manage
the currency in practice they do so (Reinhart and Rogoff (2004)). While this body of work focuses on developing
economies, our evidence shows a similar pattern across developed countries.


                                                        23
countries are members of the EU and the euro area and two indicator variables that equal one if one
of the two countries is a member of the EU or the euro area. The coefficient on HARM ON retains
its statistical significance, suggesting that a considerable portion of the recent increase in cross-
border banking activities among EU member countries was driven by the harmonization policies
in financial services.23

    In columns (5)-(8) we focus on the post 1995 period. While we lose efficiency, focusing in the
period just before and after the introduction of the FSAP is useful to examine the robustness of
our results. In all permutations the coefficient on the legislative/regulatory harmonization index is
positive and highly significant.

    The first stage estimates are in line with the literature in law and economics that argues that
prior to FSAP financial market integration in the EU was still unachievable given the diversity
of the legal regimes and the costs associated with this diversity (see Enriques and Gatti (2008)
and Malcom et al. (2009)). While many argue that the FSAP could have included bolder har-
monization measures, the elasticities in Panel B of Table 4 suggest a considerable economic effect;
a one standard deviation increase in harmonization index, almost doubles the banking integra-
tion. In Kalemli-Ozcan, Papaioannou, and Peydró (2010) we show that the strong effect of leg-
islative/regulatory harmonization policies in financial services in spurring cross-border activities
is robust to a variety of permutations. Most importantly for our focus here, the first-stage fit is
strong. Across all specifications in the full sample ((1)-(4)) the first-stage F -score of the excluded
instrument (the legislative/regulatory harmonization index) is significantly larger than 10, the rule-
of-thumb value that alerts for weak instrument problems (Staiger and Stock (1997); Stock, Wright,
and Yogo (2001)). Even when we focus on the post 1995 period, the estimate of HARM ON is 3
standard errors larger than zero, suggesting a reasonable first-stage fit.24


6.3    2SLS Estimates

We now turn to the second-stage estimates that under instrument validity identify the one-way
effect of financial integration on output synchronization.25 Panel A of Table 4 reports the second-
  23
     We also examined whether it is the joint adoption of EU Directives that fosters cross-border banking activities
or the unilateral transposition by member countries. The estimates clearly show that it is legislative/regulatory
harmonization that spurs cross-border banking activities (see Appendix Table 4).
  24
     In our set-up the Stock and Yogo (2002) critical value for weak identification is around 16.4. 8.96, and 6.66 for
critical values of 10%, 15%, and 20% respectively.
  25
     The causal effect of banking integration on output synchronization is simply the ratio of the “reduced-form”
coefficient of legislative-regulatory harmonization policies on output co-movement (reported in Table 3) to the “first-
stage” coefficient of HARM ON on banking integration (reported in Panel B-Table 4).


                                                          24
stage coefficients. The 2SLS estimate of banking integration in column (1) is negative and highly
significant. It suggests that increases in bilateral banking activities driven by legislative-regulatory
harmonization policies in financial services lead to more divergent output patterns. The 2SLS
coefficient on banking integration retains significance when we control for the product of the two
countries GDP in column (2), which also enters with a significant estimate (not shown). The
second stage estimate on BAN KIN T retains significance when we control for the flexibility of the
exchange rate regime (in (3)) and for EU and Euro area membership in column (4)). The estimates
in column (4) imply that conditional on country-pair fixed-factors, common global effects, the
flexibility of the exchange rate regime, EU and Euro area membership, and output convergence,
the component of banking integration explained by harmonization policies in financial services is
associated with a lower degree of output synchronization.

       The 2SLS coefficients on banking integration are larger in absolute value than the LS estimates
(in Panel B of Table 2). For example, the analogous LS estimate on banking integration to the
2SLS coefficient in column (1) is −0.385. The larger in absolute magnitude of 2SLS estimates sug-
gest that the OLS estimates were contaminated by measurement error and that reverse causation
was in practice not a fundamental problem. Specifically there are two main sources of attenuation
in the OLS estimates that the 2SLS helps to resolve. First, bilateral banking activities are just
one part of financial integration; although international banking activities are by far largest com-
ponent of foreign investment, theoretical works suggest that the impact of other forms of financial
integration, mostly equity investment and FDI, should have a larger impact on cross-border risk
sharing and output co-movement than integration that takes the form of debt and direct lending
(see Morgan, Rime, and Strahan (2004) and Davies (2009)). As the harmonization index that we
use as an “instrument” for banking integration is much broader than banking, covering legislative
convergence in all segments of financial intermediation (specifically in capital markets, insurance in-
dustry, company law) the larger second stage coefficients is not surprising. Second, attenuated OLS
estimates may arise because a sizable portion of international investment and lending is redirected
through financial centers (e.g. Kubelec and Sa (2009); Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007)) and thus
standard measures of bilateral integration miss indirect linkages. Since our legislative-regulatory
harmonization index is truly bilateral and not systematically biased for financial center countries
(like Switzerland or the United Kingdom) it accounts for indirect transactions through financial
centers.26
  26
    Of course the larger in absolute magnitude 2SLS coefficient may arise because the harmonization index that we
use as an instrument is correlated with relevant time-varying country-pair variables. This, however, seems unlikely,
since most of the correlates of output synchronization and bilateral international capital holdings are either time-



                                                        25
7     Conclusion

Estimating the effect of financial integration on synchronization of economic activity is difficult
given the multitude of identification challenges. To date, the central challenge for the literature has
been the absence of time varying measures of bilateral financial linkages. By using such a unique
supervisory data set, we construct time-varying de-facto and de-jure financial integration measures
for developed country-pairs over last three decades. Our country-pair-time data set enables us to
use a methodology that identifies the effect of financial integration on business cycle synchronization
through within country-pair over time changes as opposed to cross-sectional differences as typically
done in the literature. Our de-jure measure is exogenous, since it is based on changes in financial
laws for both countries in the pair.

    Why do we need country-pair-time varying measures of financial integration to identify its
causal impact on business cycle synchronization? The answer lies in the following identification
challenges. First, in a cross-section, a positive association between cross-border financial linkages
and output comovement may reflect a spurious correlation due to many commonalities between
countries. Countries closer geographically with significant economic ties and similar in other so-
ciopolitical dimensions tend to have both more synchronized output fluctuations and higher degree
of financial integration. Second, the response of integrated economies to common shocks will be
similar and indistinguishable from contagion given the upward trends in integration and business
cycle synchronization in the last three decades. Third, a significant negative association between
financial linkages and business cycle synchronization may simply be driven by the fact that capital
flows to high return/high growth countries. Fourth, measurement error in the bilateral data on
international capital holdings might attenuate or may lead to systematic biases in the estimates.
We argue that our methodology combined with our unique data on bilateral bank exposure and
the de-jure exogenous measure of integration based on changes in financial intermediation can ac-
count for all these identification challenges, clearly demonstrating the negative effect of integration
on bilateral output growth patterns, conditional on global shocks and country-pair unobserved
heterogeneity.

    Our findings require that we significantly reconsider the conventional wisdom. Contrary to the
previous studies, we show that increased financial integration leads to divergent economic activity
among country-pairs. These results are consistent with macro and finance models that highlight
invariant (e.g. distance, trust, cultural ties) or slow moving (e.g. specialization, trade). Thus they will be captured
by the country-pair fixed-effects.




                                                          26
the dominant role of firm capital/productivity shocks over shocks to bank capital. The policy
implications of our study are such that in the absence of a major worldwide crisis, developed
country financial markets work as expected channeling the funds efficiently. The results can alter
drastically in the event of a major shock to the financial system of a country such as the U.S.




                                                27
8    Data Appendix

Synchronization Index 1 [SY N CH1]: The measure is defined as minus one times the divergence
of (logarithmic) real GDP growth between each pair of countries in each year. SY N CH1i,,j,t ≡
−[(ln Yi,t − ln Yi,t−1 ) − (ln Yj,t − ln Yj,t−1 )]. For output (Y ) we use World Bank’s real per capita
GDP at constant prices series. This index follows Giannone, Lenza and Reichlin (2008). Source:
World Bank’s World Development Indicators Database (2011).

    Synchronization Index 2 [SY N CH2]: The measure follows Morgan, Rime, and Strahan
(2004) and is constructed in two steps. First, we regress (logarithmic) real GDP growth separately
for each country on country fixed-effects and year fixed-effects, i.e. ln Yi,t − ln Yi,t−1 = γi + φt + vi,t ∀
i, j. Second, we construct the business cycle synchronization index as the negative of the divergence
of the residuals for each country-pair, i.e. SY N CH2i,j,t ≡ −|νi,t − νj,t |. Source: World Bank’s
World Development Indicators Database (2011).

    Synchronization Index 3 [SY N CH3]: The measure is the correlation of the cyclical compo-
nent of (logarithmic) real GDP as measured with Baxter and King (1999) Band-Pass filter (2, 8).
The index follows Baxter and Kouparitsas (2005). Source: World Bank’s World Development
Indicators Database (2010).

    Banking Integration 1 [BAN KIN T 1]: Banking integration index based on bilateral cross-
border holdings (stocks) of banks. Data on bank’s cross-border bilateral stocks of assets and
liabilities come from the confidential version of BIS’s Locational Banking Statistics. The BIS
defines banking institutions broadly so ”reporting institutions should include not only commercial
banks but also savings banks, savings and loan associations, credit unions or cooperative credit
banks,building societies, and post office giro institutions, other government-controlled savings banks
and other financial institutions if they take deposits or issue close substitutes for deposits” (BIS
2003a,b). For each country-pair and year there are up to four observations. i ) asset holdings
(stocks) of banks located in country i in all sectors of the economy in country j; ii ) asset holdings
(stocks) of banks located in country j in all sectors of the economy in country i; iii ) liabilities
(stocks) of banks located in country i to country j. iv ) liabilities (stocks) of banks located in
country j to country i. The data is originally expressed in current U.S. dollars. First, we deflate
the four series with the U.S. deflator. Second, we standardize the series by dividing asset and
liabilities with the sum of the two countries population in each year (using data from World Bank’s
World Development Indicators Database). Third, we take the average of the log value of real
bilateral assets and liabilities in each year. Source: Bank of International Settlements, Locational


                                                     28
Banking Statistics (2008).

   Banking Integration 2 [BAN KIN T 2]: Banking integration index based on bilateral cross-
border holdings (stocks) of banks. Data on bank’s cross-border bilateral stocks of assets and
liabilities come from the confidential version of BIS’s Locational Banking Statistics. The BIS
defines banking institutions broadly so ”reporting institutions should include not only commercial
banks but also savings banks, savings and loan associations, credit unions or cooperative credit
banks,building societies, and post office giro institutions, other government-controlled savings banks
and other financial institutions if they take deposits or issue close substitutes for deposits” (BIS
2003). For each country-pair and year there are up to four observations. i ) asset holdings (stocks)
of banks located in country i in all sectors of the economy in country j; ii ) asset holdings (stocks) of
banks located in country j in all sectors of the economy in country i; iii ) liabilities (stocks) of banks
located in country i to country j. iv ) liabilities (stocks) of banks located in country j to country i.
The data is originally expressed in current U.S. dollars. First, we deflate the four series with the
U.S. deflator. Second, we standardize the series by dividing asset and liabilities with the sum of
the two countries GDP in each year (using data from World Bank’s World Development Indicators
Database). Third, we take the average of the log value of real bilateral assets and liabilities in each
year. Source: Bank of International Settlements, Locational Banking Statistics (2008).

   Trade Integration [T RADE]: Index of bilateral trade intensity. The measure is the log of
bilateral real (deflated with the U.S. price deflator) exports and imports as a share of two countries’s
GDP. This measure follows Calderon, Chong, and Stein (2007). Source: IMF’s Direction of Trade
Database (2008).

   Specialization [SP EC]: Index of industrial specialization, based on dissimilarities in pro-
duction. The measure is the sum of the absolute differences in the share of industrial production
for nine manufacturing sectors as a share of the total manufacturing production in each pair of
                                          PN      n     n
countries in each year, i.e. SP ECi,j,t ≡   n=1 si,t − sj,t . The index follows Krugman (1991),
Imbs (2006), and Kalemli-Ozcan, Sørensen, and Yosha (2003). Source: United Nations Industrial
Statistics Database (2008).

   Legislative Harmonization in Financial Services [HARM ON ]: Index of regulatory-
legislative harmonization in financial services based on the transposition of the EU Directives of the
EU Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP). We construct the bilateral harmonization index in two
                                                   k , one for each Directive k) that equal one if at
steps. First, we define 27 indicator variables (LEXi,,j,t
any given year both countries in each country-pair cell have transposed the Directive into national



                                                   29
law and zero otherwise. Second, we create the country-time varying legislative harmonization mea-
                                                                           k ). Since the variable
sure ranging by summing the values of these 27 indicator variables (LEXi,,j,t
                                                                                  K=27         
                                                                                            k
                                                                                    P
is highly skewed in the regressions we use the log value, i.e., HARM ONi,j,t ≡ ln      LEXi,,j,t .
                                                                                   k=1
Source: Kalemli-Ozcan, Papaioannou, and Peydró (2010), based on data from the EU Commission
and each EU15 member country.

   Exchange Rate Flexibility [ERC]: Bilateral index of the flexibility of the exchange rate,
based on ”coarse” regime classification of Reinhart and Rogoff (2004). The country-specific index
ranges from 1 to 5 where lower values suggest a more rigid regime. We construct the bilateral index
by taking the sum of the log classification of countries i and j in the beginning (January) of each
year t (ERC = ln(ERi,t ) + ln(ERj,t )). Source: Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2008) and Reinhart
and Rogoff (2004).

   Euro Area Both [EZ2]: Bilateral index of membership in the euro area. The measure is an
indicator variable that takes on the value one if both countries are members of the euro-zone in
year t and zero otherwise. Source: European Central Bank.

   Euro Area One [EZ1]: Bilateral index of membership in the euro area. The measure is an
indicator variable that takes on the value one if only one country is member of the euro-zone in
year t and zero otherwise. Source: European Central Bank.

   European Union Both [EU 2]: Bilateral index of membership in the EU. The measure is an
indicator variable that takes on the value one if both countries are members of the EU in year t
and zero otherwise. Source: EU Commission.

   European Union One [EU 1]: Bilateral index of membership in the EU. The measure is an
indicator variable that takes on the value one if only one country is member of the EU in year t
and zero otherwise. Source: EU Commission.

   Income [GDP ]: Log level of real GDP (in constant U.S. dollars) for country i and country j in
year t. In the regressions we use the log of the product of the two countries’ GDP. Source: World
Bank World Development Indicators Database (2011).




                                                30
References


Adam, K., Jappelli, T., Menichini, A., Padula, M., and M. Pagano. 2002. “Analyse, Compare and
    Apply Alternative Indicators and Monitoring Methodologies to Measure the Evolution of
    Capital Market Integration in the European Union.” Centre for Studies in Economics and
    Finance, Department of Economics and Statistics, University of Salerno.

Allen, F., and D. Gale. 2000. “Financial Contagion.” Journal of Political Economy, 108(1): 1–33.

Angrist, D., and J. Pischke. 2008. Mostly Harmless Economics: An Empiricist’s Companion. Prince-
     ton University Press.

Aviat, A., and N. Coeurdacier. 2007. “The Geography of Trade in Goods and Asset Holdings.”
     Journal of International Economics, 71(1): 22–51.

Backus, D., Kehoe, P., and F. Kydland. 1992. “International Real Business Cycles.” Journal of
     Political Economy, 100(4): 745–775.

Balas, A., La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., and A. Shleifer. 2009. “The Divergence of Legal Pro-
     cedures.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1(2): 138–62.

Bank of International Settlements. 2003a. “Guide to International Financial Statistics”, BIS Mon-
     etary and Economic Department (Basle, Switzerland) Papers No. 14, February.

Bank of International Settlements. 2003b. “Guide to International Banking Statistics”, BIS Mon-
     etary and Economic Department (Basle, Switzerland) Papers No. 16, April.

Baxter, M., and M. Kouparitsas. 2005. “Determinants of Business Cycle Co-movement: A Robust
     Analysis.”Journal of Monetary Economics, 52(1): 113–157.

Baxter, M., and R. G. King. 1999. “Measuring Business Cycles: Approximate Band-pass Filters
     for Economic Time-Series.”Review of Economics and Statistics, 81(4): 575–593.

Bekaert, G., and C. Harvey. 1995. “Time-varying World Integration.” Journal of Finance, 50(2):
     403–444.

Bekaert, G., Harvey, C., and C. Lundblad. 2005. “Does Financial Liberalization Spur Economic
     Growth?” Journal of Financial Economics, 77(1): 3–55.

Bekaert, G., Harvey, C., and C. Lundblad. 2006. “Growth Volatility and Financial Liberalization.”
     Journal of International Money and Finance, 25(3): 370–403.

Bekaert, G., Harvey, C., and C. Lundblad. 2011. “Financial Openness and Productivity.” World
     Development, 39(1): 1–19.

Bekaert, G., Harvey, C., and R. Lumsdaine. 2002. “Dating the Integration of World Equity Mar-
     kets.” Journal of Financial Economics, 65(2): 203–248.


                                                31
Bekaert, G., Harvey, C., Lundblad, C., and S. Siegel. 2007. “Global Growth Opportunities and Mar-
     ket Integration.” Journal of Finance, 62(3): 1081–1137.

Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., and S. Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should We Trust Difference in
     Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1): 249–275.

Calderon, C., Chong, A., and E. Stein. 2007. “Trade Intensity and Business Cycle Synchroniza-
     tion: Are Developing Countries Any Different?”Journal of International Economics, 71(1):
     2–21.

Calvo, G., and E. Mendoza. 2000. “Rational Contagion and the Globalization in Securities Mar-
     kets.” Journal of International Economics, 51(1): 79–119.

Calvo, G., C. Reinhart. 2002. “Fear of Floating.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(2):
     379–408.

Cameron, A., Gelbach, J., and D. Miller. 2008. “Bootstrap-Based Improvements for Inference with
    Clustered Errors.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90: 414–427.

Canova, F. 1998). “Detrending and Business Cycles Facts.”Journal of Monetary Economics, 41(3):
     475–512.

Canova, F. 1999. “Does Detrending Matter For the Determination of the Reference Cycle and the
     Selection of Turning Points?”Economic Journal, 109(452): 126–150.

Cecchetti, S. G., Flores-Lagunes, A., and S. Krause. 2006. “Assessing the Sources of Changes in
     the Volatility of Real Growth.” NBER Working Paper 11946.

Cornett, M., McNutt, J., Tehranian, H., and P. Strahan. 2011, Forthcoming. “Liquidity Risk Man-
     agement and Credit Supply in the Financial Crisis.” Journal of Financial Economics.

Devereux, M., and J. Yetman. 2009. “Leverage Constraints and the International Transmission of
     Shocks.” UBC Working Paper.

Doyle, B., and J. Faust. 2005. “Breaks in the Variability and Co-Movement of G7 Economic Growth.”
     Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(4): 721–740.

Ekinci M., Kalemli-Ozcan S., and B. Sørensen. 2008. “Financial Integration within EU Countries:
     The Role of Institutions, Confidence and Trust.” International Seminar on Macroeconomics.

Enders, Z., Kollman, R., and M. Mueller. 2010. “Global Banking and International Business Cy-
     cles.” CEPR Discussion Paper 7972.

Enriques, L., and M. Gatti 2008. “Is There a Uniform EU Securities Law After the Financial Ser-
     vices Action Plan?” Stanford Journal of Law, Business, and Finance, 14(1).

Enriques, L., and P. Volpin 2007. “Corporate Governance Reforms in Continental Europe.” Jour-
     nal of Economic Perspectives, 21(1): 117–140.

Frankel, J., and A. Rose. 1998. “The Endogeneity of the Optimum Currency Area Criterion.” Eco-
     nomic Journal, 108(6): 1009–1025.

                                              32
Frankel, J., and S. Schmukler. 1998. “Crises, Contagion, and Country Funds: Effects on East Asia
     and Latin America.” In Management of Capital Flows and Exchange Rates: Lessons from
     the Pacific Rim ed. Glick, R., Cambridge University Press.

Garcia-Herrero, A., and J. M. Ruiz. 2008. “Do Trade and Financial Links Foster Business Cycle
     Synchronization in a Small Open Economy.” Moneda y Credito, 226(1): 187–226.

Gelos, G., and S.-J. Wei. 2005. “Transparency and International Portfolio Holdings.” Journal of
     Finance, 60(6): 2987–3020.

Giannetti, M., and Y. Yafeh. 2008. “Do Cultural Differences Between Contracting Parties Matter?
     Evidence from Syndicated Bank Loans.” ECGI Finance Working Paper No. 224/2008.

Giannone, D., Lenza M., and L. Reichlin. 2008. “Explaining the great moderation: it is not the
     shocks.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(2-3): 621–633.

Guiso L., Sapienza P., and L. Zingales. 2009. “Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange?” Quar-
     terly Journal of Economics, 124(3).

Heathcote J. and F. Perri. 2004. “Financial Globalization and Real Regionalization.” Journal of
     Economic Theory, 119(1): 207–43.

Henry, P.B. 2000. “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging Market Equity
     Prices.” Journal of Finance, 55(2): 529–564.

Holmstrom, B., and J. Tirole. 1997. “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the Real Sec-
    tor.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(3): 663–691.

Ilzetzki E., Reinhart, C., and K. Rogoff. 2008. “Exchange Rate Arrangements Entering the 21st
      Century: Which Anchor Will Hold.” University of Maryland Working Paper.

Imbs, J. 2004. “Trade, Specialization and Synchronization.”Review of Economics and Statistics,
     86(3): 723–734.

Imbs, J. 2006. “The Real Effects of Financial Integration.”Journal of International Economics,
     68(2): 296–324.

Inklaar, R., Jong-A-Pin, R., and J. de Haan. 2008. “Trade and Business Cycle Synchronization in
      OECD Countries - A Re-examination.” European Economic Review, 52(2): 646–666.

Ivashina, V., and D. Scharfstein. 2010. “Bank Lending During the Financial Crisis of 2008.” Jour-
      nal of Financial Economics, 97(3): 319–338.

Jayaratne, J., and P. Strahan. 1997. “The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from Bank Branch
     Deregulation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(3): 639–670.

Jimenez, G., Mian, A., Peydro, J.-L., and J. Saurina. 2010. “Local versus Aggregate Lending Chan-
     nels: The Effects of Securitization on Corporate Credit Supply in Spain.” NBER Working
     Paper 16595.



                                               33
Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Kamil, H., and C. Villegas-Sanchez. 2010. “What Hinders Investment in the
     Aftermath of Financial Crises? Insolvent Firms or Illiquid Banks?” NBER Working Paper
     16528.

Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Papaioannou, E., and J. Peydró. 2010 “What Lies Beneath the Euro’s Effect
     on Financial Integration? Currency Risk, Legal Harmonization, or Trade.” Journal of Inter-
     national Economics.

Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Sørensen, B. E., and O. Yosha. 2001. “Regional Integration, Industrial Special-
     ization and the Asymmetry of Shocks across Regions.” Journal of International Economics,
     55(1): 107–137.

Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Sørensen, B. E., and O. Yosha. 2003. “Risk Sharing and Industrial Specializa-
     tion: Regional and International Evidence.” American Economic Review, 93(3): 903–918.

Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Sørensen, B. E., Reshef, A., and O. Yosha. 2010. “Why does Capital Flow to
     Rich States?” Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(4), 769-783.

Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Sorensen, B. E., and V. Volosovych. 2010. “Deep Financial Integration and Macroe-
     conomic Volatility.” NBER Working Paper 15900.

Khwaja, A., and A. Mian. 2008. “Tracing the Impact of Bank Liquidity Shocks: Evidence from an
    Emerging Market.” American Economic Review, 98(4): 1413–1442.

Kose, A., Prasad, E., Rogoff, K., and S.-J. Wei. 2009. “Financial Globalization: A Reappraisal.”
     IMF Staff Papers, 56(1): 8–62.

Kose, M. A., Otrok C., and E. Prasad. 2008. “Global Business Cycles: Convergence or Decoupling?”
     IZA Discussion Paper No. 3442.

Kose, M. A., Prasad, E. S., and M. E. Terrones. 2004. “ Volatility and Co-movement in an Inte-
     grated World Economy: An Exploration.” In Macroeconomic Policies in the World Economy,
     ed. Siebert, H., 89–122.

Kraay, A., and J. Ventura. 2000. “Current Accounts in Debtor and Creditor Countries.”Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 115(4): 1137–1166.

Kraay, A., and J. Ventura. 2007. “Comparative Advantage And The Cross-Section Of Business
     Cycles.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 5(6): 1300–1333.

Krugman, P. 1991. Geography and Trade. Cambridge, MIT Press.

Kubelec, C and F. Sa. 2009. “The Geographical Composition of National External Balance Sheets:
    1980-2005.” Bank of England and University of Cambridge Working Paper.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., and A. Shleifer. 2008. “The Economic Consequences of Legal
     Origins,” Journal of Economic Literature, 46(2): 285–332.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny. 1997. “Legal Determinants of Ex-
     ternal Finance.” Journal of Finance, 52(3): 1131–1150.


                                               34
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny. 1998. “Law and Finance.” Jour-
     nal of Political Economy, 106(6): 1113–1155.

Lane, P., and G. Milesi-Ferretti. 2007. “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II.” Journal of In-
     ternational Economics, 73(1): 223-250.

Lane, P., and G. Milesi-Ferretti. 2008. “International Investment Patterns.” Review of Economics
     and Statistics, 90(3): 518–537.

Maddaloni, A., and J.-L. Peydro. Forthcoming. “Bank Risk-Taking, Securitization, Supervision,
    and Low Interest Rates: Evidence from the Euro Area and U.S. Lending Standards.” Review
    of Financial Studies.

Malcolm, K., Tilden, M., and T. Wilsdon. 2009. “Evaluation of the Economic Impacts of the Fi-
     nancial Services Action Plan.” CRA International report prepared for the European Com-
     mission, Internal Market and Services DG.

Mendoza, E., and V. Quadrini. 2010. “Financial Globalization, Financial Crises and Contagion.”
    Journal of Monetary Economics

Mian, A. 2006. “Distance Constraints: The Limits of Foreign Lending in Poor Economies.” Journal
     of Finance, 61(6): 1465–1505.

Morgan, D. P., Rime, B., and P. Strahan. 2004. “Bank Integration and State Business Cycles,”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(3): 1555–85.

Obstfeld, M. 1994. “Risk-Taking, Global Diversification, and Growth.” American Economic Re-
     view, 84(5): 1310–1329.

Otto, G., Voss, G., and L. Willard. 2001. “Understanding OECD Output Correlations.” Reserve
      Bank of Australia Research Discussion Paper No 2001/05.

Papaioannou, E. 2009. “What Drives International Bank Flows? Politics, Institutions and Other
     Determinants.” Journal of Development Economics, 88(2): 269–281.

Paravisini, D. 2008. “Local Bank Financial Constraints and Firm Access to External Finance.”
     Journal of Finance, 63(5): 2161–2193.

Paravisini, D., Rappoport, V., Schnabl, P., and D. Wolfenzon. 2010. “Dissecting the Effect of Credit
     Supply on Trade: Evidence from Matched Credit-Export Data.” Working Paper.

Perri, F., and V. Quadrini. 2010. “International Recessions.” USC Working Paper.

Portes, R. and H. Rey. 2005. “The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows.” Journal of In-
     ternational Economics, 65(2): 269–296.

Quinn, W. 2003. “Estimating multiproduct costs when some outputs are not produced.” Empirical
     Economics, 28(4): 753–765.

Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff. 2004. “The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrangements: A Rein-
     terpretation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1): 1–48.

                                               35
Rice, T., and P. Strahan. Forthcoming. “Does Credit Competition Affect Small-Firm Finance?”
      Journal of Finance.

Rose, A. 2009. “Understanding Business Cycle Synchronization: Is Inflation Targeting Paving the
     Way to Asian Monetary Union?” University of California-Berkeley Working Paper.

Rose, A., and M. Spiegel. 2004. “A Gravity Model of Sovereign Lending: Trade, Default, and
     Credit.” NBER Working Paper 9285.

Staiger, D., and J. Stock. 1997. “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instruments.” Econo-
      metrica, 65(3): 557–86.

Stock, J. H., Wright, J. H., M. Yogo. 2002. “A Survey of Weak Instruments and Weak Identifica-
     tion in Generalized Method of Moments.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,
     20(4): 518–529.

Wooldridge, P. D. 2002. “Uses of the BIS Statistics: An Introduction. ” BIS (Basle, Switzerland)
    Quarterly Review, March.




                                              36
                                      Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                           Obs.      mean     st. dev.       min       p25        p50       p75          max

           SYNCH1          4229     -1.78        1.56     -11.18     -2.44     -1.35      -0.63         0.00
           SYNCH2          4229     -1.56        1.42     -12.09     -2.12     -1.19      -0.55         0.00
           SYNCH3          3796      0.42        0.50      -0.99      0.13      0.59       0.83         1.00
         BANKINT1          4229    588.12     1307.82          0     30.87    137.28     529.78     14693.05
         BANKINT2          4229      0.03        0.05          0      0.00      0.01       0.02         0.57
          HARMON           4229      0.96        3.68          0         0         0          0           22
              ERC          4229      4.37        1.57          2         3         4          5           10
            TRADE          4229      0.01        0.02          0      0.00      0.01       0.02         0.27
             SPEC          2291      1.78        1.15       0.24      1.04      1.48       2.19        15.33


The table reports summary statistics of the main variables used in the empirical analysis. SYNCH1 is the negative
value of the absolute difference in real GDP growth between country i and country j in year t. SYNCH2 is the
negative of the absolute difference of residual real GDP growth between country i and country j in year t. SYNCH3
denotes the correlation of the cyclical component of real GDP between country i and j estimated with the Baxter and
King Band-Pass filter (2,8). BANKINTI1 denotes the average of bilateral stocks of assets and liabilities of countries
i and j normalized by the sum of the two countries’ population in year t. BANKINT2 denotes the average of the logs
of bilateral stocks of assets and liabilities normalized by the sum of the two countries’ GDP. HARMON is a bilateral
index of legislative-regulative harmonization policies in financial services in the context of the Financial Services
Action Plan (FSAP), initiated by the EU Commission in 1998 to integrate financial services in Europe. The value
for each country-pair ranges from 0 to 27, with higher values suggesting a higher degree of harmonization. ERCSUM
denotes the sum of the values of the Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) coarse exchange rate classification of countries i and
j in the beginning of each year t. For each country the Reinhart and Rogoff (coarse) grid ranges from 1 to 5 with
higher values indicating a more flexible currency arrangement.TRADE denotes real bilateral imports and exports
as a share of the two countries’ GDP (data come from IMF’s Direction of Trade Database). SPEC is an index of
specialization that reflects the dis-similarities in industrial production in manufacturing between the two countries in
each year (data come UNIDO). For details on the construction of all variables see Section 3 and the Data Appendix.




                                                          37
                                                     Table 2: Banking Integration and Business Cycle Synchronization

                                                                     Annual Data                                                                  5-year data
              Integration:                        BANKINT1                              BANKINT2                              BANKINT1                              BANKINT2

              Synchronization:            SYNCH1             SYNCH2             SYNCH1             SYNCH2             SYNCH3             SYNCH3             SYNCH3              SYNCH3
                                          (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)                (7)                 (8)

                                                                  Panel A: Cross-Sectional (“Between”) Estimates
              Banking                     0.1272             0.1039             0.1327             0.1111             0.0391             0.0451             0.0429              0.0530
              Integration                 (0.029)            (0.0193)           (0.0289)           (0.0193)           (0.011)            (0.017)            (0.011)             (0.017)
              (BANKINT)                   4.42               5.38               4.59               5.76               3.70               2.68               4.04                3.05
              Trade                                                                                                                      4.3568                                 3.8234
              (TRADE)                                                                                                                    (2.1797)                               (2.1858)
                                                                                                                                         2.00                                   1.75
              Specialization                                                                                                             -0.0123                                -0.0076
              (SPEC)                                                                                                                     (0.0270)                               (0.0270)
                                                                                                                                         -0.46                                  -0.28
              R2 (between)                0.114              0.161              0.122              0.180              0.083              0.170              0.098               0.18

              Year FE                     No                 No                 No                 No                 No                 No                 No                  No
              Country-pair FE             No                 No                 No                 No                 No                 No                 No                  No

              Observations                153                153                153                153                153                153                153                 153




38
                                                                         Panel B: Panel (“Within”) Estimates
              Banking                     -0.3852            -0.0718            -0.3947            -0.0752            -0.0430            -0.0741            -0.0429             -0.0745
              Integration                 (0.0622)           (0.0278)           (0.0639)           (0.0283)           (0.027)            (0.026)            (0.027)             (0.027)
              (BANKINT)                   -6.19              -2.58              -6.18              -2.65              -1.62              -2.81              -1.59               -2.76
              Trade                                                                                                                      -2.5686                                -2.5885
              (TRADE)                                                                                                                    (1.2100)                               (1.2158)
                                                                                                                                         -2.12                                  -2.13
              Specialization                                                                                                             -0.0089                                -0.0088
              (SPEC)                                                                                                                     (0.0204)                               (0.0205)
                                                                                                                                         -0.44                                  -0.43
              R2 (within)                 0.130              0.147              0.130              0.148              0.232              0.280              0.231               0.28
              Year FE                     Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes
              Country-pair FE             Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes
              Observations                4,229              4,229              4,229              4,229              755                480                755                 480
              Country-pairs               153                153                153                153                153                153                153                 153


     Panel A reports cross-sectional (between) coefficients. Panel B reports panel fixed-effect (within) coefficients that include a vector of country-pair fixed-effects and a vector of year/period
     fixed-effects. Standard errors are adjusted for country-pair level heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation and corresponding t-statistics are reported below the estimates. In specifications (1)
     and (3) the dependent variable is minus one times the absolute difference in real GDP growth between country i and country j in year t (SYNCH1). In specifications (2) and (4) the dependent
     variable is minus one times the absolute difference of residual real GDP growth between country i and country j in year t (SYNCH2). These models are based on annual observations that cover
     the period 1978–2006. In columns (5)-(8) the dependent variable is the correlation of the cyclical component of real p.c. GDP between country i and j in each of the 6 five-year periods that
     cover the period 1978–2006 (SYNCH3; estimated with the Baxter and King Band-Pass filter (2,8)). BANKINT1 denotes the one period lagged value of the average of the logs of bilateral stocks
     of assets and liabilities normalized by the sum of the two countries’ population in year t. BANKINT2 denotes the one year lagged value of the average of the logs of bilateral stocks of assets
     and liabilities normalized by the sum of the two countries’ GDP in year t. TRADE denotes the log of real bilateral imports and exports as a share of the two countries’ GDP. SPEC is an index
     of specialization that reflects the dis-similarities in industrial production (in manufacturing) between the two countries in each period. In columns (5)-(8) we use the values of BANKINT1,
     BANKINT2, TRADE and SPEC in the end of the previous (five-year) period. The Data Appendix and Section 3 gives details on the construction and the sources of all variables. The Table
     also gives the number of country-pairs, the number of observations, the between R-squared (for the cross-sectional models) and the within R-squared (for the panel fixed-effect specifications).
                       Table 3: Legislative Harmonization in Financial Services and Business Cycle Synchronization

                                                                  1978–2006                                                       1995–2006
                                          (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)             (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)         (10)

            Financial Sector              -0.2420      -0.2262     -0.2249     -0.1219     -0.1309         -0.1518     -0.1776     -0.2008      -0.1992     -0.1666
            Harmonization                 (0.0430)     (0.0432)    (0.0509)    (0.0577)    (0.0778)        (0.0796)    (0.0762)    (0.0653)     (0.0608)    (0.0647)
            (HARMON)                      -5.62        -5.24       -4.42       -2.11       -1.68           -1.91       -2.33       -3.07        -3.28       -2.57
            R2                            0.096        0.097       0.117       0.123       0.189           0.15        0.153       0.225        0.227       0.348

            Control Variables
            Exchange Rate Regime          No           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes             No          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
            GDP                           No           No          Yes         Yes         Yes             No          No          Yes          Yes         Yes
            EU and EURO Controls          No           No          No          Yes         Yes             No          No          No           Yes         Yes




39
            Year FE                       Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
            Country-pair FE               Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
            Country-Specific Trends       No           No          No          No          Yes             No          No          No           No          Yes
            Observations                  4,229        4,229       4,229       4,229       4,229           1831        1831        1831         1831        1831
            Country-pairs                 153          153         153         153         153             153         153         153          153         153



     The Table reports panel fixed-effect reduced form coefficients. Standard errors are adjusted for country-pair level heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation and corre-
     sponding t-statistics are reported below the estimates. The dependent variable is minus one times the absolute difference in real GDP growth between country i and
     country j in year t (SYNCH1). HARMON is a bilateral time-varying measure of legislative-regulatory harmonization policies in financial services, conducted in the
     context of the Financial Services Action Plan (that covers capital markets, banking, and insurance). The specifications in columns (1)-(5) are estimated in the full
     sample of years (1978–2006). The specifications in columns (6)-(10) are estimated over the period 1995–2006. Columns (2)-(5) and (7)-(10) include as control variable
     a bilateral time-varying measure of the flexibility of the exchange rate regime in the previous year, based on the “coarse” regime classification of Reinhart and Rogoff
     (2004). The specifications in columns (3)-(5) and (8)-(10) also include the log of the product of the two countries’ GDP in the previous year. Columns (4), (5), (9),
     and (10) also include indicator variables that equal one when one of the two countries is a member of the EU or the euro area in the previous year and indicator
     variables that equal one when both countries are part of the EU and the euro area in the previous year. Columns (5) and (10) include linear country specific trends.
     The Data Appendix and Section 3 gives details on the construction and the sources of all variables.
     Table 4: Legislative Harmonization, Banking Integration and Business Cycle Synchronization

                                                 Full Sample Period                                     1995–2006
                                           (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)           (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)

                                                                    Panel A: 2SLS Estimates
                                                                  Dependent Variable: SYNCH1
             Banking Integration       -0.5982    -0.5989     -0.6840      -0.4942       -0.7845    -0.9926     -1.5388     -1.8723
                  (BANKINT1)          (0.1458)   (0.1439)    (0.1813)     (0.2512)      (0.5010)   (0.4429)    (0.6401)    (0.8656)
                                         -4.10      -4.16       -3.77        -1.97         -1.57      -2.24       -2.40       -2.16
          Exchange Rate Regime                                -0.1146      -0.1387                              -0.6054     -0.7177
                    (ERCSUM)                                 (0.0930)     (0.0937)                             (0.2346)    (0.2990)
                                                                -1.23        -1.48                                -2.58       -2.40

                                                                  Panel B: 1st Stage Estimates
                                                                Dependent Variable: BANKINT1
 Financial Sector Harmonization        0.4046      0.3998      0.3288       0.2466        0.1935     0.1768      0.1305      0.1064
                    (HARMON)         (0.0834)    (0.0598)    (0.0546)     (0.0504)      (0.0473)     0.0386      0.0355    (0.0361)
                                         4.85        6.69        6.03         4.89          4.09       4.58        3.67        2.95
          Exchange Rate Regime                                -0.2392      -0.2071                              -0.2905     -0.2912
                    (ERCSUM)                                 (0.0669)     (0.0623)                             (0.0612)    (0.0618)
                                                                -3.57        -3.33                                -4.74       -4.71
              First Stage F-score        23.52      44.71       36.32       23.94          16.71      20.99       13.50        8.67
                          p-value         0.00       0.00        0.00        0.00           0.00       0.00        0.00        0.00


                  GDP Control              No         Yes         Yes         Yes            No         Yes         Yes         Yes
         EU and EURO Controls              No         No          Yes         Yes            No         No          Yes         Yes
                        Year FE           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
                 Country-pair FE          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
                     Observations        4229        4229        4229        4229          1831        1831         1831      1831
                    Country-pairs         153         153         153         153           153         153          153       153




The Table reports panel fixed-effect instrumental variable coefficients. Panel A reports 2nd-Stage estimates. Panel B reports
1st-stage estimates and regression diagnostics . All models include a vector of country-pair fixed-effects and a vector of year
fixed-effects. Standard errors are adjusted for country-pair level heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation and corresponding t-
statistics are reported below the estimates. In all IV specifications the dependent variable is minus one times the absolute
difference in real GDP growth between country i and country j in year t (SYNCH1). The endogenous variable is the one
year lagged value of the average of the logs of bilateral stocks of assets and liabilities normalized by the sum of the two
countries’ population in year t (BANKINT1). It is instrumented with a bilateral time-varying measure of legislative-regulatory
harmonization policies in financial services, conducted in the context of the Financial Services Action Plan (HARMON). The
specifications in columns (1)-(4) are estimated in the full sample of years (1978–2006). The specifications in columns (5)-(6)
are estimated over the period 1995–2006. Column (2)-(4), (6)-(8) include the log of the product of the two countries’ GDP in
the previous year. Columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) include a bilateral time-varying measure of the flexibility of the exchange rate
regime in the previous year, based on the “coarse” regime classification of Reinhart and Rogoff (2004). The specifications in
columns (4) and (8) also include as controls two indicator variables that equal one when one of the two countries is a member
of the EU or the euro area respectively; and two indicator variables that equal one when both countries are part of the EU and
the euro area in the previous year. The Data Appendix and Section 3 gives details on the construction and the sources of all
variables.




                                                               40
                                Appendix Table 1: Cross-Sectional and Panel Estimates

                                                         SYNCH1                                  SYNCH2
                                             BANKINT1            BANKINT2            BANKINT1            BANKINT2
                                                       (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)

                                             Panel A: Cross-Sectional Estimates
                    Banking Integration            0.0597               0.0849             0.0645              0.0910
                          (BANKINT)              (0.0224)             (0.0185)           (0.0230)            (0.0189)
                                                     2.67                 4.58                2.8                4.82
                               Year FE                 Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes
                      Country-pair FE                  No                  No                 No                  No
                Country-Specific Trends                No                  No                 No                  No
                               R-squared             0.081               0.143               0.082               0.144

                                                  Panel B: Panel Estimates I
                    Banking Integration           -0.1862              -0.1970            -0.1871             -0.1926
                          (BANKINT)              (0.0506)             (0.0404)           (0.0513)            (0.0401)
                                                    -3.68                -4.88              -3.65               -4.80
                               Year FE                 No                  No                 No                  No
                      Country-pair FE                  Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes
                Country-Specific Trends                Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes
                               R-squared              0.11                0.09                0.11                0.09

                                                  Panel C: Panel Estimates II
                    Banking Integration           -0.0940              -0.0995            -0.0989             -0.0995
                          (BANKINT)              (0.0510)             (0.0386)           (0.0519)            (0.0391)
                                                    -1.84                -2.58              -1.91               -2.54
                               Year FE                 Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes
                      Country-pair FE                  Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes
                Country-Specific Trends                Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes
                               R-squared             0.167               0.168               0.169               0.169
                            Observations             4,229               4,229               4,229               4,229
                           Country-pairs               153                 153                 153                 153



Panel A reports cross-sectional (between) coefficients with year fixed-effects. Panel B reports panel fixed-effect (within) coeffi-
cients that include also country-specific linear time trends. Panel B reports panel fixed-effect (within) coefficients that include a
vector of country-pair fixed-effects, a vector of year fixed-effects, and country-specific linear time trends. Panel C reports speci-
fications with full set of fixed effects. In all specifications, standard errors are adjusted for country-pair level heteroskedasticity
and autocorrelation. In specifications (1) and (3) the dependent variable is minus one times the absolute difference in real GDP
growth between country i and country j in year t (SYNCH1). In specifications (2) and (4) the dependent variable is minus one
times the absolute difference of residual real GDP growth between country i and country j in year t (SYNCH2). These models
are based on annual observations that cover the period 1978–2006. BANKINT1 denotes the one period lagged value of the
average of the logs of bilateral stocks of assets and liabilities normalized by the sum of the two countries’ population in year t.
BANKINT2 denotes the one year lagged value of the average of the logs of bilateral stocks of assets and liabilities normalized
by the sum of the two countries’ GDP in year t. The Data Appendix and Section 3 gives details on the construction and the
sources of all variables.




                                                                 41
                                                  Appendix Table 2: Long-Run

                                                           Dependent Variable: SYNCH3
                                                         BANKINT1                      BANKINT2
                                                         (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)

                                            Panel A: Cross-Sectional Estimates
                           Banking Integration        0.0359        0.0246         0.0398          0.0297
                                 (BANKINT)           (0.009)      (0.0097)       (0.0085)        (0.0096)
                                                        4.12          2.52           4.66            3.09
                                        Trade                       2.6738                         2.3686
                                     (TRADE)                      (1.0996)                       (1.0916)
                                                                      2.43                           2.17
                          R-squared (between)         0.109          0.145          0.135           0.164

                                                   Panel B: Panel Estimates
                           Banking Integration       -0.0967       -0.0968        -0.0908         -0.0910
                                 (BANKINT)          (0.0331)      (0.0332)       (0.0338)        (0.0339)
                                                       -2.92         -2.91          -2.68           -2.68
                                        Trade                      -0.7101                        -0.8382
                                     (TRADE)                      (4.4868)                       (4.4800)
                                                                     -0.16                          -0.19
                                   R-2 (within)       0.413          0.413          0.405           0.405
                                  Observations          282            282            282             282
                                 Country-pairs          141            141            141             141



Panel A reports cross-sectional (between) coefficients. Panel B reports panel fixed-effect (within) coefficients that include a
vector of country-pair fixed-effects and a vector of period fixed-effects and a period constant. In all specifications the dependent
variable is the correlation of the cyclical component of real between country i and j, estimated over a 14-year period (SYNCH3;
estimated with the Baxter and King Band-Pass filter (2,8)). BANKINT1 is the average of the logs of bilateral stocks of assets
and liabilities normalized by the sum of the two countries’ population in year t. BANKINT2 is the average of the logs of
bilateral stocks of assets and liabilities normalized by the sum of the two countries’ GDP in year t. TRADE denotes the log
of real bilateral imports and exports as a share of the two countries’ GDP. In all columns we use the values of BANKINT1,
BANKINT2, and TRADE in the beginning of each of the two periods. The Data Appendix and Section 3 gives details on the
construction and the sources of all variables.




                                                                42
                                              Appendix Table 3: Sensitivity Analysis

                                               Unilateral Transposition       Stock Market Turnover          Stock Market Capitalization
                                                    (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)                    (6)

           Financial Sector Harmonization       -0.2994         -0.2177        -0.2772         -0.1906        -0.3025                -0.1685
                              (HARMON)         (0.0939)        (0.1041)       (0.0604)        (0.0619)       (0.0574)               (0.0597)
                                                  -3.19           -2.09          -4.59           -3.08          -5.27                  -2.82
                        FSAP in Country i        0.1520          0.0356
                                               (0.0935)        (0.0928)
                                                   1.63            0.38
                        FSAP in Country j        0.1772         -0.0093
                                               (0.0920)        (0.0938)
                                                   1.93           -0.10
      Stock Market Turnover in Country i                                       -0.0004         -0.0006
                                                                              (0.0011)        (0.0013)
                                                                                  -0.33           -0.44
      Stock Market Turnover in Country j                                        0.0002         -0.0024
                                                                              (0.0008)        (0.0009)
                                                                                  0.29           -2.60
 Stock Market Capitalization in Country i                                                                      0.0034                 0.0027
                                                                                                             (0.0011)               (0.0012)
                                                                                                                 3.23                   2.17
 Stock Market Capitalization in Country j                                                                      0.0036                 0.0023
                                                                                                             (0.0012)               (0.0013)
                                                                                                                 3.08                   1.80
                                  Year FE           Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes                    Yes
                         Country-pair FE            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes                    Yes
                    Country-specific trends         Yes             No             Yes             No            Yes                    No
                                  Controls          No              Yes            No              Yes           No                     Yes
                        R-squared (within)        0.185            0.227         0.313           0.231          0.305                 0.213
                             Observations          4229             1831          2593            1831           2624                  1814
                            Country-pairs           153              153           153             153            153                   153




The Table reports panel fixed-effect coefficients. All models include a vector of country-pair fixed-effects, a vector of year
fixed-effects and country-specific linear time trends. The specifications in even numbered-columns also include a vector of
country-specific linear time trends. Standard errors are adjusted for country-pair level heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation
and corresponding t-statistics are reported below the estimates. In all specifications the dependent variable is minus one times
the absolute difference in real GDP growth between country i and country j in year t (SYNCH1). HARMON is a bilateral time-
varying measure of legislative-regulatory harmonization policies in financial services, conducted in the context of the Financial
Services Action Plan (that covers capital markets, banking, and insurance). The specifications in columns (1), (3), and (5)
are estimated in the full sample of years (1978–2006). The specifications in columns (2), (4), and (6) are estimated over the
period 1995–2006. Columns (2), (4), and (6) include as control variables: (i) a bilateral time-varying measure of the flexibility
of the exchange rate regime in the previous year, based on the “coarse” regime classification of Reinhart and Rogoff (2004); (ii)
the log of the product of the two countries’ GDP in the previous year; (iii) two indicator variables that equal one when one of
the two countries is a member of the EU or the euro area respectively; (iv) two indicator variables that equal one when both
countries are part of the EU and the euro area in the previous year. In columns (1) and (2) we include in the set of explanatory
variables a country-time-varying index that reflects the degree of legislative harmonization policies in countries i and j in the
previous year. In columns (3) and (4) we include stock market turnover in countries i and j in the previous year. In columns
(5) and (6) we include stock market capitalization in countries i and j in the previous year.




                                                              43
                                                           Figure 1: GDP Synchronization across Time



     0                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.9
          1978
                 1979
                        1980
                               1981
                                      1982
                                             1983
                                                    1984
                                                           1985
                                                                  1986
                                                                         1987
                                                                                1988
                                                                                       1989
                                                                                              1990
                                                                                                     1991
                                                                                                            1992
                                                                                                                   1993
                                                                                                                          1994
                                                                                                                                 1995
                                                                                                                                        1996
                                                                                                                                               1997
                                                                                                                                                      1998
                                                                                                                                                             1999
                                                                                                                                                                    2000
                                                                                                                                                                           2001
                                                                                                                                                                                  2002
                                                                                                                                                                                         2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                       2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                              2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.8
  -0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.7
    -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.6

  -1.5                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.5


    -2                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.3
  -2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                          SUNCH1
    -3
                                                                                                                                                                                          SYNCH2                     0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                          SYNCH3
  -3.5                                                                                                                                                                                                               0




Figure 1 plots the evolution of the average value of each of the three synchronization measures employed in the empirical analysis
across the 1978-2006 period. For each year the average is estimated across 153 country pairs (our sample spans 18 countries).
SYNCH1 is the negative value of the absolute difference in real GDP growth between country i and country j in year t . SYNCH2
is the negative of the absolute difference of residual real GDP growth between country i and country j in year t . SYNCH3 is the
correlation of the cyclical component of real GDP between country i and j in each five-year period (estimated with the Baxter
and King Band-Pass filter (2,8)). The correlation is estimated with a five-year rolling window.
                                                                 Figure 2: Banking Integration over Time


 1800                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.07

 1600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.06
 1400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.05
 1200

 1000                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.04


   800                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.03

   600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.02
   400
                                                                                                                                                                            BANKINT1                                0.01
   200
                                                                                                                                                                            BANKINT2
     0                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
         1978
                1979
                       1980
                              1981
                                     1982
                                            1983
                                                   1984
                                                          1985
                                                                 1986
                                                                        1987
                                                                               1988
                                                                                      1989
                                                                                             1990
                                                                                                    1991
                                                                                                           1992
                                                                                                                  1993
                                                                                                                         1994
                                                                                                                                1995
                                                                                                                                       1996
                                                                                                                                              1997
                                                                                                                                                     1998
                                                                                                                                                            1999
                                                                                                                                                                   2000
                                                                                                                                                                          2001
                                                                                                                                                                                 2002
                                                                                                                                                                                        2003
                                                                                                                                                                                               2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                             2006
Figure 2 plots the evolution of the two banking integration measures, expressed in levels (solid lines) and in logs (dashed lines).
BANKINT1 denotes the average of the logs of bilateral stocks of assets and liabilities normalized by the sum of the two countries
                                                                                                                          countries'
population. BANKINT2 denotes the average of the logs of bilateral stocks of assets and liabilities normalized by the sum of the
two countries' GDP.
                                                         Figure 3:
                     Legislative/Regulatory Harmonization in Financial Services and Banking Integration



                                                                                     Spain-Netherlands
                                3
                                                   n)
                           gration and Harmonization)
                                          2
    Log Scale (Banking Integration
             0              1    1
                                -1




                                                        1980          1985             1990              1995            2000            2005
                                                                                        year (1978-2006)



                                                               Banking Integration (BANKINT1)                   Harmonization Index (HARMON)




Figure 3 plots the within country-pair and within year evolution over time of banking integration (BANKINT1) and the
legislative/regulatory harmonization index in financial services (HARMON) between Spain and Netherlands.
                                                                                                                         Appendix Figure 1
                                                                                 0



                                                                                                                                                        BELFRA
                                                                                                                                           DEUITA FRAITA
                                                                                                                                               BELITA
                                                                                                                                    AUTFRA CANUSA DEUFRA        BELNLD
                                                                                 -1




                                                                                                                                          AUTNLDBELDEU
                                             Synchronization Index (SYNCH1)




                                                                                                                                              AUTDEU
                                                                                                                                                 DEUNLD
                                                                                                                                     ESPNLD AUTBEL
                                                                                                               ESPSWE                              FRANLD
                                                                                                                                                   CHEDEU
                                                                                                                                              CHEITA
                                                                                                                                          BELESP              BELCHE
                                                                                                                                                            CHENLD
                                                                                                     CANSWE          AUTESPFRASWE AUTITA         GBRSWE
                                                                                                                                                  CANGBR
                                                                                                                                             ESPFRA AUTCHE
                                                                                                                                        ITANLD          CHEFRA
                                                                                                                                                           GBRUSA
                                                                                                                          AUTSWE       BELSWE   DNKGBR         FRAGBR
                                                                                                         AUSCAN                         NLDSWE
                                                                                                                             AUTDNKDNKNLD     FINSWE ESPGBR GBRNLD
                                                                                                                                                              BELGBR
                                                                                              AUSSWE            ITASWE
                                                                                                              ITAPRT       DNKFRA
                                                                                                                DNKITAAUSUSA
                                                                                                                       ITAJPN
                                                                                                                        SWEUSA   NLDUSA
                                                                                                                               DEUDNK
                                                                                                                              CANFRA       BELDNK
                                                                                                                                      FRAPRT
                                                                                                 AUSESP                      AUSNLD
                                                                                                                            CANNLD ESPITA       DNKSWE
                                                                                                                                             AUSGBR
                                                                                                                                           CHESWE
                                                                                                                                             FRAJPN
                                                                                                                                                 AUTGBR
                                                                                                                                             FRAUSA
                                                                                                       CANESP AUTJPN       NLDPRT
                                                                                                                       BELCAN
                                                                                                                    AUSFRA        BELPRT
                                                                                                                               DEUSWE
                                                                                                                                   DEUESP
                                                                                                                                       DEUJPN
                                                                                                                                       ESPPRT
                                                                                                                                         FINGBR         GBRITA
                                                                                             CANFIN
                                                                                           AUSFIN        CANITA   AUTPRT
                                                                                                               DNKUSA
                                                                                                          ESPFIN          DEUPRT BELUSA
                                                                                                                      AUSBEL
                                                                                                                          ESPUSA
                                                                                                                     FINFRA
                                                                                                                                         CHEESP
                                                                                                                                           CHEDNK
                                                                                                        AUSAUT AUTUSA           ITAUSA
                                                                                                                           FINNLD
                                                                                                                               BELFIN
                                                                                                                              AUSCHE
                                                                                                                                 CANCHE
                                                                                                                                  CHEJPN  BELJPN             DEUGBR
                                                                                                                                                                  CHEGBR
                                                                                               JPNPRTCANDNK
                                                                                            AUSDNK    FINITA
                                                                                                          AUTCAN                   JPNNLD
                                                                                 -2




                                                                                              AUSITA
                                                                                                FINPRT DNKJPN DNKESP
                                                                                           AUSPRT               FINUSA   AUTFIN
                                                                                                                     CANDEU           DEUUSA
                                                                                                                                  CHEPRT    CHEUSA
                                                                                                         PRTSWE    CANJPN AUSJPN
                                                                                                                ESPJPN          CHEFIN GBRPRT
                                                                                                                                                   JPNUSA   GBRJPN
                                                                                                       JPNSWE      AUSDEU               DNKFIN
                                                                                                  CANPRT  DNKPRT      DEUFIN
                                                                                                     FINJPN PRTUSA

                                                                                                          AUSIRL
                                                                                                                     ESPIRL
                                                                                 -3
                                                                                  3




                                                                                                                     IRLUSA
                                                                                                                   CANIRL
                                                                                                                   FINIRL                      IRLNLD
                                                                                                                       IRLSWE             BELIRL
                                                                                                                             FRAIRL                             GBRIRL
                                                                                                                IRLPRT    AUTIRL
                                                                                                          IRLJPN
                                                                                                                   IRLITA   DEUIRL CHEIRL
                                                                                                                           DNKIRL
                                                                                 -4




                                                                                             0                     2                       4                        6              8
                                                                                                                        Banking Integration (BANKINT1)




                                                                                                                         Appendix Figure 2
                                                                                5
                                                            ar fixed-effects)
          Synchronization Index (netting country-pair and year
                                                                                0
                                                                                -5
                                                                                 5
                                                                                -10




                                                                                      -4                      -2                       0                        2                  4
                                                                                                 Banking Integration (netting country-pair fixed-effects and year fixed-effects)



Appendix Figure 1 plots the cross-sectional correlation between output synchronization (SYNCH1) in the vertical axis and
banking integration (BANKINT1) in the horizontal axis. Each observation corresponds to a country-pair and both output
synchronization and banking integration are averages within each country-pair.
Appendix Figure 2 plots the within country-pair and within year correlation between output synchronization (SYNCH1) in
t e vertical
the ve t ca axis
             a s and
                 a d banking
                      ba     g integration
                                 teg at o (BANKINT1)
                                           ( N N ) in the   t e horizontal
                                                                 o o ta axis.
                                                                           a s. Each
                                                                                  ac observation
                                                                                      obse vat o corresponds
                                                                                                  co espo ds to a particular
                                                                                                                    pa t cu a
country-pair in each year. To generate the figure we first regress output synchronization and banking integration on country-
pair fixed-effects and year fixed-effects. Then we plot the residuals of the synchronization regression in the vertical axis
against the residuals from the banking integration regression in the horizontal axis.
