                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE IMPORTANCE OF HISTORY FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

                                           Nathan Nunn

                                       Working Paper 14899
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14899


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2009




Forthcoming in the Annual Review of Economics. I have benefitted from useful discussions with Daron
Acemoglu, Robert Bates, Joseph Henrich, Karla Hoff, Joel Mokyr and James Robinson. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Nathan Nunn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Importance of History for Economic Development
Nathan Nunn
NBER Working Paper No. 14899
April 2009
JEL No. N0,O0

                                            ABSTRACT

This article provides a survey of a growing body of empirical evidence that points towards the important
long-term effects that historic events can have on current economic development. The most recent
studies, using micro-level data and more sophisticated identification techniques, have moved beyond
testing whether history matters, and attempt to identify exactly why history matters. The most commonly
examined channels include: institutions, culture, knowledge and technology, and movements between
multiple equilibria. The article concludes with a discussion of the questions that remain and the direct
of current research in the literature.


Nathan Nunn
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
nnunn@fas.harvard.edu
Contents


The Importance of History for Economic Development                                                      0

1   Introduction                                                                                         1


2   The Seminal Contributions                                                                            2

    A   La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        3

    B   Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         5

    C   Engerman and Sokoloff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      7


3   Additional Evidence that History Matters                                                            10


4   Why History Matters                                                                                 14

    A   Multiple Equilibria and Path Dependence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       14

    B   Domestic Institutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16

    C   Cultural Norms of Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    19

    D   Knowledge and Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      25


5   The Relationship between History and Geography                                                      28


6   Conclusions                                                                                         31


References                                                                                              32




                                                   0
1. Introduction

In recent years, an exciting new literature has emerged empirically examining whether historic

events are important determinants of economic development today. The origins of this literature

can be traced to three lines of research that began roughly a decade ago. Engerman and Sokoloff

(1997, 2002) examined the importance of factor endowments and colonial rule for the subsequent

economic development of colonies within the Americas. Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001,

2002) developed a research agenda that sought to better understand the historical origins of cur-

rent institutions and their importance for long-term economic development. The line of inquiry

undertaken by La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997, 1998) also examined the

importance of colonial rule, but focused on the legal institutions that were transplanted by the

different colonial powers and the long-term consequences this had for investor protection and

financial development.

   What united these three lines of research, and what made them particulary novel at the time,

was their analysis of the potential importance of a historic event, colonial rule, for long-term eco-

nomic development. These three studies spawned a large literature of empirical studies seeking to

identify the importance of historic events for economic development. The earliest subsequent stud-

ies typically examined correlations between variables quantifying the impact of historic events,

which almost exclusively was colonial rule, and typically the unit of observation was a country.

These initial studies were successful at highlighting correlations in the data consistent with the

notion that history can matter, even in the long-run. However, because of their inability to establish

causality, the evidence presented was suggestive at best.1

   Since these early contributions, the literature has developed in a number of significant ways.

Much more effort has been put into collecting and compiling new variables based on detailed

historic data. Recent studies, exploiting these richer data sources, are also able to employ much

more satisfying identification strategies that typically rely on instrumental variables, falsification

tests, regression discontinuities, differences-in-differences estimation, or propensity score match-

ing techniques.2

   The literature has also moved beyond simply estimating reduced form causal relationships
   1 Examples  of these early studies include Grier (1999), Englebert (2000a,b), Bertocchi and Canova (2002), and Price
(2003).
   2 See for example Acemoglu and Johnson (2004), Banerjee and Iyer (2005), Berger (2008), Dell (2008), Feyrer and

Sacerdote (2009), Huillery (2008a), Iyer (2007), Nunn (2008a), Nunn and Qian (2008), and Nunn and Wantchekon (2008).


                                                          1
between historic events and economic development. For many studies, the goal is to also explain

exactly how and why specific historic events can continue to matter today. That is, the literature

has moved from asking whether history matters to asking why history matters.3

   This paper provides a survey of this body of empirical research. I begin by reviewing the

seminal articles by Acemoglu et al. (2001), Engerman and Sokoloff (1997, 2002), and La Porta et al.

(1997, 1998) as well as the body of literature that each contribution has generated. The next section

reviews the additional evidence from second generation studies that provide identification-based

evidence that history matters. Section 4 then surveys the precise channels of causality that have

been examined in the literature. The evidence for the importance of (i) multiple equilibria and path

dependence; (ii) domestic institutions; (iii) cultural norms of behavior; and (iv) knowledge and

technology are examined. The penultimate section of the paper, section 5, discusses the interesting

relationship between geography and history that has developed in the literature. While some

studies have pitted these two factors against each other as alternative determinants of economic

development, other studies have shown that the two factors interact in interesting and important

ways. As will be discussed, the existing body of evidence indicates that the greatest effect that

geography has on economic development is through its influence on history. The final section of

the paper, section 6, concludes by discussing the current direction of future research.


2. The Seminal Contributions

The literature linking history to economic development has its origins in three distinct but related

strands of research: Acemoglu et al. (2001); La Porta et al. (1997, 1998); and Engerman and Sokoloff

(1997, 2002). All three examine one of the largest and most important events in the world’s history:

European expansion and colonization of the globe, which began in the 16th century.

   The studies document the lasting impact that Europe’s colonization had on the development

paths of former colonies. They also share a common view that an important part of the causal

mechanism was the impact that colonial rule had on the domestic institutions that persisted after

independence.4 Viewed in this light, all three lines of research are conceptually consistent with

one another. All three argue that the institutions of a society are an important determinant of long-
   3 See for example Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2005a) Acemoglu and Johnson (2004), Becker and Woessmann

(2009), Dell (2008), Iyer (2007), Munshi and Wilson (2008), Nunn (2008b), Nunn and Qian (2008), and Nunn and
Wantchekon (2008).
   4 The studies build on an even earlier literature arguing for the importance of domestic institutions for long-term

growth. See for example North and Thomas (1973) and North (1981, 1990). More recently, also see Greif (2006).


                                                          2
term economic development, and that historical events can be an important determinant of the

evolution and long-term persistence of domestic institutions. Where the studies differ, however,

is in their views of which aspects of colonial rule were crucial for shaping institutions, and in the

specifics of the proposed causal mechanisms.

   For La Porta et al., the identity of the colonizer determined whether a civil law or common

law legal system was established and this was important for long-term development. Unlike La

Porta et al., Engerman and Sokoloff and Acemoglu et al. share the common view that it is the

characteristics of the region being colonized that were crucial factors that determined the effect

of colonial rule on long-term economic development. For Acemoglu et al., the initial disease

environment shaped the extent to which secure property rights were established in the colony, and

through their persistence these initial institutions had a large effect on long-term economic devel-

opment. Engerman and Sokoloff focus on the importance of a region’s endowment of geography

suitable for growing lucrative globally traded cash crops that were best cultivated using large scale

plantations and slave labor. These large plantations resulted in economic and political inequality,

which in turn impeded the development of institutions that promoted commercial interests and

long-term economic growth.

   We now examine the three seminal contributions, as well as the resulting literature that has

been generated by each.


A. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny

The core of La Porta et al.’s (1997, 1998) analysis is their emphasis on the differences between legal

systems based on British common law versus Roman civil law. They argue that countries with

legal systems based on British common law offer greater investor protection relative to countries

with legal systems based on civil law. They then recognize that in British colonies common law

based legal systems were transplanted, while the European countries with a legal system based on

Roman civil law – namely Spain, France, and Portugal – transplanted civil law legal systems. La

Porta et al. (1997, 1998) use this historic fact to examine the causal effect of the strength of legal rules

protecting investor rights on financial development. The authors argue that for former colonies

legal origin is largely exogenous to country characteristics and is therefore a potential instrument

that can be used to estimate the effect of the protection of investor rights on financial development.

The first stage of their IV estimates show that civil law countries, relative to common law countries,


                                                     3
do have better investor protection, and their second stage estimates indicate that countries with

weaker investor protection have smaller debt and equity markets.

   Since these initial studies a large literature has emerged exploring the potential effect that legal

origin may have on other factors.5 These studies show that legal origin is also correlated with a

host of other country characteristics, such as military conscription (Mulligan and Shleifer, 2005a,b),

labor market regulation (Botero, Djankov, La Porta, de Silanes, and Shleifer, 2004), contract en-

forcement (Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 2003, Acemoglu and Johnson, 2004),

comparative advantage (Nunn, 2007b), and even economic growth (Mahoney, 2001). These results

are both good and bad for La Porta et al.’s (1997, 1998) initial studies. They suggest that legal origin

may have effects that are even more wide-ranging than originally assumed in La Porta et al. (1997,

1998). However, if this is the case, then this calls into question the validity their use of legal origin

as an instrument for investor protection. Given that legal origin appears to be correlated with a

host of other country characteristics that may also affect financial development, it is unlikely that

the exclusion restrictions from their original papers are satisfied. As discussed in La Porta et al.

(2008), the authors are clearly aware of this fact.

   Subsequent studies also look for similar relationships involving legal origin within the United

States. Ten U.S. states that were first settled by either France, Spain, or Mexico initially developed

civil law legal systems.6 Berkowitz and Clay (2005, 2006) find that today these civil law states have

a less independent judiciaries, lower quality courts, and less stable constitutions. Although both

studies rely on OLS estimates, they do show that the correlations remain robust to controlling for a

number of additional factors, such as slavery, date of entry into the Union, state size, and climatic

characteristics.

   Other studies also highlight correlations in the data and show that there exists a relationship

between the identify of the colonizer and various measures of long-term economic development.

For example, Grier (1999) finds that at independence former British colonies on average had a

larger share of their populations in school. Bertocchi and Canova (2002) find that within Africa,

former British and French colonies have higher levels of investment and education after indepen-

dence. Although these correlations do not provide proof of the causal importance of the identity of
   5 La  Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2008) provide a survey of these early studies as well as the subsequent
literature that they generated.
    6 The ten states include: Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, New

Mexico, and Texas. Of these states only Louisiana continues to have a civil law legal system.




                                                          4
colonizer, they are consistent with La Porta et al.’s emphasis on the impact that the identity of the

colonizer (specifically, its legal system) has on the long-term economic development of its colony.


B. Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson

Like La Porta et al. (1997), Acemoglu et al. (2001) also examine the effect of colonial rule on the

institutions that were implemented and their long-term impact on economic development. How-

ever, Acemoglu et al. (2001) focus on a different determinant of the differences in institutions that

evolved across former colonies. They hypothesize that since colonies with a less deadly disease

environment had greater European settlement, in these colonies growth promoting institutions

that protected property rights were established during colonial rule. In colonies in which European

mortality was high and settlement low, the colonizers did not have an incentive to establish strong

property rights and instead established extractive rent-seeking institutions. Using this logic, the

authors estimate the causal effect of current domestic institutions on per capita income, using early

European mortality rates as an instrument for institutions. One of the assumptions underlying the

IV strategy is that initial settler mortality is not correlated with current income other than through

domestic institutions. In the first stage of their IV procedure, the authors find a strong negative

relationship between initial settler mortality and institutional quality today. The second stage

estimates indicate that domestic institutions exert a strong positive effect on per capita income.

   The elegance of the paper lies in its ability to develop a clear and convincing historical narrative

with supporting empirical evidence and show how a historic event can affect past institutions,

which through their persistence have an influence on income levels today. The study provided

an empirical foundation to support the seminal works on the importance of institutions written

by North and Thomas (1973) and North (1981, 1990).7 The study emerged at a time when the

literature was still in the process of trying to convincingly estimate the causal impact of domestic

institutions on economic development.8 An important contribution of Acemoglu et al. (2001) was

to develop a much more satisfying identification strategy than previous empirical studies.

   A number of studies have attempted to extend Acemoglu et al.’s line of research, providing

evidence for the importance of historic institutions for current economic development. Two recent

studies by Banerjee and Iyer (2005) and Dell (2008), rather than taking a broader more macro
   7 More recently, also see Greif (2006).
   8 Earlypapers in this literature include DeLong and Shleifer (1993), Knack and Keefer (1995), Mauro (1995), Hall and
Jones (1999) and Englebert (2000a,b).


                                                          5
perspective, focus on a specific regions. By doing this, the authors are able to collect and analyze

much richer data at a more micro level. The use of this richer data also allow the authors to

employ additional estimation strategies that help identify the causal effects of history on economic

outcomes today.

   Dell (2008) examines the mita forced labor system, which was instituted by the Spanish in Peru

and Bolivia between 1573 and 1812. The study combines contemporary household survey data,

geographic data, and data from historic record, and uses a regression discontinuity estimation

strategy to identify the long-term impacts of the mita system. Her identification exploits the fact

that there was a discrete change in the boundaries of the mita conscription area and that other

relevant factors likely vary smoothly around the mita boundary. Because of this, comparing the

outcomes of mita and non-mita districts very close to the border provides an unbiased estimate

of the long-term effects of the mita. The study finds that the mita system had an adverse effect

on long-term economic development. All else equal, today former mita districts have an average

level of household consumption that is 32% lower than households in former non-mita districts.

The study finds that a significant proportion of the difference can be explained by lower levels of

education and less developed road networks. Dell’s study provides valuable evidence showing

that the institutions established during colonial rule can have long-term impacts that continue to

be felt today.

   Like Dell (2008), Banerjee and Iyer (2005) also analyze the long-term effects of colonial insti-

tutions, but examine differences in revenue collection institutions across districts within colo-

nial India. The authors compare districts where revenue was historically collected directly by

British officials to districts where revenue was collected by native landlords. They find that after

independence districts with non-landlord systems have higher levels of health, education, and

agricultural technology investments relative to landlord systems. To determine the extent to which

the correlation is causal, the authors exploit the fact that in the parts of India conquered between

1820 and 1856, non-landlord revenue collection was implemented. They argue that the historic

reasons for this pattern are orthogonal to district characteristics and therefore the date of British

conquer can be used as an instrument for the revenue collection system. Their IV estimates are

consistent with their OLS estimates. They also show that their OLS results are robust when the

sample is restricted to 35 districts, in which all landlord districts are bordered by non-landlord

districts.


                                                 6
   Although the analysis of Banerjee and Iyer (2005) and Dell (2008) provide evidence of the long-

term impacts of initial colonial institutions, the studies do differ from Acemoglu et al. (2001) since

the transmission mechanism is not the persistence of these initially implemented institutions. In

Dell, the hypothesized mechanism is the concentration of wealth and power, and the resulting

provision of public goods. Similarly, in Banerjee and Iyer’s analysis the transmission mechanism

is not through the persistence of these initially implemented institutions, since the differences in

colonial land revenue collection systems no longer exist.

   One study that does empirically link early colonial institutions to institutional outcomes today

is sociologist Matthew Lange’s (2004) analysis of the differential effects of indirect rule relative to

direct rule on the quality of institutions and governance today. Using colonial documents housed

in Britain’s Public Records Office, Lange compiles information on court cases held in 33 former

British colonies in 1955. He then uses the fraction of the court cases that were presided over

by local chiefs, rather than colonial officials, as a measure of the extent of indirect rule in each

country. The measure is intended to provide a proxy for the overall extent to which colonial rule

in the country relied on traditional legal, political, and institutional structures. The study finds a

positive relationship between the extent of indirect rule and a variety of measures of institutional

quality and good governance. The primary shortcoming of the study, however, lies in its lack

of a convincing identification strategy. Because the paper relies on OLS estimates it is unknown

whether the correlations between past and current institutions capture the causal effect of historic

institutions on institutions today or simply reflect a spurious correlation driven by omitted country

characteristics.


C. Engerman and Sokoloff

The studies by Engerman and Sokoloff (1997, 2002) focus on the differential paths of development

among the New World countries of the Americas.9 Engerman and Sokoloff argue that the different

development experiences of the countries in the Americas can be explained by initial differences in

endowments of land and geography suitable for growing globally traded crops like sugar, which

were best grown on large-scale plantations using slave labor. These areas were characterized

by severe economic and political inequality, which resulted in the subsequent evolution of the

domestic institutions that protected the privileges of the elites and restricted the participation of the
  9 For   a review and discussion of these and related studies see Hoff (2003).


                                                             7
rest of the population in the commercial economy. In former Spanish colonies endowments of rich

mineral resources further strengthened the tendency towards political and economic inequality.

   Since the analysis of Engerman and Sokoloff (1997, 2002) is primarily qualitative in nature,

the literature has taken the natural next step, which is to begin to empirically examine the core

predictions that arise from their analysis. A number of studies have uncovered correlations in the

data that support the authors’ hypothesis that slavery was detrimental for subsequent economic

development. The studies find a negative relationship between various measures of economic

development and past slave use, looking across U.S. states (Mitchener and McLean, 2003) or

counties (Lagerlöf, 2005) or across New World countries (Nunn, 2008b).

   Studies have also examined additional hypotheses that arise from their study. Nunn (2008b)

uses information from the 1860 U.S. Census to examine whether the data support the inequality

channel proposed by Engerman and Sokoloff. The study, based on OLS estimates, finds a strong

positive relationship between slavery and inequality in the size of land holdings, when looking

across either states or counties. This finding is consistent with the notion that slavery resulted

in economic inequality. However, Nunn fails to find any evidence of an empirical relationship

between initial economic inequality and current income levels. Although it is true that the counties

and states with higher levels of land inequality in 1860 also have higher levels of income inequality

today, it is not true that these states and counties have lower levels of income today.10 In other

words, there is no evidence of a relationship between historic inequality and current economic

underdevelopment as hypothesized by Engerman and Sokoloff. Instead, the data are most consis-

tent with slavery having had two unrelated consequences. It increased economic inequality, which

persists today, and it also resulted in lower levels of economic development.

   Nunn (2008b) also looks outside of the U.S. to examine the inequality channel proposed by

Engerman and Sokoloff. Specifically, he examines their argument that slavery was detrimental

because it took the form of large-scale plantation slavery, which promoted extreme inequality. Us-

ing data from British Slave Registrars, Nunn disaggregates slave populations into those that were

used on plantations and those that worked in other occupations such as industry, livestock, salt,

timber, fishing, and shipping. In a second exercise, Nunn does something similar, disaggregating

slave populations by the size of the holdings that they were held on. By doing this he is able to
  10 Related to this is Frankema’s (2006) finding of a positive relationship between colonial land inequality and post-

colonial income inequality across former colonies.




                                                          8
examine whether the negative correlation between slavery and economic development is being

driven by large-scale plantation slavery. He finds that this is not the case. All forms of slavery are

negatively correlated with subsequent economic development, and when statistically significant

differences in the estimates exist, large-scale plantation slavery is found to be less correlated with

underdevelopment than smaller-scale non-plantation slavery.

   Additional evidence on the validity of Engerman and Sokoloff’s hypothesized inequality chan-

nel comes from the study by Acemoglu, Bautista, Querubin, and Robinson (2008) that examines

variation across municipalities within the state of Cundinamarca, Colombia. The analysis shows

that within Cundinamarca there is a positive relationship between 19th century land inequality

and current economic development proxied by measures of primary and secondary school enroll-

ment rates. This relationship is opposite to the negative relationship that one would expect to

observe if Engerman and Sokoloff’s hypothesis was correct. This finding can also be contrasted

to evidence from the United States showing that until 1940 there was a negative relationship

between inequality and education (Galor, Moav, and Vollrath, 2009). The study also shows that

in Cundinamarca economic inequality and political inequality are negatively correlated, a fact that

also runs counter to Engerman and Sokoloff’s hypothesis that initial economic inequality resulted

in political inequality.

   Additional evidence can be gleaned from Melissa Dell’s (2008) study of colonial Peru and Bo-

livia. In her analysis, Dell explains her finding of a negative effect of the mita system on education

and the development of road networks by the fact that in mita districts the colonial government

restricted the formation of large Spanish land holdings, called haciendas. Because the large land

owners typically lobbied for the greater provision of public goods, the non-mita districts, without

these large land owners, had lower levels of public goods. Dell provides empirical evidence to

support her argument. Comparing districts on both sides of the mita boundary, one observes

a significantly lower presence of haciendas in former non-mita districts both during and after

the mita, as well less dense road networks and less market integration today. These estimates

support her explanation that because non-mita districts had less haciendas, they did not have large

landowners that were able to lobby for local public goods. Dell’s explanation and her supporting

evidence run contrary to the inequality channel put forth by Engerman and Sokoloff. In Dell’s

setting, not enough (rather than too much) concentration and inequality in land ownership, was

the cause of long-term economic underdevelopment.


                                                  9
3. Additional Evidence that History Matters

Much of the early literature examining the importance of history for economic development exam-

ined correlations between different measures of colonial rule and current economic performance

across countries (Grier, 1999, Englebert, 2000a,b, Bertocchi and Canova, 2002, Price, 2003). Al-

though these studies are useful in highlighting correlations that exist in the data, they stop short

of providing causal evidence of the effect of history on long-term development. The more recent

empirical studies at the forefront of this literature combine much richer data, typically at a level of

analysis much finer than the country, with much more sophisticated identification techniques to

provide causal evidence of the importance of history for long-term economic development.

   One example of this line of research is Huillery’s (2008a) analysis of the differential effects of

colonial rule across districts within French West Africa. Her study combines data from historic

documents from archives in Paris and Dakar with household surveys from the 1990s. She shows

that looking across districts there is a positive relationship between early colonial investments in

education, health and infrastructure and current levels of schooling, health outcomes, and access

to electricity, water, and fuel. The study then moves to testing for the causal effect of colonial

policy on these subsequent outcome measures. Exploiting the richness of her district level data

set, Huillery uses a regression discontinuity estimation strategy, comparing the differences in her

outcomes of interest between neighboring districts only. Her estimates provide strong support that

colonial investments on education, health and infrastructure have positive and persistent effects

on current education, health, and infrastructure.

   Like Huillery (2008a), the recent study by Berger (2008) also uses micro-level data to identify

long-term impacts of colonial policies. The study also uses a regression discontinuity estimation

strategy and examines the difference in outcomes between Northern Nigeria and Southern Nigeria,

two regions of colonial Nigeria. During colonial rule the two districts were split by a straight line

running East-West located at 7◦ 100 N. Although there were many differences between the two

regions, one of the primary differences was the form of taxation. In the coastal Southern region

revenue was raised primarily through tariffs on internationally traded goods. The landlocked

North relied on a poll tax to raise revenue. As a result, in the North it was necessary to develop

an institutional structure and network to collect taxes, and to develop mechanisms to control

corruption and incompetence of government officials and native chiefs.



                                                  10
   Berger uses vaccination rates as his measure of local government quality today. Comparing

households within 1 degree on either side of the historic border between Northern and Southern

Nigeria, he finds that vaccination rates are significantly lower on the Northern side of the border.

A falsification test shows that there is something distinct about the historic border located at 7◦ 100

N. As one moves the border north or south, the estimates find no difference in vaccination rates

of households on either side of the false borders. It is only for this historic border, which does not

correspond to any modern boundary, that a significant difference exists.

   Other studies, using more sophisticated identification techniques, have revisited old questions

that were never satisfactorily answered in the early literature. One of these questions is the effect

that the length of colonial rule had on subsequent development. This question has been examined

previously by Grier (1999) and Price (2003), but their analysis relies on OLS estimates. Feyrer and

Sacerdote (2009) use a novel instrumental variables estimation strategy to provides the first causal

estimates of the impact of the length of colonial rule. The authors, as part of their identification

strategy, consider only former island colonies. They argue that how early an island was discovered

was determined in part by its location relative to prevailing wind patterns and that these wind

patterns most likely do not affect long-term development through channels other than through

the island’s date of discovery. If this is the case, then the wind vectors surrounding an island can

be used as instruments to estimate the causal effect of the length of colonial rule on subsequent

development. Their baseline set of instruments, which are constructed from satellite imagery data

reported monthly on a 1 degree by 1 degree global grid, include the annual mean and variance of

monthly East-West wind vectors.

   Their first stage estimates show that stronger westerly winds are associated with earlier dis-

covery and more years under colonial rule. According to their second stage estimates, the length

of colonial rule has a positive effect on per capita income in 2000. This result may seem surpris-

ing since it appears to provide evidence that colonial rule was good for economic development.

However, this conclusion does not follow from their study. Because the estimated effects are for

the length of colonial rule conditional on being colonized, it does not provide an estimate of the

average effect of being colonized relative to not being colonized.

   A second long-standing question that has recently been revisited with improved identification

is the long-term effect of direct colonial rule relative to indirect rule. The distinction between direct

and indirect rule, although not always clear-cut, lies in the amount of bureaucratic responsibility


                                                   11
given to native agents rather than European administrators. Direct rule occurs when only the

lowest levels of responsibility are given to natives and all other positions are occupied by Euro-

peans. Under indirect rule, much more power is given to natives, and typically local governance

structures and local elites are integrated into the colonial governance structure.

   The recent study by Iyer (2007) employs an empirically persuasive identification strategy to

examine the relative effects of direct versus indirect rule across regions within India. She addresses

the problem of the endogeneity of the form of British rule by exploiting the ‘Doctrine of Lapse’,

which was in place between 1848 and 1856. The doctrine, which stated that a native ruler’s adopted

heirs were not to be recognized by the British government, allowed the British to annex several

states where the native ruler died without a natural heir. Exploiting the Doctrine of Lapse, Iyer

constructs a district specific indicator variable that equals one if the ruler died without a natural

heir between 1848 and 1856 when the Doctrine of Lapse was in place.11

   Looking across 415 districts, Iyer estimates the effect of colonial indirect and direct rule on

investment in agriculture and agricultural productivity today. She first estimates the relationship

using OLS and finds a positive and statistically significant relationship between direct rule on

agricultural investments and productivity. On the other hand, her IV estimates report no statisti-

cally significant difference between the two types of districts. The difference between the IV and

OLS estimates is consistent with the British selectively annexing the most productive states. Iyer

(2007) also examines the effect of direct rule on the availability of public goods such as health,

education, and roads. Again she finds that the IV estimates are consistently lower than the OLS

estimates, which again is consistent with the British selecting the ‘better’ states. According to the

IV estimates, direct rule exerted a negative effect on the long-term availability of public goods.12

   As is always the case with IV estimates, the validity of the estimates rests crucially on whether

the instruments satisfy the necessary exclusion restrictions. As a test of the validity of her instru-

ments, Iyer performs a number of falsification tests. She first reports the reduced form relationship

between her instrument and her measures of the availability of public goods. Consistent with

the IV estimates, her reduced form shows a statistically significant negative relationship between

her instrument and the public goods measures. Iyer then constructs a ‘fake instrument’, which

is an indicator variable that equals one if a state’s ruler died without a natural heir between 1858
  11 Inher analysis, Iyer only considers the subset of states that were not annexed before 1848.
  12 Banerjee,Iyer, and Somanathan (2005) examine the robustness of this result across 27 different public good mea-
sures. Overall, the results confirm the findings of Iyer (2007) looking across a more restricted range of public goods.



                                                          12
and 1884, a period when the Doctrine of Lapse was no longer in place. According to the channel

proposed by Iyer, the results with the fake instrument should not provide the same reduced form

estimates as with the actual instruments. This is exactly what she finds. For all outcome measures

except one, she finds no statistically significant relationship between the fake instrument and the

outcome measures.

   One of the most dramatic examples of how history can shape long-term economic development

comes from Nunn’s (2008a) study of the impact that the external trade in slaves had on long-

term political and economic development within Africa. Combining data from historic shipping

records, reporting the total number of slaves shipped on each voyage from Africa, with historic

records that report the ethnic identity of the slaves being shipped, Nunn constructs estimates of

the number of slaves shipped during the trans-Atlantic Slave Trade. He also constructs similar

estimates for Africa’s three other slave trades: the Indian Ocean, Red Sea and trans-Saharan slave

trades. The study finds that the parts of Africa from which the largest number of slaves were taken

(normalized by land area or historic population) today are the poorest parts of Africa. The core

issue in interpreting this correlation is selection into the slave trades. If, for example, the societies

with the most poorly functioning institutions and the poorest future growth prospects selected

into the slave trades, then this would explain the negative relationship even if the external trade in

slave trades had no direct impact on the societies within Africa.

   Nunn tests whether selection is driving the results by looking at the evidence on the nature of

selection during the slave trades. He finds that the descriptive and quantitative evidence suggest

that it was not the least developed societies that selected into the slave trade. Instead, it was

actually the more developed and more densely populated societies that supplied the largest num-

bers of slaves. Nunn also constructs instruments based on the distance of each country from the

external locations of demand for the slaves. The key identification assumption is that the location

of demand influenced the location of supply and not vice versa. If, as Sokoloff and Engerman

(2000) argue, the demand for slaves was determined primarily by geographic characteristics, such

as soil quality suitable for plantation agriculture, then this assumption is reasonable. The IV

estimates provide estimates that is consistent with the OLS estimates. Overall, Nunn concludes

that the empirical evidence suggest that Africa’s external trade in slaves did have a significant

negative impact on the subsequent economic development of the regions within Africa.




                                                   13
4. Why History Matters

A. Multiple Equilibria and Path Dependence

If one thinks about classical models in economics, it far from obvious why historic events should

have any impact in the long-run. For example, in the classic Solow model, for a given set of

parameter values, there is a unique steady state level of capital and income per worker. Any event

that shocks either capital or output has a temporary impact only. In the long-run the economy

eventually converges back to a unique steady state equilibrium. Viewed in this light, it is unclear

why history should matter. However, once models with multiple equilibria are considered, then

historic events have permanent effects if they cause a movement from one equilibrium to another.13

   A recent paper by Nunn (2007a) illustrates this point by developing a model that features

multiple equilibria in the security of property rights and output per worker. It is then shown that

a period of severe extraction, by temporarily causing the optimal equilibrium to disappear, can

cause a permanent movement to an equilibrium with significantly lower income levels. Because

this equilibrium is stable, the society remains ‘stuck’ in this equilibrium even after the high-income

equilibrium returns. Using historic evidence, Nunn argues that the movement from one equi-

librium to another explains why in Africa the slave trade and colonial rule appear to have had

permanent impacts.

   On many levels, it is clear that the world we live in is filled with multiple equilibria. Suggestive

evidence of this fact can be found in a variety of real world phenomena, such as the fact that this

article was typed on a QWERTY keyboard rather than the significantly more efficient DVORAK

keyboard14 or the fact that cars are driven on the right hand-side of the road in the U.S., but on the

left side in the UK. As well, historic events, such as the battle for market dominance between VHS

and Betamax in the 1980s, also provide further evidence that multiple equilibria exist.

   Very recently, a number of studies have undertaken the task of testing empirically for the

existence of multiple equilibria. One strategy that some of studies have employed is to examine

cases where there has been an extremely large shock to an equilibrium. The studies then test

whether the shock causes a movement from the previous equilibrium to a new equilibrium. Davis
 13 For early examples of models of this type see Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny (1993), Acemoglu (1995), and Mehlum,

Moene, and Torvik (2003).
 14 For a discussion of the historic reasons for the adoption of the QWERTY keyboard see David (1985).




                                                        14
and Weinstein (2008) examine the effect of bombings on 114 Japanese cities during World War II.15

The authors find that after the bombings, the cities returned to their pre-bombing populations,

regained their shares in total manufacturing output, and most surprisingly, they also regained their

pre-existing industrial composition. Overall, the results point towards the existence of a unique

stable equilibrium of production, rather than the existence of multiple equilibria. A similar result

is found in Miguel and Roland’s (2006) analysis of the long-term effects of the U.S. bombings in

Vietnam. The authors find that the bombings had no long-term effects on populations, poverty or

consumption 25 years later.

   These tests, although very suggestive, do not provide airtight proof against the existence of

multiple equilibria in these environments. This is true for a number of reasons. It is possible

that other equilibria exist, but the shocks were not large enough to cause a movement to a new

equilibrium. It is also possible that the shocks were large enough to cause a movement, but that the

pre-bombing equilibrium is focal and therefore after the bombings this equilibrium was selected

among all possible equilibria (see Schelling, 1960).

   An innovative study by Redding, Sturm, and Wolf (2007) tests for the existence of multiple

equilibria in an environment very different from Davis and Weinstein (2008) and Miguel and

Roland (2006). The study examines the location of airport hubs in Germany before and after the

division of Germany following World War II. It is shown that after division, the location of West

Germany’s primary airport hub switched from Berlin to Frankfurt. After reunification in 1990, the

location of the hub did not switch back to Berlin. Redding et al. show that this shift cannot be

explained by changes in fundamentals over the time period. Thus, the evidence suggests that the

temporary division of Germany resulted in a permanent movement of the location of Germany’s

largest airport hub.

   One of the most dramatic examples of how a historic event can drastically alter the subsequent

path of economic development is the history of Tasmania. According to archaeological evidence,

humans first arrived in what today is Tasmania as early as 22,000 years ago across a land bridge

that connected present day Australia to Tasmania. Approximately 12,000 years ago, at the end of

the Pleistocene, rising sea levels drowned the land bridge, turning it into what is now the shallow

Bass Straight (Diamond, 1978). The archeological evidence indicates that the technologies used by

the Tasmanians deteriorated over time. The Tasmanians lost their ability to construct bone tools,
 15 See   also Davis and Weinstein (2002) which was a precursor to this paper.



                                                           15
make cold-weather clothing, and to catch fish.

   An explanation for Tasmania’s dramatic deterioration has been put forth by Anthropologist

Joseph Henrich (2004). He develops a model where skills are imperfectly transmitted from the

most skillful or successful individual in the society to all other members of the society. Henrich

shows that in this environment the size of the population matters. This is because in a larger

population the most skilled individual is, on average, more skilled. He also shows that because

of imperfect transmission, there exists a minimum population size below which the average skill

of the society actually decreases over time. Therefore, his model explains the Tasmanian technol-

ogy losses by the drop in effective population size after rising sea levels isolated Tasmania from

Australia.

   The Tasmanian experience provides a dramatic example of path dependence. One historic event

– the rising sea levels and flooding of the Bass Straight – resulted in a permanent change in the

evolutionary process and moved the society to a new trajectory, where technologies and skills

deteriorated over time. One historic event permanently changed, in a very dramatic way, the

long-term social and economic development of the Tasmanians.


B. Domestic Institutions

Even without the existence of multiple equilibria, historic events can still affect economic devel-

opment in the long-run if they alter deep determinants of long-term economic growth. The deep

determinant that has received the greatest attention in the literature is domestic institutions. The

emphasis on institutions can be seen clearly from the fact that in each of the seminal papers by

Acemoglu et al. (2001, 2002), Engerman and Sokoloff (1997, 2002), and La Porta et al. (1997, 1998)

the mechanism through which colonial rule affects current development is domestic institutions.

   The focus on institutions as a causal mechanism has also continued in subsequent research.

An example of this is Acemoglu et al.’s (2005a) study of the effect that early Atlantic trade had

in Europe. The authors argue that in countries with access to the lucrative Atlantic three corner

trade, economic and political power shifted towards commercial interests. As the merchant class

became more powerful, they were able alter domestic institutions to protect their interests against

the interests of the royalty, and these institutional changes in turn had a positive effect on long-term

prosperity. Using data on historic urbanization rates and per capita incomes, the study first shows




                                                  16
that the rise of Europe was actually a rise of the nations with access to the lucrative Atlantic trade.16

Their explanation is shown to be robust even when controlling for alternative explanations of the

rise of Western Europe, such as the rise of a Protestant work ethic (Weber, 1930, Landes, 1998), war

and inter-state competition (Tilly, 1990), and the legacy of the Roman Empire.17

   The authors argue that profits alone are not able to explain the divergent growth of Atlantic

traders and that the evolution of domestic institutions played an important role in the process.18

To test this hypothesis, the authors extend the Polity IV data back to 1350 and show that Atlantic

trade increased the quality of domestic institutions as measured by an index of the constraints on

the executive. They further hypothesize that the process of institutional change could only occur

in countries that initially had non-absolutist political institutions. They show that the data is also

consistent with this. They show that the increase in economic growth generated by the Atlantic

trade was higher for countries with better initial domestic institutions, again measured by the

constraint on the executive.

   The recent study by Gennaioli and Rainer (2007) also provides evidence of the persistence

of domestic institutions, but within the African context. The authors use ethnographic data to

construct a measure of the level of state development in pre-colonial African societies. Their OLS

estimates show that there is a positive correlation between pre-colonial political development and

the provision of public goods today. This result can be combined with evidence from Nunn (2008a)

showing that the parts of Africa from which more slaves were taken had less developed political

systems after the slave trade (and before official colonial rule). Because the evidence for both

relationships is based on correlations in the data, one must be cautious when drawing conclusions.

However, the combined evidence from Gennaioli and Rainer (2007) and Nunn (2008a) is consistent

with a chain of causality where the slave trade resulted in a deterioration of domestic political

institutions, which in turn had a long-term adverse impact on the provision of public goods.

Therefore, the evidence from the two studies provides support for the notion that history can

matter through the evolution and persistence of early institutions.
  16 These countries were Britain, France, the Netherlands, Portugal and Spain.
  17 More  recently, Becker and Woessmann (2009) also provide empirical support for the importance of the Protestant
religion, but focuses instead on the religion’s emphasis on the importance of literacy so that each individual was able to
read the Bible. The analysis identifies a positive effect of the Protestant religion on literacy and industrialization in 19th
century Prussia. (Also related is the evidence put forth by Iyigun (2008) showing that the rise of the Ottoman Empire
and its movement into Europe is partly responsible for the Protestant Reformation.)
  18 See Inikori (2002) for the alternative view that the profits that accrued to Western Europe during the three corner

Atlantic trade explains much of its growth during the time.




                                                             17
   The persistence of historically determined institutions is also the channel of causality in the

recent study by Saumitra Jha (2008) that examines the effect of early medieval trade on the for-

mation and persistence of institutions promoting religious tolerance. The study by Jha shows that

when looking across cities within India, one finds a positive relationship between participation

in overseas trade during the medieval period and religious conflict during the late 19th and

early 20th centuries. Jha addresses the endogeneity of the selection of medieval ports by using

the existence of natural harbors as an instrument for whether a coastal city was a trading port

and by using propensity score matching techniques. His estimates show that being a town that

was a medieval trading port made it less likely that the town later experienced Hindu-Muslim

riots. Using historical evidence, Jha argues that because Muslims provided access to the markets

of the Middle East, in the towns connected to this overseas trade the returns to Hindu-Muslim

cooperation was much higher. As a result, institutions that supported exchange and a peaceful

coexistence between Hindus and Muslims were developed. Although Jha’s analysis provides

evidence of a causal effect of medieval trade on long-term religious tolerance, it stops short of

verifying empirically that the intervening channel is the persistence of historic institutions.

   A number of studies also provide suggestive evidence of the importance of historic institutions.

Rather than empirically documenting the evolution and persistence of institutions over time,

they show that historic institutions have a strong effect on economic outcomes today. Examples

include Dell’s (2008) analysis of the impact of the early forced labor institutions in colonial Peru

and Bolivia, as well as Banerjee and Iyer’s (2005, 2008) studies of the effects of early land tenure

institutions in colonial India.

   Overall, the literature since Acemoglu et al. (2001) has succeeded at providing additional evi-

dence showing that institutions are an important channel through which history matters. How-

ever, much work remains to be done before we have a clear understanding of the effect that

historic events have on the formation or early institutions and their persistence and importance

for long-term development. For example, in past studies (typically at the macro-level) institutions

have been conceptualized and measured as a broad cluster of institutions. The result of this is

that by and large institutions have remained a black box that we do not clearly understand the

details of. As empirical research continues to examine specific examples of institutional change

and persistence at the micro-level, our understanding of the causes and consequences of specific

institutions will naturally improve.


                                                  18
   The recent study by Acemoglu and Johnson (2004) directly tackles the task of unpacking the

black box we call institutions. The authors make a distinction between two broad clusters of insti-

tutions that they refer to as “property rights institutions” and “contracting institutions”. According

to their definitions, property rights institutions protects individuals from theft or expropriation by

the government or elites, and contracting institutions enforce private contracts written between

individuals. The study explores the historical determinants of both types of institutions. They

show that although there is a strong relationship between a country’s legal origin and the quality

of its contracting environment today,19 legal origin is not correlated with measures of property

rights institutions. Extending previous research by Acemoglu et al. (2001), the study shows that

there is a strong correlation between initial European settler mortality rates and property rights

institutions, but no correlation between settler mortality and contracting institutions.

   To unbundle the effects of these different types of institutions on economic outcomes, the

authors use legal origin as an instrument for contracting institutions and initial settler mortality as

an instrument for property rights institutions.20 Using this IV procedure, the authors estimate the

effect of both types of institutions on three outcome variables: current income, investment, finan-

cial development, and the form of financial intermediation (i.e. equity versus debt contracts). They

find that property rights institutions have a positive and significant effect on income, investment

and financial development. On the other had, contracting institutions appear to have a much more

limited impact, only affecting the form of financial intermediation.


C. Cultural Norms of Behavior

Another way in which historic events can have long-term impacts is if these past events per-

manently affect culture or norms of behavior. Although in economics the notion of culture is

often batted around with little meaning, in other disciplines culture is often given much more

content.21 For example, evolutionary anthropologists have long recognized that there are clear

micro-foundations that explain the existence of a phenomenon like culture (e.g., Cavalli-Sforza

and Feldman, 1981, Boyd and Richerson, 1985). If information acquisition is either imperfect or
  19 This  is consistent with the previous findings of Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2002), Djankov
et al. (2003) and Lerner and Schoar (2005).
   20 Motivated by Acemoglu et al. (2002), the authors also use initial population density in 1500 as an alternative

instrument for property rights institutions.
   21 This is not to say that there are not serious studies in economics that seek to understand and model in a concrete

way culture and its transmission. Examples include Verdier (2000, 2001) and Tabellini (2008).



                                                          19
costly, then selection favors short-cuts to learning. Individuals, rather than using scarce resources

to acquire all of the information needed for every decision to be made, will instead develop

‘rules-of-thumb’. These short-cuts or norms of behavior allows individuals to free-ride on the

learning of others. These short-cuts then become internalized as individuals come to believe that

certain behaviors are the ‘right’ behaviors in certain situations.

   The idea that norms of behavior may be a channel through which history can affect long-term

economic development is not new. One of the most famous links between history, culture, and

development is Max Weber’s (1930) hypothesis that the Protestant Reformation was instrumental

in facilitating the rise of industrial capitalism in Western Europe. He argues that Protestantism, in

contrast to Catholicism, approved the virtues of hard work and the accumulation of wealth, and

that these values, referred to as the “Protestant work ethic”, provided the moral foundation that

spurred the transition to a modern market based industrial economy. A more recent example is

Mokyr’s (2008) argument that an important determinant of the Industrial Revolution was the de-

velopment of a social norm he calls ‘gentlemanly culture’ that emphasized honesty, commitment,

and cooperation.

   Empirical studies exploring the link between history and culture typically attempt to isolate

culture by comparing the some measure or proxy of a cultural belief across individuals in the same

external environment. If individuals’ stated beliefs or actions vary in a systematic manner when

faced with the same situation, then this provides suggestive evidence of the importance of culture.

   This logic builds on earlier studies that attempt to identify the existence of cultural differences

between groups. In this literature, two strategies are employed in an attempt to identify systematic

differences in behavior among individuals in the same environment. The first strategy is to bring

the same environment to people of different backgrounds. This is the strategy undertaken in the

studies by Henrich, Boyd, Bowles, Camerer, Gintis, McElreath, and Fehr (2001) and Henrich, Boyd,

Bowles, Gintis, Fehr, Camerer, McElreath, Gurven, Hill, Barr, Ensminger, Tracer, Marlow, Patton,

Alvard, Gil-White, and Henrich (2005) where the ultimatum game was conducted in 15 extremely

remote small-scale societies across the world. The second strategy that has been employed is to

examine situations where individuals from different backgrounds have been brought into the same

environment. Miguel and Fisman (2007) look for a culture of corruption using the accumulation of

unpaid parking violations among foreign diplomats stationed in Manhattan. Following a similar

logic, Miguel, Saiegh, and Satyanath (2008) seek to identify the existence of a culture of violence


                                                  20
by examining the number of yellow and red cards fouls given to soccer players from different

countries playing in six professional soccer leagues. Fernandez and Fogli (2007) examine the

behavior of individuals whose parents were born in different countries, but today live in the

United States. They find that the labor force participation and fertility of second generation females

are positively correlated with the historic labor force participation and fertility of the individual’s

country of ancestry.

   The earliest studies examining the possibility that cultural norms may be historically deter-

mined use an experimental setting to control for the external environment of individuals. Psy-

chologists Cohen, Nisbett, Bowdle, and Schwarz (1996) test whether in the U.S. South there is a

‘culture of honor’, where a special importance is placed in defending one’s reputation and honor,

even if this requires aggression and violence. Their explanation for why this culture exists in the

U.S. South and not the North lies in the different histories of settlement in the two areas. The

North was settled by groups with a farming background, while the South was settled primarily

by the Celts which had been herders since prehistoric times and had never engaged in large-scale

agriculture. They argue that historically in herding cultures, with their low population densities

and weak states, protection of one’s property was left to the individual. The result of this is that

some aspects of the norms of aggressive behavior that were developed as a means to protect one’s

herds continue to persist today.

   To test the culture of honor hypothesis, Cohen et al. (1996) conducted a series of experiments

involving white males from the U.S. North and South. In the experiments, each individual was

bumped by an accomplis and called an “asshole”. (The participants did not know this was

part of the experiment.) Cohen et al., using a number of methods including direct observation,

psychological tests, and saliva tests, compare the effects of this incident on Southerners relative

to Northerners. They find the Southerners became more upset, were more likely to feel that their

masculinity was threatened, became more physiologically and cognitively primed for aggression

as measured by a rise in testosterone and cortisol levels, and were more likely to engage in

aggressive behavior subsequently.

   Another study, which is well-known study in the sociology literature, is Salaman’s (1980)

comparison of two similar towns located in the same county in Eastern Illinois. Both towns were

settled about 100 years ago, but one was settled by German immigrants from East Frisia and the

other by Irish immigrants. Using survey data, Salaman documents the persistent of norms relating


                                                  21
to land inheritance, which reflect the ethnic heritage of the two communities.

   Avner Greif (1994), relying on game theory and historic evidence, examines the historical ori-

gins of the divergent evolution of collectivist and individualist cultures among the Genoese and

Maghribis, respectively. Relying on qualitative historical evidence, Greif argues that the differences

between the two groups have their origins in the different enforcement strategies undertaken by

merchants towards overseas agents during long-distance medieval trade. Among the Maghribi,

merchants relied on a collective enforcement strategy, where all merchants collectively punish any

agent who had cheated. Among the Genoese, enforcement was achieved through an individual

punishment strategy (Greif, 1993).

   Although these pioneering studies provide scarce evidence supporting the role of norms as a

channel through which history matters, the shortcoming of each study is that only two groups are

being compared. Although the studies by Cohen et al. (1996), Salaman (1980), and Greif (1994)

carefully document differences between the two groups being examined, the studies are unable

to prove that the source of these difference is the historical channel being examined. In all three

examples, the two groups being examined differ along many dimensions other than the historic

dimension under consideration. Because of this, one cannot conclude that the cultural differences

observed today do not arise as a result of other factors.

   More recent studies attempt to use the same comparative logic of these early studies, but extend

the sample to include many more observations. By doing this, more sophisticated statistical

techniques can be employed to help identify with greater certainty the importance of history in

determining current cultural norms of behavior. Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008) empirically

examine the well-know hypothesis put forth by Putnam, Leonardi, and Nanetti (1993) that within

Italy city states that became independent during the 1000–1300 period developed higher level of

social capital and these higher levels of social capital continue to persist today. The authors bring

Putnam et al.’s hypothesis to the data by collecting various city level measures of social capital.

They show that looking across 400 Italian cities, there is a positive relationship between their

measures of social capital and whether the city was free in 1176.

   The core issue when interpreting this correlation is that these independent cities may also be

different along many other dimensions which may also affect social capital today. In an attempt to

overcome this identification issue, the authors rely on historically motivated instrumental vari-

ables. Motivated by the historic fact that after the collapse of the Holy Roman Empire, local


                                                 22
autonomy was often formed around existing religious authorities, the authors use whether a town

had a local bishop in the 5th century as one instrument. Their second instrument is motivated

by the author’s argument that a city that was a part of the Etruscan civilization during the 8th

century was more likely to have become an independent city during the Middle Ages. Using these

instruments, the authors provide IV estimates that are consistent with their OLS estimates.

   The authors also use the historic presence of the Norman Kingdom in the South of Italy to

develop a falsification test to assess the validity of their instruments. Because of the Norman

Kingdom in the South of Italy, Southern cities were unable to gain independence. Using the first

stage estimates from their IV procedure, the authors derive, for each Southern city, the predicted

probability of its being free if it wasn’t located in the South. They show that among these Southern

cities, this predicted probability is uncorrelated with their measures of social capital. The authors

argue that this result provides suggestive evidence that the exclusion restrictions for their IV esti-

mates are satisfied. Having a local bishop during the Holy Roman Empire and being an Etruscan

city does not appear to have an effect on social capital in the South, where their potential effect

through independence was shut down historically. If the relationship between their instruments

and social capital was because of a correlation with factors other than independence, then one

would also expect to find a similar relationship in Southern Italy.

   The recent study by Guido Tabellini (2007) also considers the historical origins of norms of

behavior, but is interested in using this relationship to identify the causal effect of norms on

economic development. His analysis examines differences in trust in others, respect for others, and

confidence in the benefit of individual effort across regions within Europe. Using an IV estimation

strategy to isolate exogenous’ variation in cultural norms, Tabellini uses two historically based

instruments: (i) the literacy rate at the end of the 19th century, and (ii) the political institutions in

place over the past several centuries. According to the first stage estimates, European regions with

historically lower literacy and less well developed institutions today have less trust in others, less

respect for others, and less confidence in the benefit of individual effort. The second stage of the IV

estimates report a positive effect of the measured norms on current per capita income levels and

average annual growth between 1977 and 2001.

   Although the instruments are relevant, it is less clear whether the necessary exclusion restric-

tions are satisfied. The historic variables may have affected the evolution of factors other than

cultural norms. Tabellini clearly understands this concern and controls for a variety of factors


                                                   23
including current literacy, current political institutions, and the historic urbanization rate. He also

controls for the capital stock and the sectoral composition of employment in the 1970s, arguing that

these are also possible channels through which the historic variables may affect current economic

development. The extent to which one takes the estimates as causal rather than correlations

observed in the data is clearly a matter of individual judgement based on the plausibility of the

identification strategy.

   Like Tabellini (2007), Nunn and Wantchekon (2008) also consider the historical determinants of

trust, but in a very different environment. The authors examine whether the trans-Atlantic and

Indian Ocean slave trades were responsible for a culture of mistrust within Africa. This is done by

combining survey data from the 2005 Afrobarometer with estimates of the number of slaves taken

from each ethnic group in Africa. The study finds a very strong negative relationship between an

individual’s reported trust in others and the number of slaves taken from the individual’s ethnic

group during the slave trades. As always, the core concern with this correlation is the non-random

nature of the selection of the historic event. To better understand whether the relationship is

causal, the authors instrument for slave exports using the historic distance from the coast of each

individual’s ethnic group, while controlling for each individual’s current distance from the coast.

The IV results confirm the OLS estimates. They also perform a number of falsification tests, the

results of which suggest that the instrument’s exclusion restrictions are likely satisfied.

   The study then attempts to distinguish between the two most plausible channels through which

the slave trade could have adversely affected trust. One channel is that the slave trade altered the

cultural norms of the ethnic groups exposed to the trade, making them inherently less trusting.

A second channel is that the slave trade resulted in a long-term deterioration of the legal and

political institutions, and these weak institutions cause individuals to be less trusting of others. To

distinguish between these two channels, the authors construct a second measure of slave exports,

which is the average number of slaves that were taken from the geographic location that each

individual is currently living in. This is different from the first measure, which is the average

number of slaves taken from an individual’s ethnic group.22

   Identification between the two channels is based on the fact that when an individual relocates

the individual’s internal norms move with them, but the individual’s external institutional en-
  22 Bothmeasures are averages over a given land area. Because the two variables are measured in the same units, if the
individual lives in the same location as his ancestors the two variables will take on the same value.




                                                          24
vironment is left behind. In other words, institutions, which are external to the individual, are

much more geographically fixed, relative to cultural beliefs which are internal to the individual.

Therefore, if one accepts that the slave trade had a causal effect on trust, then the two variables

can be used distinguish to which extent the slave trade affects trust through the culture channel

and through the institutions channel. If the slave trade affects trust primarily through internalized

norms and cultural beliefs, which are ethnically based and internal to the individuals, then when

looking across individuals what should matter is whether their ancestors were heavily enslaved.

If the slave trade affects trust primarily through its deterioration of domestic institutions, which

are external to the individual and geographically immobile, then what should matter is whether

the external environment the individual is living in was heavily affected by the slave trades.

   The empirical results provide evidence consistent with the slave trades adversely affecting

trust through both cultural norms and institutions, but the magnitude of the culture channel is

approximately twice the magnitude of the institutions channel. This result is significant because it

provides one of the first pieces of evidence attempting to quantifying the impact of a historic event

through both its effect on institutions and on its effect on culture.

   Although, there has been a recent surge in papers seeking to test whether norms of behavior are

one channel through which history matters, the literature is still very young and still very far from

developing a clear understanding about norms. For example, we still do not understand a number

of very fundamental and important issues related to history, norms, and economic development.

In what environments do norms be changed and when do they tend to persist? Which norms are

more persistent and which are more prone to change? What is the relationship between norms and

institutions? How do the two interact? Are they complements or substitutes?


D. Knowledge and Technology

A number of studies have hypothesized that knowledge, education and technology may also be

channels through which historic events have long-term impacts. Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez-De-

Silanes, and Shleifer (2004) conjecture that part of the positive relationship between European

settlement and economic growth documented by Acemoglu et al. (2001) may reflect the knowl-

edge and “know how” brought by the settlers to the colony. Although their study is unable to

provide causal evidence proving their hypothesis, it does highlight correlations in the data that

are consistent with their view. Using OLS estimates the authors show that across countries, school


                                                  25
enrollment in 1900 is positively correlated with income in 2000, and that a country’s initial settler

mortality rate is strongly correlated with schooling in 1900. The authors also examine panel data

over five year intervals between 1960 and 2000. They find a strong positive relationship between

initial education and the subsequent five year change in democracy.23 However, in a subsequent

study, Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson, and Yared (2005b) show that this result is driven by the

worldwide increase in average education and democracy that has occurred between 1960 and 2000.

Once one includes time period fixed effects, then the correlation disappears.

   Evidence from other studies also provide evidence consistent with education being a channel

through which historic events affect long-term development. A recent study by sociologist Robert

Woodberry (2004) documents correlations between measures of the historic presence of missionar-

ies and current per capita income and democracy across former non-settler colonies. Woodberry

argues that the historical presence of missionaries, particularly protestant missionaries, resulted

in a number of benefits for the native populations, such as increased education and a decrease in

injustice and abuse by the colonizers. Because these abuses angered the indigenous populations,

making missionary work more difficult, missionaries had an incentive to fight against these in-

justices. According to Woodberry, these consequences in turn served to promote democracy after

independence.

   As well, Huillery’s (2008a) finding that in French West Africa differences in colonial investments

in schooling can still be observed today also provides some evidence that consistent with a per-

sistent impact of education. Similarly, Bolt and Bezemer (2008) also show that there is a positive

correlation between colonial education levels and current income across African countries.

   As Glaeser et al. (2004) acknowledge, their analysis (as well as the other studies cited here) are

unable to prove the primacy of education as a fundamental factor affecting long-term develop-

ment. The primary difficulty is establishing a causal link. Both the demand for and the supply

of education are potentially endogenous to a large number of factors, including the quality of

domestic institutions. Countries with better institutions also tend to have better governments

that provide a higher level of public goods, including education. As well, countries with better

institutions tend to have more secure property rights, which raises the returns to investments,

including human capital investments. Therefore, when examining correlations between colonial
  23 For additional evidence on the possible link between education and democratic institutions also see Glaeser,

Ponzetto, and Shleifer (2006).




                                                       26
education and current economic development, it is possible that this correlation is being driven by

other omitted factors.

   Although these studies all focus on the transfer of education and knowledge from Europe to

the colonies, historically, there was also knowledge transfer in the other direction. An example is

the Columbian Exchange. A study by Nunn and Qian (2008) examines one part of this exchange:

the introduction of the potato to the Old World from the New World. Their study estimates the

impact of the new food technology on population growth and development in the Old World. The

authors show that the potato was calorically and nutritionally superior to all Old World crops,

such as wheat, barley, rye, and rice. Because of this, for the parts of the Old World that were

able to adopt the potato, its diffusion from the New World resulted in a large positive shock

to agricultural productivity. The authors use a difference-in-differences estimation strategy and

compare the difference in population growth before introduction relative to the population growth

after introduction between countries that were able to adopt potatoes and those that were not. A

country’s ability to adopt potatoes is measured using GIS based climate and soil data from the

FAO. According to their estimates, the introduction of the potato had a very large positive impact

on population growth, accounting for about a quarter of the observed increase in population after

1700. The authors also find that the introduction of the potato spurred economic development,

which they measure by the urbanization rate, but that this effect is felt approximately 100 years

after the increase in population growth.

   The recent study by Comin, Easterly, and Gong (2007) providews a unique analysis of the pos-

sible historical persistence and importance of knowledge and technology. The authors document a

positive relationship between historic technology levels (as far back as 1000BC) and current income

per capita across different parts of the world. The authors interpret their findings using a model

where the stock of existing technology decreases the cost of adopting new technologies, they show

that if a society has a more advanced technology in the past, then because of lower costs to technol-

ogy acquisition, this will increase its stock of technology and income today. Therefore, according

to the model, past technology levels can have a direct causal impact on economic development

today. However, other interpretations of their correlations are also possible. The most obvious is

that the relationship between historic technology and current technology is being driven by some

omitted factor, which tends to persist over time. Viewed in this light, their correlation is not at all

surprisingly, especially given that previous studies have also documented a similar persistence in


                                                  27
economic and political performance over time. For example, Bockstette, Chanda, and Putterman

(2002) empirically document a positive relationship between state antiquity and current economic

performance. The persistence of technology may simply be another manifestation of the persis-

tence of economic performance over long periods of time.


5. The Relationship between History and Geography

An alternative determinant of economic development which is often pitted against history is

geography. Proponents of the geography view argue that unchanging fixed geographic factors,

such as ecology, climate, natural endowments, and the disease environment, are the primary

determinants of long-term economic development. This view has been emphasized by a number of

studies that highlight strong statistical correlations between economic development and a variety

of geographic characteristics, such as the climate (Kamarck, 1976), the disease environment (Sachs,

Mellinger, and Gallup, 2001, Sachs and Malaney, 2002), natural openness (Rappaport and Sachs,

2003), and resource endowments (Sachs and Warner, 2001).

   An example of the tension between the ‘geography matters’ and the ‘history matters’ views

can be seen if we return to Acemoglu et al.’s (2001) examination of the effects of institutions on

long-term growth.24 In their study, because initial settler mortality is used as an instrument for

domestic institutions to explain the causal effect of institutions on income, the exclusion restriction

that must be satisfied is that initial settler mortality only affects current income through its historic

effect on institutions. Jeffrey Sachs (2003), a proponent of the geography view, argues that the IV

estimates are biased because there is a direct and persistent effect of geographic characteristics on

income today. The argument is that areas that had high settler mortality during colonial rule con-

tinue to have deadly disease environments and this results in low income levels today. Therefore,

initial settler mortality is correlated with income through a channel other than institutions and the

exclusion restriction is not satisfied.

   Acemoglu et al. (2001) clearly understand this concern and address it directly in their study.

They argue that the primary diseases that killed Europeans were malaria and yellow fever, and that

these diseases have a limited effect on indigenous populations that have developed immunities to

the diseases. Because of native immunities, it is unlikely that European settler mortality rates are
  24 This debate often takes the form of ‘geography matters’ versus ‘history matters’. See for example Rodrik, Subrama-

nian, and Trebbi (2004).



                                                          28
highly correlated with the disease burdens faced by native populations either historically or today.

The authors also show that their results remain robust to the inclusion of a host of controls that

measure geographic characteristics and the local disease environment.

   Another piece of evidence of the relative importance of history versus geography has been put

forth by Acemoglu et al. (2002), who document that there has been a ‘reversal of fortunes’ among

countries that were colonized. The countries that were the most prosperous in 1500 are the poorest

countries today.25 They argue that if geography is a fundamental determinant long-term economic

development, then we would not expect this drastic change in the relative prosperity of countries

over time.

   Part of the reason for the debate lies in the fact that geography affects human actions in the

past, and it affects human actions today. In other words, in addition to affecting income directly,

geography also influences history which in turn affects income today. There are many examples

where small and seemingly innocuous geographic differences become magnified through historic

events and as a result end up having large impacts on long-term economic development. One

example is the differences in soil and climate which made plantation agriculture and its reliance

on slavery more or less profitable in different parts of the Americas (Engerman and Sokoloff, 1997,

2002). Even more dramatic examples of the effect of geography through history come from Jared

Diamond’s (1997) book Guns, Germs and Steel. The book is devoted to exploring the answer to the

question of why Europeans colonized the rest of the world and not the other way around. The

proximate answer to this question is clear. It is because Europeans had superior technology, such

as guns, swords, and ships. As well, they also brought with them germs with them that killed

large numbers of native populations, particularly in the Americas and Australia. But why did

Europeans have superior technology? And why did their germs kill native populations and not

the other way around?

   Diamond’s answer to the first question is that the Europe’s technological advantage, which

stems from more complex specialized societies, arose because crops and animals were domesti-

cated earlier and in more varieties than in other parts of the world. Among the nine locations

that food production initially arose, the Fertile Crescent was the first and domesticated the most
  25 Huillery
            (2008b) tests for a reversal of fortunes within districts of former French West Africa. She does not find
any evidence of a reversal at this more micro level. Instead, she finds that Europeans tended to settle in the initially
more prosperous parts of French West Africa and European settlement exerted a strong positive effect on long-term
development.




                                                          29
species. Despite its name, the Fertile Crescent was not the most fertile region on earth. Instead,

its advantage lied in its having the largest number of species of wild plants that were suitable for

domestication. Similarly, the Fertile Crescent, and Eurasia more generally, also had the largest

endowment of animals that could be domesticated.

   The domestication of plants and animals quickly spread East and West throughout Eurasia, but

diffused much less quickly South to the African continent. This is because when moving East or

West, the length of the day does not change, and the climate is generally not drastically different.

However, this is not true when moving North or South, where the length of the day changes

and the climate typically is very different. More generally, for continents with a North-South

orientation, such as the Americas or Africa, domestication or technological advance tended not to

spread as quickly as in Eurasia with its East-West orientation. Because of the early domestication

of animals in Eurasia, humans lived in close proximity to animals. As a result of this, new animal-

based diseases, such as measles, tuberculosis, influenza, and smallpox, developed. Over time

genetic resistances to the diseases were developed. The parts of the world without domesticated

animals did not develop these diseases or a genetic resistance to the diseases. This explains why

European diseases decimated native populations and not the other way around.

   Overall, Diamond’s explanation for Europe’s global dominance illustrates clearly the large

effects that geography can have through history. The historical origins of European colonization of

the globe lies in two deep determinants: (i) being endowed with wild plants and animals suitable

for domestication, and (ii) being located on a continents with an East-West orientation.

   Although Diamond’s analysis provides descriptive evidence showing that geography can have

large impacts through history, it does not provide a quantitative assessment of the relative impor-

tance of the historic effect of geography relative to its direct contemporaneous effect on develop-

ment.26 A recent study by Nunn and Puga (2007) attempts to estimate the magnitude of these two

channels for one geographic characteristic, terrain ruggedness, which is measured as the average

absolute slope of a country’s surface area. The study identifies two channels through which terrain

ruggedness should matter for economic development. One is a direct contemporaneous effect of

ruggedness on income. All else equal, on rugged terrain it is more difficult to build buildings,

roads, bridges and other infrastructure; agriculture and irrigation is also more difficult; and trade
  26 Olsson and Hibbs Jr. (2005) empirically tests Diamond (1997). Overall, their estimates provide strong support for

his hypotheses.




                                                         30
is more costly. For these reasons, terrain ruggedness is expected to have a direct negative effect on

income.

   The study also identifies a historic effect of terrain ruggedness. During Africa’s slave trade,

societies were able to use rugged terrain to protect and hide from slave raiders and kidnappers.

This allowed individuals, villages, and societies to partially defend against the negative effects

of the slave trades documented in Nunn (2008a). Therefore, for the African continent which

was exposed to the slave trade, ruggedness also had a historic indirect positive effect on income.

Ruggedness allowed areas to escape from the slave trade, thereby increasing long-term economic

growth. Exploiting the fact that the slave trade only affected Africa, Nunn and Puga are able

to estimate the magnitude of both effects of ruggedness. They find that the indirect historic

effect of ruggedness is consistently twice the magnitude of the direct contemporaneous effect

of ruggedness, suggesting that for this geographic characteristics, the importance of geography

through history swamps its importance today.

   Overall, the body of evidence reviewed here suggests that the largest effects of geography on

current economic development may work through its influence on past events rather than through

its direct effect on economic outcomes today.


6. Conclusions

The empirical literature examining the relationship between history and current economic devel-

opment has developed considerably in the past years. The main fact established by this literature

is that history matters. A wide variety of papers have documented the important effects that

certain historic events have had on long-term economic development. These studies range from

Acemoglu et al.’s (2001) study showing that colonial rule affected the subsequent development of

domestic institutions and economic development to Banerjee and Iyer’s (2005) study that shows

the importance of colonial land revenue systems within India to Nunn’s (2008a) analysis showing

that Africa’s slave trade adversely affected subsequent development.

   Although the literature has made considerable progress in showing that history matters, what

remains less well understood are the exact channels of causality through which history matters.

For most of the studies undertaken to date, their greatest shortcomings lie in their inability to

precisely identify the exact mechanism or channel of causality. For example, Nunn’s (2008a) study

of Africa’s slave trade documents the adverse long-term effects of the slave trade, but it is unable

                                                 31
to identify the precise channels and mechanisms at play. Similarly, Banerjee and Iyer’s (2005)

analysis is unable to pin down the precise channels through which the historical land revenue

system in India, established by the British 150 years ago, continues to have an effect long after

it was abolished. Even in Acemoglu et al.’s (2001) analysis, which identifies a broad cluster of

institutions as the intervening mechanism, this broad cluster remains, by and large, a black box

left to be unpacked. Although the follow-up paper by Acemoglu and Johnson (2004) takes initial

steps in this direction, much remains to be done before this historic channel of causality is clearly

understood.

   The most recent studies that rely on micro-level data and analysis (e.g., Acemoglu et al., 2008,

Dell, 2008, Huillery, 2008a, Iyer, 2007, Nunn and Wantchekon, 2008) are beginning to identify finer

causal factors and more precise mechanisms. However, since these studies rely on data at a much

more micro level, the scope of their analysis is more limited. For example, it is difficult to know if

the effects of the mita forced labor system convincingly identified by Dell (2008) are similar to the

effects of other coercive labor systems in other parts of the world. For this reason, as studies

becomes much more focused, evidence from complementary studies from other locations and

times are also needed before one can assess whether specific results are part of broad systematic

patterns that exist in the data or whether the results are specific to that environment. For this

reason, although this literature has grown greatly in recent years, many more historic events and

mechanisms left to be examined before we have a clear picture of the overall importance of historic

events and the specific channels through which they continue to affect economic development

today.



References

Acemoglu, Daron, “Reward Structure and the Allocation of Talent,” European Economic Review, 39
 (1995), 17–33.

Acemoglu, Daron, María Angélica Bautista, Pablo Querubin, and James A. Robinson, “Economic
  and Political Inequality in Development: The Case of Cundinamarca, Colombia,” in Elhanan
  Helpman, ed., Institutions and Economic Performance (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA,
 2008), 181–245.

Acemoglu, Daron, and Simon Johnson, “Unbundling Institutions,” Journal of Political Economy, 113
  (2004), 949–995.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
  Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review, 91 (2001), 1369–1401.


                                                 32
———, “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World
 Income Distribution,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117 (2002), 1231–1294.

———, “The Rise of Europe: Atlantic Trade, Institutional Change and Economic Growth,” Ameri-
 can Economic Review, 95 (2005a), 546–579.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson, and Pierre Yared, “From Education to
  Democracy,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 95 (2005b), 44–49.

Banerjee, Abhijit, and Lakshmi Iyer, “History, Institutions and Economic Performance: The Legacy
  of Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India,” American Economic Review, 95 (2005), 1190–1213.

———, “Colonial Land Tenure, Electoral Competition and Public Goods in India,” (2008), Harvard
 Business School Working Paper 08-062.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Lakshmi Iyer, and Rohini Somanathan, “History, Social Divisions and Public
  Goods in Rural India,” Journal of the European Economic Association Papers and Proceedings, 3 (2005),
  639–647.

Becker, Sascha O., and Ludger Woessmann, “Was Weber Wrong? A Human Capital Theory of
  Protestant Economic History,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124 (2009), forthcoming.

Berger, Daniel, “Taxes, Institutions and Governance: Evidence from Colonial Nigeria,” (2008),
  mimeo, New York University.

Berkowitz, Daniel, and Karen Clay, “American Civil Law Origins: Implications for State Constitu-
  tions,” American Law and Economics Review, 7 (2005), 62–84.

———, “The Effect of Judicial Independence on Courts: Evidence from the American States,”
 Journal of Legal Studies, 35 (2006), 399–400.

Bertocchi, Graziella, and Fabio Canova, “Did Colonization Matter for Growth? An Empirical Ex-
  ploration into the Historical Causes of Africa’s Underdevelopment,” European Economic Review,
  46 (2002), 1851–1871.

Bockstette, Valeri, Areendam Chanda, and Louis Putterman, “States and Markets: The Advantage
  of an Early Start,” Journal of Economic Growth, 7 (2002), 347–369.

Bolt, Jutta, and Dirk Bezemer, “Understanding Long-Run African Growth: Colonial Institutions or
  Colonial Education? Evidence from a New Data Set,” (2008), mimeo.

Botero, Juan C., Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer,
  “The Regulation of Labor,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (2004), 1339–1382.

Boyd, Robert, and Peter J. Richerson, Culture and the Evolutionary Process (University of Chicago
  Press, London, 1985).

Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., and M.W. Feldman, Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A Quantitative Ap-
  proach (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1981).

Cohen, Dov, Richard E. Nisbett, Brian F. Bowdle, and Norbert Schwarz, “Insult, Agression, and the
  Southern Culture of Honor: An “Experimental Ethnography”,” Journal of Personality and Social
  Psychology, 70 (1996), 945–960.

Comin, Diego, William Easterly, and Erick Gong, “Was the Wealth of Nations Determined in 1000
  B.C.?” (2007), mimeo, Harvard Business School.

                                                  33
David, Paul A., “Clio and the Economics of QWERTY,” American Economic Review Papers and
 Proceedings, 75 (1985), 332–337.

Davis, Donald R., and David E. Weinstein, “Bones, Bombs, and Breakpoints: The Geography of
 Economic Activity,” American Economic Review, 92 (2002), 1269–1289.

———, “A Search for Multiple Equilibria in Urban Industrial Structure,” Journal of Regional Science,
 48 (2008), 29–65.

Dell, Melissa, “The Mining Mita: Explaining Institutional Persistence,” (2008), mimeo, MIT.

DeLong, J. Bradford, and Andrei Shleifer, “Princes and Merchants: City Growth before the Indus-
 trial Revolution,” Journal of Law and Economics, 36 (1993), 671–702.

Diamond, Jared, “The Tasmanians: The Longest Isolation, the Simplest Technology,” Nature, 274
  (1978), 185–186.

———, Guns, Germs, and Steel (W.W. Norton & Company, New York, 1997).

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, “The Regula-
  tion of Entry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117 (2002), 1–37.

———, “Courts,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (2003), 453–517.

Engerman, Stanley L., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and Differential
  Paths of Growth Among New World Economies: A View from Economic Historians of the
  United States,” in Stephen Harber, ed., How Latin America Fell Behind (Stanford University Press,
  Stanford, 1997), 260–304.

———, “Factor Endowments, Inequality, and Paths of Development Among New World
 Economies,” Working Paper 9259, National Bureau of Economic Research (2002).

Englebert, Pierre, “Pre-Colonial Institutions, Post-Colonial States, and Economic Development in
  Tropical Africa,” Political Research Quarterly, 53 (2000a), 7–36.

———, “Solving the Mystery of the Africa Dummy,” World Development, 28 (2000b), 1821–1835.

Fernandez, Raquel, and Alessandra Fogli, “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work,
  and Fertility,” (2007), mimeo, New York University.

Feyrer, James D., and Bruce Sacerdote, “Colonialism and Modern Income: Islands as Natural
  Experiments,” Review of Economics and Statistics (2009), forthcoming.

Frankema, Ewout, “Colonial Origins of Inequality: Exploring the Causes and Consequences of
  Land Distribution,” (2006), mimeo, University of Groningen.

Galor, Oded, Omer Moav, and Dietrich Vollrath, “Inequality in Land Ownership, the Emergence
 of Human Capital Promoting Institutions and the Great Divergence,” Review of Economic Studies
 (2009), forthcoming.

Gennaioli, Nicola, and Ilia Rainer, “The Modern Impact of Precolonial Centralization in Africa,”
 Journal of Economic Growth, 12 (2007), 185–234.

Glaeser, Edward L., Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, “Do Institu-
  tions Cause Growth?” Journal of Economic Growth, 9 (2004), 271–303.



                                                34
Glaeser, Edward L., Giancomo Ponzetto, and Andrei Shleifer, “Why Does Democracy Need Edu-
  cation,” Working Paper 12128, National Bureau of Economic Research (2006).

Greif, Avner, “Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: The Maghribi
  Traders’ Coalition,” American Economic Review, 83 (1993), 525–548.

———, “Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theoretical Reflection
 on Collectivist and Individualist Societies,” Journal of Political Economy, 102 (1994), 912–950.

———, Institutions and the Path ot the Modern Economy: Lessons from Medieval Trade (Cambridge
 University Press, New York, 2006).

Grier, Robin M., “Colonial Legacies and Economic Growth,” Public Choice, 98 (1999), 317–335.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, “Long-Term Persistence,” (2008), mimeo.

Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
 Per Worker than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114 (1999), 83–116.

Henrich, Joseph, “Demography and Cultural Evolution: How Adaptive Cultural Processes can
 Produce Maladaptive Losses – The Tasmanian Case,” American Antiquity, 69 (2004), 197–214.

Henrich, Joseph, R. Boyd, S. Bowles, H. Gintis, E. Fehr, C. Camerer, R. McElreath, M. Gurven,
 K. Hill, A. Barr, J. Ensminger, D. Tracer, F. Marlow, J. Patton, M. Alvard, F. Gil-White, and
 N. Henrich, “‘Economic Man’ in Cross-Cultural Perspective: Ethnography and Experiments
 from 15 Small-Scale Societies,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28 (2005), 795–855.

Henrich, Joseph, Robert Boyd, Sam Bowles, Colin Camerer, Herbert Gintis, Richard McElreath, and
 Ernst Fehr, “In Search of Homo Economicus: Experiments in 15 Small-Scale Societies,” American
 Economic Review, 91 (2001), 73–79.

Hoff, Karla, “Paths of Institutional Development: A View from Economic History,” World Bank
 Research Observer, 18 (2003), 205–226.

Huillery, Elise, “History Matters: The Long-Term Impact of Colonial Public Investments in French
 West Africa,” (2008a), mimeo, Paris School of Economics.

———, “The Impact of European Settlement within French West Africa: Did Pre-Colonial Prosper-
 ous Areas Fall Behind?” (2008b), mimeo, Paris School of Economics.

Inikori, Joseph E., Africans and the Industrial Revolution in England: A Study in International Trade and
  Economic Development (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002).

Iyer, Lakshmi, “Direct Versus Indirect Colonial Rule in India: Long-Term Consequences,” (2007),
  mimeo, Harvard Business School.

Iyigun, Murat, “Luther and Suleyman,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123 (2008), forthcoming.

Jha, Saumitra, “Trade, Institutions and Religious Tolerance: Evidence from India,” (2008), mimeo,
  Stanford University.

Kamarck, Andrew M., The Tropics and Economic Development (John Hopkins University Press, Balti-
  more, MD, 1976).

Knack, Stephen, and Philip Keefer, “Institutions and Economic Performance: Cross-Country Tests
 Using Alternative Institutional Measures,” Economics & Politics, 7 (1995), 207–227.


                                                   35
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, “The Economic Consequences
  of Legal Origins,” Journal of Economic Literature, 46 (2008), 285–332.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “Legal Determi-
  nants of External Finance,” Journal of Finance, 52 (1997), 1131–1150.

———, “Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106 (1998), 1113–1155.

Lagerlöf, Nils-Petter, “Geography, Institutions and Growth: The United States as a Microcosm,”
  (2005), mimeo, York University.

Landes, David S., The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some are so Rich and Some so Poor (W.W.
  Norton & Company, New York, 1998).

Lange, Matthew K., “British Colonial Legacies and Political Development,” World Development, 32
  (2004), 905–922.

Lerner, Josh, and Antoinette Schoar, “Does Legal Enforcement Affect Financial Transactions? The
  Contractual Channel in Private Equity,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120 (2005), 223–246.

Mahoney, Paul G., “The Common Law and Economic Growth: Hayek Might be Right,” The Journal
 of Legal Studies, 30 (2001), 503–525.

Mauro, Paolo, “Corruption and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110 (1995), 681–712.

Mehlum, Halvor, Karl Moene, and Ragnar Torvik, “Predator or Prey? Parasitic Enterprises in
 Economic Development,” European Economic Review, 47 (2003), 275–294.

Miguel, Edward, and Ray Fisman, “Corruption, Norms and Legal Enforcement: Evidence from
 Diplomatic Parking Tickets,” Journal of Political Economy, 115 (2007), 1020–1048.

Miguel, Edward, and Gérard Roland, “The Long Run Impact of Bombing Vietnam,” (2006), mimeo,
 University of California, Berkeley.

Miguel, Edward, Sebastian Saiegh, and Shanker Satyanath, “National Cultures and Soccer Vio-
 lence,” (2008), mimeo, University of California, Berkeley.

Mitchener, Kris James, and Ian W. McLean, “The Productivity of U.S. States Since 1880,” Journal of
 Economic Growth, 8 (2003), 73–114.

Mokyr, Joel, “The Institutional Origins of the Industrial Revolution,” in Elhanan Helpman, ed.,
 Institutions and Economic Performance (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 2008), 64–119.

Mulligan, Casey B., and Andrei Shleifer, “Conscription as Regulation,” American Law and Economics
 Review, 7 (2005a), 85–111.

———, “The Extent of the Market and the Supply of Regulation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 120 (2005b), 1445–1473.

Munshi, Kaivan, and Nicholas Wilson, “Identity, Parochial Institutions, and Career Decisions:
 Linking the Past to the Present in the American Midwest,” (2008), mimeo, Brown University.

Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, “Why is Rent-Seeking So Costly to
 Growth,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 83 (1993), 409–414.

North, Douglas C., Structure and Change in Economic History (W.W. Norton & Company, New York,
 1981).

                                               36
———, Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance (Cambridge University Press,
 New York, 1990).

North, Douglas C., and Robert Paul Thomas, The Rise of the Western World (Cambridge University
 Press, Cambridge, UK, 1973).

Nunn, Nathan, “Historical Legacies: A Model Linking Africa’s Past to its Current Underdevelop-
 ment,” Journal of Development Economics, 83 (2007a), 157–175.

———, “Relationship-Specificity, Incomplete Contracts, and the Pattern of Trade,” Quarterly Jour-
 nal of Economics, 122 (2007b), 569–600.

———, “The Long-Term Effects of Africa’s Slave Trades,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123
 (2008a), 139–176.

———, “Slavery, Inequality, and Economic Development in the Americas: An Examination of the
 Engerman-Sokoloff Hypothesis,” in Elhanan Helpman, ed., Institutions and Economic Performance
 (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 2008b), 148–180.

Nunn, Nathan, and Diego Puga, “Ruggedness: The Blessing of Bad Geography in Africa,” (2007),
 mimeo.

Nunn, Nathan, and Nancy Qian, “Columbus’s Contribution to World Population and Urbaniza-
 tion: A Natural Experiment Examining the Introduction of Potatoes,” (2008), mimeo, Harvard
 University.

Nunn, Nathan, and Leonard Wantchekon, “The Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade and the Evolution of
 Mistrust in Africa: An Empirical Analysis,” (2008), mimeo, Harvard University.

Olsson, Ola, and Douglas A. Hibbs Jr., “Biogeography and Long-Run Economic Development,”
  European Economic Review, 49 (2005), 909–938.

Price, Gregory N., “Economic Growth in a Cross-section of Nonindustrial Countries: Does Colo-
  nial Heritage Matter for Africa?” Review of Development Economics, 7 (2003), 478–495.

Putnam, Robert, Robert Leonardi, and Raffaella Nanetti, Making Democracy Work (Simon & Schus-
  ter, New York, 1993).

Rappaport, Jordan, and Jeffrey D. Sachs, “The United States as a Coastal Nation,” Journal of
  Economic Growth, 8 (2003), 5–46.

Redding, Stephen J., Daniel Sturm, and Nikolaus Wolf, “History and Industrial Location: Evidence
  from German Airports,” (2007), CEPR Discussion Paper Series, No. 6345.

Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi, “Institutions Rule: The Primacy of
  Institutions Over Geography and Integration in Economic Development,” Journal of Economic
  Growth, 9 (2004), 131–165.

Sachs, Jeffrey D., “Institutions Don’t Rule: Direct Effects of Geography on Per Capita Income,”
  Working Paper 9490, National Bureau of Economic Research (2003).

Sachs, Jeffrey D., and Pia Malaney, “The Economic and Social Burden of Malaria,” Nature, 415
  (2002), 680–685.

Sachs, Jeffrey D., Andrew D. Mellinger, and John L. Gallup, “The Geography of Poverty and
  Wealth,” Scientific American, 284 (2001), 70–76.

                                              37
Sachs, Jeffrey D., and Andrew Warner, “The Curse of Natural Resources,” European Economic
  Review, 45 (2001), 827–838.

Salaman, Sonya, “Ethnic Differences in Farm Family Land Transfers,” Rural Sociology, 45 (1980),
  290–308.

Schelling, Thomas, The Strategy of Conflict (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1960).

Sokoloff, Kenneth L., and Stanley L. Engerman, “History Lessons: Institutions, Factor Endow-
  ments, and Paths of Development in the New World,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14 (2000),
  217–232.

Tabellini, Guido, “Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions of Europe,”
  (2007), mimeo, Bocconi University.

———, “The Scope of Cooperation: Values and Incentives,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123
 (2008), 905–950.

Tilly, Charles, Coercion, Capital and European States, A.D. 990–1990 (Blackwell Publishers, Cam-
   bridge, 1990).

Verdier, Alberto Bisin Thierry, “Beyond the Melting Pot: Cultural Transmission, Marriage and the
  Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115 (2000), 955–988.

———, “The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the Dynamics of Preferences,” Journal of
 Economic Theory, 97 (2001), 298–319.

Weber, Max, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (Routledge, London, 1930).

Woodberry, Robert D., “The Shadow of Empire: Christian Missions, Colonial Policy, and Democ-
 racy in PostColonial Societies,” Phd dissertation in sociology, University of North Carolonia at
 Chapel Hill (2004).




                                                 38
