                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       DO REGULATIONS BASED ON CREDIT RATINGS AFFECT A FIRM'S COST
                              OF CAPITAL?

                                           Darren J. Kisgen
                                           Philip E. Strahan

                                         Working Paper 14890
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14890


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2009




We thank seminar participants at Boston College, Bentley University and Dalhousie University. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Darren J. Kisgen and Philip E. Strahan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Do Regulations Based on Credit Ratings Affect a Firm’s Cost of Capital?
Darren J. Kisgen and Philip E. Strahan
NBER Working Paper No. 14890
April 2009
JEL No. G18,G2,G3

                                            ABSTRACT

In February 2003, the SEC officially certified a fourth credit rating agency, Dominion Bond Rating
Service (“DBRS”), for use in bond investment regulations. After DBRS certification, bond yields
change in the direction implied by the firm’s DBRS rating relative to its ratings from other certified
rating agencies. A one notch better DBRS rating corresponds to a 39 basis point reduction in a firm’s
debt cost of capital. The impact on yields is driven by cases where the DBRS rating is better than
other ratings and is larger among bonds rated near the investment-grade cutoff. These findings indicate
that ratings-based regulations on bond investment affect a firm’s cost of debt capital.


Darren J. Kisgen
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Av.
Chestnut Hill, MA
Kisgen@bc.edu

Philip E. Strahan
Carroll School of Management
324B Fulton Hall
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
philip.strahan@bc.edu
Credit rating agencies play a central role in financial markets. Previous studies examine

whether credit ratings affect yields on a firm’s bonds due to the information ratings impart

about default risk. Ratings may also affect bond yields because regulations affect the kinds of

investors able to hold a firm’s bonds or the cost of holding a bond. Relying on an exogenous

change in the regulatory status of a particular rating agency, this paper shows that ratings-

based regulations of bond investment affect the cost of debt. We also examine how

regulatory status subsequently affects a rating agency’s rating decisions.



The Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) designates certain rating agencies as

Nationally Recognized Statistical Ratings Organizations (“NRSRO(s)”), certifying these

agencies as qualified for implementation of various kinds of regulations. Numerous

institutions and regulatory bodies rely on ratings from NRSROs for bond investment rules and

regulations. These regulations, for example, link the number of institutional investors who

may hold bonds (or their capital requirements) to ratings of those bonds granted by an

NRSRO (see Kisgen (2006) and Section I.A below for more details). As of January 2003,

Standard and Poor’s, Moody’s and Fitch were the only NRSROs, but in February 2003 the

SEC designated Toronto-based Dominion Bond Rating Service (“DBRS”) as a fourth

NRSRO. We exploit this unexpected change in DBRS’s regulatory status as a quasi-natural

experiment to test how ratings can affect bond yields, not merely as a proxy for information

but directly through their impact on regulatory enforcement.



We first document that the change in DBRS’s status affected yields on the bonds they rate.

Firms DBRS rates better than the other NRSROs as of January 2003 experience a decline in

their cost of debt after February 2003. By the end of 2003 these firms had experienced a 39


                                                1
basis point drop in bond yields compared to firms whose DBRS ratings were the same as the

average of the other agencies. To avoid potential selection bias, we consider only bonds rated

by DBRS prior to their obtaining NRSRO status. By holding the ratings fixed as of January

of 2003, we rule out information-based explanations for the change in yields; since the ratings

do not change over time, new information can not explain the change in yields. These tests

indicate that the change in regulatory status of DBRS changed the impact of its ratings on a

firm’s bond yields.



While our tests rule out changes in information affecting yields, it may be that NRSRO status

itself increases the value of DBRS ratings after February or 2003. Perhaps SEC certification

enhances DBRS’ reputation, thereby increasing the credibility of its ratings in the market,

even if those ratings do not change. Prior to 2003, DBRS was not a well-established rating

agency. Several rating agencies petitioned the SEC for NRSRO status, but only DBRS was

granted the accreditation. This vetting out process may indicate that DBRS ratings are higher

quality, and thus financial markets may consider ratings provided by DBRS as more

informative after February 2003.



To rule out certification, we conduct three additional tests. First, we show that the effect of

the change in DBRS’s regulatory status affects yields only when they rate a firm better than

the other agencies; when the DBRS rating is worse, the cost of capital does not increase.

Certification following promotion to NRSRO would imply a symmetric effect on yields. In

contrast, the regulatory explanation implies that better ratings would affect bond yields

because many of the regulations link investment constraints to the best of the NRSRO ratings

(or sometimes the second best). Second, the effect on yields is stronger around the


                                                2
investment-grade boundary, where regulations based on ratings are most prevalent and

significant. The consequence for an issuer losing its investment grade, for example, can be

substantial. When S&P downgraded General Motors to speculative grade, their bonds fell

8%, and at least one reason provided was that the “downgrade has sent institutions running for

the exits…many [of them] have rules that prohibit them from owning non-investment grade

debt” (Forbes, 2005). We find that firms with better DBRS ratings around the investment

grade cutoff see a reduction in their debt cost of capital of approximately 54 basis points.

While we have no direct data on bond holdings, we believe this decline occurs because more

investors can hold these bonds, leading gradually to a decline in their yields. Third, we

conduct two falsification tests, incorrectly assuming that a change in regulatory status

occurred in February 2004 or February 2005. Conducting the same experiments with these

alternate dates does not generate any of the results we find for the actual event date. We

conclude from this additional evidence that credit ratings affect a firm’s cost of capital

specifically due to regulations based on ratings.



Having established our main finding, we next test whether DBRS changes its ratings methods

when it becomes an NRSRO. These tests are more descriptive in nature, and any

interpretation of these results is more speculative. Yet we report these results to provide a

more complete description of the impact of this event. After becoming an NRSRO, DBRS

expands its market presence and rates more U.S. issuers. Moreover, before becoming an

NRSRO, DBRS focused on the high-grade market. After, they increased their emphasis on

speculative-grade firms and seem to have begun rating a wider array of firms, just as the

incumbent NRSROs do.




                                                3
We also find that DBRS ratings become more highly correlated with the ratings of the other

NRSROs after February 2003. This ratings convergence occurs because the relationship

between issue size and lagged yields and the DBRS rating shifts. Prior to becoming an

NRSRO, large issues and bonds with a relatively high yield were more likely to be rated

better by DBRS than the other agencies. This effect disappears after DBRS becomes an

NRSRO. Also, when we control for the effect of size and yields, the ratings convergence

result disappears. DBRS seems to have rated large and higher-yield firms more generously,

perhaps trying to win market share. After February 2003, this incentive may have been

dominated by the incentive to provide more credible ratings.



Our study extends recent papers testing how ratings affect bond yields. Kliger and Sarig

(2000) use a similar quasi-natural experiment approach to test how information from ratings

affects yields. They compare bond yields before and after Moody’s added modifiers in April

1982, increasing the fineness of their ratings measure (e.g., an A-rated firm then became an

A1, A2 or A3 rated firm). They find that the change in information content decreased yields

of bonds rated at the high end of the scale relative to bonds rated at the low end. Our study

complements theirs. Like Kliger and Sarig (2000), we exploit a natural experiment, but our

set-up varies the regulatory status of the rating agency holding information constant, exactly

the reverse of their empirical design. Consistent with our study, Bongaerts, Cremers and

Goetzmann (2008) find that Fitch ratings - the third NRSRO – matter mainly for regulatory

reasons. While they are not able to exploit a natural experiment, they find that firms are more

likely to have a Fitch rating when S&P and Moody’s are on opposite sides of the investment

grade margin, and that a positive Fitch rating only comes with lower yields for bonds near




                                               4
investment grade. Taken together, these studies indicate that ratings affect a firm’s cost of

capital for both information and regulatory reasons.1



The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section I we establish the main hypothesis

of the paper and provide institutional details regarding rating regulations. In Section II we

discuss the contribution of the paper relative to existing literature. In Section III we provide

the empirical tests of the paper. In Section IV we conclude.



I. Hypothesis Development and Institutional Background



I. A. Ratings-Based Regulations and Debt Cost of Capital



The cost of debt capital for a firm is fundamentally determined by the risk free cost of capital

and a spread due to estimated default risk. If the supply of debt capital from investors is

infinitely elastic at the correct rate of interest, regulatory restrictions for certain investors on

bond investment should not affect a firm’s cost of capital. However, if the supply of capital is

not infinitely elastic, regulations which affect the cost to investors of investing in a particular

bond class or restrictions placed on investors in certain bonds may affect a firm’s cost of




1
  Our study also generally relates to previous literature which examines the information content of ratings, and
whether ratings affect financing and investment decisions. Hand, Holthausen and Leftwich (1992) find
statistically significant negative average excess bond and stock returns upon the announcement of bond rating
downgrades. Ederington, Yawitz and Roberts (1987) and West (1973) find that credit ratings are significant
predictors of yield to maturity. Ederington and Goh (1998) show that credit rating downgrades result in negative
equity returns. Faulkender and Petersen (2006) and Sufi (2009) find that having a rating increases a firm’s
leverage (and they conclude this is due to increased access to capital). Kisgen (2006 and 2009) finds that credit
ratings affect firm capital structure decisions.


                                                       5
capital.2 For example, yields on bonds with higher regulatory costs will be higher to compete

with bonds that have lower regulatory costs, ceteris paribus. By affecting a firm’s cost of

capital, these regulations may materially affect a firm’s financing and investment decisions.



Many investment rules and regulations are based on a bond’s credit rating as provided by

rating agencies. Regulations based on credit ratings began as early as 1931, when banks were

required to mark-to-market lower rated bonds. In 1936, the U.S. Treasury Department then

issued a ruling that banks could not invest in securities that are “distinctly and predominantly

speculative” according to a “designated standard” which must be “supported by not less than

two rating manuals.” Following this, banks went through a significant reorganization with the

ultimate result being an increase in spreads between BBB rated and BB rated bonds. In 1989,

Savings and Loans were prohibited from investing in junk bonds such that they could not hold

any junk bonds by 1994. In 1993, the Basle Committee on Bank Supervision proposed in its

market risk guidelines that internationally active commercial banks dealing in securities

should hold extra capital against their non investment-grade bond inventories as well.



Insurance company investment is also affected by regulations based on ratings. In 1951, the

National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) established the Securities

Valuation Office (SVO) to assign risk ratings to bonds held in the investment portfolios of

insurance companies. These risk ratings are largely determined using credit ratings, whereby

the SVO assigns 6 quality ratings that correspond to the ratings of the major agencies. Firms

that are rated A or above get a value of 1, firms that are BBB get a value of 2, BB get a 3, B a


2
 Restrictions on investment might also affect a bond’s liquidity, which would affect its cost of capital even if the
supply curve was infinitely elastic. Regulations affect firm disclosure as well; in 1982, the SEC allowed less
detailed disclosure requirements for issuers of investment grade securities relative to non-investment grade.

                                                         6
4, any C level gets a 5, and any D rating gets a 6. The insurance company’s capital

requirements are determined by these ratings, thus higher capital requirements are imposed on

insurers when their portfolios contain bonds with lower ratings, so the riskier securities are

more expensive for insurance companies to own. At this time, the NAIC began equating the

term “investment grade” to bonds with a Baa-rating or better. Investment grade bonds were

therefore bonds with a rating of Baa or BBB or higher by Moody’s or S&P’s, respectively,

and junk (or high-yield) bonds are those with rating of Ba or BB or lower by Moody’s or

S&P’s, respectively. In 1990, the NAIC further tightened guidelines for junk bond

investment by life insurance companies.



Several additional institutions are affected by regulations based on ratings. SEC Rule 2a-7

states that money market mutual funds are required to limit investments in bonds rated less

than A+, and commercial paper rated less than A1 (see Kisgen (2007)). In 1975, the SEC

adopted Rule 15c3-1 that set forth broker-dealer haircut requirements that were a function of

the credit ratings of those securities. Through this rule, the SEC applied a net capital rule

whereby credit ratings became the basis for determining the percentage reduction in the value

(“haircut”) of bonds owned by broker-dealers for the purpose of calculating their capital

requirements. Many trustees use credit ratings to give guidelines to fund managers as well.

Pension funds also often place limits on the amount of a portfolio that can be invested in junk

bonds, and in 1988 the Department of Labor instituted a regulation permitting pension fund

investment in asset-backed securities only rated A or better. Investment grade bond mutual

funds can only hold up to 5% of assets in non-investment grade bonds but must sell any

security if it falls below a B rating. The Eurobond and Asset Backed Securities markets often

require a certain rating for a firm to participate in that market. California state regulations


                                                 7
prohibit California-incorporated insurance companies from investing in bonds rated below

single-A. In this paper, we investigate whether these extensive rules and regulations affect a

firm’s cost of capital.



I. B. Nationally Recognized Statistical Ratings Organizations (NRSROs)



The regulations discussed in the previous section are all based on credit ratings. Without

further clarification for which rating agency’s ratings could be used for these regulations,

arbitrary firms could be established to provide specious “ratings” to circumvent the effects of

these regulations. Recognizing this issue, in 1975 the SEC designated certain ratings agencies

as "nationally recognized statistical rating organizations" (NRSROs), which indicated that

they are qualified for use in regulations. The three existing rating agencies at the time —

Moody's, S&P, and Fitch — were immediately "grandfathered" into the NRSRO category.

Consequently, only NRSRO ratings were valid for the determination of broker-dealers' capital

requirements, and then bank and insurance company regulators adopted the NRSRO

distinction, as did other financial regulators. The SEC then decided to use it again for money

market mutual funds regulations. The SEC acknowledges, “Although we originated the use

of the term NRSRO for a narrow purpose in our own regulations, ratings by NRSROs today

are used widely as benchmarks in federal and state legislation, rules issued by other financial

regulators, in the United States and abroad, and private financial contracts.” (SEC, 2003)



A rating agency must apply to the SEC to obtain NRSRO status. The NRSRO process has

been criticized for a lack of transparency regarding the qualifications and process of obtaining

NRSRO status and for perhaps inefficiently limiting the number of certified rating agencies,


                                                8
thereby stifling competition. Firms that were rejected for NRSRO status complained that the

process was unfair and stifled competition. The SEC did not originally provide a statement of

the qualifications for being designated as an NRSRO, and in 1997, when the agency proposed

regulations that would define an NRSRO, it did not enact final regulations. The primary

guidance for whether a firm would qualify was that the firm should be “nationally

recognized” in the United States and be an issuer of “credible and reliable ratings”. From

1975 to 2000, the SEC designated only four additional firms as NRSROs, but several mergers

led to the number of NRSROs reverting to the original three (Moody's, S&P, and Fitch) by

2000. This changed however in 2003, when the SEC granted DBRS NRSRO status, which is

the basis for our study.



The Credit Rating Reform Act of 2006 subsequently required the SEC to establish clearer

guidelines for which firms would qualify for NRSRO status (see Cantor and Packer (1994)

and White (2007)). Since then, five additional firms have been granted NRSRO status: Japan

Credit Rating Agency, Ltd., Ratings and Investment Information, Inc., LACE Financial,

Realpoint LLC, and Egan-Jones Ratings Company. The total of NRSROs as of January 2009

was ten (A.M. Best, a rating agency primarily focused on the insurance industry, was granted

NRSRO status in 2005). The SEC continues to consider the implications of the designation,

and with recent regulations, has tried to minimize the impact of ratings. Our study speaks

directly to one of the primary dimensions in which these regulations are material for a firm.




                                               9
II. Credit Rating Literature and Relative Contribution



Significant literature examines the information content of ratings. Credit ratings might impact

a firm’s bond yields if they provide non-public information regarding a firm’s probability of

default. Rating agencies may receive significant sensitive information from firms that is not

public, as firms may be reluctant to provide information publicly that would compromise their

strategic programs, in particular with regard to competitors. Credit agencies might also

specialize in the information gathering and evaluating process and thereby provide more

reliable measures of the firm’s creditworthiness. Regulation FD also excludes rating

agencies, such that rating agencies continue to be allowed to receive non-public information.



The literature examining the information content of ratings is comprised of three main

approaches: tests examining the relationship between the level of a firm’s bond yield and

ratings, tests examining the relationship between changes in yields and changes in ratings, and

tests utilizing a natural experiment to identify the impact of ratings on bond yields. These

studies typically do not make a distinction between regulatory versus information based

explanations for the impact on yields, although most emphasize the information aspect. For

example, Hand, Holthausen and Leftwich (1992) find statistically significant negative average

excess bond and stock returns upon the announcement of downgrades of straight debt.

Ederington, Yawitz and Roberts (1987) and West (1973) find that credit ratings are significant

predictors of yield to maturity beyond the information contained in publicly available

financial variables and other factors that would predict spreads. Ederington and Goh (1998)

show that credit rating downgrades result in negative equity returns and that equity analysts

tend to revise earnings forecasts “sharply downward” following the downgrade. They further


                                               10
conclude that this action is a result of the “downgrade itself – not to earlier negative

information or contemporaneous earnings numbers.”3 Becker and Milbourn (2009) examine

the change in ratings quality when Fitch decides to rate a firm, in addition to Moody’s and

S&P. Kliger and Sarig (2000) rely on a natural experiment to examine the informational

impact of ratings on yields. In April 1982, Moody’s added modifiers to their ratings,

increasing the fineness of their ratings measure (e.g., an A-rated firm then became an A1, A2

or A3 rated firm). This represents an exogenous change in the information provided by

Moody’s ratings, holding its regulatory status constant. Kliger and Sarig (2000) find that this

change impacts bond yields in the direction implied by the modification. Tang (2009) extends

this work by relying on the same event for additional tests.



Other papers examine the impact of ratings on the supply of debt capital. Faulkender and

Petersen (2006) and Sufi (2009) find that firms with bond or bank-loan ratings issue more

debt or have more leverage. Since firms choose to be rated, Faulkender and Peterson (2006)

use instrumental variables for the existence of a bond rating for identification. Sufi (2009)

relies on firm fixed effects and control variables for identification. Our study differs from

these studies by looking at the regulatory impact of different levels of ratings instead of the

impact of having rating, we look at the impact on yields not leverage, and we rely on a natural

experiment for identification. Our study also pinpoints the direct impact of regulations,

whereas these other studies examine general supply of capital effects.




3
 Cantor and Packer (1997) also show that the average credit rating is more correlated with yields than that of
either agency alone, while Morgan (2002) shows that hard-to-value firms such as banks (especially trading
banks) are more likely to receive a split rating than other firms.

                                                       11
Finally, recent literature also focuses on the impact of ratings on corporate leverage. Kisgen

(2006) finds that firm near a change in credit rating are more likely to undertake leverage

reducing activity. Kisgen (2009) finds that after a firm is downgraded, a firm is more likely to

reduce leverage, presumably to regain a previous rating target. These effects are shown to be

stronger at the investment grade cutoff, and also stronger for firms which see downgrades in

their commercial paper ratings, both of which are consistent with the significance of

regulations. To the extent that we find that regulations based on ratings affect a firm’s cost of

capital, this paper provides justification for the corporate behavior documented in this

previous work.



Our contribution lies fundamentally with our empirical design which allows us to identify

specifically the regulatory impact of ratings. The change in regulatory status of DBRS should

have no impact on the information content of DBRS ratings that were assigned prior to DBRS

receiving that status. Even after DBRS received NRSRO status, the information impact of the

change in status should be small. DBRS might be able to obtain better access to firms after

receiving DBRS certification from the SEC, but it is unclear to what extent that would

manifest. Our empirical tests also rely on the ratings prior to February 2003 to examine this

affect, so the identification issues raised in Faulkender and Petersen (2006), Sufi (2009) and

Becker and Milbourn (2009) are mitigated. Our study is the first to document that regulations

based on rating affect a firm’s cost of capital.




                                                   12
III. Empirical Results



III.A. Data and Summary Statistics



Bond ratings and yield data come from Bloomberg from 2001-2005. We obtain a firm’s

DBRS, S&P, Moody’s and Fitch ratings, and the yields on its bonds for each month. The

sample is constrained to include only non-financial firms with a DBRS rating where we can

observe monthly bond yields. For the main empirical tests of the paper, the sample is further

constrained to include only bonds rated by DBRS as of January 2003, one month prior to their

winning NRSRO status. This sub-sample consists of 42 firms and 90 bonds (when a firm has

multiple bonds, we include all of them and then cluster standard errors by firm). We merge

these observations to Compustat to obtain firm specific information, such as size and

leverage.



Tables 1-3 report summary statistics for the sample of firms rated by DBRS. Table 1 reports

the number of issuers and bonds in each year of our sample from 2001-2005, as well as the

distribution across rating bins. Notably, DBRS increases its market share considerably after

2003, gains access to the U.S. market, and expands across to whole spectrum of the ratings

distribution. For example, in 2001 almost 90% of their business focused on Canadian issuers.

By 2005 this share had fallen to about 50%. After obtaining NRSRO status, the number of

firms rated by DBRS increases from 46 in 2002 to 165 in 2005 (the total number of firms

actually rated by DBRS is higher, since we place restrictions for inclusion in our sample).

The distribution of firms rated by DBRS also changes significantly after they obtain NRSRO

status. Of the firms rated by DBRS, 27.1% have a BB or BBB rating prior to February 2003,


                                              13
compared to 48.8% for S&P. After becoming and NRSRO, 46.7% of DBRS’s newly rated

issuers have a BB or BBB rating, compared to 52.8% for S%P. Thus, DBRS chooses to rate

more low-quality firms and more firms near the investment grade distinction after becoming

an NRSRO.



Table 2 reports statistics on the bonds rated by DBRS, Moody’s and S&P. Since Moody’s

and S&P rate virtually all bonds, this sample is effectively the sample of firms rated by DBRS

that we can identify in Bloomberg. The mean rating for bonds rated by DBRS increases after

DBRS becomes an NRSRO, indicating that DBRS rates on average lower quality issuers after

obtaining NRSRO status (a bond’s rating is cardinalized for these tables, such that a AAA

bond is coded with a value of 1, AA+ is 2, etc.). DBRS also appears to rate firms somewhat

more favorably than the other rating agencies at all times, and that propensity increases

slightly after NRSRO status. However, as we see below, this relationship may reflect some

omitted characteristic of a bond which DBRS merely weights differently from the other

agencies.



Table 3 compares characteristics of firms rated by DBRS versus the sample of firms rated by

S&P, using Compustat data. DBRS-rated firms are about three times larger than the average

of firms rated by S&P. DBRS also rates a disproportionate number of mining and

construction firms, which reflects its Canadian headquarters. No significant differences exist

for leverage or the percentage of tangible assets for firms rated by DBRS compared to those

rated by S&P.




                                              14
III.B. Main Tests



Table 4 reports results from the first main tests of the paper (columns 1 & 2). We test the

following cross-sectional regressions for each of the ten months after DBRS obtains NRSRO

status. The months, T, range from March to December 2003.



(YieldT – YieldJan2003)i = α+ β1*(DBRS-Mean Rating)Jan2003,i + εi                                 (1)



For each test, the dependent variable is the yield on a firm’s bond for the indicated month

minus its yield on January 2003, the month prior to DBRS obtaining NRSRO status. The

intercept in (1) controls for changes in bond spreads between month T and January of 2003.

The explanatory variable equals the bond’s DBRS rating as of January 2003 minus the mean

rating from Moody’s and S&P as of January 2003.4 Our identification strategy is designed to

focus solely on the regulatory effects on yields, so the dependent variable captures the change

in the mean NRSRO rating (including DBRS) that occurs only because of the change in

DBRS’s status. If DBRS rates a bond the same as the other agencies, then becoming an

NRSRO has no impact on the average rating the bond receives (and our explanatory variable

equals 0). If DBRS differs from the other agencies, however, then a firm’s average NRSRO

rating will change as a result of the change in DBRS’s regulatory status. Since we hold the

ratings constant at their predetermined level (January 2003), the variable captures the change

in a firm’s average NRSRO rating that occurs solely because of the change in DBRS’s status.




4
  We report our results using the average of Moody’s and S&P because almost all of our bonds are rated by both
of the two major NRSROs. In contrast, only 5 of the 90 bonds are rated by Fitch. We have, however, also
estimated equation (1) using the average across all three of the NRSRO when the Fitch rating is available and the
results are very similar to those reported here. See Table 7 and the description below.


                                                       15
Any information provided by a firm’s rating in January 2003 should be incorporated in the

yield as of January of 2003.5 Each cross-sectional test includes bonds for the 42 firms with

DBRS ratings as of January 2003. If DBRS ratings affect a firm’s cost of capital once DBRS

obtains NRSRO status, we expect β1 to be greater than 0, implying a better DBRS rating leads

to lower yields and a worse rating leads to a higher yield. The null hypothesis is that the

regulatory status of DBRS is not important for a firm’s cost of capital, implying β1=0.



The results indicate that the difference in a bond’s DBRS rating from the other agencies

significantly affects its yield once DBRS obtains NRSRO status (Table 4). By December

2003, yields change by 16 basis points per ratings-notch difference between DBRS and the

other agencies.6 Given the structure of the empirical design, it’s difficult to explain this

change in yield with anything other than this particular event. This change in yield however

is not immediate. For example, three months after DBRS obtains NRSRO status, the yield

change is only 5 basis points, and not statistically distinguishable from zero. The gradual

increase in magnitude makes sense given the regulatory explanation for these results, and

given the relative illiquidity of the corporate bond market. Investors may not immediately

adjust to the change in regulatory status of NRSRO, and therefore the full effect is

incorporated slowly as investors modify their portfolios. An information-based explanation

would imply a more immediate impact on yields.



5
 A change in the NRSRO rating stemming from an increase or decrease in default risk for a bond could also be
correlated with yield changes. As a robustness test, we have also estimated equation (1) controlling for this
effect by adding the change in the mean NRSRO rating between month T and January 2003. This variable does
not enter the regression with a significant coefficient, and the effect of the pre-existing DBRS rating remains
economically and statistically significant. See Table 7 and the description below.
6
  Although we have clustered at the issuer level, we have also estimated the model using issuer-level averaged
data with non-clustered, robust standard errors (so N=42 rather than 90). In this model the point estimate
increases from 16 to 27 basis points at the 10-month horizon, with a T-statistic of 2.52 (from 2.17).

                                                       16
Table 4 also reports our falsification tests (columns 3-6). We incorrectly pretend that a

change in regulatory status occurs in February of 2004 or February of 2005, and re-estimate

equation (1). The sample for each test includes all DBRS-rated firms as of January of the

particular year. These tests do not generate the same results. The difference in rating

between DBRS and the other agencies has no impact on yields after these artificial event

dates. These tests reinforce that the previous results are unique to February 2003, the month

that DBRS was awarded NRSRO status.



III.C. Regulation, not certification



So far we have established that the change in regulatory status strengthened the market impact

of the DBRS rating. Is that due to regulatory effects of ratings, or SEC certification of

DBRS? Market participants might view ratings from DBRS as more credible signals of

default risk because of a rigorous SEC vetting process. The remaining tests of this section are

designed to clarify whether these results are indeed specific to ratings-based regulations.



In Table 5, we examine whether the yield impact is larger when the DBRS rates a firm more

favorably versus when it rates a firm worse. If the change in yield identified in Table 4 is due

to certification, DBRS ratings should become uniformly more informative after February

2003. This additional information content would thus affect yields symmetrically, decreasing

yields when DBRS rates better and increasing them when they rate worse. The regulatory

channel predicts a significant asymmetry in the yield effect, however, because most

regulations depend on a minimum rating from one (or sometimes two) NRSRO. For example,

if Moody’s and S&P rate a firm investment grade already, a non-investment grade rating from


                                               17
DBRS should have little regulatory impact. On the other hand, if Moody’s rates a firm

investment grade and S&P does not, then an investment grade rating from DBRS could

significantly expand the pool of investors willing to hold these bonds and thus lower the yield.

To examine this implication, we extend the model above, as follows:



(YieldT – YieldJan)i = α+ β2*Better* (DBRS-Mean Rating)Jan,i + β3*Worse*(DBRS-Mean
Rating)Jan,i + εi                                                                    (2)



This test is identical to the test of equation (1) except for the introduction of the dummy

variables Better and Worse. Better equals one if the DBRS rates a firm better than the mean

rating of the other agencies; Worse equals one if the DBRS rates a firm worse. If the DBRS

rating is equal to the mean rating of the other agencies, the value of “DBRS-Mean Rating” is

zero and thus the Better and Worse dummies are not live variables. The regulatory

explanation implies that the coefficient on β2 is greater than zero and that β2 > β3. The

certification explanation implies that both β2 and β3 are both greater than zero (and equal to

each other).



The results of Table 5 indicate a significantly higher impact on yields from a DBRS rating

that is better than the mean rating than if it is worse. A one notch better rating from DBRS

implies a 39 basis point reduction in a firm’s debt cost of capital by December 2003. The

relative difference between a better DBRS rating versus a worse DBRS rating is 42 basis

points (39-(-3)). The hypothesis that β2 and β3 are equal is rejected at the 1% level in all

months six months or later than the event date. Furthermore, the impact on yields from a

worse DBRS rating is insignificant in all months (in month seven it is ‘significant’ but in the



                                               18
wrong direction). The evidence in this table strongly support the notion that ratings-based

regulations affect a firm’s cost of capital.



In Table 6, we examine whether the impact on yields from DBRS becoming an NRSRO is

larger for firms rated near the investment-grade/speculative-grade cutoff. Many of the

regulations outlined in Section I are concentrated or are more severe if a firm’s rating is below

investment grade. Therefore, a firm near the investment grade margin can benefit more from

the change in DBRS’s status than a firm that is very highly rated (A or above), or very poorly

rated (B or worse). Having DBRS rate better than the other NRSROs accrues large benefits to

firms near an upgrade to investment grade or to those near a downgrade to speculative grade.

To examine these firms, we create a dummy variable, “Near Investment Grade”, which equals

one if the firm is rated BBB or BB (Kisgen (2006) uses a similar measure)). If regulations are

insignificant for a firm’s cost of capital, we would expect to see no incremental difference for

this group of firms. We interact the DBRS relative rating with a “Near Investment Grade”

dummy variable to test if its effects are larger for these marginal firms.



Table 6 shows that the effects are concentrated among firms near investment grade when

DBRS rates better than the other agencies. The magnitude is both statistically and

economically significant, with nearly a 55 basis point reduction in yields for firms with a

better DBRS rating that are near the investment grade distinction (and a 16 basis point decline

for better firms that are away from the investment grade margin). The large magnitude of the

estimated effect presumably reflects the high spread between the investment grade and

speculative grade markets during our sample, which averaged about 250 basis points in 2003

(BBB v. BB). Some caution should also be taken with the interpretation of these results, since


                                                19
the subsample of firms near the investment grade cutoff with a DBRS rating which is better

than the average rating of other rating agencies is only 9 firms (and 15 bonds). The evidence

nevertheless underscores the importance of regulations for a firm’s cost of capital.



III.D. Robustness Tests



Table 7 reports three robustness tests. Each column has one cross-sectional regression,

inverting the presentation format relative to Tables 4-6. Column 1 reports the benchmark

regression for comparison (the model in the last row of Table 6), and the subsequent columns

report the robustness tests. All of these regressions are based on the cross-sectional regression

at the 10-month horizon. First, we redefine the relative rating variable using the all three

NRSROs - Moody’s, S&P and Fitch – to define the mean NRSRO (column 2). Second, we

introduce four control variables: the initial (January 2003) mean NRSRO rating, the change in

the mean NRSRO rating (December - January), the log of the size of the bond, and an

indicator for Canadian issuers (column 3). Third, we change the dependent variable from the

absolute yield change to the percentage change in yield, with and without the four new control

variables (columns 4 & 5).

       Our results remain similar across all three robustness tests. Introducing the Fitch

rating has very little impact because only 5 bonds are affected by this change; if anything the

results get slightly stronger. Introducing the four control variables strengthens the effect of

the DBRS rating for the firms near the investment-grade margin (slightly) and weakens the

effect for the other bonds (again only slightly). Adding the initial level of the rating controls

for the possibility that spreads within the corporate bond market changed; adding the change

in the mean NRSRO rating controls for the possibility that some of the yields change due to


                                                20
changes in credit quality; adding the log of issue size controls for the possibility that larger

issues experienced a change in yields compared to smaller issues; and adding the Canadian

indicator controls for the possibility that Canadian firms experienced yield changes relative to

American issuers. In fact, we do find significance on both the initial rating and the Canadian

indicator (R2 rises to about 50%), but adding these controls has very little effect on our main

result.



III.E. Does DBRS change it ratings methods?



In Table 8 we test whether DBRS changes the way it rates bonds. For these tests, we use the

sample of bonds rated by DBRS prior to becoming an NRSRO (columns 1-3), and we then

expand the sample to include all DBRS-rated bonds before and after February 2003 (columns

4-6). By including all bonds, we lose the clean identification of the tests of the previous

section. However, including them allows us to examine the behavior of DBRS before and

after they receive NRSRO status. While causality is hard to sort out in these tests, we report

them to paint a more complete picture of this event.



The dependent variable for the tests in Table 8 equals the DBRS rating in a particular bond-

month. We order the ratings from 1 (AAA) to 2 (AA+) all the way up to 20 (CC). We report

both fixed effects OLS regressions (columns 1 and 4), and, since there are no natural units for

credit ratings, ordered Logits. The independent variables are bond or issuer characteristics,

measured one month prior to the month for the DBRS rating. These variables include the

mean rating issued by S&P and Moody’s (measured on the same numerical scale), the log of

the issue size, the yield of the issue, an indicator for whether the bond was issued by a


                                                21
Canadian firm, an indicator for bonds near the investment grade cutoff, and an indicator for

whether the time period was after DBRS receives NRSRO status. The yield of the issue and

the rating of the issue are of course correlated; moreover, it is difficult to sort out the causality

between yields and ratings because ratings changes both lead and lag yield changes. Hence

we report results with and without the yield.



The first and fourth columns of Table 8 reports the stripped down OLS model with bond fixed

effects, the mean rating by the longstanding NRSROs, a post-NRSRO indicator, and their

interaction. A coefficient of one on the mean rating variable suggests that DBRS follows

rating changes by the other agencies one-for-one. The actual coefficient of 0.52 (0.56 with all

bonds) indicates that changes in ratings are significantly related for DBRS compared to other

firms, but that DBRS also makes changes independent from the other agencies. The

coefficient on the mean rating variable interacted with the Post-NRSRO indicator is positive

and significant, meaning that changes in ratings from DBRS become more tightly linked to

those of the other NRSROs after February 2003. So, DBRS converges toward the other

NRSROs after their change in status.



Next, we drop the bond fixed effects and replace them with bond characteristics to help

identify why DBRS diverges from the other agencies. We report ordered Logits, which are

estimable (and preferred to OLS) in the absence of the fixed effects. DBRS tends to provide a

more favorable rating to large issues prior to gaining NRSRO status, but this preference falls

in the post-NRSRO period. In the sample with all bonds, the sum of the direct and interaction

terms is not statistically significant, suggesting that there is no impact of issue size after

DBRS becomes an NRSRO. (Since the model conditions on the other NRSRO ratings, the


                                                 22
result means that DBRS does not place greater weight on size than the other agencies.) DBRS

also seems to provide Canadian issuers more favorable ratings in both periods. We find no

evidence that DBRS rates firms near the investment grade cutoff more favorably, either

before or after becoming an NRSRO. Having shown that DBRS rates more firms near the

investment grade cutoff in the post period, one might expect that they would also

systematically provide them with better ratings. This does not appear to be the case. We

conclude that although there is more demand for DBRS ratings from firms near the

investment grade cutoff, DBRS maintains its objectivity when rating them.



In columns 3 and 6, we add the bond yield to the models. Prior to February 2003, firms with

higher bond yields receive better ratings from DBRS, controlling for the firm’s rating from

the other agencies. This result could reflect demand from firms who believe their bond yields

do not reflect fundamentals, and who therefore seek another rating. Or, DBRS may market

their services to firms whose ratings appear too conservative. Regardless, it suggests a

contrarian style prior to NRSRO status. In the post NRSRO period, this relationship

disappears completely. The coefficient on the yield interacted with the post period (0.69)

negates the pre NRSRO effect (-0.75), and the sum of these effects is not significant in either

sample.



IV. Conclusions



We have shown that regulations constraining bond investment affect yields and thus firms’

cost of capital. Our strategy exploits a quasi-natural experiment: in February 2003, the SEC

deemed DBRS a ‘Nationally Recognized Statistical Rating Organization’. Ratings granted by


                                              23
such NRSROs are used to determine capital requirements for holders of bonds such as

insurance companies, banks and broker-dealers. Moreover, some investors will not hold

bonds unless they are rated investment grade by one or more of the NRSROs. We find that

bond yields fall for firms that DBRS rates more favorably than the other NRSROs after the

SEC’s decision. The decline shows up asymmetrically. There is no increase in yields for

bonds that DBRS rates relatively unfavorably. Moreover, the effects are larger around the

investment-grade cutoff, where the effects of regulatory constraints are most binding. Hence,

we conclude that bond regulations affect yields. The result suggests that simple tradeoff

theories, where firm balance financial distress costs against tax benefits, are too simple. Our

results imply, for example, that a firm losing its investment grade would suffer a larger

increase in its cost of capital than would be expected solely from the implied increase in

probability of distress.



We also provide some descriptive evidence about DBRS’ ratings methods before and after

becoming an NRSRO. These results are harder to interpret causally, particularly correlations

between ratings and yields. Nevertheless, the data suggest that DBRS rates bonds more like

the other major agencies after becoming an NRSRO. In 2006 Congress passed legislation

improving the transparency and lowering the cost of becoming an NRSRO. Five new

agencies have recently become NRSROs, raising the total number to nine from three less than

ten years ago. This change in structure may radically alter the incentive of these agencies,

especially because, as we have shown, ratings granted by them can change firms’ cost of

capital even absent changes in risk.




                                               24
                                       REFERENCES

Becker, B. and T.T. Milbourn, “Reputation and Competition: Evidence from the Credit Rating
Industry”, working paper.

Bongaerts, Dion, Martijn Cremers and William Goetzmann, 2008, “Multiple Ratings and
Credit Spreads,” Yale ICF Working Paper no. 08-27.

Cantor, Richard and Frank Packer, 1994, “The Credit Rating Industry,” Federal Reserve Bank
of New York Quarterly Review 19(2), 1-26.

Cantor, Richard and Frank Packer, 1997, “Split Ratings and the Pricing of Credit Risk,”
Journal of Fixed Income 7(3), 72-82.

Ederington, L. H.; J. B. Yawitz; and B. E. Roberts. “The Informational Content of Bond
Ratings”, The Journal of Financial Research 10 (1987), 211-226.

Ederington, L. H., and J. C. Goh. “Bond Rating Agencies and Stock Analysts: Who Knows
What When?”, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 33 (1998), 569-585.

Faulkender, M., and M. Peterson, 2006, Does the source of capital affect capital structure?,
Review of Financial Studies.

Forbes, “GM’s Preferred Stock Clearance Sale”, March 24, 2005.

Hand, J. R. M.; R. W. Holthausen; and R. W. Leftwich. “The Effect of Bond Rating Agency
Announcement on Bond and Stock Prices”, Journal of Finance 47 (1992), 733-752.

Kisgen, Darren J., 2006, “Credit Ratings and Capital Structure”, Journal of Finance 61,
1035-1072.

Kisgen, Darren J., 2007, “The Influence of Credit Ratings on Corporate Capital Structure
Decisions”, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance.

Kisgen, Darren .J., 2009, “Do Firms Target Credit Ratings or Leverage Levels?”, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.

Kliger, D., and O. Sarig, 1999, The information value of bond ratings, Journal of Finance, 55,
2879-2903.

Morgan, Donald P., 2002, “Rating Banks: Risk and Uncertainty in an Opaque Industry,”
American Economic Review 92(4), 874-888.

SEC, “Rating Agencies and the Use of Credit Ratings under the Federal Securities Laws”,
2003.


                                              25
Sufi, A., “The Real Effects of Debt Certification: Evidence from the Introduction of Bank
Loan Ratings”, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Tang, T., “Information asymmetry and firm's' credit market access: Evidence from Moody's
credit rating format refinement”, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

West, R. R., 1973, Bond ratings, bond yields and financial regulation: some findings, Journal
of Law and Economics 16, 159-168.

White, L. J., “A New Law for the Bond Rating Industry – For Better or For Worse?”, New
York University Law and Economics Working Papers, 2007.




                                             26
                                                                     Table 1: Sample Description

This table reports the number of observations over time for which we can observe the DBRS rating, the yield on the bond and the average rating by the other three
NRSROs, and the ratings distributions using the DBRS scale.


                                                                                  Number of           Number of         Number of        Fraction
Year                                                                             observations          Bonds             Issuers      Canadian Issuers
2001                                                                                         314                 57              32               87%
2002                                                                                         818                113              46               78%
2003                                                                                       1,534                235              73               71%
2004                                                                                       3,878                541             119               57%
2005                                                                                       8,224                877             165               51%
Total                                                                                     14,768              1,823             435

                                                                                                                                        After NRSRO
                                                                                                     S&P Ratings                                      S&P Ratings
                                                                                                   Distribution 2001-    Existing                   Distribution 2003-
Distribution of DBRS-rated bonds                                               Before NRSRO                02           Customers    New Customers          05
AAA                                                                                      5.8%                   1.1%            3.4%           7.1%              0.9%
AA                                                                                       7.7%                   4.7%            4.0%           5.4%              3.9%
A                                                                                       59.5%                  20.3%           49.2%          38.3%             18.3%
BBB                                                                                     26.9%                  28.4%           43.4%          36.6%             30.1%
BB                                                                                       0.2%                  20.4%            0.0%          10.1%             22.7%
B                                                                                        0.0%                  18.5%            0.0%           2.4%             19.9%
CCC and worse                                                                            0.0%                   6.6%            0.0%           0.2%              4.2%
                                                                              Table 2: Summary Statistics

This table reports simple summary statistics for yields and ratings for our sample of bonds with a rating from all three agencies - Moody's, S&P and DBRS.
                                                                                        Before DBRS became an NRSRO              After DBRS became an NRSRO
                                                                                                  (N=1,226)                               (N=13,542)
                                                                                                            Standard                              Standard             P-value 1 : (H0:
                                                                                            Mean            Deviation               Mean          Deviation             Pre==Post)

Yield to Maturity (%)                                                                         6.43                 0.96              5.23               1.07                 0.00
Fraction rated the same by all agencies                                                      73.0%                   -              64.0%                 -                  0.66
Absolute rating difference (Best - Worst)                                                     0.30                 0.53              0.52               0.83                 0.44
Mean Rating (S&P, Moody's & Fitch) - 1 means AAA, 2 means AA, …                               6.29                 2.30              6.92               3.12                 0.02
DBRS rating - Mean Rating                                                                    -0.17                 1.04              -0.25              0.84                 0.08

1
    The p-value tests the null that the mean in the two periods is the same. The statistic is built controlling for bond-level fixed effects and clustering the data by issuer.
                                             Table 3: DBRS Sample v. Other S&P Rated Compustat Firms
This table reports simple summary statistics for Compustat firms with a DBRS ratings and an S&P-rated with S&P-rated Compustat firms that were not
rated by DBRS. Neither sample contains financial companies (SIC = 6).
                                                                                          DBRS Rated                        S&P Rated
                                                                                                     Standard                          Standard
                                                                                     Mean            Deviation         Mean            Deviation


Leverage (total liabilities / book assets)                                         0.68               0.14             0.69              0.20
Asset size (MM $s)                                                                 21.5               40.5              7.3              18.9
PP&E / assets                                                                      0.07               0.06             0.06              0.06
Share mining & construction (SIC = 1)                                             16.7%                 -             6.0%                 -
Share manufacturing (SIC = 2 or 3)                                                29.2%                 -             42.9%                -
Share regulated (SIC = 4)                                                         46.4%                 -             26.4%                -
                                                              Table 4: Cost of capital falls when DBRS becomes an NRSROs

Each row in this table represents three cross-sectional regressions. We report regressions of the change in the yield to maturity on bonds after January 2003, the month before the SEC
deemed DBRS and NRSRO in columns 1 & 2, controlling for the difference between the DBRS rating and the average rating (from Moody's and S&P) as of January 2003. Each regression
includes an intercept which is not reported. The regressions in columns 3 & 4 and 5 & 6 report the same cross sectional models and act as a falsification test because there was no change in
DBRS's regulatory status during these years. T-statistics are reported in parentheses based on residuals clustered by firm (since some firms issue more than one bond).
                                                                                 Year in which DBRS becomes an
                                                                                             NRSRO                                                   Falsification Tests
                                                                                               2003                                     2004                                     2005

                                                                                                                       DBRS-Mean                                DBRS-Mean
                                                                               DBRS-Mean rating,                      rating, January                          rating, January
                                                                                 January 2003           N (R 2 )           2004                N (R 2 )             2005                N (R 2 )
One-month after NRSRO (March)                                                        -0.04                89                -0.01               208                  0.01                497
                                                                                    (0.96)               0.03              (0.83)               0.01                (0.03)               0.01

Two-months after NRSRO (April)                                                         0.02                89              -0.01                202                 -0.11                494
                                                                                      (1.11)              0.01             (0.11)               0.01                (1.71)               0.04

Three-months after NRSRO (May)                                                         0.03                90              -0.01                208                 -0.08                499
                                                                                      (1.04)              0.01             (0.33)               0.01                (1.60)               0.02

Four-months after NRSRO (June)                                                         0.05                90              -0.03                206                 -0.03                495
                                                                                      (1.21)              0.03             (0.69)               0.01                (0.79)               0.01

Five-months after NRSRO (July)                                                         0.05                90              -0.01                204                 -0.01                491
                                                                                      (1.00)              0.02             (0.03)               0.01                (0.07)               0.01

Six-months after NRSRO (August)                                                        0.07                86              -0.05                201                 -0.02                495
                                                                                      (1.44)              0.04             (1.41)               0.03                (0.36)               0.01

Seven-months after NRSRO (September)                                                   0.09                86              -0.04                200                 -0.01                495
                                                                                      (1.44)              0.07             (0.97)               0.01                (0.12)               0.01

Eight-months after NRSRO (October)                                                     0.11                85              -0.03                206                 -0.03                499
                                                                                      (1.70)              0.08             (0.85)               0.01                (0.44)               0.01

Nine-months after NRSRO (November)                                                     0.14                85              -0.05                206                 -0.03                493
                                                                                      (2.34)              0.13             (1.18)               0.02                (0.42)               0.01

Ten-months after NRSRO (December)                                                      0.16                89              -0.05                206                 -0.03                499
                                                                                      (2.17)              0.13             (1.00)               0.02                (0.37)               0.01
                                        Table 5: Cost of capital falls when DBRS only for firm rated better
Each row in this table represents one cross-sectional regression. We report regressions of the change in the yield to maturity on bonds after January
2003, the month before the SEC deemed DBRS and NRSRO. We control for the difference between the DBRS rating and the average rating (from
Moody's and S&P) as of January 2003. Each regression includes an intercept which is not reported. T-statistics are reported in parentheses based on
residuals clustered by firm (since some firms issue more than one bond).


                                                                             DBRS-Mean rating      DBRS-Mean
                                                                               if DBRS rates      rating if DBRS   P-value testing         N
                                                                                   better          rates worse      that (1)=(2)          (R 2 )
                                                                                     (1)                (2)

One-month after NRSRO                                                               -0.12               0.02            0.26               89
                                                                                   (1.21)              (0.71)                             0.06

Two-months after NRSRO                                                              0.01                0.03            0.86               89
                                                                                   (0.22)              (0.83)                             0.01

Three-months after NRSRO                                                            0.10                -0.03           0.17               90
                                                                                   (1.43)              (0.81)                             0.04

Four-months after NRSRO                                                             0.17                -0.04           0.04               90
                                                                                   (2.07)              (1.41)                             0.08

Five-months after NRSRO                                                             0.19                -0.06           0.03               90
                                                                                   (2.25)              (1.65)                             0.08

Six-months after NRSRO                                                              0.21                -0.05           0.01               86
                                                                                   (2.80)              (1.50)                             0.12

Seven-months after NRSRO                                                            0.27                -0.06           0.00               86
                                                                                   (3.16)              (2.18)                             0.17

Eight-months after NRSRO                                                            0.28                -0.03           0.01               85
                                                                                   (2.73)              (0.93)                             0.15

Nine-months after NRSRO                                                             0.30                0.01            0.02               85
                                                                                   (2.89)              (0.32)                             0.19

Ten-months after NRSRO                                                              0.39                -0.03           0.00               89
                                                                                   (3.72)              (0.76)                             0.24
                                                 Table 6: Cost of Capital Falls Most for Near Investment-grade Firms

Each row in this table represents one cross-sectional regression. We report regressions of the change in the yield to maturity on bonds after January 2003, the month
before the SEC deemed DBRS and NRSRO. We control for the difference between the DBRS rating and the average rating (from Moody's and S&P) as of January 2003.
Each regression includes an intercept which is not reported. T-statistics are reported in parentheses based on residuals clustered by firm (since some firms issue more than
one bond).


                                                                                                                                     Near Investment
                                                                                                      DBRS-Mean        DBRS-Mean     Grade * DBRS-
                                                                                Near Investment      rating if DBRS   rating if DBRS  Mean rating if              N
                                                                                    Grade              rates better    rates worse DBRS rates better            (R 2 )
One-month after NRSRO                                                                 -0.35               0.02              -0.04            -0.30                89
                                                                                     (4.32)              (0.33)            (1.43)            (2.16)              0.21

Two-months after NRSRO                                                                -0.35               0.07              -0.03            -0.17               89
                                                                                     (3.49)              (1.17)            (1.06)            (1.80)             0.22

Three-months after NRSRO                                                              -0.27               0.11              -0.07            -0.06               90
                                                                                     (2.63)              (1.31)            (2.06)            (0.51)             0.15

Four-months after NRSRO                                                               -0.20               0.09              -0.07             0.09               90
                                                                                     (1.75)              (1.07)            (2.21)            (0.69)             0.19

Five-months after NRSRO                                                               0.14                0.08              -0.03             0.20               90
                                                                                     (0.85)              (1.05)            (1.00)            (1.34)             0.10

Six-months after NRSRO                                                                0.14                0.07              -0.01             0.25               86
                                                                                     (1.14)              (0.97)            (0.42)            (1.85)             0.16

Seven-months after NRSRO                                                              0.02                0.10              -0.06             0.28               86
                                                                                     (0.14)              (1.42)            (1.89)            (2.20)             0.25

Eight-months after NRSRO                                                              -0.07               0.08              -0.03             0.30               85
                                                                                     (0.41)              (1.04)            (1.00)            (2.04)             0.25

Nine-months after NRSRO                                                               -0.07               0.11              0.01              0.30               85
                                                                                     (0.49)              (1.57)            (0.49)            (2.18)             0.29

Ten-months after NRSRO                                                                -0.01               0.16              -0.01             0.37               89
                                                                                     (0.01)              (2.28)            (0.31)            (2.65)             0.32
                                                                       Table 7: Robustness Tests
Each column in this table represents one cross-sectional regression, where the dependent variable measures the change in the yield from January 2003 to December
2003. We control for the difference between the DBRS rating and the average rating (from Moody's and S&P) as of January 2002. Each regression includes an intercept
which is not reported. T-statistics are reported in parentheses based on residuals clustered by firm (since some firms issue more than one bond).

                                                                            Baseline model:       Include Fitch    Add Control
                                                                            Table 6, final row   when available     Variables           Log of Yield Change

Near Investment Grade Indicator                                                   -0.01               0.02            0.02             0.002            -0.006
                                                                                  (0.01)             (0.08)          (0.09)           (0.06)            (0.20)
DBRS-Mean rating if DBRS rates better                                              0.16               0.16            0.10             0.024             0.015
                                                                                  (2.28)             (2.32)          (0.97)           (1.97)            (0.83)
DBRS-Mean rating if DBRS rates worse                                              -0.01               -0.01           0.08            -0.007             0.000
                                                                                  (0.31)             (0.39)          (0.81)           (1.29)            (0.01)
Near Investment Grade * DBRS-Mean rating if DBRS rates better                      0.37               0.43            0.42             0.055             0.061
                                                                                  (2.65)             (2.59)          (2.52)           (2.36)            (2.27)
Mean level of rating as of January 2003                                              -                  -             -0.04              -              -0.005
                                                                                     -                  -            (2.27)              -              (1.69)
Change in rating, January to December 2003                                           -                  -             -0.11              -              -0.007
                                                                                     -                  -            (0.74)              -              (0.29)
Log of Issue Size                                                                    -                  -             0.01               -               0.000
                                                                                     -                  -            (0.37)              -              (0.04)
Indicator for Canadian issuers                                                       -                  -             -0.61              -              -0.108
                                                                                     -                  -            (3.23)              -              (3.39)

N                                                                                  89                 89               86               89                86
R2                                                                                0.32               0.32             0.50             0.26              0.43
                                            Table 8: Regression of DBRS ratting relative to rating by other NRSROs, including lagged bond Yield
Table reports regressions of the DBRS rating on the average rating by Moody's and S&P and issue characteristics. Each rating is converted into a number (e.g. AAA=1, AA=2, etc), so an
increase in the dependent variable means DBRS rates the firm worse. All of the regressors are measured as of the preceding month. We report each model with OLS and also using an
ordered logit. Also, we report the model for all of our data and for the subset of bond rated by DBRS both before and after the change in their status. T-statistics are reported in parentheses
based on residuals clustered by firm (since some firms issue more than one bond).
                                                                                  Only Bonds issued and rated by DBRS before DBRS
                                                                                                 became an NRSRO                                                  All Bonds

Mean Rating (S&P & Moody's) - 1 means AAA, 2 means AA, …                                0.52                  2.07             2.20              0.56                2.31                2.42
                                                                                       (2.46)               (6.72)           (7.22)             (3.58)              (8.01)              (8.68)
Log of Issue Size                                                                         -                  -0.93            -0.90                -                 -0.98               -0.94
                                                                                          -                 (3.81)           (4.09)                -                (4.45)              (4.76)
Indicator for Canadian Issuers                                                            -                 -1.37            -1.23                 -                -1.33               -1.15
                                                                                          -                 (1.78)           (1.76)                -                (1.83)              (1.76)
Indicator for Bonds near Investment Grade                                                 -                  0.13             0.17                 -                -0.67               -0.58
                                                                                          -                 (0.22)           (0.27)                -                (1.07)              (0.92)
Bond Yield                                                                                -                     -            (0.66)                -                    -                -0.75
                                                                                          -                     -            (2.62)                -                    -               (3.12)
Indicator for DBRS Post NRSRO                                                          -0.49                -1.48            -4.60              -0.50               -4.65               -8.29
                                                                                       (2.52)               (1.54)           (3.51)             (2.50)              (2.71)              (4.34)
Mean Rating * Post NRSRO                                                                0.07                 0.06            -0.03               0.07                0.01               -0.08
                                                                                       (2.82)               (0.41)           (0.18)             (2.74)              (0.03)              (0.52)
Log of Issue Size * Post NRSRO                                                            -                   0.20             0.18                -                  0.71                0.68
                                                                                          -                 (1.53)           (1.54)                -                (2.33)              (2.18)
Indicator for Canadian Issuers * Post NRSRO                                               -                 -0.23            -0.40                 -                 0.75                0.57
                                                                                          -                 (0.32)           (0.58)                -                (0.99)              (0.83)
Indicator for Bonds near Investment Grade * Post NRSRO                                    -                 -0.02            -0.11                 -                0.32                 0.21
                                                                                          -                 (0.04)           (0.15)                -                (0.52)              (0.36)
Bond Yield * Post NRSRO                                                                   -                     -              0.60                -                    -                 0.69
                                                                                          -                     -            (2.46)                -                    -               (2.60)

P-value for Chi 2-test that Issue size coefficient = 0 after NRSRO                        -                  0.00              0.00               -                  0.36               0.36
                  2
P-value for Chi -test that Bond Yield coefficient = 0 after NRSRO                         -                    -               0.73               -                    -                0.62
Estimation Method                                                                Fixed Effects OLS               Ordered Logit           Fixed Effects OLS               Ordered Logit
N                                                                                                         4,270                                                    14,058
R2 (within for fixed effects OLS, pseudo for ordered logit)                             0.38                 0.48              0.48              0.41               0.55               0.55
