NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BETTER LATE THAN NOTHING:
SOME COMMENTS ON DEATON (2009) AND HECKMAN AND URZUA (2009)
Guido W. Imbens
Working Paper 14896
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14896

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2009

I have benefitted from discussions with Joshua Angrist, Susan Athey, Abhijit Banerjee, David Card,
Gary Chamberlain, Esther Duflo, Kei Hirano, Geert Ridder, Chuck Manski, Sendhil Mullainathan,
and Jeffrey Wooldridge, although they bear no responsibility for any of the views expressed here.
Financial support for this research was generously provided through NSF grant 0820361. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Guido W. Imbens. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Better LATE Than Nothing: Some Comments on Deaton (2009) and Heckman and Urzua
(2009)
Guido W. Imbens
NBER Working Paper No. 14896
April 2009
JEL No. C10,C50,C90
ABSTRACT
Two recent papers, Deaton (2009), and Heckman and Urzua (2009), argue against what they see as
an excessive and inappropriate use of experimental and quasi-experimental methods in empirical work
in economics in the last decade. They specifically question the increased use of instrumental variables
and natural experiments in labor economics, and of randomized experiments in development economics.
In these comments I will make the case that this move towards shoring up the internal validity of estimates,
and towards clarifying the description of the population these estimates are relevant for, has been important
and beneficial in increasing the credibility of empirical work in economics. I also address some other
concerns raised by the Deaton and Heckman-Urzua papers.

Guido W. Imbens
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
imbens@fas.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

Two recent papers, Deaton (2009; Deaton from hereon), and Heckman and Urzua (2009;
HU from hereon), argue against what they see as an excessive and inappropriate use of
experimental and quasi-experimental methods in empirical work in economics in the last
decade.1 Deaton and HU reserve much of their scorn for the local average treatment
effect (LATE) introduced in the econometric literature by Imbens and Angrist (1994; IA
from hereon). HU write: “Problems of identification and interpretation are swept under
the rug and replaced by ‘an effect’ identified by IV that is often very difficult to interpret
as an answer to an interesting economic question,” (HU, page 19). Deaton writes: “The
LATE may, or may not, be a parameter of interest ... and in general, there is no reason
to suppose that it will be. ... I find it hard to make any sense of the LATE. ... This goes
beyond the old story of looking for an object where the light is strong enough to see;
rather, we have control over the light, but choose to let it fall where it may, and then
proclaim that whatever it illuminates is what we were looking for all along,” (Deaton,
page 10). He also rails against the perceived laziness of these researchers by raising the
“futility of trying to avoid thinking about how and why things work,” (Deaton, page 14).2
HU wonder whether these researchers are of the opinion: “that disguising identification
problems by a statistical pocedure is preferable to an honest discussion of the limits of
the data?” (HU, page 19).
The fact that two such distinguished economists so forcefully question trends in current practice, may suggest to those not familiar with this literature that it is going
seriously awry. In these comments I will argue that this is not the case. Much progress
has in fact been made in empirical practice, and empirical work is much more credible
as a result of the natural experiments revolution started by Card, Angrist, Krueger, and
others in the late eighties. Starting in the late eighties their work, and more recently
that by development economists such as Banerjee, Duflo, and Kremer arguing in favor of
randomized experiments, has had a profound influence on empirical work. By emphasizing internal validity and study design, this literature showed the importance of looking
1

The papers make similar arguments, perhaps not surprisingly given Deaton’s acknowledgement that
“much of what I have to say is a recapitulation of his [Heckman’s] arguments.” (Deaton p. 4)
2
Curiously, Deaton exempts the leaders of this movement from these charges, by declaring them “too
talented to be bound by their own methodological prescriptions.” (Deaton, page 2).

[1]

for clear and exogenous sources of variation in potential causes. In contrast to what
Deaton and HU suggest, this issue is distinct and separate from the choice of the models
and estimation methods used. In fact, recently there has been much interesting work
exploring the benefits of randomization for identification, estimation and assesment of
structural models. For an early example see Hausman and Wise (1979) who estimate a
model for attrition with data from randomized income maintenance experiment, and for
recent examples see Card and Hyslop (2005) who estimate a structural model of welfare
participation using experimental data from Canada, Todd and Wolpin (2003), who analyze data from Mexico’s Progressa program, Imbens, Rubin and Sacerdote (2001) who
estimate labor supply models exploiting random variation in unearned earnings using
data from lottery winners, Duflo, Hanna, and Ryan (2007) who look at the effect of
monitoring and financial incentives on teacher’s absences, and Athey, Levin and Seira
(2004) who use randomized assignment of auction formats to estimate structural models
of bidding behavior. There is much room for such work where experimental variation
is used to improve the identification of the structural models. It would put at risk the
progress made in improving the credibility of empirical work in economics, if this message
got lost in minor squabbles about the relative merits of structural work versus work less
directly connected to economic theory, or in discussions of second-order technicalities
such as adjustments for heteroskedasticity in the calculation of standard errors and the
Behrens-Fisher problem (e.g., Deaton, page 33).3
In my view, it is helpful to separate the discussion into two parts. The first part
concerns the questions of interest, and the second the methods conditional on the question. In my opinion the main concern with the current trend towards credible causal
inference in general, and towards randomized experiments in particular, is that it may
lead researchers to avoid questions where randomization is difficult, or even conceptually
impossible. There are many such questions, and many of them are of great importance.
Questions concerning the causal effects of macro-economic policies can rarely be settled
by randomized experiments. The effect of mergers and acquisitions cannot be studied
using experiments. Similarly, questions involving general equilibrium effects cannot be
answered by simple experiments. In other examples randomized experiments raise ethical
3

Moreover, there is nothing in these issues that makes observational studies less vulnerable to them.

[2]

concerns, and are ultimately not feasible. These are not new concerns, and I am sympathetic with the comments in this regard made by, for example, Rodrik (2008). There
is clearly much room for non-experimental work, and history abounds with examples
where causality has ultimately found general acceptance without any experimental evidence. The most famous example is perhaps the correlation between smoking and lung
cancer. The interpretation of this correlation as evidence of a causal effect of smoking
on lung cancer is now generally accepted, without any direct experimental evidence to
support it. It would be unfortunate if the current interest in credible causal inference,
by insisting on sometimes unattainable standards of internal validity, leads researchers
to avoid such questions. At the same time, the long road towards general acceptance of
the causal interpretation of the smoking and lung cancer correlation (and Fisher’s longtime scepticism about the causality of this correlation) shows the difficulties in gaining
acceptance for causal claims without randomization.
However, the importance of questions for which randomization is difficult or infeasible, should not take away from the fact that for answering the questions they are
designed for, randomized experiments, and other what David Card calls design-based
strategies, have many advantages. Specifically, conditional on the question of interest
being one for which randomized experiment is feasible, randomized experiments are superior to all other designs in terms of statistical reliability. Where as Deaton sees no
special role for experiments, Freedman, hailed by Deaton himself as “one of [the world’s]
greatest statisticians” (Deaton, title page, acknowledgement) is unambiguous in his opening sentence, “Experiments offer more reliable evidence on causation than observational
studies,” (Freedman, 2006, abstract) That is not to say that one may not choose to do an
observational study for other reasons, e.g., financial costs, or ethical considerations. However, no other design will have the credibility that a randomized experiment would have.
Suppose we are interested in question that can be addressed by randomized experiments,
for example, whether a job training program has an effect on labor market outcomes,
or whether class size affects educational outcomes. In such settings, the evidence from
a randomized experiment is unambiguously superior to that from observational studies.
As a result, randomized experiments have often been very influential in shaping policy
debates, e.g., the 1965 Perry Preschool Project on early childhood interventions (see for
some recent discussions Holden (1990) and Manski (1997)), the National Supported Work
[3]

Demonstration experiments on labor market programs (e.g., Lalonde, 1986), or Project
STAR on class size reductions (e.g., Krueger, 1999). More generally, and this is really the
key point, in a situation where one has control over the assignment mechanism, there is
little to gain, and much to lose, by giving that up through allowing individuals to choose
their own treatment regime. Randomization ensures exogeneity of key variables, where
in a corresponding observational study one would have to worry about their endogeneity.
In these comments I will make five points, from the perspective of an econometrician
who is interested in the methodological aspects of this literature. First, I will give a
different characterization of goals and focus of the literature Deaton and HU take issue
with. For its emphasis on obtaining credible causal estimates, and for developing a clear
understanding of the nature of the variation that gives these estimates credibility, I will
refer to this as the causal literature. Second, I will discuss briefly the origins of this causal
literature, which partially takes its motivation from the failure of specific structural models, such as the Heckman selection model (e.g., Heckman, 1978), to satisfactorily address
endogeneity issues in the context of estimation of causal effects of labor market programs.
This was famously documented by Lalonde (1986); see also Fraker and Maynard (1987).
Third, I will argue that, in cases where the focus is establishing the existence of causal
effects, and where experiments are feasible, experiments are unambiguously the preferred
approach: since Fisher (1925) it has formally been established that randomization gives
such designs a credibility unmatched by any other research design.
Fourth, I will make the case that a key contribution of the recent theoretical literature on causality has been to clarify the merits, as well as the limitations, of instrumental
variables, local average treatment effects and regression discontinuity designs in settings
with heterogenous causal effects. An important insight is that in settings with heterogenous effects, instrumental variables strategies do not identify the average effect of
the treatment (e.g., Heckman, 1990). However, as shown by IA instrumental variables
methods do identify the average treatment effect for a well defined subpopulation, the
average effect for what IA call the compliers. Although in many cases the local average
treatment effects, and similarly the estimands in regression discontinuity designs, are
not the average effects that researchers set out to estimate, the internal validity of those
estimands is often much higher than that of other estimands. I will also take issue with
the Deaton and HU view that somehow instrumental variables methods are atheoretical.
[4]

The exclusion restrictions that underly such methods are motivated by subject matter,
that is economic, rather than statistical, knowledge. Moreover, the focus on instrumental variables estimands, rather than on reduced form correlations between outcomes and
exogenous variables (including instruments), is motivated by the belief that the former
are more likely to be invariant, or structural, than the latter, that is, are more likely to
generalize to other settings.
In the fifth point, I discuss issues related to external validity, that is, the ability of
the estimands to generalize to other populations and settings. The causal literature has
emphasized internal validity over external validity, with the view that a credible estimate
of the average effect for a subpopulation is preferred to an estimate of the average for the
overall population with little credibility. This is consistent with the biomedical literature.
Although the primacy of internal validity over external validity has been criticized in that
literature, there is little support for moving towards a system where studies with low
internal validity receive much weight in policy decisions. External validity is generally
a bigger problem in economics than in biomedical settings, with substantial variation
in both preferences and constraints between individuals, as well as variation over time.
Understanding variation in treatment effects is therefore of great importance in these
settings, and it has received a fair amount of attention in the experimental literature
(e.g., Banerjee and Duflo, 2008).

2

Causal Models and Design-Based Approaches

The literature that does not conform to the Deaton and HU standards of structural work
is variously referred to, in a somewhat pejorative manner, as reduced-form, atheoretical,
or statistical (as opposed to economic). These are not terms commonly used in this literature itself. They are also at odds with their historical use.4 In the classical simultaneous
equations setting, the reduced form is used to refer to the regression of the endogenous
variables on the full set of exogenous variables (which is typically estimated by ordinary
least squares), not to equations estimated by instrumental variables methods. The almost
complete lack of instrumental variables methods in the statistical literature makes that
4

In an even more remarkable attempt to shape the debate by changing terminology, Deaton proposes
to redefine exogeneity in a way that allows for the possibility that a randomly generated number is not
exogenous with respect to economic behavior.

[5]

label also inappropriate for the literature that Deaton and HU focus on in their criticism.
What is shared by this literature is not so much a lack of theoretical or economic motivation, but rather an explicit emphasis on credibly estimating causal effects, a recognition
of the heterogeneity in these effects, clarity in the identifying assumptions, and a concern
about endogeneity of choices and the role study design plays. I will therefore refer to
this interchangeably as the causal, or design-based literature. Early influential examples
include the Card (1990) study of the impact of immigration using the Mariel boatlift,
Angrist’s (1990) study of the effect of veteran status on earnings using the Vietnam era
draft lottery as an instrument, and the Angrist and Krueger (1991) study of the effect of
education on earnings using variation in educational achievement related to compulsory
schooling laws. More recently this has led to many studies using regression discontinuity
designs. See Lee and Lemieux (2009) for a review. The recent work in development
economics has taken the emphasis on internal validity even further, stressing formal randomization as a systematic and robust approach to obtaining credible causal effects (e.g.,
Duflo, Glennerster, and Kremer, 2008). This has led to a spectacular increase in experimental evaluations in development economics (see for example the many experiments
run by researchers associated with the Poverty Action Lab at MIT), and in many other
areas in economics, e.g., Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004), Duflo and Saez (2003), and
many others.
Often the focus is on causal effects of binary interventions or treatments. See Imbens
and Wooldridge (2009) for a recent review of the methodological part of this literature.
Even if simple average effects of these interventions are not directly the answering questions about plausible economic policies, they are often closely related to the effects of
such policies, and therefore viewed as quantities of interest. A major concern in this
literature is that simple comparisons between economic agents in the various regimes are
often not credible as estimates of the average effects of interest, because the assignment
to a particular regime was partly the result of choices by optimizing agents. As a consequence, great care is applied to the problem of finding credible sources of exogenous
variation in the receipt of the intervention of interest, often in combination with the
innovative collection of original data sources.
To focus the discussion, let me introduce a specific example. Suppose a state, say
California, is considering reducing class size in first through fourth grade by 10%. En[6]

tering in the California policymakers’ decision is the a comparison of the cost of such a
class size reduction with its benefits. Suppose that the policymakers have accurate information regarding the cost of the program, but are unsure about the benefits. Ultimately
the hope is that such a reduction would improve labor market prospects of the students,
but let us suppose that the state views the program as worthwhile if it improves some
measure of skills, say measured as a combination of test scores, by some amount. What
is the relevance for this decision of the various estimates available in the literature? Let
us consider some of the studies of the effect of class size on educational outcomes. There
is a wide range of such studies, but let me focus on a few. First, there is experimental
evidence, from the Tennessee STAR experiments starting in 1985 (e.g., Krueger, 1999).
Second, there are estimates based on regression discontinuity designs using Israeli data
(Angrist and Lavy, 1999). Third, there are estimates exploiting natural variation in class
size arising from natural variation in cohort size, using data from Connecticut in Hoxby
(2000). None of these estimates directly answers the question facing the decisionmakers
in California. So, are any of these three studies useful for informing our California policy
maker? In my view all three are. In all three cases finding positive effects of class size
reductions on test scores would move my prior beliefs on the effect in California towards
bigger effects. Exactly how much each of the three studies would change my prior beliefs
would depend on the external and internal validity of the three studies. Specifically,
the external validity of each study would depend on (i) its timing to the studies relative
to the target program, with older studies receiving less weight, (ii) differences between
the study population and the California target population, including the targed grade
levels in each study, (iii) differences between the study outcomes and the goals of the
California programs. In terms of these criteria the Connecticut study would do best. In
terms of internal validity, that is, of the estimate having a credible causal interpretation,
the experimental Tennessee study and, next, the Israeli study would do better. The
main point, though, is that all three studies are in my view useful. None of the three
answers directly the question of interest, but the combination is considerably better than
any single one. We could clearly do better, if we designed a study especially to study
the California question. Ideally we would run an experiment in California itself, which,
five years later, might give us a much more reliable answer, but it would not help the
policy makers at this moment very much. If we did an observational study in California,
[7]

however, I would still put some weight on the Connecticut, Tenessee and Israeli studies.
One may go further in formalizing the decision process in this case, and I will do so in
Section 6.
Reiterating the main point, having a variety of estimates, with a range of populations,
and a range of identification strategies, can be useful to policy makers even if none of the
individual studies directly answers the policy question of interest. It is of course unrealistic to expect that the California policy makers would be able to pick a single study from
the literature, in order to get an answer to a question that had not actually been posed
yet when these studies were conducted. This is, again, not a new point. The proponents
of randomization in the new development economics have argued persuasively in favor of
doing multiple experiments (Duflo, 2004; Banerjee 2007, Banerjee and Duflo, 2008). It
is obvious that, as Deaton comments, simply repeating the same experiment would not
be very informative. However, conducting experiments on a variety of settings, including
different populations, and different economic circumstances, would be. As Deaton suggests, informing these settings by economic theory, much as the original negative income
tax experiments were, would clearly improve our understanding of the processes, as well
as our ability to inform public policy.
The focus of the causal literature has been on shoring up the internal validity of the
estimates, and on clarifying the nature of the population these estimates are relevant
for. This is where instrumental variables, local average treatment effects, and regression
discontinuity methods come in. These often do not answer exactly the question of interest.
As a result, a single estimate is unlikely to provide a definitive and comprehensive basis
for informing policy. Rather, the combination of several such studies, based on different
populations and in different settings, can give guidance on the nature of interventions
that work.
Let me mention one more example. Deaton cites a study by Banerjee, Duflo, Cole,
and Linden (2007) who find differences in average effects between randomized evaluations
of the same program in two locations. Banerjee et al surmise that these differences are
related to differential initial reading abilities. Deaton dismisses this conclusion as not
justified by the randomization, because that question was not part of the original protocol
and would therefore be subject to data mining issues. This is formally correct, but it is
precisely the attempt to understand differences in the results of past experiments, that
[8]

leads to further research and motivates subsequent experiments, thus building a better
understanding of the heterogeneity in the effects that can assist in informing policy. See
for another example of such a meta analysis Card, Kluve, and Weber (2009), and for
additional discussion Section 6.

3

Lalonde (1986): The Failure of Non-experimental
Methods to Replicate Experimental Evaluations of
Labor Market Programs

Surprisingly, neither Deaton nor HU discuss in much detail the origins of the resurgence
of interest in randomized and natural experiments, and the concern with the internal
validity of some of the structural modelling. HU vaguely reference the “practical difficulty
in identifying, and precisely estimating the full array of structural parameters” (HU, page
2), but mention only an unreferenced paper by Hausman (presumably Hausman, 1981)
as one of the papers that according to HU “fueled the flight of many empirical economists
from structural models” (HU, page 2, footnote 6). I think the origins behind this flight
are not quite as obscure as may appear from reading Deaton and HU. A major role was
played by Lalonde’s landmark 1986 paper, “Evaluating the Econometric Evaluations of
Training Programs with Experimental Data.” In this paper, widely cited, and still widely
taught in labor and econometrics courses in economics PhD programs, Lalonde studies
the ability of a number of econometric methods, including Heckman’s selection models, to
replicate the results from an experimental evaluation of a labor market program, on the
basis of non-experimental data. He concluded that they could not do so systematically.
Lalonde’s evidence, and subsequent confirmations of his conclusions, e.g., Fraker and
Maynard (1987), had a profound impact in the economics literature, and even played
a role in influencing Congress to mandate experimental evaluations for many federally
funded programs.
It is difficult to argue that the focus in Lalonde’s study, the average effect of the
Nationally Supported Work (NSW) program, is not “useful for policy or understanding,”
(Deaton, Abstract). The most direct evidence that it meets this criterion is the willingness of policy makers to provide substantial funds for credible evaluations of similar labor
market and educational programs. Nevertheless, the question therefore arises whether
[9]

evaluation methods other than those considered by Lalonde would have led to better
results. There is some evidence that matching methods would have done better. See
the influential paper by Dehejia and Wahba (1999), although this is still disputed, e.g.,
Smith and Todd (2005). See Imbens and Wooldridge (2009) for a recent review. Matching methods, however, hardly meet Deaton’s criteria for “analysis of models inspired by
economic theory” (Deaton, page 2). Until there are more succesful attempts to replicate
experimental results, it would therefore seem inescapable that there is a substantial role
to be played by experimental evaluations in this literature if we want data analyses to
meet Leamer’s standard of being taken seriously by other researchers.

4

The Benefits of Randomized Experiments

One of the most curious discussions in Deaton concerns the merits of randomized experiments. He writes: “I argue that evidence from randomized experiments has no special
priority. ... Randomized experiments cannot automatically trump other evidence, they
do not occupy any special place in some hierarchy of evidence,” (Deaton, page 4). These
are remarkable statements. If true, in the unqualified way Deaton states them, it would
throw serious doubt on the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA) insistence on randomized evaluations of new drugs and treatments. But of course Deaton’s statements are
wrong. Deaton is both formally wrong, and wrong in spirit. Randomized experiments
do occupy a special place in the hierarchy of evidence, namely at the very top.5
Formally, as shown originally by Fisher (1925), randomization allows the researcher
to precisely quantify the uncertainty associated with the evidence for an effect of a treatment. Specifically, it allows for the calculation of exact p-values of sharp null hypotheses.
These p-values are free of assumptions on distributions of outcomes, assumptions on the
sampling process, or assumptions on interactions between units, solely relying on randomization and a sharp null hypothesis. No other design allows for this. Now this is
strictly speaking a very narrow result, with subtle extensions to more interesting questions. We can establish the presence of a causal effect through the calculation of p-values,
but we cannot estimate the average effect without some additional assumptions. Unless
we rule out interactions, the average effect depends on assignments to other individuals
5

See the earlier quote by Freedman.

[10]

and thus needs to be defined carefully. In the absence of interactions we can estimate
the average effect without bias, but the validity of confidence intervals still relies on
large sample approximations (e.g., Neyman, 1923; Freedman, 2008). Nevertheless, even
if experiments rely on some assumptions for inference on average treatment effects, they
do so to a lesser extent than observational studies, by not requiring assumptions on the
assignment mechanism.
Deaton himself hedges his remarkable claims, by adding that “actual experiments
are frequently subject to practical problems that undermine any claims to statistical or
epistemic superiority,” (Deaton, abstract), a somewhat confusing statement given that
according to his earlier comments there is no initial superiority to undermine. It is
obviously true that violations of assignment protocols, missing data, and other practical
problems, create complications in the analyses of data from randomized experiments.
There is no evidence, however, that giving up control of the assignment mechanism, and
conducting an observational study, improves these matters. Moreoever, the suggestion
that any complication, such as a violation of the assignment protocol, leads to analyses
that lose all credibility accorded to randomized experiments is wrong. Again, it is both
formally wrong, and wrong in substance. That this suggestion is formally wrong is
easiest illustrated in an example. Consider a randomized experiment with 2N units,
N randomly assigned to the treatment group, and the remaining N assigned to the
control group. Suppose we wish to test the sharp Fisher null hypothesis that there is no
causal effect whatsoever of a job search assistance program on employment status. For
such an experiment we can calculate the exact p-values using Fisher’s methods. Now
suppose that there is noncompliance. Some individuals assigned to the program, did
not participate in the program, and some assigned to the control group, did in fact
participate in the program. Let Yi∗ ∈ {0, 1} be the outcome we would have observed for
individual i, had this individual been exposed to the treatment assigned to her. Let Ci
be an indicator for compliance with the treatment received, and let Wi be the treatment
assigned. The complete data p-value pcomp can be written as a function the complete
data, pcomp = p(Y∗ , W), where Y∗ and W are the 2N vectors with typical element Yi∗
and Wi respectively. The problem is that we do not observe Yi∗ if Ci = 0 (the individual
does not comply with the treatment assigned). However, even in that case we know
that Yi∗ ∈ {0, 1}. Hence we can derive, in the spirit of the work by Manski (1990,
[11]

1994, 2003), the range of p-values consistent with the observed data, without making
any assumptions whatsoever about the nature of the noncompliance. Depending on the
data, we may therefore be able to conclude, in spite of the noncompliance, that we can
be confident that the treatment did have some effect. The point is that in settings with
limited noncompliance we can still make precise statements of the type validated by
randomized experiments, with no additional assumptions. An important role is played
here by Manski’s insight that identification is not a matter of all or nothing. Thus,
some of the benefits of randomization formally remain even in the presence of pratical
complications.
In his paper Deaton also questions what we learn from experiments: “One immediate
consequence of this derivation is a fact that is often quoted by critics of RCTs, but
is often ignored by practitioners, at least in economics: RCTs are informative about
the mean of the treatment effects, Yi1 − Yi0 , but do not identify other features of the
distribution. For example, the median of the difference is not the difference in medians,
so an RCT is not, by itself, informative about the median treatment effect, something
that could be of as much interest to policy makers as the mean treatment effect.” Deaton
is correct in stating that experiments are not informative about the median treatment
effect. As a side issue, this raises the question, of course, how any study can be, other
than by making untestable assumptions, but let me ignore that question. The more
important issue is the second claim in the Deaton quote. In many cases average effects
on (functions of) outcomes are indeed what is of interest to policy makers, not quantiles
of differences in potential outcomes. The key insight is that a social planner, maximizing
a welfare function that depends on the distribution of outcomes in each state of the world,
would only care about the two marginal distributions, not about the distribution of the
difference. Suppose that the planner’s choice is between two programs. In that case
the social planner would look at the welfare given the distribution of outcomes induced
by the first program, and compare that to the welfare induced by the second program.
As Manski (1996) writes, “Thus, a planner maximizing a conventional social welfare
function wants to learn P [Y (1)] and P [Y (0)], not P [Y (1) − Y (0)].”(Manski, 1996, page
714). (Here P [Y (w)] denotes the distribution of Y (w).) The decision may depend on the
median of the marginal distributions of Yi (0) and Yi (1), but would in general not depend
on the median of the treatment effect Yi (1) − Yi (0).
[12]

Deaton also raises issues concerning the manner in which data from randomized experiments are analyzed in practice. Consider a carefully designed randomized experiment,
with covariates present that were not taken into account in the randomization.6 Deaton
raises three issues. The first concerns inference, or estimation of standard errors. The
second is concerned with finite sample biases. The third issue deals with specification
search and the exploration of multiple hypotheses. I will address each in turn. Before
doing so, note, however, that although Deaton raises these issues in the context of experimental evaluations, there is nothing specific to randomized experiments that makes
them more vulnerable to these issues than observational studies. Moreoever, in my view
these three are second order issues. That is, second order relative to the first order issues of selection and endogeneity in observational evaluation studies that have long been
highlighted by Heckman (e.g., Heckman, 1978; Heckman and Robb, 1985).
First, the standard errors. This is an issue even in large samples. If the average effect
is estimated as the difference in means by treatment status, the appropriate variance,
validated by the randomization, is the robust one, allowing for heteroskedasticity. Using
the standard ols variance based on homoskedasticity leads to confidence intervals that
are not necessarily justified even in large samples. This is correct, and in practice it is
certainly recommended to use the robust variance here. Moroever, the standard error
issue that is often the biggest concern in practice, clustering, is nowadays routinely taken
into account. See Duflo, Glennerster, and Kremer (2008) for more discussion.
The second issue concerns finite sample issues. Researchers often include covariates
in regression estimates of average treatment effect. In randomized experiments this is not
strictly necessary. Because the covariates are in expectation uncorrelated with the treatment indicator, the standard omitted variable bias argument implies that their omission
or inclusion does not introduce any asymptotic bias. In finite samples including covariates can introduce some bias, because the finite sample correlation between the treatment
indicator and the covariates need not equal zero, even if the population correlation does.
On the other hand, including covariates can substantially improve the precision if these
covariates are good predictors of the outcomes given or without the treatment. In finite
samples there is therefore a tradeoff between some finite sample bias, and large sample
6

In fact one would always, even in small samples be at least as well off by stratification on these
covariates, e.g., Imbens, King, McKenzie, and Ridder (2009).

[13]

precision gains. In practice including some covariates that are a priori believed to be
substantially correlated with the outcomes, is likely to improve the expected squared
error. An additional point is that if the regression model is saturated, e.g., with a binary covariate including both the covariate and the interaction of the covariate and the
treatment indicator, there is no bias, even in finite samples.7
The third issue Deaton raises concerns the exploration of multiple specifications,
for example through the estimation of average effects for various subgroups. This is
formally correct, and I would certainly encourage researchers to follow more closely the
protocols established by the FDA, which, for example, insists on listing the analyses to
be conducted prior to the collection of the data. Again there is of course nothing specific
to randomized experiments in this arguments: any time a researchers uses pre-testing,
or estimates multiple versions of a statistical model there should be concern that the
final confidence intervals no longer have the nominal coverage rate. However, I think
that this is again a second order issue. In randomized experiments one typically finds,
as in Lalonde (1986), that the results from a range of estimators and specifications are
robust. Had Deaton added a real example of a case where results based on experiments
were sensitive to these issues, his argument would have been more convincing.
Ultimately, and this is really the key point, it seems difficult to argue that, in a setting
where it is possible to carry out a randomized experiment, one would ever benefit from
giving up control over the assignment mechanism, by allowing individuals to choose their
own treatment status. In other words, conditional on the question, the methodological
case for randomized experiments seems unassailable, and none of the arguments advanced
by Deaton and HU weaken that. I do not want to say that in practice randomized
experiments are generally perfect, or that their implementation cannot be improved, but
I do want to make the claim that given up control over the assignment process is unlikely
to improve matters. It is telling that neither Deaton nor HU give a specific example
where an observational study did improve, or would have improved, on a randomized
experiment, conditional on the question lending itself to a randomized experiment.
7

A separate issue is that it is difficult to see how finite sample concerns could be used as an argument
against actually doing experiments. There are even fewer observational settings for which we have exact
finite sample results.

[14]

5

Instrumental Variables, Local Average Treatment
Effects, and Regression Discontinuity Designs

In some settings a randomized experiment would have been feasible, or at least conceivable, but was not actually conducted. This may have been the result of ethical considerations, or because there was no particularly compelling reason to conduct an experiment.
In some of those cases, credible evaluations can be based on instrumental variables or
regression discontinuity strategies. As a rule, such evaluations are second best to randomized experiments for two reasons. First, they rely on additional assumptions, and
second, they have less external validity. Often, however, such evaluations are all we have.
The theoretical econometrics literature in the last two decades has clarified what we can
learn, and under what conditions, about the intervention in those settings.8 In doing so,
this literature has made many connections to the statistics and psychology literature on
observational studies. Rather than leading to “unnecessarily rhetorical barriers between
disciplines” (Deaton, page 2), this has been a remarkably effective two-way exchange,
leading to substantial convergence in the statistics and econometrics literatures, both
in terms of terminology and in the exchange of ideas. On the one hand, economists
have now generally adopted Rubin’s potential outcome framework (Rubin, 1973, 1990;
Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983), labeled the Rubin Causal Model by Holland (1986), which
formulates causal questions as comparisons of unit-level potential outcomes.9 Although
this framework is a substantial departure from the Cowles Commission general set up
of simultaneous equations models, it is closely related to the interpretation of structural
equations in, for example, Haavelmo (1943). On the other hand, statisticians gained
an appreciation for, and understanding of, instrumental variables methods. See for example, what is probably the first use of instrumental variables published in the mainstream medical literature, although still written by economists, McClellan and Newhouse
(1994). Special cases of these methods had been used previously in the biostatistics literature, in particular in settings of randomized experiments with one-sided compliance
(e.g., Zelen, 1979), but no links to the econometrics literature had been made. Furthermore economists significantly generalized applicability and understanding of regression
8
9

For a recent review of this literature, see Imbens and Wooldridge (2009).
Compare for example, the set up in Heckman and Robb (1985) with that in Heckman (1990).

[15]

discontinuity designs (Hahn, Todd, and VanderKlaauw, 2001), which originated in the
psychology literature. See Shadish, Campbell and Cook (2000), and Cook (2008) for a
historical perspective. Within economics, however, the results in IA and Hahn, Todd,
and VanderKlaauw (2001) are unusual. As a consequence these papers have generated a
substantial degree of controversy, as echoed in the quotes from Deaton and HU. Let me
offer some comments on this.
The standard approach in econometrics is to state precisely, at the outset of an analysis, what is the object of interest. Let me use Angrist’s (1989) famous draft lottery study
as an example. In that case one may be interested in the average causal effect of serving
in the military on earnings. Now suppose one is concerned that simple comparisons between veterans and non-veterans are not credible as estimates of average causal effects
because of unobserved differences between veterans and nonveterans. Let us consider
the arguments advanced by Angrist in support of using the draft lottery number as an
instrument. The first key assumption is that draft eligibility is exogenous. Since it was
actually randomly assigned, this is true by design in this case. The second is that there
is no direct effect of the instrument, the lottery number, on the outcome. This is what
Angrist, Imbens and Rubin (1996) call the exclusion restriction.10 This is a substantive
assumption that may well be violated. See Angrist (1990) and Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin (1996) for discussions of potential violations. The third assumption is what IA call
monotonicity, which requires that any man who would serve if not draft eligible, would
also serve if draft eligible.11 In this setting monotonicity seems a very reasonable assumption. See Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin for discussions of the implications of violations of
this assumption.
These three assumptions are not sufficient to identify the average effect of serving
in the military for the full population. However, we can identify the average effect on
the subpopulation of what Angrist, Imbens and Rubin (1996) call compliers. Compliers
in this context are individuals who were induced by the draft lottery to serve in the
military, as opposed to never-takers who would not serve irrespective of their lottery
number, and always-takers, who would volunteer irrespective of their lottery number.
10

Deaton actually calls this second assumption “exogeneity”, in an unnecessary and confusing change
from conventional terminology
11
In another unnecessary attempt to change established terminology HU argue that this should be
called “uniformity.”

[16]

But, Deaton might protest, this is not what we said we were interested in! That may
be correct, depending on what is the policy question. One could imagine that the policy
interest is in compensating those who were involuntarily taxed by the draft, in which case
the compliers are exactly the population of interest. If, on the other hand the question
concerns future drafts that may be more universal than the Vietnam era one, the overall
population may be the closer to the population of interest. In that case there are two
alternatives that do focus on the average effect for the full population. Let us briefly
discuss both in order to motivate the case for reporting the local average treatment
effect. See also Manski (1996) for a discussion of these issues.
One principled approach is Manski’s (1990, 1996, 2003) bounds, or partial identification, approach. Manski might argue that one should maintain the focus on the overall
average effect, and derive the bounds on this estimand given the assumptions one is
willing to make. Manski’s is a coherent perspective, and a useful one. While I have no
disagreement with the case for reporting the bounds on the overall average treatment
effect, there is in my view a strong case for also reporting estimates for the subpopulation for which one can identify the average effect of interest, that is the local average
treatment effect. The motivation for this is that there may be cases with wide bounds
on the population average, some of which are, and some of which are not, informative
about the presence of any effects. Consider an example of a randomized evaluation of a
drug on survival, with one-sided noncompliance, and with the randomized assignment as
an instrument for receipt of treatment. Suppose the bounds for the average effect of the
treatment are equal to [−1/4, 1/4]. This can be consistent with a substantial negative
average effect for compliers, lowering survival rates by 1/8, or with a substantial positive
average effect for compliers, raising survival rates by 1/8.12 In both examples there need
not be any statistical evidence that the effect differs for compliers and nevertakers. One
would think that in the first case a decision maker would be considerably less likely to
implement universal adoption of the treatment than in the second, and so reporting only
12

To be specific, let the probability of complier and never-takers be equal to 1/2. With the endogenous
regressor (receipt of treatment) denoted by Xi , and the instrument (assignment of treatment) denoted
by Zi , let pzx = pr(Y = 1|X = x, Z = z). In the first example, p00 = 3/8, p10 = 1/4, and p11 = 1/4. In
the second example p̃00 = 1/8, p̃10 = 1/4, and p̃11 = 1/4. Now in both cases the sharp bounds on the
average treatment effect are [−1/4, 1/4], in the first example τlate = −1/8, and in the second example
τ̃late = 1/8.

[17]

the bounds might leave out relevant information.
A second alternative approach to the focus on the local average treatment effect is to
complement the three assumptions that allowed for identification of the average effect for
compliers, with additional assumptions that allow one to infer the overall average effect,
at least in large samples. The concern is that the assumptions that allow one to carry
out this extrapolation are of a very different nature from, and may be less credible than,
those that identify the local average treatment effect. For that reason I would prefer to
keep those assumptions separate, and report both the local average treatment effect, with
its high degree of internal, but possibly limited external validity, and possibly add a set
of estimates for the overall average effect with the corresponding additional assumptions,
with lower internal, but higher external, validity. Let us be more specific in the context of
the Angrist study. One might write down a model for the outcome (earnings), depending
on veteran status:
Yi = α + β · Vi + εi .
In addition one might write down a Heckman-style latent index model (Heckman, 1978;
1990) for the decision to serve in the military, as a function of the instrument Zi (draft
eligibility):
Vi∗ = π0 + π1 · Zi + ηi .
The latent index Vi∗ represents the difference in utility from serving, versus not serving,
in the military with the observed veteran status equal to

1
if Vi∗ > 0,
Vi =
0
if Vi∗ ≤ 0.
The inclusion of the instrument Zi in the utility function can be thought of as reflecting
the cost a low lottery number imposes on the action of not serving in the military. Suppose
that the only way to stay out of the military if drafted is through medical exemptions.
In that case it may well be plausible that the instrument is valid. Health status is
captured by the unobserved component ηi : individuals in poor health ηi < −π0 − π1
(nevertakers in the AIR terminology) would not serve even if drafted, and individuals
with −π0 − π ≤ ηi < −π0 (compliers) would serve if drafted, but not as volunteers, and
[18]

individuals with −π0 ≤ ηi (alwaystakers) would always serve.13
Although not widely used anymore, this type of model was very popular in the eighties, as one of the first generation of models that explicitly took into account selection bias
(Heckman, 1978, 1990) Note that this model embodies all the substantive assumption
underlying the local average treatment effect. Thus, the instrumental variables estimator
can be justified by reference to this, admittedly simple, structural model.
Although originally this type of model was often used with a distributional assumption
(typically joint normality of (ηi , εi )), this is not essential in this version of the model.
Without any distributional assumptions, only assuming independence of εi and Zi is
sufficient for identyfing the average effect of military service, β. More important is the
assumption of a constant effect of veteran status. Such an assumption is rarely implied
by theory, and is often implausible on substantive grounds (e.g., with binary outcomes).
Suppose we relax the model and explicitly allow for heterogenous effects:
Yi = α + (β + νi ) · Vi + εi ,
where νi captures the heterogeneity in the effect of veteran status for individual i. If we
maintain joint normality (now of the triple (εi , ηi , νi )), we can still identify the parameters
of the model, including β, that is, the average effect of veteran status. See for example,
Björklund and Moffitt (1987). Unlike in the constant effect model, however, in this case
the normality assumption is not innocuous. As Heckman (1990) shows, a nonparametric
version of this model is not identified, unless the probability of veteran status, as a
function of the instrument Zi , is arbitrarily close to zero and one for some choices of the
instrument. As this is implied by the range of the instrument being unbounded, this
is often referred to as “identification at infinity” (Chamberlain, 1986; HU). In the case
with a binary instrument, this assumption is easy to check. In the Angrist study, the
probability of serving in the military for the draft eligible and non-eligible is far from
zero and one, and so nonparametric identification fails. The contribution of the LATE
literature was the insight that, although one could not identify the average effect for
the overall population, one could still identify the average effect for compliers. In the
structural model above, compliers are the individuals with π0 −π1 ≤ ηi < π0. Think again
13

There are also arguments why the instrument need not be valid. For example, individuals may avoid
the draft by enrolling in additional education to receive educational deferments. See Angrist, Imbens
and Rubin (1996) for more discussion.

[19]

of the case where the nevertakers with ηi < −π0 − π1 correspond to individuals in poor
health. These individuals cannot be induced to serve in the military through the draft.
It seems intuitively clear that we cannot identify the average effect of military service for
this group from such data, because we never see them serving in the military. So, the
problem in this case is not so much that researchers are “trying to avoid thinking about
how and why things work,” (Deaton, page 14), but that there is little basis for credible
extrapolation from the local average treatment effect to the overall average effect.
Reporting the local average treatment effect, solely, or in combination with bounds
or point estimates for the overall average based on additional assumptions, is thus emphatically not motivated by a claim that the local average treatment effect is the sole or
primary effect of interest. Rather, it is motivated by a sober assessment that estimates for
other subpopulations do not have the same internal validity, and by an attempt to clarify
what can be learned from the data in the absence of identification of the population
average effect. It is based on a realization that, because of heterogeneity in responses,
instrumental variables estimates are a distinct second best to randomized experiments.
Let me end this discussion with a final comment on the substantive importance of what
we learn in such settings. Although we do not learn what the average effect is of veteran
status, we can, in sufficiently large samples, learn for a particular, well-defined subpopulation, learn what the effect is. We may then wish to extrapolate to other subpopulations,
even if only qualitatively, but given that the nature of those extrapolations is often substantially less credible than the inferences for the particular subpopulation, it may be
useful to keep these separate.
These arguments are even more relevant for the regression discontinuity case. In
the sharp regression discontinuity case we learn about the average effect of a treatment
at a fixed value of the covariate. Let us consider Lee’s (2008) example of the effect
of incumbency on election outcomes. Lee uses comparisons of congressional districts
where the previous election was barely won by a Democrat with districts where the
previous election was barely wone by a Republican. This leads to estimates of the effect
of incumbency that have a high degree of internal validity, but that only apply to districts
with close elections. These may well be very different from districts that are heavily
leaning to one party. There is little reason to believe that districts with close elections
are the only ones of interest, but in the absence of credible models for extrapolation, this
[20]

is again all we can do.
Fuzzy regression discontinuity designs rank even lower in terms of external validity.
As pointed out by Hahn, Todd, and VanderKlaauw (2001), in arguably the most important contribution of economists to the regression discontinuity design literature, fuzzy
regression discontinuity designs combine the limitations of sharp regression discontinuity designs, in that they only refer to units with a particular value of the covariates,
with those of instrumental variables estimates, in that they only reflect on compliers.
However, for this subpopulation, these designs often have great internal validity. Many
convincing examples have now been published. See the survey paper by Lee and Lemieux
(2009) and the special issue of the journal of econometrics (Imbens and Lemieux, 2008).
Again, researchers do not necessarily set out to estimate the average for these particular subpopulations, but in the face of the lack of internal validity of estimates for other
subpopulations they choose to report estimates for them.

6

Internal versus External Validity

Much of the debate ultimately centers on the weight researchers put on external validity
versus internal validity of estimators. There is no disagreement that both are important.
See Banerjee and Duflo (2008) for a recent discussion in the context of experimental
evaluations in development economics. Returning to the class size example from Section
2, Angrist and Lavy (1999), Hoxby (2000), and Krueger (1999) do not study the effect
of class size as a historical phenomenon: they want to inform the policy debate on
class size. Similarly, Card (1990) is presumably not interested in soley in the effect
of the Mariel boatlift, rather he is interested in informing the debate on the effects of
immigration of low-skilled workers. In order to be useful in informing policy, a study
needs to have internal validity (have a credible causal interpretation for the population it
refers to) as well as external validity (be relevant for the populations the treatment may
be extended to). In many disciplines the weights placed on different studies are heavily
loaded in favor of internal validity. The FDA insists on elaborate protocols to ensure
the internal validity of estimates, with much less emphasis on their external validity.
This has led, at times, to the approval of treatments with a subsequent reversal of that
decision, after the treatment was found to have adverse effects on populations that were
[21]

underrepresented in the original study populations. Part of this is unavoidable. First,
randomized experiments can only be conducted on volunteers, and there is no systematic
method for ensuring that the population of volunteers is representative of the population
of interest. Second, after a succesful randomized experiment, the target population may
well change. If a treatment is in a trial very succesful for moderately sick patients, it may
well be used for sicker patients that were not part of the original study. Doing a second
experiment is not always an option, and is often not ethical if there are demonstrable and
sizable effects on a closely related population. Third, other things may change between
the experiment and the subsequent adoption that affects the efficacy of the treatment.
Again, this is unavoidable in practice.
In economic applications the issue of external validity is considerably more severe.
In many biomedical treatments the effects are through relatively stable biological mechanisms that generalize to other populations. A vaccine for a particular strain of HIV
that prevents infection in the US has a high likelihood of working for the same strain in
Africa as well. In contrast, an educational reform that is found to raise test scores in
England is unlikely to be directly applicable to the US given the differences in educational
institutions and practices.
It may be helpful to put some more structure on this problem.14 Suppose we have
a number of units. To be specific I will refer to them as states. We are interested in
the effect of an intervention, e.g., putting a price cap into place at p1 versus at p0 , on
demand for a particular commodity. For ease of exposition let us assume that p1 −p0 = 1.
Let the expected difference in demand, at the two potential values for the price cap, be
denoted by θs , indexed by state s. States may differ in the expected effect, because they
differ in terms of institutions, or because they differ in terms of population composition.
Let us denote the relevant characteristics of the states by Xs , and for purposes of this
discussion, let us assume we observe Xs .
Now suppose we have a model for the household level demand function:
Di = β0 + β1 · p + β2 · Ii · p + εi ,
where Di is household level demand, Ii is household income, and εi are unobserved
differences between households. The parameters β are structural parameters, common
14

This discussion is partly based on conversations with Abhijit Banerjee and Sendhil Mullainathan.

[22]

to all states. Given this model, the difference in expected demand in state s if the price
is fixed at p1 versus p0 is
θs = E[D|S = s, P = p1 ] − E[D|S = s, P = p0 ] = β1 + β2 · E[I|S = s].
Let Xs = E[I|S = s] be average income in state s, so that we can write
θs = g(Xs , β) = β1 + β2 · Xs .
Futhermore, suppose that our interest is solely in the difference in average outcomes in
California,
θca = g(Xca , β).
Now consider the case where we have data from an experiment in Tennessee, where
randomly selected individuals were faced with a price of p1 , and others with a price of
p0 . Thus, with a sufficiently large sample, we would learn from the Tennessee experiment
the value of θtn = g(Xtn , β).
Suppose we also have data from an observational study from Connecticut. In this state
we have a random sample of demand, income, and prices, (Di , Ii, Pi ), for i = 1, . . . , N.
We may be concerned that in this state prices are endogenous, and so let us assume that
we also observe an instrument for price, Zi . If the instrument is valid, and conditional
on income both correlated with prices and uncorrelated with εi , this will allow us to
estimate the structural parameters β using two-stage-least-squares. Let us allow for the
possibility that the instrument is not valid, or more generally for misspecification in the
structural model. In that case β̂ct, the estimator for β based on Connecticut data, need
not be consistent for β. Let us denote the probability limit of the estimator by βct we index this probability limit by the state to capture the possibility that if the same
structural model was estimated in a different state, the bias might well be different.
The first question now is how we would choose between two estimates of the intervention in California: the experimental one from Tennessee,
exp
θ̂ca
= θtn,

versus the structural one, based on parameter estimates from Connecticut, combined
with the characteristics from California,
struct
θ̂ca
= g(Xca , βct).

[23]

In principle the choice between the two estimators would depend on the variation in
effect θs , and in the variation in the pseudo-structural parameter βs . In the absence of
additional information, one may need to rely on prior beliefs. If one believes there is little
exp
variation in θs , one might prefer θ̂ca
. If one believed the structural model was close to
struct
correctly specified, one would prefer θ̂ca
. Note the benefits in this case of experimental

data: if the structural model had actually been estimated on experimental data, there
would be no bias, and βct would be equal to β, and thus g(Xca , βct) would be equal to
θca . That is not always the case. If the structural model was richer, a simple experiment
with randomly assigned prices would not necessarily pin down all structural parameters.
However, in general it will help pin down some combination of the structural parameters,
by forcing the model to fit the experimental evidence.
The answer to the first question may also differ if the experiment in Tennesee focused
on a question that differed from that in California. If the experiment in Tennessee
involved randomly assigning prices of p2 and p3 , rather than the price levels that enter
into the California question, p0 and p1 , it may be difficult to estimate θca from the
Tennessee results. This would not pose any conceptual problems from the structural
model perspective.
A second question is what one would do if one had both the experimental evidence
from Tennessee and the observational data from Connecticut. In that case one could, in
the spirit of the Lalonde (1986) evaluation of econometric evaluation methods, compare
the experimental estimate for Tennesee, θtn, with the structural one based on Connecticut
struct
struct
estimates, θ̂tn
= g(Xtn , βct). The comparison of θtn and θ̂tn
reflects on the adequacy

of the structural model. If the structural model passes the test, there is a stronger case
for using the structural model to predict the effect of the intervention in California. If
the prediction fails, however, the conclusion is that the structural model is not adequate,
struct
and thus invalidates θ̂ca
. This test does not reflect in any way on the experimental
exp
estimate θ̂ca
.

A third question concerns the information content of additional experiments. With
two or more experiments we would be able to update our beliefs on the amount of
variation in θs . It obviously would not help much if we did the second experiment in
a state very similar to Tennessee, but if we did the second experiment in a state very
different from Tennessee, and ideally more similar to California, we would likely learn
[24]

much about the amount of variation in θs . If we have detailed information on Xs , having
a substantial number of experiments may enable us to approximate the function g(x; β)
without directly estimating β, simply fitting a flexible functional form to E[θs |Xs ] =
g(Xs ). If we can approximate this function accurately, we would be able to predict the
effect of the intervention in California. In this case one could also incorporate different
experiments, e.g., those involving other price caps. If there is any choice, one should do
the experiments in a wide range of settings, that is, in the current example, in states
with different Xs . The analyses by Card, Kluve and Weber (2009), Hotz, Imbens and
Mortimer (2005), Kremer and Holla (2008) and Duflo nand Chattopadhyay (2004) fit
into this framework.
The fourth question concerns the benefits of multiple observational studies. This is
not quite so clear. In many cases one would expect that repeated observational studies in
different locations would have similar biases, generated through similar selection mechanisms. Finding that multiple observational studies lead to the same results is therefore
not necessarily informative. To get a handle on the bias, the difference βs − β, we would
need observational study from states that do not have the same biases as the first state,
Connecticut. Identifying such states may be more difficult than finding a state with potentially different effects θs : it may well be that the biases in observational studies would
be similar in all states, arising from the same selection mechanisms.

7

Conclusion

Deaton offers a critical appraisal of the methodologies currently in fashion in development
economics. He argues that randomized experiments have no special role in the hierarchy
of evidence, and, as do Heckman and Urzua, argues somewhat presumptuously that
instrumental variables methods do not answer interesting questions. He suggests moving
towards more theory-based studies, and away from randomized and natural experiments.
In these comments I take issue with some of these positions, and caution against his
recommendations. The causal or design-based literature, going back to the work in labor
economics by Angrist, Card, Krueger and others, and the current experimental literature
in development economics, including work by Duflo, Banerjee and Kremer, has greatly
improved the standards of empirical work by emphasizing internal validity and clarifying
[25]

the nature of identifying assumptions. Although it would be regrettable if this trend led
researchers to avoid questions that cannot be answered through randomized or natural
experiments, it is important not to lose track of the great strides made by this literature
towards improving the credibility of empirical work.

[26]

References
Angrist, J., (1990), ”Lifetime Earnings and the Vietnam Era Draft Lottery: Evidence from
Social Security Administrative Records,” American Economic Review, 80, 313-335.
Angrist, J., G. Imbens and D. Rubin (1996), “Identification of Causal Effects Using
Instrumental Variables,”Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91, 444-472.
Angrist, J., and V. Lavy (1999), “Using Maimonides’ Rule to Estimate the Effect of Class
Size on Scholastic Achievement”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. CXIV, 1243.
Athey, S., J. Levin, and E. Seira, (2004), “Comparing Open and Sealed Bid Auctions:
Theory and Evidence from Timber Auctions,”Unpublished Paper.
Banerjee, A., (2007), Making Aid Work, Cambridge, MIT Press.
Banerjee, A., and E. Duflo, (2008), “The Experimental Approach to Development Economics,”unpublished manuscript, department of economics, MIT.
Banerjee, A., and R. He, (2008), Making aid work, in William R. Easterly, ed., Reinventing
Foreign Aid, Cambridge, MA. MIT Press, pp. 4792.
Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, S. Cole, and L. Linden, (2007): “Remedying Education:
Evidence from Two Randomized Experiments in India,”Quarterly Journal of Economics
Vol. Vol. 122(3): 1235-1264.
Bertrand, M., and S. Mullainathan, (2004), “Are Emily and Greg More Employable Than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination,”American Economic Review, Vol. 94(4):991-1,013.
Björklund, A. and R. Moffitt, (1987), “The Estimation of Wage Gains and Welfare
Gains in Self–Selection Models,”Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. LXIX, 42–49.
Card, D., (1990), “The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market,” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review 43, 245-257.
Card, D., and D. Hyslop, (2005), “Estimating the Effects of a Time-Limited Earnings
Subsidy for Welfare-Leavers,”Econometrica, Vol 73(6):1723-1770
Card, D., J. Kluve, and A. Weber, (2009), “Active Labor Market Policy Evaluations: A
Meta-Analysis,”Working Paper 4002, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
Card, D., and A. Krueger, (1994): “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of
the Fast-food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania,” American Economic Review,
84 (4), 772-784.
Chattopadhyay, R., and E. Duflo, (2004) “Women as Policy Makers: Evidence from a
Randomized Policy Experiment in India,”Econometrica, Volume 72(5):1409-1443.
Chamberlain, G. (1986), “Asymptotic efficiency in semi-parametric models with censoring,”Journal of Econometrics, Vol 32(2), 189-218.
Cook, T., (2008), “Waiting for Life to Arrive”: A History of the Regression-Discontinuity Design in Psychology, Statistics, and Economics, Journal of Econometrics. Vol 142(2):636654
Deaton, A., (2009), “Instruments of Development: Randomization in the Tropics, and the
Search for the Elusive Keys to Economic Development,”NBER Working Paper #14690.
Dehejia, R., and S. Wahba, (1999), “Causal Effects in Nonexperimental Studies: Reevaluating the Evaluation of Training Programs”, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 94, 1053-1062.
Duflo, E. (2004), Scaling up and evaluation, Annual World Bank Conference on Development
Economics 2004, Washington, DC. The World Bank.

[27]

Duflo, E., R. Glennerster, and M. Kremer, (2008), “Using Randomization in Development Economics Research: A Toolkit,”Handbook of Development Economics, (T. P.
Schultz and J. Strauss eds.), 3895-3962.
Duflo, E., R. Hanna, and S. Ryan (2007), “Monitoring Works: Getting Teachers to Come
to School,”unpublished manuscript, department of economics, MIT.
Duflo, E., and E. Saez (2003): “The Role of Information and Social Interactions in Retirement Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,”Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 118(3):815-842, 118(3).
Fisher, R. A., (1925), The Design of Experiments, 1st ed, Oliver and Boyd, London.
Fraker, T., and R. Maynard, (1987), “The Adequacy of Comparison Group Designs for
Evaluations of Employment-Related Programs”, Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 22,
No. 2, p 194–227.
Freedman, D., (2006), “Statistical Models for Causation: What Inferential Leverage Do
They Provide,”Evaluation Review, 691-713.
Freedman, D., (2008), “On Regression Adjustments to Experimental Data,”Advances in
Applied Mathematics, 180-193.
Haavelmo, T. (1943), ”The Statistical Implications of a System of Simultaneous Equations,”
Econometrica 11, 1-12.
Hahn, J., P. Todd, and W. van der Klaauw, (2000), “Identification and Estimation
of Treatment Effects with a Regression-Discontinuity Design,”Econometrica, 69(1): 201209.
Hausman, J., (1981), “Labor Supply,”in Aaron and Pechman (eds.) How Taxes Affect Economic Behavior, The Brooking Institution, 27-72.
Hausman, J., and D. Wise, (1979), “Attritin Bias in Experimental and Panel Data: The
Gary Income Maintenance Experiment,”Econometrica, Vol. 47(2): 455-473.
Heckman, J., (1978), “Dummy Endogenous Variables in a Simultaneous Equations System”,
Econometrica, Vol. 46, 931–61.
Heckman, J. (1990), ”Varieties of Selection Bias,” American Economic Review 80, 313-318.
Heckman, J., and R. Robb, (1985), “Alternative Methods for Evaluating the Impact of Interventions,”in Heckman and Singer (eds.), Longitudinal Analysis of Labor Market Data,
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Heckman, J., and J. Smith, (1995), “Assessing the Case for Social Experiments,”Journal
of Economic Perspective, 9(2), 85-115.
Heckman, J., and S. Urzua., (2009), “Comparing IV With Structural Models: What
Simple IV Can and Cannot Identify,”NBER Working Paper, # 14706.
Holden, C., (1990), “Headstart Enters Adulthood,”Science, 247: 1400-1402.
Holland, P., (1986), ”Statistics and Causal Inference,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 81, 945-970.
Hotz, V. J., G. Imbens, and J. Mortimer, (2005), “Predicting the Efficacy of Future
Training Programs Using Past Experiences”, Journal of Econometrics, vol 125(1-2):241270.
Hoxby, C. (2000), “The Effects of Class Size on Student Achievement: New Evidence from
Population Variation,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 115(4):1239-1285.
Imbens, G., and J. Angrist (1994), “Identification and Estimation of Local Average Treatment Effects,”Econometrica, Vol. 61, No. 2, 467-476.
Imbens, G., G. King, D. McKenzie, and G. Ridder, (2009), “On the Benefits of Stratification in Randomized Experiments,”unpublished manuscript, Department of Economics,
Harvard University.

[28]

Imbens, G., D. Rubin, and B. Sacerdote, (2001), “Estimating the Effect of Unearned
Income on Labor Supply, Earnings, Savings and Consumption: Evidence from a Survey
of Lottery Players,” American Economic Review 91, 778-794.
Imbens, G., and T. Lemieux (2008) “Special issue editors’ introduction: The regression
discontinuity design - Theory and applications,” Journal of Econometrics, Vol 142(2),
611-644.
Imbens, G., and J. Wooldridge (2009) “Recent Developments in the Econometrics of
Program Evaluation,” forthcoming, Journal of Economic Literature.
Kremer, M., and A. Holla, (2008) “Pricing and Access: Lessons from Randomized Evaluations in Education and Health,”, unpublished manuscript, department of economics,
Harvard University.
Krueger, A. (1999) “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol 114(2), 497-532.
Lalonde, R.J., (1986), “Evaluating the Econometric Evaluations of Training Programs with
Experimental Data,”American Economic Review, 76, 604-620.
Lee, D., (2008), “Randomized Experiments from Non-random Selection in U.S. House Elections”, Journal of Econometrics,Vol 142(2): 675-697.
Lee, D. and T. Lemieux, (2009), “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics ,”NBER
Working Paper # 14723.
Manski, C., (1990), “Nonparametric Bounds on Treatment Effects,”American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 80, 319-323.
Manski, C., (1997), “The Mixing Problem in Programme Evaluation,”Review of Economic
Studies, 64: 537:553.
Manski, C., (1996), “Learning about Treatment Effects from Experiments with Random
Assignment of Treatments,”The Journal of Human Resources, 31(4): 709-73.
Manski, C. (2003), Partial Identification of Probability Distributions, New York: SpringerVerlag.
Manski, C., G. Sandefur, S. McLanahan, and D. Powers (1992), “Alternative Estimates of the Effect of Family Structure During Adolescence on High School,”Journal of
the American Statistical Association, 87(417):25-37.
McClellan, M., and J. P. Newhouse, (1994), “Does More Intensive Treatment of Acute
Myocardial Infarction in the Elderly Reduce Mortality”, Journal of the American Medical
Association, Vol 272, No 11, 859–866.
Neyman, J., (1923), “On the Application of Probability Theory to Agricultural Experiments.
Essay on Principles. Section 9,”translated in Statistical Science, (with discussion), Vol 5,
No 4, 465480, 1990.
Rodrik, D., (2008), “The New Development Economics: We Shall Experiment, But How
Shall We Learn?,”Unpublished Manuscript, Kennedy School, Harvard University.
Rosenbaum, P., (1995), Observational Studies, Springer Verlag, New York.
Rosenbaum, P., and D. Rubin, (1983), “The Central Role of the Propensity Score in
Observational Studies for Causal Effects”, Biometrika, 70, 41-55.
Rubin, D. (1974), “Estimating Causal Effects of Treatments in Randomized and Non-randomized
Studies,”Journal of Educational Psychology, 66, 688-701.
Rubin, D. , (1978), “Bayesian inference for causal effects: The Role of Randomization”,
Annals of Statistics, 6:34–58.
Rubin, D. B., (1990), “Formal Modes of Statistical Inference for Causal Effects,”J ournal of
Statistical Planning and Inference, 25, 279-292.

[29]

Shadish, W., T. Campbell and D. Cook, (2002), Experimental and Quasi-experimental
Designs for Generalized Causal Inference, Houghton and Mifflin, Boston.
Smith, J. A. and P. E. Todd, (2005), “Does Matching Address LaLonde’s Critique of
Nonexperimental Estimators,”Journal of Econometrics, 125(1-2), 305-353.
Todd, P., and K. Wolpin (2003), “Using a Social Experiment to Validate a Dynamic
Behavioral Model of Child Schooling and Fertility: Assessing the Impact of a School
Subsidy Program in Mexico,”, Penn Institute for Economic Research Working Paper
03-022
Zelen, M., (1979), ”A New Design for Randomized Clinical Trials”, New England Journal of
Medicine, 300, 1242–1245.

[30]

