NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE GREAT INFLATION IN THE UNITED STATES AND THE UNITED KINGDOM:
RECONCILING POLICY DECISIONS AND DATA OUTCOMES
Riccardo DiCecio
Edward Nelson
Working Paper 14895
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14895

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2009

An earlier version of this paper was presented at the NBER Great Inflation Conference, Woodstock,
Vermont, September 25-27, 2008. We thank Frank Smets and Rafael Wouters for providing the estimation
code for Smets and Wouters (2007). We are grateful to Michael Bordo and Athanasios Orphanides
(the conference organizers), Matthew Shapiro (our discussant), and conference and pre-conference
attendees, for comments on the previous versions of this paper. We are also indebted to Leon Berkelmans,
Christopher Erceg, Jesper Lindé, Andrew Levin, Christopher Neely, Ricardo Nunes, Christina Romer,
David Wheelock, and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Board for many useful suggestions.
Charles Gascon, Luke Shimek, and Faith Weller provided research assistance. The views expressed
in this paper are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis, the Federal Reserve System, the Board of Governors, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Riccardo DiCecio and Edward Nelson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Great Inflation in the United States and the United Kingdom: Reconciling Policy Decisions
and Data Outcomes
Riccardo DiCecio and Edward Nelson
NBER Working Paper No. 14895
April 2009
JEL No. E31,E52,E58
ABSTRACT
We argue that the Great Inflation experienced by both the United Kingdom and the United States in
the 1970s has an explanation valid for both countries. The explanation does not appeal to common
shocks or to exchange rate linkages, but to the common doctrine underlying the systematic monetary
policy choices in each country. The nonmonetary approach to inflation control that was already influential
in the United Kingdom came to be adopted by the United States during the 1970s. We document our
position by examining official policymaking doctrine in the United Kingdom and the United States
in the 1970s, and by considering results from a structural macroeconomic model estimated using U.K.
data.

Riccardo DiCecio
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Research Division
P.O. Box 442
St. Louis, MO 63166-0442
Riccardo.DiCecio@stls.frb.org
Edward Nelson
Research Division
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
P.O. Box 442
St. Louis, MO 63166
edward.nelson@stls.frb.org

1. Introduction
In this paper we study the Great Inflation in both the United States and the United
Kingdom. Our concentration on more than one country reflects our view that a sound
explanation should account for the experience of the Great Inflation both in the United
States and beyond. We emphasize further that an explanation for the Great Inflation
should be consistent with both the data and what we know about the views that guided
policymakers.
Figure 1 plots four-quarter inflation for the United Kingdom using the Retail Price Index,
and four-quarter inflation using the U.S. CPI. The peaks in inflation in the mid-1970s
and 1980 are over 20% in the United Kingdom, far higher than the corresponding U.S.
peaks. On the other hand, the ups and downs do resemble those in the United States; if
we plotted the U.K. series alone and removed the numbering from the vertical axis, the
figure might easily be mistaken at first glance for a depiction of U.S. inflation. This
suggests that U.S. and U.K. inflation share a basic common explanation. But, for reasons
discussed below, the most standard rationalizations for the coincidence of inflation across
economies—those that emphasize trading and exchange rate linkages—are not very
appealing when it comes to explaining the similarities in the U.S. and U.K. inflation
experiences. Instead of appealing to common shocks or to exchange rate regime, we
explain the similarity of U.S. and U.K. inflation by appealing to the common doctrines
underlying policy decisions. In particular, the flawed approach to inflation analysis,
which dominated U.K. policymaking for several postwar decades, became very
influential in the United States in the 1970s.
In the course of our paper, we establish the following about the Great Inflation of the
Seventies:
(1) Nonmonetary approaches to inflation analysis and control dominated pre-1979
policymaking in the United Kingdom.
(2) U.S. policymakers adopted this framework from the early 1970s, and so believed that
inflation was a nonmonetary phenomenon, in a sense made precise below. This implied a
belief that cost-push forces could produce inflation in the long run, even without
monetary accommodation.

1

Figure 1. U.K. and U.S. four-quarter inflation rates
30
U.K. RPI inflation
U.S. CPI inflation

25

Percent

20

15

10

5

0
1964

1968

1972

1976

1980

1984

1988

1992

1996

2000

2004

(3) The nonmonetary view of inflation was held consistently by Federal Reserve
Chairman Arthur Burns from late 1970 until his departure in 1978, and adhered to by
other senior policymakers during Burns’ tenure and in 1978−79.
(4) As a corollary, 1970s inflation outcomes did not reflect policymakers’ use of a
Phillips curve model (with or without the “vertical in the long run” property).
We use “Great Inflation of the Seventies” rather than “Great Inflation” deliberately
because our account stresses the influence of U.K. ideas on 1970−79 U.S. policymaking,
and not on U.S. policy in both the 1960s and 1970s. For the United States, we do not
find it useful to categorize the 1960s as part of the same inflation epoch as that of the
1970s. To do so is to gloss over the very significant segment of U.S. policymaking in
1969−70 in which both policy decisions and the principles guiding them were largely
modern and appropriate (i.e.: natural rate/long-run-vertical Phillips curve ideas had been
rapidly incorporated into policy thinking; and the monetary authorities deliberately made
real interest rates positive in order to move from an excess aggregate demand position, to
a zero or temporarily negative output gap, so as to remove inflationary pressure). The
key to understanding 1970s policymaking in the United States is an appreciation of the

2

fact that, instead of continuing the 1969−70 framework, U.S. policy thinking “went
British,” with cost-push ideas becoming dominant at the most senior policy levels from
late 1970. As Milton Friedman (1979a) observed, “Ever since the founding of the
colonies in the New World, Britain has been a major source of our economic and political
thought.” The Great Inflation period is another example of this influence, as the
predominant U.S. policy thinking during the 1970s was patterned on a U.K. precedent.
In Section 2 we discuss why we emphasize doctrine in studying the Great Inflation. Then
in Sections 3 and 4 we document the common themes in U.K. and U.S. policymaking.
We go on to illustrate in Section 5 some of our points about U.K. policymaking doctrine
in the 1970s through an examination of the monetary policy shock realizations implied by
a version of the Smets and Wouters (2007) model estimated on U.K. data. We also
critically consider more benign interpretations of U.K. monetary policy decisions during
the 1970s. Section 6 concludes.
2. Why we emphasize doctrine
With the benefit of hindsight, the discussions of the Great Inflation in such 1990s
contributions as Taylor (1992), McCallum (1995), and DeLong (1997) can be seen as a
backlash against the mechanical application of an “as-if” approach to analyzing past
policy episodes. A common practice in studying U.S. inflation data had been to take for
granted that policymakers knew the correct model of private economic behavior (i.e., the
specification of IS and Phillips curves). Likewise, the “as-if” approach viewed data
outcomes as the result of policymakers’ optimization of their objective function,
conditional on their correct specification of private behavior (which appeared as
constraints in the policymaker optimization problem). Applications to the Great Inflation
of the time-consistency or conservative-central-banker hypotheses can be thought of as
quintessential examples of the “as-if” approach. These stories attribute to policymakers
knowledge of the economy’s structure, and characterizes high inflation as a conscious
choice by policymakers—a choice following from their assumed preference for a positive
output gap target.
The as-if assumption is not appropriate for the study of policymakers’ choices, even
though it is valuable for the modeling of choices by private agents. Recognition of this
point has naturally been followed by the greater integration into the study of the Great
Inflation of nonquantitative information, including the record of policymakers’ stated
3

views of the economy. Such an approach has been pursued by Romer and Romer (2002,
2004), Orphanides (2003), and others in the study of U.S. 1970s policymaking, and is
continued in this paper. The emphasis that this approach gives to the importance of
policymakers’ views also brings the study of the Great Inflation onto the same footing as
the study of other episodes in monetary history. For example, Romer and Romer (2004)
observe that examination of the ideas driving policymaking was an important element of
Friedman and Schwartz’s (1963) study of the Great Depression, 1 while the analysis of
inflation targeting by Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin, and Posen (1999) makes extensive
use of policymakers’ statements.
The emphasis on policymakers’ misconceptions about economic behavior has further
antecedents in the 1970s discussions of the Great Inflation in both the United States and
the United Kingdom. Friedman (1972, p. 13) argued that “the erratic and destabilizing
monetary policy has largely resulted from the acceptance of erroneous economic
theories”; in that connection, Friedman attributed cost-push views regarding inflation to
Federal Reserve Chairman Arthur Burns. In the United Kingdom, Robbins (1973)
likewise blamed policy mistakes on cost-push views, which, he argued, meant that the
United Kingdom was suffering from a “crisis of intellectual error… due largely to
misconceptions prevalent even at high expert levels.” Laidler (1979, p. 899) similarly
judged that the United Kingdom’s inflation performance reflected the use of “erroneous
economics” in policy formation.
It is one thing to attribute the policy decisions underlying the Great Inflation to
policymakers’ erroneous views about economic behavior; it is another to take a stand on
the specific theoretical errors that were the main source of Great Inflation policies.
Romer (2005) groups a number of candidate explanations for the Great Inflation under
the umbrella of the “ideas hypothesis.” The arguments made in the aforementioned
studies by Taylor (1992), McCallum (1995), and DeLong (1997) all fall under that
umbrella; specifically, all three studies conjecture that 1970s policymakers believed in a
long-run Phillips curve tradeoff. While sharing these authors’ rejection of the timeconsistency story, we reject their appeal to a tradeoff explanation. We believe that an
important element of a good positive-economics explanation for the Great Inflation is
recognition that inflation was not consciously created by policymakers. This is a much———————————————————————————————————
1

Meltzer (2003) also traces Great Depression-era monetary policy decisions to Federal Reserve doctrine,
which he argues was constant across the 1920s and 1930s.
4

neglected feature of the Great Inflation. Any story of the Great Inflation that appeals
either to time-consistency arguments or to monetary policy exploitation of a Phillips
curve equation is, at its core, claiming that policymakers deliberately injected inflation
into the economy. This claim flies in the face of the evidence that 1970s policymakers
believed that inflation was not a monetary phenomenon. Policymakers in the 1970s had a
modern view of the costs of inflation, but lacked a modern view of their power to
determine the inflation rate through monetary policy. An approach that attempts to be
realistic about the considerations driving 1970s monetary policy decisions must take this
fact into account.
2.1 Sources
Gorodnichenko and Shapiro (2007, p. 1152) observe that the absence of electronic
versions of Arthur Burns’ public statements is an obstacle to a comprehensive analysis of
the information in those statements. This observation is valid for the textual analysis that
Gorodnichenko and Shapiro apply to statements, which requires the entirety of the
statements (i.e., the population); it is also a legitimate concern if the aim is to discern
Burns’ model of the economy, as this again ideally involves studying the population of
statements, and certainly requires a large and representative sample. Large samples of
Burns’ statements have been covered by the separate analyses of Burns’ views on the
economy in Romer and Romer (2002, 2004), Hetzel (1998), Christiano and Gust (2000),
Orphanides (2003), and Nelson (2005), with much non-overlapping material across
papers. One aim of the present paper is to reconcile our characterization of Burns’ views
with these studies. But in obtaining the characterization we give, we make use of a large
sample of Burns’ statements that includes many not cited in the earlier studies. One
reason why we are able to undertake this is that there has been a major improvement in
the electronic availability of Federal Reserve Chairmen’s statements through the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis’ FRASER archival database. This database contains speeches
and opening statements to Congress made by Chairman Burns, including the substantial
number not included in the selection in Burns (1978). At present the database does not
include the question-and-answer portion of Congressional testimony, but we draw on
these by consulting the relevant hardcopy transcripts.
In the United Kingdom, central bank independence did not exist prior to 1997. Monetary
policy decisions were made by the Treasury, and so by the executive branch of the
government. Nelson (2005, 2008) characterizes the economic doctrine of pre-1997 U.K.
5

governments by collecting and reconciling public statements on economic matters given
by leading policymakers. In this paper, on the other hand, we look at a source not
previously consulted—namely, the U.K. Treasury’s Economic Progress Report, a
monthly analysis of economic conditions that began publication in January 1970. In the
following section, we set out the doctrine revealed by analysis of this policy publication.
3. Official U.K. doctrine on inflation during the 1970s
This section outlines the doctrine underlying policymaking in the United Kingdom during
the 1970s. The documentation of U.K. Treasury views provided here shows that there
were several aspects of U.K. official doctrine on inflation held consistently over 1970−79
(not all completely independent propositions, but listed separately for ease of our
documentation below):
(i) Monetary policy can be a source of inflation, by producing excess aggregate demand.
(ii) Pure cost-push inflation (i.e., sustained inflation in the absence of excess demand) can
occur.
(iii) It follows from (i) that monetary restraint (e.g., monetary policy designed to remove
the excess of nominal spending growth over potential output growth in the long run) is a
necessary element of inflation control.
(iv) But from (ii) above, monetary restraint is not sufficient for inflation control, even in
the long run.
(v) There is a first-difference or speed-limit term driving inflation dynamics, irrespective
of the sign of the output gap.
(vi) There is no long-run tradeoff between inflation and the output gap (or equivalently,
no long-run tradeoff between inflation and unemployment relative to its natural rate).
We now document each of these points using the Treasury’s Economic Progress Report
(EPR).

6

(i) Excess demand can add to inflation
The U.K. Treasury recognized that “excess total demand” could be a source of inflation
(EPR, July 1978, p. 4) and this was one reason “to avoid overheating the economy”
(EPR, November 1977, p. 1).
(ii) Inflation can be a purely cost-push phenomenon
According to the Treasury, the postwar period in the U.K. had “led to a general
realization that inflation could not be simply identified with excess total demand” (EPR,
July 1978, p. 4). Its own analysis of inflation emphasized nonmonetary factors. For
example, a 1968 Treasury analysis in the publication Economic Trends observed,
“The retail price index rose by about ½ per cent in June… The increase in June
was largely the result of higher prices for fresh fruit and the reintroduction of
prescription charges, which were only partially offset by lower potato prices.”
(Treasury, “The Economic Situation,” in Economic Trends, August 1968, p. vii.)
An analysis like this might be appropriate for analyzing erratic monthly movements in
the price level, but the Treasury carried it over to the analysis of longer-term inflation
movements. And when it came to explaining inflation movements at a deeper level than
referring to movements in specific components of the price index, the Treasury was
typically satisfied to appeal to the relation between prices and costs:
“The main factor sustaining this continuing high rate of price increase has been
the rapid advance in wage costs…” (EPR, November 1970, p. 6.)
“The factors underlying the rise of prices have, however, changed. The initial
acceleration was mainly a result of the effects of devaluation on import prices…
Since last autumn, however, a different pattern has emerged… [T]here has been a
very marked rise in costs resulting mainly from the fast rise in money wages…”
(EPR, January 1971, p. 6.)
“A higher level of pay settlements was much the most important factor in the
faster rise of costs and prices during 1970…” (EPR, May 1971, p. 5.)

7

“The slow rise in the prices of basic materials and fuel in recent months has,
however, been more than offset by the strong rate of increase in wage costs,
which have become the dominant influence on price rises.” (EPR, June 1975, p.
6.)
The prevalence of cost-push explanations for inflation at the official level across the
1970s indicates that exogenous cost shocks were not being invoked simply to account for
short-run movements in inflation, but for ongoing movements too. This reflected the
U.K. Treasury’s uncritical acceptance of the notion that “the phenomenon of persistent
inflation reflected a cost-push—and specifically wage-push—progress, associated with
modern collective bargaining procedures.” (EPR, July 1978 p. 4.)
(iii) Monetary restraint is a necessary element of inflation control
The Treasury did accept that monetary restraint could contribute to avoiding inflation that
arose from positive output gaps. Consequently, it referred to 1977 policy developments
with the observation, “Firm control of the main monetary aggregates continued to be an
important feature of policy…” (EPR, April 1978, p. 5.)
(iv) Monetary restraint is not sufficient for inflation control
But the U.K. authorities thought that a negative output gap did not remove inflationary
pressure. Persistent inflation alongside negative output gaps—which U.K. policymakers
thought was the state of affairs prevailing during most of the 1970s—therefore appeared
to justify the use of nonmonetary instruments against inflation. The Treasury credited
incomes policy with lowering inflation: “Current pay policy appears to have been
successful in avoiding an inflationary ‘pay explosion.’” (EPR, April 1978, p. 5.)
(v) There is a speed-limit term driving inflation dynamics
The U.K. Treasury did concede a role for demand in determining inflation when the
output gap was negative, but this concession was limited to an influence of the change in
the output gap on inflation (not of the gap level, as in Phillips curve analysis). For
example, in 1967 the Treasury observed,

8

“If over any period the projected rate of increase in output is faster than that of
potential output, the pressure of demand will rise and this is normally likely to
result in a feedback through the economy on the rate of increase of wage rates…”
(Treasury, “Econometric Research for Short-Term Forecasting,” Economic
Trends, February 1967; quotation from p. x; emphasis added.)
In the 1970s, the Treasury again allowed a gap-growth-rate term as a possible influence
on inflation:
“The index of retail prices has shown a much smaller monthly increase recently…
reflecting some slowing down in the growth of domestic costs and possibly the
falling pressure of demand.” (EPR, November 1975, p. 7.)
The Treasury thus saw only a deteriorating output gap, not a constant negative output gap
level, as capable of taking away inflationary pressure.
(vi) There is no long-run tradeoff between inflation and the output gap
The U.K. Treasury did not embrace the tradeoff view of inflation associated with a
permanently negatively sloped Phillips curve. 2 It viewed the whole postwar period as
witnessing “persistence of inflation even during the downturn and ‘trough’ phases of the
business cycle” (EPR, July 1978, p. 4), thereby defying simple Phillips curve analysis.
This did not lead the Treasury to adopt modern expectational Phillips curve analysis
before the late 1970s, but did lead it to reject the view that eliminating inflation and
restoring a zero output gap (from its perceived negative value) were incompatible goals.
Thus in 1975, the Treasury observed, “A sharp reduction in the rate of inflation is now an
overriding priority for the nation and a precondition for a reduction of unemployment…”
(EPR, August 1975, p. 1.) It later added, “Failure to control inflation will put all these
objectives at risk.” (EPR, July 1976, p. 3.)
3.1 The change in official doctrine (1979)
In 1979, following the election of the Thatcher Government, the Treasury noted that the
introduction of new macroeconomic policies “represent a complete change of attitude
———————————————————————————————————
2

To be precise, here we mean a curve that is negatively sloped when a scatter of unemployment and
inflation is considered.
9

towards the way in which the economy works…” (EPR, June 1979, p. 1); in particular,
inflation was now accepted as being a monetary phenomenon, and incomes policies were
abandoned. Consistent with this framework, the Treasury attributed the decline in
inflation in 1982 to “a low pressure of demand” (EPR, November 1982, p. 10). Its
perspective on the pressure of demand that had prevailed during the 1970s changed too;
the Treasury observed that the “underlying growth in productivity in most countries
seems to have fallen since the early 1970s” (EPR, October 1979, p. 1), and, in parallel
with U.S. developments described in Orphanides (2003), the U.K. authorities revised
down their estimates of potential output for the 1970s. 3 With more realistic estimates of
potential output, previous output/inflation combinations were more compatible with a
monetary explanation for inflation.
3.2 International factors: Bretton Woods
Where does Bretton Woods fit into the U.K. experience? Cecchetti et al (2007) note that
the Great Inflation outside the United States is often routinely explained by appealing to
the transmission of U.S. inflation via the Bretton Woods mechanism. The breakdown of
Bretton Woods is also often similarly cited as a source of world inflation. Some studies
of the United Kingdom, such as Benati (2004), do use Bretton Woods as a means of
classifying different U.K. monetary policy regimes. 4 Here we explain why we emphasize
flaws in domestic policy thinking rather than the changing status of Bretton Woods as the
source of the United Kingdom’s Great Inflation.
The United Kingdom had a fixed exchange rate until June 1972, with no changes in its
dollar exchange value between 1967 and 1971. It would nevertheless be inappropriate to
conclude that Bretton Woods was a constraint whose disappearance produced the U.K.’s
Great Inflation, and whose pre-1972 presence prevented U.K. economic doctrines from
determining U.K. monetary policy. On the contrary, extensive foreign exchange controls
gave U.K. policymakers substantial scope to vary domestic interest rates for reasons other
than the exchange rate constraint.

———————————————————————————————————
3

See Nelson and Nikolov (2004) for details on output gap mismeasurement in the United Kingdom during
the 1970s, and the subsequent official revisions.
4
For other recent discussions of whether Bretton Woods was responsible for the spread of the Great
Inflation, see Bordo and Eichengreen (2008) and Romer (2005).
10

It is difficult to pinpoint an instance where the fixed exchange rate policy in itself
dictated a tighter monetary policy in the United Kingdom in the 1960s and 1970s. A
policy tightening in 1966 did coincide with a foreign exchange crisis, but also coincided
with a perceived positive output gap, which in its own right would justify a tightening.
When a foreign exchange crisis in 1967 coincided with a perceived negative output gap,
devaluation was permitted; for the rest of the 1960s, the balance-of-payments constraint
was perceived as a restriction on the allocation of output across sectors rather than on
demand in aggregate. And there was no conflict between exchange rate policy and
demand management in 1970−71: interest rates were cut, and never raised, in both years;
this monetary expansion was desired by the authorities for domestic reasons; and the
balance of payments surpluses that occurred were consistent with the aim of stimulating
the U.K. economy. When a conflict between the U.K. authorities’ expansion of demand
and their exchange rate obligations did arise in 1972, the conflict was resolved not by
imposition of the external constraint on monetary policy decisions, but by floating of the
pound sterling.
3.3 International factors: the influence of overseas experience
As the preceding discussion implies, we assign little importance to structural economic
forces, as opposed to common policymaking doctrine, in accounting for similarities in
inflation rates across countries during the 1970s. This assignment, as well as our
emphasis on the United Kingdom as the originator of doctrine, matches up with an
assessment made on one occasion by Milton Friedman (1979b, pp. 35−36):
“I do not believe there is any such thing as world inflation; there is only inflation in
individual nations. Given a floating exchange rate system, there need be no
relationship between the inflation [rate] in one country and another… [T]here is a
common element, namely the force of ideas… Countries all over the world are
experiencing inflation because countries all over the world have been affected by the
socialist and Keynesian sets of ideas that have emanated very largely from Great
Britain…”
But this account has so far left unanswered the question of why U.K. policymakers were
guided by an erroneous doctrine for so long. If, as we argue, U.K. policymakers were
mistaken in regarding inflation as a cost-push phenomenon, why did they not realize their
error earlier? In particular, why didn’t low inflation in countries like Germany make
11

U.K. policymakers wake up to the need to use monetary policy as the central weapon
against inflation, and to abandon their reliance on price and wage control measures? 5
The answer is that U.K. policymakers and many leading U.K. commentators rationalized
other countries’ experiences in two ways. The first rationalization was the position that
inflation in other countries may well reflect excess demand problems in those countries,
but that the U.K. inflation actually was a cost-push problem. For example, a 1970 news
report of a bulletin by the U.K.’s influential National Institute of Economic and Social
Research said, “In most other European countries, it is argued, inflation is caused by
increasing consumer demands. In Britain, by contrast, inflation appears to be the result
of the sharp rises in wages…” 6 The second rationalization attributed low inflation in
Germany to nonmonetary factors, such as the incomes policies allegedly implied by
Germany’s “social market” framework.
Prominent outside observers of the U.K. economy often accepted or reinforced the view
that U.K. inflation was cost-push in nature. For example, Solow (1969, p. 24) stated,
“The conventional view is that the price level is almost completely cost-determined in
Great Britain, and is certainly less sensitive to direct demand conditions than in the
United States. My results generally confirm this view.” In 1970, the OECD Secretary
General, Emile van Lennep, said, “Inflation has been accelerating in the United Kingdom
despite the fact that demand pressure has been falling for several years.” 7 Later, Blinder
(1979, p. 74) observed, “From what I have heard about the U.K. economy, not even the
most dedicated data miner can detect an effect of demand on inflation.” Blinder added
that it “may indeed be empirically valid” to treat unemployment as exerting no influence
on U.K. wage determination (1979, p. 75).
3.4 Summing up 1970s doctrine
Our characterization of U.K. policymakers’ views of inflation can be summarized by a
modified Phillips curve such as: 8
———————————————————————————————————
5

Beyer et al (2009) provide further comparison of German and U.K. monetary policies during the 1970s.
Kansas City Star, August 26, 1970.
7
Quoted in Daily Telegraph (London), November 11, 1970.
8
Nelson (2008) justifies this equation on the basis of a different set of U.K. policymaker statements from
that used here. The representation is also similar to the equation that Friedman and Schwartz (1982) use to
characterize cost-push views of inflation.
6

12

πt = b + αDt (yt – yt*) + δ∆(yt – yt*) + Etπt+1 + ξt.

(1)

Here πt is quarterly inflation, b is a constant, yt − yt* is the output gap (i.e., the log of the
ratio of output to potential output), ∆ is the first-difference operator, and ξt is a cost-push
process that is highly persistent and undergoes shifts in mean. The parameters α and δ
are strictly positive, while Dt is an indicator function that depends on the sign of the
output gap: Dt = 1.0 for yt > yt*, but Dt = 0 for yt < yt*. The presence of this term implies
that if equation (1) is a valid description of inflation behavior, the output gap level
matters for inflation only when there is positive excess aggregate demand; excess supply
(i.e., a negative output gap) fails to withdraw inflationary pressure. We will find that
equation (1) is not in fact a valid description of inflation determination in the United
Kingdom, and that the post-1979 policymakers were therefore correct to reject it.
Nevertheless, U.K. policymakers’ adherence to a view of inflation captured by equation
(1) takes us far in understanding U.K. policy decisions during the 1970s. We take this
point up in Section 5. Prior to that, we demonstrate that the mistaken views about
inflation that were prevalent in the United Kingdom did not remain a source of error
special to U.K. policy circles. On the contrary, these views were adopted during the
1970s by the principal policymakers in the United States.
4. Official U.S. doctrine on inflation during the 1970s
As we discuss in detail in Appendix A, in 1969−70 U.S. policymakers had fairly
orthodox views of inflation, most notably expressed in their endorsement of a modern
Phillips curve—i.e., policymakers believed that inflation was elastic with respect to
demand pressure in all regions, and that the Phillips curve became vertical in the long
run. This position appears to have been that of Arthur Burns upon becoming Federal
Reserve Chairman in early 1970, and similar views were held by several key Nixon
Administration personnel. But both Burns and other senior policymakers rapidly
changed their view of the inflation process in favor of a predominantly nonmonetary
approach. 9 We contend that Burns’ views throughout the period from late 1970 to his
departure as Chairman in early 1978, as well as those of other major officials in 1970−78
———————————————————————————————————
9

Romer and Romer (2002) contend that Burns entered office already holding cost-push views of inflation.
For the contrary argument that Burns underwent a change shortly after taking office, see Nelson (2005).
There is no disagreement across these accounts on the importance of nonmonetary views in Burns’ thinking
from late 1970 to late 1973, and both sources provide considerable documentation. Accordingly, our
documentation here focuses on the more contentious and less documented issue of what were Burns’ views
from 1974 to 1978.
13

and into 1979, are well captured by equation (1) and the accompanying propositions (i)(vi) given above. As we will see, Burns and other Federal Reserve Board figures
explicitly appealed to the U.K. experience as a forerunner of the U.S. experience. Let us
review the doctrinal items (i)-(vi) of Section 3 once more, this time using them to
describe U.S. doctrine.
(i) Excess demand can add to inflation
Chairman Burns accepted that “policies that create excess aggregate demand… lead
ultimately to galloping inflation” (July 30, 1974, testimony to Banking and Currency
Committee, House of Representations, in Burns, 1978, p. 170). Accordingly, for
inflation arising from excess demand, “the raging fires of inflation will eventually burn
themselves out” if the boom was wound back by official restriction of demand (Burns,
August 6, 1974, p. 17). 10 Burns accepted that excess demand conditions had been created
in the late 1960s and in 1973; accordingly, the “current inflation began in the middle
1960s” (August 21, 1974, p. 6) with “the underlying inflationary trend caused by lax
financial policies” (July 27, 1976, p. 671), while 1973 had again seen an “overheating of
the economy” (September 20, 1974, p. 4). More generally, Burns observed that “we also
know that when the money supply grows excessively, inflation will be generated.” (July
26, 1977, testimony, in Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs Committee, House of
Representatives, 1977a, p. 99.) This proposition, he noted, was especially relevant to the
medium term: “excessive monetary growth will eventually result in more rapid inflation”
(September 25, 1975, testimony, in Budget Committee, U.S. Senate, 1975b, p. 177); and
therefore: “If we create money at a more rapid rate than we have been doing, sooner or
later that money will go to work and express itself in higher prices.” (July 29, 1975,
testimony, in Joint Economic Committee, 1975, p. 158.)
Burns’ successor as Federal Reserve Chairman, G. William Miller, shared this
perspective, contending, “If the Fed takes the restraint off and lets the money be printed,
then, sure, there could be lower interest rates for a while, but then there would be a
terrible inflation—and disaster.” 11
———————————————————————————————————
10

References given in the text with a date and page number but no other bibliographical information are
from Chairman Burns’ statements and speeches as given in the Federal Reserve Bulletin or in the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis’ FRASER archive of Burns’ public statements (available at
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/historicaldocs/statements/). Bibliographical information on these statements is
given chronologically in the Bibliographical Appendix.
11
Quoted in the New York Times, July 4, 1978.
14

(ii) Inflation can be a purely cost-push phenomenon
Federal Reserve officials during the 1970s also believed, however, that exogenous costpush forces (the ξt term in equation (1)) could produce sustained inflation without
monetary accommodation. The experience of the United Kingdom was invoked as an
empirical example of this phenomenon. For example, an unsigned article in the Federal
Reserve Bulletin of October 1970 stated,
“The United Kingdom provides the clearest example among the industrialized
countries of inflation that is primarily of the cost-push variety. The British
economy is clearly operating below its productive potential… Yet labor costs
have been rising rapidly…” (Board of Governors, 1970, p. 749.)
Around this time, Chairman Burns came to the view that the U.S. economy had inherited
the cost-push characteristics perceived as relevant to the United Kingdom. By mid-1975,
when asked if he expected wages to respond to fundamentals, Burns was saying, “I hope
you’re right about the behavior of wages. That’s the way things should work, but they
haven’t worked that way in recent years in this country or in Canada or in Great Britain.”
(May 1, 1975, testimony. in Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee, U.S.
Senate, 1975, p. 194.)
Burns cited wage-push as a major source of inflationary pressure: “I do think that our
trade unions at the present time have excessive market power. I also think that some of
our legislation has been conducive to increases in wages and, therefore, to higher
inflation rates…” (September 4, 1975, testimony, in Agriculture and Forestry Committee,
U.S. Senate, 1975, p. 16.) Thanks to labor union behavior, wage-push pressures would
exist even in the absence of wage-increasing legislation: “inflation has not come to an
end… One of the most important sources it is coming from and will continue to come
from is the increase in wages.” (July 29, 1975, testimony, in Joint Economic Committee,
1975, p. 152.) In 1977 Burns claimed: “in the last analysis the wage increases that take
place are fundamental to the rate of inflation.” (November 9, 1977, testimony, in
Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee, U.S. Senate, 1977, p. 30.)
But Burns also cited firms as originators of cost-push pressure: “my impression is that
many of our business corporations are no longer paying attention to factors on the
15

demand side in the same way they did in earlier years.” (October 2, 1975, testimony, in
Budget Committee, House of Representatives, 1975, p. 78.) Prices in particular sectors
were also autonomous contributors to inflation, a key example being food prices:
“concern about the effects of rising food prices on the overall rate of inflation is clearly
warranted.” (September 4, 1975, testimony, in Agriculture and Forestry Committee, U.S.
Senate, 1975, p. 3.) Burns had a parallel concern about import prices: “If the dollar
depreciates in foreign exchange markets, that releases forces that tend to raise our price
level.” (July 26, 1977, testimony. in Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs Committee,
House of Representatives, 1977a, p. 70.) Any of these factors could aggravate domestic
cost-push forces, Burns argued: “Nowadays, inflation from almost any source tends to be
built into wages and thus to aggravate the wage-price spiral.” (September 4, 1975,
testimony, in Agriculture and Forestry Committee, U.S. Senate, 1975, p. 4.) He summed
up: “inflation has become, as you correctly point out, a complex phenomenon. I deplore
some of the price increases that are taking place… I think, sometimes, that we are
moving into a cost-plus economy, and that is a disturbing development.” (September 25,
1975, testimony, in Budget Committee, U.S. Senate, 1975b, p. 168.) The great
importance Burns attributed to cost-push factors came out in August 1974 when he stated
that only about 3 to 3.5 percentage points of the United States’ annual rate of inflation of
12% in the first half of 1974 could be attributed to money growth (August 21, 1974,
testimony, in Committee on the Budget, U.S. Senate, 1974, p. 238).
Burns’ cost-push views were so entrenched that they obscured his interpretation of the
Fisher relation between expected inflation and nominal interest rates. He did recognize
that the Fisher relation was fundamental: “Over the long run, the rate of inflation is the
dominant influence on interest rates.” (September 25, 1975, testimony. in Budget
Committee, U.S. Senate, 1975b, p. 166.) But since Burns believed that the wage-price
controls introduced in August 1971 had directly reduced inflationary expectations, he felt
that nominal interest rates could fall without implying a loosening of monetary policy. In
a speech in November 1971, Burns said that “the freeze has been extremely effective,”
adding: “Interest rates have come down substantially as the inflationary premium has
been squeezed out.” (November 11, 1971, p. 2.) This viewpoint allowed Burns to
interpret cuts in interest rates by the Federal Reserve not as force-fed monetary
stimulation, but as responses to falling private inflationary expectations: “Interest rates
are still falling, and yesterday’s decline in the Federal Reserve discount rate recognizes
that.” (November 11, 1971, p. 3.)

16

(iii) Monetary policy is a necessary part of inflation control
Burns accepted quantity-theory logic in the sense that he realized that the Federal
Reserve could be a dominant influence on nominal spending growth (∆m + ∆v) over
longer periods. He accordingly accepted that a necessary condition for price stability was
for the Federal Reserve to provide nominal income growth rates that were not persistently
excessive relative to long-run growth in potential output (∆y*). Thus he observed in
1975 that existing monetary growth rates, “while appropriate in the present environment,
could not be maintained indefinitely without running a serious risk of releasing new
inflationary pressures.” (May 1, 1975, testimony, in Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs
Committee, U.S. Senate, 1975, p. 172.) Burns saw the Federal Reserve as concerned
with “bringing the long-run growth of the monetary aggregates down to rates compatible
with general price stability.” (July 29, 1977, testimony, in Banking, Finance and Urban
Affairs Committee, House of Representatives, 1977b, p. 68.) Likewise, a downward
money growth path was “absolutely necessary if President Carter’s publicly announced
goal of reducing the pace of inflation by two percentage points by the end of 1979 is to be
achieved.” (May 3, 1977, p. 467; emphasis added.) We italicize “necessary” because its
use instead of “necessary and sufficient” distinguishes Burns’ nonmonetary view of
inflation from the standard, monetary view. Monetary policy, in Burns’ conception, was
a necessary instrument for securing price stability because monetary policy actions were
required to prevent the emergence of positive output gaps. Thus, when an excessdemand problem was perceived as having emerged in 1973, Burns observed that
“classical tools of economic stabilization—that is, general monetary and fiscal policies—
can be more helpful at such a time” (February 26, 1974, statement, in Joint Economic
Committee, 1974, p. 720). 12
(iv) Monetary policy is not sufficient for inflation control
Burns believed that monetary policy was not sufficient for inflation control. To cast the
issue in quantity-equation terms, for ∆m + ∆v to secure dependable control of inflation
(π), inflation should be endogenous and continuously related to aggregate demand. In
those circumstances, actions on ∆m + ∆v ultimately bear down on π alone, leaving ∆y to
———————————————————————————————————
12

Burns therefore recognized, in line with equation (1), that excess demand pressure could be
superimposed on cost-push factors as a source of inflation, and acknowledged that an excess demand
problem had emerged in 1973. Burns’ 1974 statements on the need for demand restraint thus do not
constitute a repudiation of his cost-push views of inflation (though for a contrary interpretation, see Romer
and Romer, 2004, p. 141).
17

be pinned down by the exogenous value of potential output growth ∆y*. This was not,
however, Burns’ position; rather he saw π as insensitive to aggregate demand over a large
range, as it is in equation (1), implying that aggregate demand control cannot by itself
secure inflation control.
In the following exchange Burns explicitly denied that one could speak of a specific
noninflationary growth rate of money, or equivalently, a specific monetary policy that
could deliver price stability:
Mr. NEAL. … [W]hat would have happened had the money growth rate been
consistent with price stability?
Dr. BURNS. I don’t know that I or anyone else could ever answer that question,
because we would be dealing with an imaginative reconstruction of the past. In any
such reconstruction of the past, you would certainly have to specify the character of
fiscal policy in the country. You would have to specify the labor policies pursued by
the Government and by the trade unions and by business firms. You would have to
specify pricing policies. Then you might get some approach to a meaningful
answer… But I don’t think you would learn a thing merely by asking what would
have happened if monetary policy had kept the rate of growth of the money supply
at a level that is consistent with general price stability. (July 27, 1976 question and
answer session, in Banking, Currency and Housing Committee, House of
Representatives, 1976, p. 28.)
Reflecting his judgment that monetary policy actions were insufficient for inflation
control, Burns believed that incomes policy was needed, a position he repeated
emphatically even after the abolition of wage-price controls in April 1974. For example,
in August 1974, Burns said that “monetary policy should not be relied upon exclusively”
and called for “[f]resh efforts” at incomes policy arrangements (August 6, 1974, pp. 17,
18). In 1975, Burns argued, “Sooner or later, in my judgment, we will move once again
toward an incomes policy in this country… I think the world will continue to look in this
direction for part of an answer to its problems.” (July 29, 1975, testimony, in Joint
Economic Committee, 1975, p. 145.) In the same year Burns offered a specific proposal:
“I think we ought to hold up for public airing those instances where we have some reason
to believe that there is an abuse of economic power, whether on the part of our

18

corporations or our trade unions...” (October 2, 1975, testimony, in Budget Committee,
House of Representatives, 1975, p. 179.)
Burns reaffirmed these positions in 1976 and 1977. In 1976, he observed, “In the kind of
world that we live in—with trade unions playing a large role in the determination of
wages, so that competition in the labor market is very limited, and with not a few of our
business firms having market power, as I think we all know—if we try to rely solely on
monetary and fiscal policies to achieve general price stability, I believe we are likely to
fail… I am convinced that we will return to an incomes policy sooner or later…” (March
22, 1976, testimony, in Budget Committee, U.S. Senate, 1976, p. 85.) In 1977 Burns
stated, “I feel, Senator, that some sort of incomes policy will have to be developed in our
country…” (November 9, 1977, testimony, in Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs
Committee, U.S. Senate, 1977, p. 29.)
Relative to an earlier period in U.S. history when aggregate demand management was a
sufficient tool against inflation, Burns said, structural change had produced a “catch”;
there were now “tremendous nonmonetary pressures…tending to drive costs and prices
higher.” (August 13, 1977 speech, in Burns, 1978, p. 417.) A favorite formulation of
Burns was that monetary policy in the new circumstances should do what it can against
inflation, but that monetary policy was not enough. For example, Burns said in 1975:
“The Federal Reserve is firmly committed to do what it can to restore general price
stability in this country.” (May 1, 1975, testimony, in Banking, Housing and Urban
Affairs Committee, U.S. Senate, 1975, p. 173; emphasis added.) He stressed in 1976:
“Monetary policy alone, however, cannot solve our nation’s stubborn problem of
inflation.” (November 18, 1976, speech, in Burns, 1978, p. 250.) Even at his final FOMC
meeting (in February 1978), which he presided over on an interim basis, Burns described
himself and his colleagues as “do[ing] what we can to reduce the rate of inflation”
(FOMC Minutes, February 28, 1978, p. 31). G. William Miller adopted similar
formulations during his tenure as Federal Reserve Chairman (see e.g., Nelson, 2005).
Monetary policy within this framework was seen as able to provide a floor but not a
ceiling for the inflation rate. As Burns put it, “if a 5 per cent rate of price advance were
to be accepted complacently by Government, inflationary expectations would intensify,
and the actual rate of price increases would then almost certainly move toward higher
levels.” (February 3, 1977, p. 123.)

19

Policymakers (erroneously) saw the predominant situation of the 1970s as one of
coexisting cost-push inflation and negative output gaps. Therefore, the perceived
function of monetary policy became one of avoiding a compounding of the cost-push
inflation that would occur if a positive output gap (and accompanying demand-pull
inflation) were permitted. Thus Burns described his money growth target choices in
1975−76 as designed to “facilitate substantial recovery in economic activity without
aggravating the problem of inflation.” (July 27, 1976, p. 671.) Similarly, the following
year he said that the “basic objective of monetary policy in the recent past has been to
promote conditions conducive to substantial expansion in economic activity, while
guarding against the release of new inflationary forces.” (March 2, 1977, p. 229.) “New”
here refers to demand-pull forces on top of the existing cost-push forces. Or as Treasury
Secretary Michael Blumenthal characterized the policy assignment in 1978, “Bill Miller
has to keep the money supply from going through the roof.” 13
Burns summed up his necessary-but-not-sufficient vision of monetary policy in 1976:
“Monetary policy—no matter how well designed and implemented—cannot do the job
alone. Adherence to a moderate course of monetary policy can, however, make a
significant contribution to the fight against inflation.” (July 27, 1976, p. 671.)
The series of papers of which this paper is part provides a detailed chronology of the
nonmonetary actions against inflation taken in both the United Kingdom and the United
States during the 1970s. In particular, Nelson (2005) discusses not only the U.S. wageprice controls of 1971−74, but later U.S. measures, including the Ford Administration’s
“Whip Inflation Now” program of 1974, the Carter measures against specific prices in
1977, and the Carter Administration’s incomes policy initiatives in 1978−79. It is true
that use of incomes policies in the United States was not restricted to the 1970s, as wageprice guideposts were pursued by the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations in the
1960s. But the underlying theoretical rationale for the 1960s measures was distinct from
the pure cost-push view of inflation that prevailed among U.S. policymakers in the 1970s.
We discuss U.S. policies against inflation during the 1960s in Appendix A.
(v) The growth rate of the output gap matters for inflation
Burns took as a lesson from his studies of the business cycle that the first difference of
———————————————————————————————————
13

Quoted in New York Times, July 4, 1978.
20

the output gap mattered for inflation. Burns (1951, p. 198) observed, “inflation does not
wait for full employment,” and this belief carried over into his observations on 1970s
developments. For example, in 1976, Burns argued, “Some step-up in the rate of
inflation was perhaps unavoidable in view of the vigor of economic recovery.” (February
19, 1976, p. 233.) Later in the year he warned that underlying inflation “could well
increase as our economy returns to higher level of resource utilization.” (November 18,
1976, speech, in Burns, 1978, pp. 244−245.) Likewise, in 1977 Burns stated: “As we
should know by now, pressures on resources and prices can arise even at a time of
substantial unemployment.” (February 23, 1977, p. 226.) He dismissed a negative output
gap level as a restraint on inflation and emphasized instead the speed-limit channel:
“Substantial amounts of idle capacity and manpower provide little assurance that price
pressures will not mount as the economic growth rate speeds up. Indeed, the historical
record of business cycles in our country clearly demonstrates… that the prices of final
goods and services gather substantial upward momentum well before full utilization of
resources is achieved….” (March 22, 1977, p. 361.)
In Burns’ view, the first-difference term mattered for inflation in a symmetric manner:
not only, as noted above, did he believe that very rapid expansion promoted inflation, but
additionally, slow growth in output (relative to potential) restrained inflation (e.g.,
February 3, 1976, p. 5). This first-difference term could however be overwhelmed by the
other factors mattering for inflation, so cost-push forces could raise inflation even during
periods of a widening output gap (see his July 30, 1974, remarks on 1970−71
developments, in Burns, 1978, p. 170). Likewise, weakening cost-push forces could
mean that inflation fell during a strong recovery, as in 1975−76.
The speed-limit element in Burns’ view of inflation helps reconcile his endorsement of
cost-push interpretations with other, seemingly more standard, Burns statements
emphasized in other studies. Romer and Romer (2004, p. 141) interpret Burns’ warnings
of inflationary pressure in 1977 as reflecting “changes in [his] beliefs in the mid-1970s”
toward believing that inflation responded to the level of slack as well as an assessment on
Burns’ part that output was exceeding potential, though they admit that they cannot
reconcile the easy monetary policy of 1976−77 with this change of beliefs. No inference
of change in Burns’ views is necessary, however; policy statements by Burns throughout
1974−78 are consistent with the cost-push plus speed-limit views that we believe he held
consistently over the 1970−78 period.

21

Moreover, further examination suggests that Burns did not believe that the output gap
was positive in 1977; the 1977 quotation Romer and Romer offer from Burns refers to
“the pace of economic activity,” i.e., a speed-limit not a gap-level channel from demand
to inflation; and in the above quotations Burns explicitly referred to a level of economic
slack existing in 1977, i.e., to a negative output gap. Indeed, Burns’ statement that “there
is now considerable slack in the economy” (February 23, 1977, p. 226) and his
observation of “[s]ubstantial amounts of idle capacity and manpower” (March 22, 1977,
p. 361) specifically refute Romer and Romer’s contention that Burns believed that the
gap had turned positive by 1977. In addition, Burns’ views on potential output had not
adjusted downward adequately in 1977, as he endorsed a potential output growth rate
estimate of “3.5 percent or a shade below that.” (May 2, 1977, testimony, in Banking,
Housing and Urban Affairs Committee, U.S. Senate, 1977, p. 17.)
Burns’ speed-limit view can also reconcile his many statements about the limited power
of monetary policy with his occasional observations that the Fed could, in fact, eliminate
inflation. For example, Burns said in 1974, “we could stop this inflation in a very few
months, and stop it dead in its tracks…” (February 26, 1974, testimony, in Joint
Economic Committee, 1974, p. 747). In 1977, he stated, “For our part, we at the Federal
Reserve know that inflation ultimately cannot proceed without monetary nourishment.”
(July 29, 1977, testimony, in Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs Committee, House of
Representatives, 1977b, p. 69.) And similarly, he observed, “serious inflation could not
long proceed without monetary nourishment” (in his August 13, 1977 speech, in Burns,
1978, p. 417.)
As discussed below, statements like these are often interpreted as implying that Burns
really had a monetary view of inflation, according to which monetary accommodation is
crucial in making cost-push shocks matter for inflation. This interpretation is untenable,
as it contradicts Burns’ many denials (including during 1974−78) that a specific inflation
rate was implied by a particular monetary policy choice. But we can reconcile Burns’
statements in the preceding paragraph with these denials by using equation (1), which
represents our characterization of U.S. official doctrine in the 1970s. With equation (1),
it is possible, starting from conditions of a zero or negative output gap, for a monetary
policy to offset cost-push forces by making the output gap more negative.
Such a monetary policy effect on inflation has different characteristics from those that
arise in a standard framework for describing inflation determination. According to the
22

latter, a given negative output gap exerts ongoing downward pressure on inflation, and no
alternative policy can remove inflation. But equation (1), in which negative levels of the
output gap do not matter for inflation, implies that a given degree of aggregate demand
restraint would exert only a temporary effect on inflation; a widening output gap (i.e.,
continuous negative growth in the output gap) is required to maintain downward pressure
on inflation. Moreover, since cost-push forces are an independent source of ongoing
inflation under specification (1), that specification suggests that it is valuable to remove
these forces directly through nonmonetary measures.
Thus, Burns argued, the Fed could stop inflation via a restriction channel, but “the only
way we could do that is to bring the distress of mass unemployment on this nation.”
(February 26, 1974, testimony, in Joint Economic Committee, 1974, p. 747.) Similarly,
CEA Chairman Charles Schultze stated in 1978: “We can't wring this inflation out of the
economy through measures which promote unemployment and economic slack. Such
policies have only a limited impact on the kind of inflation from which we now
suffer...” 14 Note the reference to a “limited impact”—i.e., a temporary impact arising
from the gap-growth channel.
(vi) Inflation cannot purchase permanent gains of output above potential
Burns repeatedly denied the existence of a tradeoff between unemployment and inflation.
For example, in 1975 he stated: “Whatever may have been true in the past, there is no
longer a meaningful tradeoff between unemployment and inflation.” (September 19,
1975, speech, in Burns 1978, p. 221.) He elaborated: “There was a time when there was
a tradeoff, and you could see it on a chart, between inflation rates and unemployment
rates. Today, the nice relationship that previously existed no longer appears. In my
judgment there is no tradeoff any more.” (September 25, 1975, testimony, in Budget
Committee, U.S. Senate, 1975b, p. 164.) Late in his tenure, Burns observed:
“Economists and public officials used to argue about the tradeoff between inflation and
unemployment. Whether or not such a tradeoff existed in the past, I doubt that it exists at
the present time.” (May 3, 1977, testimony, in Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs
Committee, U.S. Senate, 1977, p. 15.)

———————————————————————————————————
14

Quoted in Daily News (New York), March 31, 1978.
23

In contrast to the long-run-tradeoff view, according to which higher inflation can
permanently buy an excess of output above potential, Burns saw low inflation as
desirable and conducive to achievement of policymakers’ real goals. For example, Burns
testified in 1974: “There is no conflict between the objective of maintaining the integrity
of the currency and the policy declared in the [Employment] Act of ‘maximum
employment, production, and purchasing power.’” (February 26, 1974, testimony, in
Joint Economic Committee, 1974, p. 757.) 15 He observed in 1975: “among its several
major objectives the Federal Reserve should seek over the long run to help this country
return to a stable price level.” (July 24, 1975, testimony, in Banking, Currency and
Housing Committee, House of Representatives, 1975, p. 219.) In 1976, Burns reaffirmed
that “elimination of our disease of inflation must therefore remain a major objective of
public policy.” (July 27, 1976, p. 671). He went on to be more specific: “Our objective
ought to be a zero rate of inflation; no other objective, I think, will serve this country
well.” (July 27, 1976, testimony, in Banking, Currency and Housing Committee, House
of Representatives, 1976, p. 29.)
Our recognition of Burns’ rejection of a tradeoff is incorporated in the specification of
equation (1): while positive gaps have a positive relation with inflation conditional on
expected inflation, the coefficient on the expected-inflation term is unity, so there is no
relationship between the absolute levels of inflation and the output gap in the long run.
Incidentally, if there were evidence that the Federal Reserve during the 1970s internally
used Phillips-style regressions that implied a tradeoff, this would not be good evidence
that the most authoritative officials believed in a tradeoff. For his part, Burns said that he
took computer models “with a grain of salt” (May 1, 1975, testimony, in Banking,
Housing and Urban Affairs Committee, U.S. Senate, 1975, p. 194.) He also noted:
“Economists these days have made life easy for themselves by using econometric
models. I must say to you that, rightly or wrongly, I do not trust the results that are
wrung out of these models. The models are based on average experience over a
considerable period of time. I think we have been passing through a unique period and
the characteristics of this period are not built into the econometric models that economists
often rely upon.” (October 2, 1975, testimony, in Budget Committee, House of
Representatives, 1975, p. 180.) Burns’ belief that the U.S. economy had undergone
———————————————————————————————————
15

Other 1970s policymakers expressed similar views. For example, George Shultz, while OMB Director in
1971, said that there was a “zone of full employment with relatively stable prices,” which 1960s
policymakers had missed by overstimulating the economy (Omaha World-Herald, February 14, 1971).
24

structural change that had given it a cost-plus style pricing system, would only have
reinforced his skepticism about the reliability of econometric estimates.
We have found that we can characterize Burns’ views with a simple equation, but we do
not suggest that this was estimated or reestimated econometrically. Indeed, equation (1)
is not econometrically identified using aggregate data. Burns’ intuition about inflation
behavior was based not on macroeconometric estimates, but on the cost-push behavior
(and implied source of the ξt shocks) that he thought he could observe directly at the firm
and industry level.
4.1 Why Phillips curve tradeoff ideas were not important
Baumol and Blinder (1982, p. 301), McCallum (1989, 1995), and Taylor (1992) all argue
that U.S. inflation outcomes in the 1970s reflect policymakers’ belief in a permanent
Phillips curve tradeoff. More recently, that hypothesis has also been advanced by
Sargent (1999). We have argued that belief in a Phillips curve tradeoff was not an
important factor driving U.S. policymaking in the 1970s. It is true, as Taylor (1997)
notes, that an empirical Phillips curve scatter diagram was discussed in the 1969
Economic Policy Report of the President. 16 But that report was issued by the outgoing
administration. Statements by senior figures in the Nixon Administration in 1969 suggest
they had absorbed the natural rate hypothesis. For example, the Council of Economic
Advisers stated that “there is no fixed relationship or ‘tradeoff’ between unemployment
and inflation…” (in Joint Economic Committee, 1969, p. 334). Furthermore, U.S.
monetary policy was tight during 1969 (Chairman Martin’s final year as Federal Reserve
Chairman). If the 1969 policies had been continued, there would have been no Great
Inflation of the Seventies. Instead, the policies of restraint ended, and were put into
reverse, over 1970−72, and the cost-push view of inflation came to predominate among
U.S. policymakers.
4.2 Comparison with other interpretations
We now compare our interpretation of U.S. official doctrine with some others available
in the literature. As noted above, an early study that attributed, as we do, cost-push views
———————————————————————————————————
16

McCallum (1989, p. 181) also cites this scatter diagram as evidence that “inflation-unemployment
tradeoffs have been important in policy deliberations.”
25

to Chairman Burns is Friedman (1972). We already have laid out some alternative
interpretations of 1974−77, as well as agreement on 1971−73, with the studies of Romer
and Romer (2002, 2004). We have also indicated problems with approaches (such as
Sargent, 1999) that attribute Phillips-curve-tradeoff views to policymakers.
Chari, Christiano, and Eichenbaum (CCE) (1998, p. 467) claim that Chairman Burns
“clearly understood” that inflation required monetary accommodation. 17 But they adduce
no unambiguous evidence of this allegedly clear understanding on Burns’ part. Indeed,
both CCE and Christiano and Gust (2000) provide one quotation after another from
Burns to the effect that excess demand no longer drives inflation and that higher growth
rates of wages and other costs automatically push up inflation—i.e., affirmations of the
strict cost-push position on inflation. CCE do provide one seemingly orthodox statement
by Burns regarding the monetary character of inflation; it is from a 1977 speech, near the
end of Burns’ tenure. In portions of the speech subsequent to the orthodox statement
quoted by CCE, Burns repeated his claim that the character of inflation had changed to
cost-push, and acknowledged only that lower money growth would “probably” reduce
inflation. 18 Even late in his tenure, therefore, Burns would not grant that monetary
restraint would reduce or eliminate inflation for certain, and he was emphatic that modern
inflation conditions did not reflect a positive output gap. Even more crucially, via the
speed-limit term in equation (1), we are able to reconcile Burns’ 1977 statement with his
other statements on inflation, without attributing a monetary view of inflation to Burns.
Hetzel (1998) is an important early study that stresses Burns’ cost-push views on
inflation. In one passage, however, Hetzel (1998, p. 35) seems to concur with the CCE
position that Burns understood that sustained inflation required monetary
accommodation. But he does not reconcile this claim with Burns’ many statements to the
contrary; and as we have stressed, the full record of Burns’ views suggests a cost-push
plus speed-limit view of inflation, not a modern or standard view of inflation.
The more general message that we believe should be borne in mind is that Burns largely
accepted that monetary policy could determine aggregate demand but did not, we argue,
accept that the same was true of the determination of inflation. His statements about
accommodation should therefore be interpreted carefully: indeed, on one occasion, Burns
———————————————————————————————————
17
18

A similar view was expressed by Lombra (1980).
See Burns’ August 13, 1977, speech, reprinted in Burns (1978).
26

observed, “I don’t know what ‘accommodate’ means precisely.” (March 13, 1975,
testimony, in Budget Committee, U.S. Senate, 1975a, p. 835.) If one believes that
monetary policy can determine ∆m + ∆v and so the sum π + ∆y, but that monetary policy
is powerless regarding π, then “accommodation” of a higher ∆m + ∆v rate does not imply
that the policymaker is permitting higher inflation. Rather, the exogenously-determined
inflation rate would (according to this view) prevail irrespective of the ∆m + ∆v value; in
these circumstances, accommodating higher nominal income growth simply corresponds
to giving room for output to grow. Or as Burns once framed the issue, “This is a rather
high rate of [M1] expansion by historical standards, but it is not too high when idle
resources are extensive and financing needs still reflect rising prices.” (May 1, 1975,
testimony, in Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee, U.S. Senate, 1975, p.
172.)
5. An estimated structural model for the United Kingdom
We have argued that the key to understanding U.K. inflation in the 1970s was the
nonmonetary approach to inflation control; and that this flawed approach has even more
to answer for because of its influence on U.S. policymaking in the 1970s. In the
remainder of this paper, we provide a closer look at key policymaking episodes in the
United Kingdom. We do this by examining output from the Smets and Wouters (2007)
model estimated on U.K. data, and illustrating how U.K. data outcomes can be
understood as resulting from the flawed policy framework of the 1970s.
The model is a dynamic general equilibrium system with sticky wages and prices. 19 The
loglinearized version of the model is given in full in Smets and Wouters (2007), so we
highlight only a few equations here. First, the monetary policy rule has the nominal
interest rate (Rt) respond to quarterly inflation (πt), the model-consistent output gap
(gapt), and the first difference of the gap:
Rt = ρRRt−1 + (1−ρR)[rππt + rygapt] + r∆y∆gapt + etR

(2)

———————————————————————————————————
19

Previous work on estimation for the United Kingdom of dynamic general equilibrium models closely
related to that of Smets and Wouters (2007) includes Harrison and Oomen (2008), Li and Saijo (2008), and
ourselves (2007). The last of these studies provides a defense of the use of a closed-economy model as a
reasonable abstraction for the study of U.K. inflation.
27

It is important to note that our estimation sample for this rule, as for the rest of the model,
is 1962 Q1−2005 Q4, notwithstanding our emphasis on the enormous difference between
1970s and post-1979 policies. Following Ramey (1993), we interpret results from a
sample that includes regime breaks as depicting average behavior of the economy. For
our data and sample, the relatively low inflation periods 1962−69 and 1983−2005, and
the positive mean of the real interest rate associated with those years, will imply that the
estimates of rule (2) will have fairly reasonable stabilizing characteristics (e.g., rπ above
1.0). It is consequently appropriate to think of the 1970s monetary policy actions as
substantially consisting of deviations from this average rule, and to view these deviations
as largely captured in the estimated monetary policy shock series. These deviations can
be expected to be persistent, which makes it convenient for us to follow Smets and
Wouters’ assumption that etR is a stationary AR(1) process.
Two other equations worth highlighting are the wage and price Phillips curves:
πt = π1πt−1 + π2Etπt+1 −π3µtp + etp

(3)

wt = w1wt−1 + (1−w1) (Etwt+1 + Etπt+1) – w2πt + w3πt−1 + w4(mrst − wt) + etw .

(4)

In equation (2), 0 < π1 < 1 is a function of the degree to which prices are indexed to
lagged inflation; π2 > 0; π3 > 0; µtp is the log of the inverse of real marginal cost; and etp
is a price-equation cost-push shock. In equation (3), wt is the real wage, 0 < w1 < 1, w2
and w3 are functions of the degree of indexation of wages to lagged inflation, w4 > 0, and
mrst is the typical household’s marginal rate of substitution in period t between
consumption and contributing more labor input to production. 20 The shocks to the two
Phillips curves are assumed to follow univariate ARMA processes:
(1−ρpL) etp = (1 − µpL) ηtp

(5)

(1−ρwL) etw = (1− µwL) ηtw ,

(6)

where ηtp and ηtw are white noise exogenous disturbances, and L is the lag operator.
For our purposes, it is useful to consider the sense in which these equations contradict the
cost-push view of inflation. The price Phillips curve in itself is not inconsistent with
———————————————————————————————————
20

See Erceg, Henderson, and Levin (2000) for the justification for this type of wage Phillips curve.
28

cost-push views, since it relates the dynamics of inflation to an average of marginal cost
and to a cost-push shock specific to the price Phillips curve. But the cost-push view of
inflation is largely contradicted when the wage and price Phillips curves are taken
together. The wage equation makes wage inflation endogenous and, in particular,
responsive in a symmetric manner to aggregate demand (via the presence of the mrst − wt
term and the responsiveness of this term to aggregate demand). 21 Because of this
endogeneity, inflation is a monetary phenomenon in the model provided that w4 > 0.
Some elements of the cost-push view of inflation could nevertheless be salvaged if the
cost-push shocks were very persistent. This would imply long systematic departures of
inflation from target even if policymakers kept the output gap close to zero. 22 The price
Phillips curve shock is particularly important in this regard; as Smets and Wouters (2007)
note, the shock term in the wage Phillips curve can be interpreted either as a wage-push
shock or a specific type of preference shock (a labor supply shock). Provided the shocks
in the wage equation are interpreted as labor supply shocks, they can be thought of as
affecting inflation via their effect on potential output; the price equation’s shocks then
provide the source of the truly “cost-push” shocks in the model (i.e., the etp shocks in
equation (3) are analogous to the ξt shocks in equation (1)). 23 Strong serial correlation in
the price Phillips curve shock would support the idea that cost-push forces are important
for medium-run inflation dynamics even without monetary accommodation. Absence of
serial correlation in the cost-push shock would, by contrast, suggest that cost-push forces
have only a short-run influence on inflation if not accommodated by the monetary
authorities.

———————————————————————————————————
21

Other equations of the model in turn make aggregate demand sensitive to monetary policy.
The lagged price-inflation term in the price Phillips curve does mean that a white noise cost-push shock
that is not accommodated is still propagated somewhat into expectations of future inflation. But provided
that the lagged-inflation coefficient is reasonably far below unity, this propagation is quite muted: for
example, with π1 ≤ 0.5 and a 1% white-noise cost-push shock arising this period, the effect of the shock on
one-year-ahead expected inflation is below 0.1%. Also, note that the lagged inflation term makes inflation
today sensitive to past monetary policy actions, not just to past nonmonetary forces.
23
Following Smets and Wouters (2007), the estimated policy rule (2) incorporates a response to the output
gap whose definition that is based on the presumption that the wage Phillips curve shocks are markup
shocks that do not affect potential output. If we accept the alternative interpretation of the wage Phillips
curve shock as labor supply shocks, we must think of rule (2) as incorporating mismeasurement of the
output gap. Specifically, policymakers must be assumed to be erroneously excluding the labor supply
shock from their definition of potential output. In that case, policymakers are responding to an output gap
estimate that contains a zero-mean error arising from the misspecification of potential output behavior.
22

29

Table 1. Bayesian Estimates of Smets-Wouters (2007) Model on U.K. Data
Estimation Period 1962 Q1−2005 Q4
Parameter

φ
σc

Interpretation

Capital adjustment
cost
Intertemporal
substitution in
consumption
Habit formation

Prior
Mean
(St. Dev.)
4.00a
(1.50)
1.50a
(0.38)

Mode

Posterior
Mean

5%, 95%

7.60

7.18

5.55, 8.73

1.13

1.43

1.02, 1.68

0.70b
0.82
0.53
(0.10)
Probability
of
wage
0.50b
0.65
0.59
ξw
adjustment
(0.10)
Labor
supply
2.00a
1.90
1.34
σl
elasticity
(0.75)
Probability
of
price
0.50b
0.58
0.63
ξp
adjustment
(0.10)
Wage
indexation
0.50b
0.54
0.50
ιw
(0.15)
Price
indexation
0.50b
0.27
0.28
ιp
(0.15)
Capital
utilization
0.50b
0.54
0.57
ψ
(0.15)
Degree
of
fixed
costs
1.25a
1.79
1.79
Φ
(0.13)
Policy
response
to
1.50a
1.20
1.74
rπ
inflation
(0.25)
Interest-rate
0.75b
0.85
0.90
ρR
smoothing
(0.10)
Policy
response
to
0.13a
0.03
0.10
ry
output gap
(0.05)
Policy
reponse
to
gap
0.13a
0.10
0.18
r∆y
change
(0.05)
Steady-state
inflation
0.63c
0.59
0.59
π
(0.10)
Discounting
0.25c
0.21
0.25
100·((1/β)−1)
(0.10)
Steady-state
labor
0.00a
5.00
5.49
l
(in logs)
(2.00)
Balanced growth rate
0.40a
0.52
0.45
γ
(0.10)
Capital share in
0.30a
0.18
0.17
α
income
(0.05)
a. Normal distribution. b. Beta distribution. c. Gamma distribution.

h

30

0.43, 0.81
0.50, 0.72
0.65, 2.33
0.51, 0.69
0.30, 0.71
0.15, 0.37
0.38, 0.76
1.64, 1.93
1.34, 2.05
0.86, 0.93
0.04, 0.14
0.10, 0.22
0.46, 0.72
0.10, 0.41
3.21, 8.17
0.38, 0.54
0.10, 0.24

Table 2. Bayesian Estimates of Smets-Wouters (2007) Model on U.K. Data
Estimation Period 1962 Q1−2005 Q4
Estimates for Shock Processes
Parameter
σa
σb
σg
σΙ
σR
σp
σw
ρa
ρb
ρg
ρI
ρr
ρp
ρw
µp
µw
ρga

Interpretation

Standard deviation of
technology shock
Standard deviation of
risk premium shock
Standard deviation of
spending shock
Standard deviation of
investment tech. shock
Standard deviation of
monetary policy shock
Standard deviation of
price eqn. shock
Standard deviation of
wage eqn. shock
AR(1) for technology
shock
AR(1) for risk premium
shock
AR(1) for spending
shock
AR(1) for
investment tech. shock
AR(1) for monetary
policy shock
AR(1) for price
equation shock
AR(1) for wage
equation shock
MA(1) for price
equation shock
MA(1) for wage
equation shock
Correlation, spending
and technology shocks

Prior
Mean
(St. Dev.)
0.10c
(2.00)
0.10c
(2.00)
0.10c
(2.00)
0.10c
(2.00)
0.10c
(2.00)
0.10c
(2.00)
0.10c
(2.00)
0.50b
(0.20)
0.50b
(0.20)
0.50b
(0.20)
0.50b
(0.20)
0.50b
(0.20)
0.50b
(0.20)
0.50b
(0.20)
0.50b
(0.20)
0.50b
(0.20)
0.50a
(0.25)

Mode

Posterior
Mean

5%, 95%

0.61

0.63

0.57, 0.70

0.51

0.29

0.20, 0.50

0.81

0.81

0.74, 0.89

1.47

1.47

1.30, 1.65

0.28

0.31

0.27, 0.34

0.39

0.43

0.34, 0.45

0.51

0.54

0.45, 0.60

0.99

0.99

0.98, 0.99

0.13

0.60

0.19, 0.77

0.97

0.97

0.95, 0.99

0.09

0.14

0.03, 0.21

0.36

0.32

0.23, 0.45

0.97

0.94

0.89, 0.99

0.99

0.99

0.98, 0.99

0.93

0.92

0.82, 0.96

0.88

0.87

0.81, 0.94

0.50

0.49

0.34, 0.65

a. Normal distribution. b. Beta distribution. c. Inverse gamma distribution.

31

For our estimation, we use observations on the U.K. nominal Treasury bill rate, quarterly
retail price inflation, 24 quarterly wage inflation, and per-capita values of log real GDP,
log real consumption, log real investment, and log aggregate hours. GDP, consumption,
investment, and real wages are assumed to share a loglinear trend. 25
Estimates of the model using Smets and Wouters’ Bayesian procedure are given in
Tables 1 and 2. We focus the discussion on the estimates of the Phillips curves discussed
above. First, we note that wages are estimated to depend on the discrepancy between the
marginal rate of substitution and the real wage: the implied value of w4 in equation (4) is
0.02 irrespective of whether the mode or mean value of the posterior distribution is used.
Therefore, this condition for inflation to depend symmetrically on monetary policy
actions is satisfied, rejecting one aspect of cost-push analysis. Second, we note from
Table 2 that the price cost-push shock term has only minor estimated persistence:
although its AR(1) coefficient is over 0.90 (mode 0.97, mean 0.94), so too is the
accompanying MA(1) coefficient (mode 0.93, mean 0.92), implying that a common
factor virtually cancels from the dynamics of equation (5) and delivers a near-white noise
cost-push process. 26 Third, the value of π1 in equation (3) is moderate: using the mode
values of these estimates, the implied value of π1 is 0.21; using the mean values, it is
0.22. The dynamics of the price Phillips curve therefore do little to propagate a cost-push
shock. Taken together, these results suggest that U.K. policymakers were wrong to
attribute inflation movements to long-lasting special factors and to dismiss the scope for
monetary policy to influence inflation.
Table 3 gives variance decompositions for the estimated model. For horizons of four
quarters ahead or more, monetary policy shocks account for about 11% or more of
variation in both inflation and output growth; indeed, for inflation they account for nearly
20% of the forecast error variance at a two- to three-year horizon. Several VAR studies

———————————————————————————————————
24

In contrast to the series plotted in Figure 1, the retail price inflation series used in estimation excludes
mortgage costs. It also removes effects on the index of tax increases in 1979 and 1990. The adjustments
are described in DiCecio and Nelson (2007).
25
Data sources for most of the series are given in DiCecio and Nelson (2007). The remaining data required
for the VAR used here are: population (for which we use Darby and Lothian (1983) data to 1971, spliced
into the U.K. Office of National Statistics (ONS) series mgsl.q after 1971) and a nominal wage index (total
compensation, ONS series dtwm.q, divided by employment, obtained by British Labour Statistics data up
to 1978, spliced into ONS series bcaj.q).
26
There is substantial, but less complete, cancellation of the AR and MA terms underlying the wage shock
process too.
32

for the United States find a lower fraction of output forecast error variance accounted for
by monetary shocks at business cycle horizons than we obtain for the United Kingdom,
Table 3. Forecast Error Variance Decompositions at Horizon k
εa

εb

εg

εI

εR

εp

εw

εa

εb

εg

k=1

εI

εR

εp

εw

k = 12

∆y

6.7

33.1

30.4

20.9

7.6

1.1

0.3

7.3

30.1

26.2

18.5

11.6

1.6

4.8

∆c

1.2

87.8

0.1

0.1

10.4

0.3

0.2

3.9

72.4

0.5

0.2

14.4

0.9

7.8

∆i

0.5

6.4

0.1

86.6

5.6

0.7

0.1

1.9

6.1

0.4

78.9

8.7

1.6

2.4

l

20.6

27.7

27.0

18.3

6.0

0.2

0.1

7.8

11.7

17.5

6.2

22.0

5.5

29.3

π

2.2

1.1

0.8

0.1

8.2

62.8

24.7

2.7

1.6

2.1

0.2

19.2

17.8

56.4

∆w

1.2

4.1

0.1

0.4

2.6

25.5

66.1

3.2

4.1

0.3

0.7

6.2

23.4

62.2

R

2.2

17.5

1.0

0.8

62.8

8.7

6.9

5.0

7.8

4.9

1.1

19.4

4.3

57.5

k=4

k = 30

∆y

7.4

31.3

27.9

19.4

10.9

1.6

1.6

7.3

29.8

26.0

18.3

12.0

1.6

5.0

∆c

3.2

78.3

0.3

0.2

14.2

0.9

2.8

3.9

71.7

0.5

0.2

14.8

0.9

8.0

∆i

1.6

6.2

0.3

81.8

8.0

1.6

0.5

1.9

6.1

0.5

78.2

9.1

1.7

2.5

l

14.8

22.8

24.5

12.5

21.2

2.1

2.1

4.6

5.6

10.1

3.2

10.7

4.2

61.6

π

3.2

1.9

1.7

0.2

17.6

27.7

47.8

2.8

1.4

2.2

0.4

16.6

15.4

61.3

∆w

2.5

3.9

0.2

0.7

5.7

24.5

62.5

3.1

4.0

0.3

0.7

6.7

23.2

61.8

R

4.9

13.4

3.2

1.5

40.9

7.8

28.3

4.8

5.1

4.9

1.2

13.1

3.0

67.9

k=8

k =100

∆y

7.4

30.7

26.7

18.8

10.8

1.6

4.0

7.4

29.7

25.9

18.3

12.0

1.7

5.2

∆c

3.9

74.3

0.4

0.2

13.7

0.9

6.5

4.0

71.3

0.5

0.2

14.7

0.9

8.3

∆i

1.9

6.2

0.4

79.9

8.0

1.6

1.9

2.0

6.0

0.5

78.0

9.1

1.7

2.7

l

10.4

15.9

21.1

8.5

26.4

4.5

13.2

6.2

3.5

7.1

2.1

6.7

2.8

71.6

π

2.8

1.7

1.9

0.2

19.7

19.8

53.8

4.2

1.1

2.0

0.3

12.8

12.2

67.4

∆w

3.1

4.0

0.3

0.7

5.7

23.9

62.3

3.2

4.0

0.3

0.7

6.7

23.3

61.7

R

5.4

9.9

4.6

1.3

24.2

5.4

49.1

7.5

3.0

3.7

0.9

7.6

2.4

74.9

Note: Numbers reported are estimated percent contribution of the innovation to the
variance of the row variable. The innovations (column headers) are to technology (εa),
the risk premium (εb), spending (εg), investment technology (εI), the monetary policy rule
(εR), the price Phillips curve (εp), and the wage Phillips curve (εw). The endogenous
variables (row headers) are output growth (∆y), consumption growth (∆c), investment
growth (∆i), log hours (l), price inflation (π), wage inflation (∆w), and the short-term
interest rate (R).

33

while Cochrane (1998) argues that monetary policy shocks contribute trivially to the
forecast error variance of U.S. inflation. The comparatively larger fractions that we find
in our estimated structural model may be due to our use of U.K. data instead of U.S. data.
But more likely, they are largely due to our deliberately imposing a constant-parameter
policy rule over the whole sample. As noted above, this choice magnifies the variance of
the deviations from the estimated full-sample rule. Effects of monetary policy are
therefore likely to be manifested to a greater degree as contributions of monetary policy
shocks to the variance of the model variables—rather than indirectly as the effects of the
monetary policy rule on the transmission of the non-policy shocks.
The wage Phillips curve and price Phillips curve shocks account for a large share of the
variation in the nominal variables, while the wage Phillips curve shock accounts for a
large fraction of the variation of hours, reinforcing our inclination to interpret it as a labor
supply shock. Interest-rate decisions are driven by the wage Phillips curve innovation,
because that innovation is part of a persistent shock process; by contrast, the price
Phillips curve innovation accounts for a far smaller amount of interest-rate variation.
5.1 Great Inflation episodes
In Figure 2a, we plot the short-term nominal interest rate and four-quarter inflation in the
United Kingdom for 1969 Q4−1979 Q2. In Figure 2b we plot the arithmetic first
differences of these two series, which helps somewhat to isolate the responsiveness (in
sign and magnitude) of monetary policy to movements in inflation. 27 In Figure 2c we plot
the behavior of the model’s estimated U.K. monetary policy shocks over the 1970s. 28 As
foreshadowed above, several of the observations on the monetary policy shock are
notably negative in the 1970s, reflecting expansionary departures of monetary policy
from the more orthodox rule estimated over 1962−2005. Four episodes stand out:
● There is a steeply negative value of the monetary policy shock in 1971 Q2. In April
1971, the Government cut interest rates by 1% despite the fact that inflation was rising.
The Government was relying on its direct influence on specific prices (for example, on
———————————————————————————————————
27

That is, Figure 2b plots 400*(Rt – Rt−1), where Rt is the nominal interest rate in quarterly fractional units;
and πtA – πt−1A, where πtA = 100*([Pt – Pt−4]/Pt−4), Pt being the unlogged price level.
28
The shocks are constructed from the data and the median parameter estimates via the Kalman smoother.
The Kalman smoother seems a more natural method for generating shocks than the Kalman filter in cases
such as ours where the assumption underlying model estimation is that the structural parameters and the
policy rule responses are time-invariant (see Hamilton, 1994, p. 394).
34

Figure 2a. Nominal interest and four-quarter inflation rates, U.K., 1969 Q4−1979 Q2
30
RPI/RPIX inflation
25

Treasury bill rate

Percent

20
15
10
5
0
1969

1970

1971

1972

1973

1974

1975

1976

1977

1978

Figure 2b. Nominal interest and inflation rates, first differences, U.K., 1969 Q4−1979 Q2
10
First difference, inflation
First difference, interest rate

Percent

5

0

-5

-10
1969

1970

1971

1972

1973

1974

1975

1976

1977

1978

1977

1978

Figure 2c. Estimated monetary policy shocks, U.K., 1969 Q4−1979 Q2
1.5

Annualized percent

1.0
0.5
0.0

-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
1969

1970

1971

1972

1973

1974

35

1975

1976

utilities prices) to control inflation. It even saw expansionary monetary policy as
reducing inflationary pressure, on the grounds that output growth diluted unit labor cost
growth (the denominator in the unit labor cost expression—nominal wages—being
perceived as out of reach of monetary policy actions).
● There are some substantial, negative monetary policy shocks from 1974 Q2 to 1976
Q1. Even one former insider on U.K. policymaking seemed to be at a loss to explain
monetary policy over this period: Cairncross (1992, pp. 215−216) observes, “For some
reason monetary policy had remained remarkably relaxed in Labour’s first two years [i.e.,
to March 1976], with bank rate (or MLR [Minimum Lending Rate]) falling from 13% to
9¾ in April 1975, rising to 12% in October 1975 and then falling again to 9% in March
1976.” What is more, even the maximum level of the nominal interest rate over this
period was well below the inflation rate, and several of the rate cuts were against the
background of rising inflation. Faulty measures of the output gap do not seem to account
for the extent of the ease of U.K. monetary policy over this period. 29 The reason for the
relaxed stance of monetary policy seems to be the U.K. authorities’ heavy reliance on
wages policies (the series of “Social Contract” agreements between the Government and
unions) and their parallel belief that monetary policy tightening would not bring inflation
down.
● In 1977, there is a series of negative monetary policy shocks as nominal interest rates
were brought down into single digits despite double-digit inflation. This period was
again one characterized by reliance on the Social Contract as the inflation-fighting tool.
● Another notable negative monetary policy shock occurs in 1979 Q2. In April 1979, the
U.K. Government cut interest rates by 1% despite the fact that inflation was rising. This
decision followed the Government’s signing of a new agreement with the unions, again
intended to fight inflation by direct restraint of wages.
These results from the estimated model illustrate our contention that while inflation in the
United Kingdom in the 1970s was not in fact a cost-push process, the policy choices that
led to the Great Inflation are traceable to the authorities’ adherence to cost-push views.

———————————————————————————————————
29

See Nelson and Nikolov (2004).
36

5.2 Other explanations for the U.K. policy episodes
Let us consider some more benign interpretations of the monetary policy easings that
took place in the United Kingdom during the 1970s. One such interpretation is based on
the fact that the U.K. stockmarket underwent an extraordinary decline during the 1970s.
The Financial Times stockmarket index in 1974 was as low in nominal terms as it had
been in the late 1950s (see, e.g., Bordo and Wheelock, 2004). Could this stockmarket
behavior justify the pattern of U.K. monetary policy decisions in the mid-1970s,
explaining why nominal interest rates were so low compared with inflation rates? To us
this proposed justification is weak. It may explain partially why policymakers behaved
the way they did, but it does not establish that a tighter and more orthodox monetary
policy would not have been superior. We first note that if a period is associated with
stockmarket weakness, that is not generally a sufficient reason in the monetary policy
rules literature for rejecting comparison of actual policy decisions with simple rules based
on macroeconomic aggregates. For example, the U.S. stockmarket was weak in the
1970s, yet it is standard to compare actual policy against rules that respond only to
inflation and an index of real aggregate activity such as the output gap, detrended output,
or output gap growth (see, e.g., Orphanides, 2003). Policymakers concerned with
macroeconomic stabilization should not care about stockmarket weakness per se. And
monetary policy rules that respond to stock prices are not likely to contribute to
macroeconomic stabilization better than rules that concentrate purely on responding to
inflation and aggregate economic activity. Because the relationship between stock prices
and macroeconomic aggregates tends to be very loose in practice, interest-rate responses
to stock prices are likely to detract from macroeconomic stabilization.
It also deserves emphasis that the weakness of the stockmarket was largely a symptom of
the faulty U.K. policy framework in place in the 1970s—i.e., of highly inflationary policy
accompanied by nonmonetary interventions. These nonmonetary interventions were
distortions that worsened for private corporations the costs of high inflation rates. Direct
controls on prices, profits, and dividends, alongside an unindexed taxation system,
magnified the collapse of the stockmarket (as well as other U.K. markets for corporate
capital, such as the debenture market, which contracted dramatically in the mid-1970s).
Among their other effects, the nonmonetary measures against inflation meant that prices
were not allowed to have their optimal relation to costs, intensifying the squeeze on
corporate liquidity in the mid-1970s. The U.K. monetary policy easings in 1974−76 may
have been partly undertaken to lessen this squeeze. For example, policymakers may have
37

been more inclined to boost aggregate demand on the grounds that this would hold down
nominal unit costs and also restrain unit cost growth relative to inflation. But that
rationale for monetary policy easing reflects the flawed U.K. doctrinal framework, with
its neglect of the links between aggregate demand and inflation. Efforts to hold down or
reduce interest rates may well have helped ease the corporate liquidity situation, but they
also contributed to the expansionary monetary policies responsible for high inflation.
Another rationalization for the policy easings of the 1970s might be found in the fact that
the price index used to compute the “headline” inflation series in the United Kingdom,
the Retail Price Index, gives a heavy weight to mortgage costs. This factor is not relevant
to the consideration of the 1971 monetary policy easing, because the inclusion of
mortgages in the RPI began only in the mid-1970s (Lawson, 1992, p. 849). But, for the
other easing periods examined above, it could conceivably be argued that an easing was
justified by the connection between mortgages and price inflation. Might policymakers
have thought that cutting policy rates would reduce mortgage rates, thereby helping to
reduce RPI inflation pressure, and perhaps producing a favorable wage-price spiral via
links between the RPI and wages? Again, such rationales might help explain U.K. policy
decisions in a positive-economics sense, but do not seem to us provide a good economic
justification for those decisions. Any thinking by policymakers along “mortgage
rate/price/wage spiral” lines is valid only in the faulty nonmonetary framework of
inflation analysis. Judged from a more orthodox position on inflation determination, the
“spiral” view is invalid except as a description of the very short run. Interest-rate cuts
aimed at provoking mortgage rate cuts might deliver short-term inflation benefits, but do
so at the cost of long-term inflation control. Over the long run, RPI behavior is similar to
that of indices of U.K. prices that exclude mortgage costs, such as the RPIX series and
the modern CPI. Fundamentally, this is because long-term inflation behavior is driven by
aggregate demand, swamping shorter-term influences on inflation. Interest-rate cuts
ultimately raise RPI inflation via the stimulus to demand, so the cuts do not have a sound
foundation as an inflation-control measure.
We therefore find no legitimate basis for the policymaking framework followed in the
United Kingdom during the 1970s in either stockmarket or mortgage rate behavior.

38

6. Conclusion
Economic policy in the United Kingdom during the 1970s was guided by a doctrinal
framework that suggested that inflation arose from nonmonetary factors and could—and
only could—be brought down by nonmonetary measures. This contrasts with the modern
policymaking framework in many countries, which is guided by the notion that monetary
restraint—and only monetary restraint—is the way to control inflation. We have argued
that policymakers’ adherence to the older doctrinal framework is useful for understanding
why they made the mistakes that led to U.K. inflation outcomes in the 1970s. Seemingly
nonstandard interest-rate decisions during the 1970s can be understood as a consequence
of policymakers using this framework, even though the decisions are unjustifiable from
the point of view of more enlightened economic theory. Moreover, the U.S. Great
Inflation of the Seventies can be understood as arising from U.S. policymakers’ embrace
of the U.K. nonmonetary framework. After pursuing an orthodox policy against inflation
during 1969—which would have avoided the 1970s Great Inflation if it had been
continued—U.S. policy circles in the early 1970s inherited the faulty doctrine already in
place in the United Kingdom. The similarities of the U.S. and U.K. Great Inflation
experiences can therefore be seen as arising not from common shocks, but from common
errors in policymaking doctrine.

39

Appendix A. U.S. policy against inflation during the 1960s
Wage-price guideposts—i.e., federal government announcements giving
recommendations for the maximum increases to take place in private sector wages and
prices, sometimes laid out on an industry-by-industry basis—were used as an antiinflation measure by the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations during the 1960s. In this
Appendix, we show that the thinking underlying these measures was not the same as that
underlying the 1971−74 U.S. wage and price controls and other 1970s nonmonetary
measures against inflation. We thereby reaffirm our position that 1970s U.S. policy on
inflation arose from the adoption by 1970s U.S. policymakers of U.K. cost-push views,
rather than from a continuation of the doctrines adhered to by 1960s U.S. policymakers. 30
We summarize the issues involved ahead of our detailed discussion. The major, and most
authoritative, proponents of guidelines explicitly rejected the nonmonetary (a.k.a. pure
cost-push) view of inflation. As we detail below, the 1961−68 policymaking view was
not as orthodox or modern as that prevailing in 1969−70, but it did share with the
1969−70 and modern positions the view that inflation was sensitive to both positive and
negative output gaps. It follows that policymakers accepted that aggregate demand
measures by themselves could produce price stability: i.e., they conceded that monetary
policy measures that resolutely restricted the level of aggregate demand would, if applied,
be sufficient to remove all inflationary pressure. Policymakers opposed such an
application, however, and instead favored a mix of aggregate demand and guideline
policies. Guidelines had value, according to this view, as a complement to aggregate
demand measures, and specifically could improve the inflation rate achievable under full
employment; but if price stability was desired and guidelines were unavailable, it was
accepted that aggregate demand measures were capable of securing price stability.
The 1970s U.S. doctrine departed from both the 1960s U.S. official position and modern
views by embracing the “British” position that inflation was insensitive to negative
output gaps. Monetary policy measures by themselves could not remove all inflationary
pressure according to the 1970s view: i.e., it was believed that even with demand
restricted to a low level, prolonged inflation could occur. Pure cost-push inflation
———————————————————————————————————
30

As a related matter, we aim to show that our reference to the “Great Inflation of the Seventies” as a
distinct entity is not a denial that the United States had an inflation problem during the 1960s; therefore, it
is not subject to the criticism of Levin and Taylor (2008).
40

consequently could occur according to the 1970s doctrinal framework, so inflation was
viewed as a nonmonetary phenomenon.
A1. Samuelson and Solow
Prior to considering policymakers’ views, we first consider the rationale for the U.S.
guideposts of the 1960s offered by Paul Samuelson and Robert Solow. Though neither
was officially affiliated with the Johnson Administration, they were affiliated with the
1960−61 Kennedy transition and 1961−63 Kennedy Administration, and were the most
prominent scholarly defenders of the guidepost policies.
As is well known, Samuelson and Solow (1960) are associated with a simple Phillips
curve of the type:
πt = a0 + a1E(ut − ut*).
or the same specification with an expectational term:
πt = a0 + a1E(ut − ut*) + a2Etπt+1,
with a1 < 0, ut* being the natural unemployment rate. We include a rational expectation
of inflation in specifying the dynamic Phillips curve above. It is true that an element of
1960s and 1970s controversies on inflation determination was how expectations were
formed—e.g., whether the expected-inflation variable should consist of lagged inflation
with unit coefficient, lagged inflation with nonunit coefficient, or a rational expectation
of current or future inflation. But this controversy is not germane to the issue of a
tradeoff between inflation and unemployment, which can emerge even with a rational
expectation of inflation provided that the expectation has a coefficient a2 differing from
unity (specifically, 0 < a2 < 1).
The dynamic equation has a long-run form:
E[π] = b0 + b1E[(u − u*)]
with b0 = a0/(1−a2), b1 = a1/(1−a2).

41

Some observers have interpreted the position that policymakers tried to exploit a
perceived inflation/unemployment tradeoff as implying policymaker belief in this longrun condition coupled with a target for unemployment below the full-employment or
natural rate; that is, an objective for unemployment of E[(u − u*)] < 0. But this does not
appear to be what 1960s advocates of a long-run Phillips curve relation had in mind in
speaking of a tradeoff; rather, the employment target was characterized as a fullemployment concept, with the associated unemployment rate being a distinct value
pinned down by real factors. Furthermore, at the policy level, Federal Reserve Chairman
Martin articulated in 1967 the desirability of avoiding “a situation of overfull
employment and overutilization of resources” (February 9, 1967, testimony, in Joint
Economic Committee, 1967, p. 416).
If the policymaker goal for real variables amounted to a zero output (and unemployment)
gap, how does the Samuelson-Solow relation imply a long-run policymaking dilemma?
Let us add a shock term to the dynamic Phillips curve,
πt = a0 + a1E(ut − ut*) + a2Etπt+1 + ξt.
Samuelson and Solow (1960) stressed the importance of variations in ξt and, as did later
authors, they labeled it a “cost-push” factor. Provided it has a zero mean, however, this
shock term does not generate a long-run tradeoff between inflation and real variables.
The shock term produces a tradeoff in variances, not in means, and continues to do so if a
long-run vertical Phillips curve replaces the one studied by Samuelson and Solow (1960).
(See Taylor, 1979, 1986.)
If the cost-push shock term has a nonzero mean, then we can decompose the long-run
intercept of the Phillips curve as b0 = π* + E[ξ], where π* is the inflation rate
corresponding to price stability and E[ξ] is the mean of the ξt series. Then
E[π] = π* + E[ξ] + b1E[(u − u*)].
It is the long-run nonvertical, nonzero-mean shock term that delivers the tradeoff or
policy dilemma that Samuelson and Solow (1960) emphasized. Samuelson and Solow
argued that inflationary momentum arising from cost-push sources meant that E[ξ] could
not be counted on to be zero. Samuelson (1969) stated: “In 1960, when I prepared for
President[-Elect] Kennedy a report on the State of the American Economy, I had to
42

express pessimism concerning the ability of any mixed economy to achieve price stability
along with full employment and free markets.” (Emphasis in original.)
Similarly, Samuelson (1961) commented, “there is reason to fear that the cost-push spiral
of creeping inflation may come back into being in 1962 while unemployment is still at
the socially undesirable level of more than 5 percent.” In 1970, he asked, “What can be
done about cost-push inflation, this scourge that makes it impossible to have both full
employment and price stability?” (Samuelson, 1970.)
The guidepost policy came into force in the United States in 1962. Subsequently,
Samuelson (1968, p. 60) argued that while a (permanently nonvertical) Phillips curve
relation continued to be a structural feature underlying U.S. data, guideposts could
produce deviations from the historical curve by decreasing the mean of cost-push shocks:
“All these studies pick up what we all thought was there, namely, a strong costpush element in the 1955−57 data… There is a plus residual continuing for many
quarters in that earlier period and there is a negative residual in the 1960s.”
Reflecting this view, Solow (1968, p. 13) added an intercept-dummy variable when
including post-1962 observations in his estimated Phillips curve equation, so as to
capture the favorable effects on mean inflation claimed for the guidepost policies.
Samuelson and Solow repeatedly reaffirmed in the 1960s that they did not envision
inflation as a pure cost-push phenomenon a la the U.K. (and also later, Burns’)
conception. It was a time-varying intercept—equivalently, a Phillips curve shock term of
nonzero mean—which was the source of a tradeoff or policy dilemma, if aggregate
demand policies alone were used to control inflation. The presence of this term was not
seen as precluding a symmetric Phillips curve relation, whereby inflation depended
continuously on unemployment or output gaps.
This position—that the tendency for the intercept of the Phillips curve to take undesirably
high values, makes it appropriate to take guidepost measures against wages and prices—
must be distinguished fundamentally from the pure cost-push position—i.e., that no
Phillips relation holds below full employment, leaving incomes policy the only feasible
instrument against inflation. Solow made it explicit that his support for guidelines did
not rest on a pure cost-push view of inflation:
43

“I want to make this very clear. I am not resting my case on a theory of cost-push
inflation… [but instead] only on the degree of tightness in the economy at which
the price level begins to rise unacceptably rapidly.” (Solow, 1966, p. 64; emphasis
in original.)
Thus Solow wanted to reduce the mean value of cost-push forces so that the permanently
nonvertical Phillips curve, though implying an inverse relation between inflation and
gaps, did not imply a tradeoff between these series. Solow’s was not a modern view of
inflation, due to his acceptance of a permanent tradeoff and his fear of a nonzero mean
cost-push shock; but equally, it was not a 1970s-type view of inflation, because Solow
accepted that inflation did respond continuously to monetary policy via an output gap
channel.
A2. Policy-level doctrine
Federal Reserve. It is unclear whether Federal Reserve Chairman Martin believed in a
long-run tradeoff between inflation and unemployment. But he recognized the need to
avoid overfull employment, as noted above; so, even if he had a nonvertical Phillips
curve in mind, his aims did not include exploiting it to purchase output levels in excess of
potential output.
As far as cost-push views are concerned, Chairman Martin in the mid-1960s was not a
believer in pure cost-push theories of inflation, but he did see cost-push elements as a
component of inflation (see his February 9, 1967, testimony, in Joint Economic
Committee, 1967, p. 421). Aggregate demand measures were not “necessarily the right
tool” in the face of cost-push inflation, but were essential in the absence of other tools
being applied (ibid, p. 422); and restraint of aggregate demand could limit the extent to
which inflation responded to cost-push forces (ibid, p. 425).
Administration personnel. In 1966, Treasury Secretary Fowler conceded that pursuit of
price stability via aggregate demand measures alone was feasible:
“The administration included price stability as a goal to be sought along with…
full employment and a healthy rate of growth. It believes that there is a
fundamental compatibility of these three objectives and that in seeking one of
them it is unwise to sacrifice the others. If one objective, such as price stability or
44

full employment, is sought with the utmost vigor without concern for the others,
that is not wise national policy.” (February 3, 1966, testimony, in Joint Economic
Committee, 1966, p. 180.)
As the above quotation indicates, and in contrast to the case in the 1970s, the use of
incomes policy as an anti-inflation instrument was seen by 1960s policymakers as
desirable so as to avoid the need for trading off goals; it did not constitute a denial that, in
principle, aggregate demand measures alone could deliver price stability. In keeping with
this perception, CEA Chairman Gardner Ackley saw guideposts as moving pricing
decisions in a direction which removed the need to trade off unemployment and inflation:
“We begin with the fundamental premise that this Nation must be able to enjoy the
benefits of both high employment and price stability. We conclude that the wageprice guideposts offer the best opportunities for encouraging behavior which will
reconcile these two key objectives.” (February 19, 1965, testimony in Joint
Economic Committee, 1965, p. 6.)
This statement, like those of Martin, Samuelson, and Solow, reflects a view of inflation
crucially different from pure cost-push view common to United Kingdom in the 1960s
and 1970s and to the United States in the 1970s. Despite his appeal to the presence of
cost-push elements in the pricing process, Ackley’s statements imply that cost-push
shock elements’ effect on inflation can be counteracted by a maintained negative output
gap. Cost-push elements existed according to 1960s U.S. policy doctrine, and were a
source of a tradeoff (or, as Ackley put it, “of an inflationary bias of the economy at full
employment”); 31 but 1960s U.S. doctrine did not deny that, in principle, a desired
inflation rate could be secured solely by the fixing of aggregate demand at a certain level.
A3. U.S. policy in 1969−70
As discussed in the main text, 1969 saw two important changes in official U.S. doctrine.
First, there was an explicit embrace of no-long-run tradeoff view, as documented in the
text from CEA statements. 32 Secondly, the Administration (which initially included
Arthur Burns as a White House advisor, prior to his move to the Federal Reserve in 1970)
took a truly monetary view of inflation by arguing that incomes policy was not necessary
———————————————————————————————————
31

Ackley (1966, p. 78).
Romer (2007, pp. 10−11) similarly notes that late 1960s U.S. policymakers rejected any long-run
tradeoff.

32

45

to eliminate inflation or to remove a long-run tradeoff. The previous Administration’s
position that there was an inherent tendency for cost-push forces to have a zero average
effect on inflation, even in the absence of monetary accommodation, was not continued.
This new doctrine had a very short-lived initial influence on policy due to changes in
views by Chairman Burns during 1970 and by the Nixon Administration thereafter; but it
was distinct, as we have stressed, from both pre-1969 and 1971−79 policymaker views.

46

Appendix B. Bibliographical information
B1. Material from Federal Reserve publications
November 11, 1971: “Summary of Remarks by Arthur F. Burns, Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System, at the New York Stock Exchange.”
(http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/historicaldocs/statements/download/28999/Burns_19711111.pdf).
August 6, 1974: Burns’ statement before the Joint Economic Committee
(http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/historicaldocs/statements/download/28175/Burns_19740806.pdf).
August 21, 1974: Burns’ statement before the Senate Budget Committee
(http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/historicaldocs/statements/download/28176/Burns_19740821.pdf).

September 20, 1974: Burns’ remarks at the Financial Conference on Inflation
(http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/historicaldocs/statements/download/29556/Burns_19740920.pdf).

February 3, 1976: Burns’ statement to the Banking, Currency, and Housing Committee
(http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/historicaldocs/statements/download/29131/Burns_19760203.pdf).
February 19, 1976: Burns’ statement before the Joint Economic Committee, Federal
Reserve Bulletin, February 1976, pp. 231−236.
July 27, 1976: Burns’ statement before the Banking, Currency and Housing Committee,
House of Representatives, Federal Reserve Bulletin, August 1976, pp. 668−674.
February 3, 1977: Burns’ statement before the Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs
Committee, House of Representatives, Federal Reserve Bulletin, February 1977, pp.
119−124.
February 23, 1977: Burns’ statement before the Joint Economic Committee, Federal
Reserve Bulletin, March 1977, pp. 222−227.
March 2, 1977: Burns’ statement before the Budget Committee, House of
Representatives, Federal Reserve Bulletin, March 1977, pp. 227−233.

47

March 22, 1977: Burns’ statement before the Budget Committee, U.S. Senate, Federal
Reserve Bulletin, April 1977, pp. 358−362.
May 3, 1977: Burns’ statement before the Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs
Committee, U.S. Senate, Federal Reserve Bulletin, May 1977, pp. 463−468.
February 28, 1978: “Transcript, Federal Open Market Committee Meeting, February 28,
1978.” (www.federalreserve.gov).
B2. Newspaper articles cited
“Britain’s Economy Stalled,” Kansas City Star, August 26, 1970, page 2B.
Clifford German, “British Inflation Worst of the OECD Nations,” Daily Telegraph
(London), November 11, 1970, page 17.
Associated Press, “Signs Pointing Up for U.S. Economy, Budget Chief Says,” Omaha
World-Herald, February 14, 1971, page 25A.
“Schultze: Inflation Pressures Are Greater Than Expected,” Daily News (New York),
March 31, 1978, page 32.
Clyde H. Farnsworth, “High Interest Rates: A Federal Reserve Inoculation to Cure the
Inflation Disease?,” New York Times, July 4, 1978, page 32.

48

References
Ackley, Gardner (1966). “The Contribution of Guidelines.” In G.P. Shultz and R.Z.
Aliber (eds.), Guidelines: Informal Controls and the Market Place. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press. 67−78.
Agriculture and Forestry Committee, U.S. Senate (1975). Russian Grain Sales:
Hearings. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Banking, Currency and Housing Committee, House of Representatives (1975). Federal
Reserve Consultations with Congress on the Conduct of Monetary Policy Pursuant to
House Concurrent Resolution 133: Hearings, July 22, 23, and 24, 1975. Washington,
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Banking, Currency and Housing Committee, House of Representatives (1976). Federal
Reserve Consultations with Congress on the Conduct of Monetary Policy Pursuant to
House Concurrent Resolution 133: Hearings July 27 and 28, 1976. Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office.
Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs Committee, House of Representatives (1977a).
Federal Reserve Reform Act of 1977: Hearings. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs Committee, House of Representatives (1977b).
Conduct of Monetary Policy: Hearings. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office.
Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee, U.S. Senate (1975). Second Meeting
on the Conduct of Monetary Policy: Hearings. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee, U.S. Senate (1977). Fifth Meeting on
the Conduct of Monetary Policy: Hearings. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office.

49

Baumol, William J., and Alan S. Blinder (1982). Economics: Principles and Policy—
Second Edition. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Benati, Luca (2004). “Evolving Post-World War II U.K. Economic Performance,”
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Vol. 36(4), 691−717.
Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen (1999).
Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Beyer, Andreas, Vítor Gaspar, Christina Gerberding, and Otmar Issing (2009). “Opting
out of the Great Inflation: German Monetary Policy after the Breakdown of Bretton
Woods.” ECB Working Paper No. 1020.
Blinder, Alan S. (1979). “What’s ‘New’ and What’s ‘Keynesian’ in the ‘New
Cambridge’ Keynesianism?,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
Vol. 9(1), 67−85.
Board of Governors, Federal Reserve System (1970). “Inflation in Western Europe and
Japan,” Federal Reserve Bulletin, October, 743−755.
Bordo, Michael, and Barry Eichengreen (2008). “Bretton Woods and the Great
Inflation.” NBER Working Paper No. 14532.
Bordo, Michael D., and David C. Wheelock (2004). “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices:
A Look Back at Past U.S. Stock Market Booms,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Review, Vol. 86(6), 19−44.
Budget Committee, House of Representatives (1975). Second Budget Resolution, Fiscal
Year 1976: Hearings. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Budget Committee, U.S. Senate (1975a). The 1976 First Concurrent Resolution on the
Budget: Hearings, Volume II. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Budget Committee, U.S. Senate (1975b). Second Concurrent Resolution on the Budget:
Hearings, Volume I. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
50

Budget Committee, U.S. Senate (1976). First Concurrent Resolution on the Budget—
Fiscal Year 1977: Hearings, Volume V. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office.
Burns, Arthur F. (1951). “Mitchell on What Happens During Business Cycles.” In W.C.
Mitchell (ed.), What Happens During Business Cycles: A Progress Report. New York:
National Bureau of Economic Research. vii−xi. Reprinted in Arthur F. Burns, The
Frontiers of Economic Knowledge. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1954.
187−198.
Burns, Arthur F. (1978). Reflections of an Economic Policy Maker—Speeches and
Congressional Statements: 1969−1978. Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute.
Cairncross, Alec (1992). The British Economy Since 1945: Economic Policy and
Performance, 1945−1990. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Cecchetti, Stephen G., Peter Hooper, Bruce C. Kasman, Kermit L. Schoenholtz, and
Mark W. Watson (2007). “Understanding the Evolving Inflation Process.” Report for
2007 Meeting of U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, March.
Chari, V.V., Lawrence J. Christiano, and Martin Eichenbaum (1998). “Expectation Traps
and Discretion,” Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 81(2), 462−492.
Christiano, Lawrence J., and Christopher Gust (2000). “The Expectations Trap
Hypothesis,” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic Perspectives, Vol. 24(2),
21−39.
Cochrane, John, (1998). “A Frictionless View of U.S. Inflation,” NBER
Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 13(1), 323−384.
Committee on the Budget, U.S. Senate (1974). The Federal Budget and Inflation:
Hearings. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Darby, Michael R., and James R. Lothian (1983). The International Transmission of
Inflation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

51

DeLong, J. Bradford (1997). “America’s Peacetime Inflation: The 1970s.” In C.D.
Romer and D.H. Romer (eds.), Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press. 247–276.
DiCecio, Riccardo, and Edward Nelson (2007). “An Estimated DSGE Model for the
United Kingdom,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, Vol. 89(4), 215−231.
Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin (2000). “Optimal
Monetary Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, Vol. 46(2), 281−313.
Friedman, Milton (1972). “Have Monetary Policies Failed?,” American Economic
Review (Papers and Proceedings), Vol. 62(2), 11−18.
Friedman, Milton (1979a). “Hooray for Margaret Thatcher,” Newsweek, July 9, p. 56.
Friedman, Milton (1979b). “Correspondence: A Debate on Britain’s Economic Policy,”
Director, December, 34−36.
Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz (1963). A Monetary History of the United
States, 1867−1960. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz (1982). Monetary Trends in the United States
and the United Kingdom: Their Relation to Income, Prices, and Interest Rates,
1867−1975. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, and Matthew D. Shapiro (2007). “Monetary Policy When
Potential Output Is Uncertain: Understanding the Growth Gamble of the 1990s,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, Vol. 54(4), 1132−1162.
Hamilton, James D. (1994). Time Series Analysis. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press.
Harrison, Richard, and Ozlem Oomen (2008). “Evaluating and Estimating a DSGE
Model for the United Kingdom.” Manuscript, Bank of England.

52

Hetzel, Robert L. (1998). “Arthur Burns and Inflation,” Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond Economic Quarterly, Vol. 84(1), 21−44.
Joint Economic Committee (1965). January 1965 Economic Report of the President:
Hearings, Part 1. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Joint Economic Committee (1966). January 1965 Economic Report of the President:
Hearings, Part 2. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Joint Economic Committee (1967). The 1967 Economic Report of the President:
Hearings, Part 2. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Joint Economic Committee (1969). The 1969 Economic Report of the President:
Hearings, Part 2. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Joint Economic Committee (1974). The 1974 Economic Report of the President:
Hearings. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Joint Economic Committee (1975). Midyear Review of the Economic Situation and
Outlook: Hearings. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Laidler, David (1979). “Book Review: The Political Economy of Inflation,” Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 87(4), 896−901.
Lawson, Nigel (1992). The View from No. 11. London: Bantam.
Levin, Andrew T., and John B. Taylor (2008). “Falling Behind the Curve: A Positive
Analysis of Stop-Start Monetary Policy and the Great Inflation.” Paper presented at
NBER Conference on the Great Inflation, September.
Li, Huiyu, and Hikaru Saijo (2008). “Why Did Aggregate Volatilities Decline in the
U.S., U.K. and Japan?” Manuscript, University of Tokyo.
Lombra, Raymond E. (1980). “Reflections on Burns’ Reflections,” Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking, Vol. 12(1), 94−105.

53

McCallum, Bennett T. (1989). Monetary Economics: Theory and Policy. New York:
Macmillan.
McCallum, Bennett T. (1995). “Two Fallacies Concerning Central-Bank Independence,”
American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings), Vol. 85(2), 207−211.
Meltzer, Allan H. (2003). A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 1. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Nelson, Edward (2005). “The Great Inflation of the Seventies: What Really Happened?,”
Advances in Macroeconomics 3, Article 3.
Nelson, Edward (2008). “An Overhaul of Doctrine: The Underpinning of U.K. Inflation
Targeting.” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, August; Economic
Journal, forthcoming. http://research.stlouisfed.org/wp/more/2007-026/
Nelson, Edward, and Kalin Nikolov (2004). “Monetary Policy and Stagflation in the
U.K.,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Vol. 36(3), 293−318.
Orphanides, Athanasios (2003). “The Quest for Prosperity without Inflation,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, Vol. 50(3), 633−663.
Ramey, Valerie (1993). “How Important Is the Credit Channel in the Transmission of
Monetary Policy?,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 39(1),
1−45.
Robbins, Lionel (1973). “A Crisis of Intellectual Error,” Financial Times, December 14,
p. 17.
Romer, Christina D. (2005). “Commentary: Origins of the Great Inflation,” Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, Vol. 87(2), 177−185.
Romer, Christina D. (2007). “Macroeconomic Policy in the 1960s: The Causes and
Consequences of a Mistaken Revolution.” Lecture, Economic History Association
Annual Meeting, September.

54

Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer (2002). “The Evolution of Economic
Understanding and Postwar Stabilization Policy.” In Rethinking Stabilization Policy.
Kansas City, MO: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 11−78.
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer (2004). “Choosing the Federal Reserve Chair:
Lessons from History,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 18(1), 129−162.
Samuelson, Paul A. (1961). “The American Economy on the Move,” Financial Times,
August 3, pp. 8 and 14.
Samuelson, Paul A. (1968). “Theoretical Problems.” In On Incomes Policy: Papers and
Proceedings from a Conference in Honour of Erik Lundberg. Industrial Council for
Social and Economic Studies. 58−62.
Samuelson, Paul A. (1969). “Lessons of the 1960s,” Newsweek, July 14, p. 79.
Samuelson, Paul A. (1970). “Price Controls,” Newsweek, December 28, p. 57.
Samuelson, Paul A., and Robert M. Solow (1960). “Analytical Aspects of Anti-Inflation
Policy,” American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings), Vol. 50(2), 177−194.
Sargent, Thomas J. (1999). The Conquest of American Inflation. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Smets, Frank, and Rafael Wouters (2007). “Shocks and Frictions in U.S. Business
Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, Vol. 97(3),
586−606.
Solow, Robert M. (1966). “Comments.” In G.P. Shultz and R.Z. Aliber (eds.),
Guidelines: Informal Controls and the Market Place. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press. 62−66.
Solow, Robert M. (1968). “Recent Controversy on the Theory of Inflation: An Eclectic
View.” In S.W. Rousseas (ed.), Inflation: Its Causes, Consequences and Control: A
Symposium. New York: New York University. 1−17.

55

Solow, Robert M. (1969). Price Expectations and the Behavior of the Price Level.
Manchester, U.K.: Manchester University Press.
Taylor, John B. (1979). “Estimation and Control of a Macroeconomic Model with
Rational Expectations,” Econometrica 47, 1267−1286.
Taylor, John B. (1986). “Reply.” In R.J. Gordon (ed.) The American Business Cycle:
Continuity and Change. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 672−677.
Taylor, John B. (1992). “The Great Inflation, the Great Disinflation, and Policies for
Future Price Stability.” In A. Blundell-Wignall (ed.), Inflation, Disinflation and
Monetary Policy. Sydney: Ambassador Press. 9−31.
Taylor, John B. (1997). “America’s Peacetime Inflation: The 1970s: Comment.” In C.D.
Romer and D.H. Romer (eds.), Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press. 276−280.

56

