                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    DISCLOSURE AND THE COST OF CAPITAL:
             EVIDENCE FROM FIRMS’ RESPONSES TO THE ENRON SHOCK

                                           Christian Leuz
                                          Catherine Schrand

                                        Working Paper 14897
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14897


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2009




¸˛We appreciate helpful comments from Ray Ball, Christine Botosan, John Coates, Mihir Desai, Gene
  Fama, Fabrizio Ferri, Luzi Hail, Anil Kashyap, Lubos Pastor, Raghu Rajan, Andrei Shleifer, Heather
  Tookes, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, Luigi Zingales, and workshop participants at Duke University,
  ESMT Berlin, Harvard Business School, Harvard Law School, University of Chicago, University of
  Illinois at Chicago, Vienna University of Economics and Business, and Yale University. We thank
  Shanshan Cao, Wannia Hu, Avery Michaelson and Eugene Soltes for their excellent research assistance.
  Christian Leuz gratefully acknowledges research funding provided by the Initiative on Global Markets
  (IGM) at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The views expressed herein are those
  of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Christian Leuz and Catherine Schrand. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Disclosure and the Cost of Capital: Evidence from Firms’ Responses to the Enron Shock
Christian Leuz and Catherine Schrand
NBER Working Paper No. 14897
April 2009
JEL No. G01,G12,G14,G30,M41,M42

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper examines the link between disclosure and the cost of capital. We exploit an exogenous
cost of capital shock created by the Enron scandal in Fall 2001 and analyze firms’ disclosure responses
to this shock. These tests are opposite to the typical research design that analyzes cost of capital responses
to disclosure changes. In reversing the tests and using an exogenous shock, we mitigate concerns about
omitted variables in traditional cross-sectional disclosure studies. We estimate shocks to firms’ betas
around the Enron events and the ensuing transparency crisis. Our analysis shows that these beta shocks
are associated with increased disclosure. Firms expand the number of pages of their annual 10-K filings,
notably the sections containing the financial statements and footnotes. The increase in disclosure is
particularly pronounced for firms that have positive cost of capital shocks and larger financing needs.
We also find that firms respond with additional interim disclosures (e.g., 8-K filings) and that these
disclosures are complementary to the 10-K disclosures. Finally, we show that firms’ disclosure responses
reduce firms’ costs of capital and hence the impact of the transparency crisis.


Christian Leuz
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637-1610
and NBER
cleuz@chicagobooth.edu

Catherine Schrand
University of Pennsylvania
schrand@wharton.upenn.edu
1.      Introduction

        The link between corporate disclosure, investor information and the cost of capital is one

of the most fundamental relations in finance and accounting. Understanding this link is of

substantial interest to firms that provide information to capital markets as well as to financial

market regulators who mandate disclosures. Various theoretical models predict that an increase

in information quality is negatively related to the cost of capital (e.g., Diamond and Verrecchia,

1991; Easley and O’Hara, 2004; Lambert et al., 2007). Similarly, the estimation risk literature

suggests that higher quality information should manifest in lower systematic risk and expected

returns (e.g., Barry and Brown, 1985; Coles and Loewenstein, 1988; Handa and Linn, 1993;

Coles et al., 1995; Kumar et al., 2008).

        Despite its importance, the empirical evidence on the link between disclosure,

information quality, and the cost of capital is far from conclusive.               In the estimation risk

literature, studies often rely on indirect proxies for information quality such as firm age or listing

period and hence there are alternative interpretations of the results (e.g., Barry and Brown, 1984;

Clarkson and Thompson, 1990; Kumar et al., 2008). Studies that use more direct proxies for

information quality suggest that firms with more extensive disclosures exhibit a lower cost of

capital, but the evidence is mostly cross-sectional in nature (see, e.g., survey by Leuz and

Wysocki, 2008). Thus, there are substantial concerns about whether these relations can be

interpreted in a causal way since there are reasons to believe that the same factors that drive

firms’ disclosure choices could also directly affect the cost of capital.1




1
  For example, firms that need to raise external financing for new growth opportunities are likely to increase
disclosure. However, pursuing these opportunities may also change firms’ cost of capital. Separating these two
effects in the cross-section is difficult.



                                                                                                          -1-
       To mitigate these concerns, this paper relates an exogenous cost of capital shock – the

Enron collapse – to firms’ disclosure responses, which is essentially the reverse experiment to

the prior literature. The events surrounding the collapse of Enron led to substantial concerns

about the transparency of other U.S. firms, in particular, the quality of their financial statements

and disclosures. As such, we use the revelations about Enron as an information-related shock

that changed investors’ beliefs about the quality (or precision) of their information and hence

firms’ costs of capital. The cost of capital shock in turn should lead firms to re-evaluate their

disclosure policies and trigger changes in their disclosure behavior. By exploiting this natural

experiment, we provide new and complementary evidence that disclosure and the cost of capital

are related as predicted by theory and that firms can influence their cost of capital through firm-

specific disclosures.

       Our analysis focuses on the period when the news about Enron’s losses and accounting

irregularities hit the market in Fall 2001. The news quickly grew into widespread concerns about

the transparency of U.S. corporate reporting and, in particular, about the disclosures of special

purpose vehicles, off-balance sheet financing, and related-party transactions (see Appendix for

details). The concerns culminated in the passage of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in August 2002.

       Our sample comprises 1,868 U.S. firms with December fiscal-year ends and required

financial data from 1999 to 2001. We measure shocks to their costs of capital around the Enron

events using an econometric technique suggested by Lockwood and Kadiyala (1988) that allows

for a quadratic model to estimate beta during the event window as the transparency crisis was

unfolding. We focus on the shock to systematic risk in an attempt to separate cost of capital

changes from updated assessments of firms’ future cash flows. The quadratic form is also

important because it can account for the impact of a firm’s immediate responses during the event




                                                                                                 -2-
period on its cost of capital.2 The first part of the analysis examines firms’ disclosure responses

to the information-related cost of capital shock. We analyze responses in firms’ annual SEC

filings (Form 10-K), which occur after the event period, as well as potentially more immediate

responses in 8-K filings, conference calls and earnings announcements.

        We document that the cost of capital shocks over the Enron event period are associated

with an increase in the firms’ disclosures in their subsequent annual 10-K filings. Firms extend

the number of pages in their 10-K filings, notably the sections containing narrative discussions

like Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis” (MD&A), and Item 13, “Certain

Relationships and Related Transactions,” as well as the financial statements and footnotes. This

evidence shows that firms respond to transparency concerns and cost of capital shocks with

additional disclosures. The documented link between cost of capital shocks and additional 10-K

disclosures is robust to a broad set of alternative specifications and sensitivity checks to address,

in particular, concerns about the validity of the beta estimates, an undue influence of the events

of September 11, 2001 and updated cash-flow estimates.

        For firms that experience positive beta shocks, the increase in disclosure is particularly

pronounced for those that are likely to be more sensitive to their cost of capital because they

have larger external financing needs and more growth opportunities. This finding is consistent

with the idea that the firms most affected by the shock are most likely to respond. We also find

that Arthur Anderson clients respond more strongly to the beta shocks, increasing the 10-K pages

and the section on related-party transactions compared to firms with other auditors. This finding

is consistent with our interpretation that the disclosures are a response to the transparency

concerns created by the Enron scandal.

2
  However, we also show that our results are not driven by the choice of a quadratic model and that we obtain
similar results from a standard market model.



                                                                                                                -3-
       We also analyze disclosures made in the period immediately after the shock (hereafter

“interim” disclosures). Although we do not find a significant relation between the beta shocks

and the changes in the number of words in the firms’ annual earnings announcements, firms do

respond by increasing the number of 8-K filings. The additional 8-K disclosures mitigate the

effects of the shock but they do not eliminate the relation between the beta shocks and disclosure

in the 10-K. This finding is noteworthy because it suggests that firms view the annual 10-K

filing as a relevant disclosure mechanism to improve transparency and alleviate investor

concerns, despite its lack of timeliness.

       It is also conceivable that firms respond to the Enron shock with additional disclosures to

avoid future litigation or to thwart a regulatory response, not to mitigate transparency concerns

or to address changes in their cost of capital. This potential alternative explanation, however,

does not predict the cross-sectional result, described previously, that firms with the largest

disclosure responses are those that have larger external financing needs and more growth

opportunities.   Moreover, the notion that firms provide more but not necessarily more

informative disclosures is difficult to reconcile with our final set of analyses showing that 10-K

disclosure increases are associated with abnormal volume reactions around the 10-K filing and

with a subsequent decline in beta. These findings suggest that the additional disclosures are

informative to investors and indeed lower the cost of capital. The latter result is important

because it implies that even if the Enron scandal did not lead to cost of capital shocks per se but

nonetheless triggered changes in other firms’ disclosures, these disclosures are related to

subsequent declines in the cost of capital.

       This study contributes to the prior literature in several ways.          First, by linking

information-related beta shocks to firms’ disclosure responses, we provide evidence that is less




                                                                                                -4-
likely to reflect an omitted variable that jointly affects disclosures and the cost of capital. Prior

studies generally provide evidence from cross-sectional analyses of disclosure or information

levels (e.g., Botosan, 1997; Botosan and Plumlee, 2002; Easley et al., 2002; Francis et al., 2004,

2005). Similarly, the estimation risk literature generally analyzes cross-sectional differences in

firm characteristics (e.g., Barry and Brown, 1984; Clarkson and Thompson, 1990). There are a

few studies that examine changes in disclosure policies (e.g., Healy et al., 1999; Leuz and

Verrecchia, 2000), use corporate events such as dividend changes or share repurchases (e.g.,

Grullon et al., 2002; Kumar et al., 2008) or exploit disclosure choices when firms access capital

markets (e.g., Lang and Lundholm, 2000; Schrand and Verrecchia, 2005). But none of these

studies identifies an exogenous event that changes firms’ disclosure decisions (including those

with a design in changes). Second, our study provides novel evidence that firms respond to

transparency crises and credibility shocks in markets with increases in their disclosures. The

documented disclosure increases occur shortly after the Enron scandal, but preceding the

political response to the crisis, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. Finally, we contribute to the

estimation risk literature by showing that beta estimates respond to an information-related shock

in predictable ways and that firms’ subsequent disclosure responses reduce the impact of the beta

shocks, as predicted by theory. As Kumar et al. (2008) note, such evidence is also useful in the

ongoing debate about the conditional CAPM (e.g., Wang, 2003; Lettau and Ludvigson, 2001).

       The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops the hypotheses and explains our

research design exploiting the Enron events in 2001. In section 3, we define our disclosure and

cost of capital proxies. Sections 4 and 5 present the results on the relation between the cost of

capital shocks and firms’ disclosure responses. Section 6 presents the analysis of subsequent

market responses to firms’ disclosure responses. Section 7 concludes the paper.




                                                                                                 -5-
2.         Hypothesis development and research design

           There is a long-standing literature in financial economics providing theories on the

relation between investor information and the cost of capital (e.g., Diamond and Verrecchia,

1991; Easley and O’Hara, 2004; Lambert et al., 2007). An implication of these theories is that a

change in investor information (e.g., its precision) leads to a change in the cost of capital.

Optimal disclosure behavior in turn implies that firms respond to information-related shocks to

their cost of capital by changing their disclosure policy.        That is, assuming that a firm’s

disclosure policy is optimal at a given point in time, an information-related shock to the cost of

capital should lead to a reassessment of its disclosure policy. Our main prediction is that, ceteris

paribus, firms with increases in their cost of capital are likely to increase their disclosures.

Furthermore, firms’ disclosure increases should lead to subsequent reductions in the cost of

capital.     Relating firms’ disclosure responses to an information-related shock as well as

consequent cost of capital changes to the new disclosures should provide evidence that investor

information and the cost of capital are indeed related as predicted by theory.

           To test these predictions, we exploit the events at Enron as an exogenous shock to other

firms’ costs of capital. On October 16, 2001, Enron announced a third quarter loss of $618

million and hinted at problems with its partnerships. On November 29, 2001, Enron announced

it would restate its earnings back to 1997 and add $628 million of debt to its 2000 balance

sheet. Between these events, the SEC launched an inquiry into Enron’s accounting practices

and then initiated a formal investigation that included Enron’s auditors, Arthur Anderson.

Subsequently, Enron was removed from the S&P 500, its debt was downgraded to junk and,

eventually, it filed for bankruptcy. Appendix A.1 provides more details on the sequence of

events.




                                                                                                 -6-
         We believe that the nature of the Enron scandal is particularly suited to our analysis.

The announcements revealed that Enron had been able to hide its economic and financial

condition, despite compliance with SEC financial reporting requirements, which led to general

concerns about U.S. financial reporting quality. As such, the Enron events likely caused

investors to revise their beliefs about the precision (or quality) of their information.

Furthermore, even if the Enron scandal was a symptom of a larger transparency crisis, the

timing of this shock should be exogenous to other firms, which is all we need for our empirical

strategy.

         The following timeline provides a stylized overview of our research design and how it

relates the events at Enron to our main hypothesis:

     Pre-event-period            Event period                 Pre-report period           Post-report period
                                     ↑↑↑↑                                             ↑
                              Enron events unfold                         Disclosure Response


         In the pre-event period, firms are in equilibrium with respect to their disclosure decisions.

Investors have rational expectations over firms’ future cash flows and the precision of their cash

flow estimates. In the event period, the Enron scandal unfolds and leads to investor concerns

about a systematic lack of transparency in U.S. financial reporting.3 As a result, investors revise

their beliefs about the precision of their estimates for other firms in the economy, which changes

firms’ cost of equity capital. This information-related shock to the cost of capital alters firms’

optimal disclosure levels and hence they adjust their disclosure policies. In response to firms’

disclosures, investors revise and update their beliefs and the cost of capital adjusts again.

         By relating investors’ uncertainty about their information set to expected returns and

hence firms’ cost of capital, the estimation-risk literature provides the conceptual underpinnings
3
 See Appendix A.1 for citations to articles in the financial press that suggest that the market viewed the Enron
scandal as indicative of widespread transparency problems in the U.S.



                                                                                                                   -7-
for our analysis and, in particular, investors’ reactions to the Enron shock. This literature starts

from the premise that the parameters of the return-generating process are generally not known

and have to be estimated (e.g., Klein and Bawa, 1976, 1977). While early studies conclude that

the effects are diversifiable (e.g., Brown, 1979; Reinganum and Smith, 1983), Barry and Brown

(1985) show that estimation risk is not diversifiable when information is differentially distributed

across securities. Extending this finding, Coles and Loewenstein (1988) and Coles et al. (1995)

show that when modeling estimation risk with respect to asset payoffs (rather than returns)

estimation risk is not diversifiable and affects equilibrium returns and betas even when

information is symmetrically distributed. Along similar lines, Lambert et al. (2007) analyze

information structures that lend themselves more naturally to an interpretation as firm-specific

disclosures about future cash flows and show that more precise disclosures move firms’ cost of

capital closer to the risk-free rate. This effect is again not diversifiable and manifests itself in

firms’ beta factors as well as the market risk premium for the economy.4 Finally, Kumar et al.

(2008) analyze the effects of estimation risk on the cross section of stock returns and firms’ cost

of capital when investors learn from information of uncertain quality (or precision). They

demonstrate that, in this situation, asset prices, firms’ beta factors, and the market risk premium

are estimation-risk dependent and respond to changes in the quality of information.5

         Based on these theories, we expect that the Enron events led to an information-related

shock to firms’ cost of capital. We focus on changes in firms’ beta factors for two reasons.

First, the Enron events may have had an impact on investors’ expectations of future cash flows
4
  As Lambert et al. (2008) show, the link between information and the cost of capital in Easley and O’Hara (2004) is
solely driven by precision effects and very similar to the link described above, except that the analysis in Easley and
O’Hara (2004) is limited to effects on firm-specific variances, which makes them diversifiable.
5
  Kumar et al. (2008) also provide empirical evidence that beta factors fall immediately after dividend initiations and
share repurchases, i.e., corporate events that can be interpreted as reducing information uncertainty. Similarly, Barry
and Brown (1984) and Clarkson and Thompson (1990) find that systematic risk of low information firms decreases
as time passes (e.g., the length of their listing period) and information increases.



                                                                                                                   -8-
for some firms and not just on the precision of their cash flow estimates. By focusing on

changes in firms’ beta factors, rather than abnormal returns, we attempt to separate cost of

capital and cash flow effects. In addition, we include industry controls in all analyses and we

check that our results are not driven by or sensitive to the inclusion of energy firms, for which

the Enron events likely had significant cash flow effects. We also conduct a robustness analysis

that uses changes in (analysts’) earnings expectations as a control for updated assessments of

future cash flows. Second, it is likely that the Enron events increased the market risk premium.

However, shocks to the risk premium apply to the entire economy and are constant across firms.

The beta factor in turn exacerbates or dampens any premium shocks for a given firm and hence

appropriately captures cross-sectional differences in the cost of capital shock.6

        In addition, the Enron shock could have affected investors differentially and hence could

have altered information asymmetries among investors. Increased information asymmetry can

raise the market risk premium demanded by investors as well as the firm-specific cost of capital

(e.g., Amihud and Mendelson, 1986; Diamond and Verrecchia, 1991; Garleanu and Pedersen,

2004; Lambert and Verrecchia, 2008). However, information asymmetry effects do not alter our

primary hypothesis that the Enron shock led to changes in firms’ cost of capital and that, ceteris

paribus, firms with increases in their cost of capital respond with an increase in disclosure.

        We also make several cross-sectional predictions. We predict that firms that are more

sensitive to their cost of capital because, for example, they have greater external financing needs,

increase their disclosures more than less sensitive firms. We predict firms with larger credibility

issues after the Enron events to respond more strongly, holding all else equal. Finally, it is

possible that firms with a positive cost of capital shock respond by increasing their disclosure,

6
 We note that without estimating changes in the market risk premium, we cannot quantify the full magnitude of the
cost of capital shock, but doing so is not necessary for a cross-sectional design.



                                                                                                              -9-
while firms with a negative shock maintain their policies. Such a response is likely if the costs

of retaining disclosures are small.

       To test these hypotheses in the context of the Enron events, we estimate variations of the

following general specification of a cross-sectional model:

          Change in disclosure = α + beta shock + control variables + ε                        (1)

and also separate models for firms that experience a positive shock and have a higher sensitivity

to their cost of capital versus all other firms. We first analyze average changes in disclosure in

firms’ annual 10-K filings as the shock occurred during the fourth quarter of 2001. Thus, firms

could respond in their annual filings with the SEC, which are due 90 days after year end. In the

timeline above, we measure the beta shocks during the event period and then separately in the

pre-report period to account for the possibility that firms respond to the shock with interim

disclosures (or costly signals) during or after the event period but before filing the 10-K.

Although the news about Enron’s problems was a surprise to the market and occurred during a

relatively short window, the event period is long enough that a firm may respond to the shock

during the event period or shortly thereafter. Responses could be interim disclosures, such as

conference calls or press releases, or costly financial signals, such as changes in the dividend

policy or stock repurchases.

       We explicitly account for such interim responses in our second set of analyses. We

estimate equation (1) but include measures of changes in 8-K filings, conference call activity,

and disclosures in the fourth-quarter earnings announcement as controls. We also estimate

equation (1) using our various interim disclosure proxies as the dependent variable. These

analyses serve three purposes. First, evidence that firms respond immediately to the cost of

capital shock in predictable ways serves to increase the confidence in our shock proxies.



                                                                                             -10-
Second, including these disclosures in the model of 10-K disclosures mitigates concerns about

omitted variables. If an omitted variable drives firms to increase disclosure in the 10-K, it

likely also causes firms to increase other disclosure. In this case, including proxies for changes

in the other disclosures in the model should attenuate the coefficient on the beta shocks, which

we examine. Third, the analysis provides evidence on the role of the 10-K filing as a disclosure

instrument. The 10-K must be filed within 90 days after the fiscal-year end and hence it may

not be a timely vehicle to reduce transparency concerns. At the same time, the 10-K may be

particularly appropriate to address such concerns because it contains audited financial

statements and it is subject to SEC review. Thus, if more timely but potentially less credible

interim disclosures are substitutes for disclosure responses in the 10-K, there may be no

association between the beta shocks over the event period and firms’ 10-K responses when we

control for interim disclosures. If, however, interim and 10-K disclosures are complements, the

relation between the beta shock remaining after the interim response and the 10-K disclosures

is attenuated unless we control for interim responses.

       In our third and final set of analyses, we invert the model in equation (1) and examine

subsequent market reactions to firms’ disclosures responses after the Enron shock.           If the

disclosures are useful to investors and increase the precision of their information, the market

should respond to the release of this information and the cost of capital should decline. In

performing these analyses, we also investigate the alternative hypothesis that firms increase their

disclosure following the crisis merely to address concerns about litigation or to thwart future

regulation. If firms provide additional disclosures that are not informative to investors (but

reduce litigation risk), we do not expect the disclosure changes to be related to subsequent




                                                                                               -11-
declines in the cost of capital.7 In this analysis, we measure the cost of capital response to a

disclosure change, which is closer in design to traditional disclosure studies, except that we use

cross-sectional variation in disclosure that is generated by an exogenous shock.

         Finally, we note that there are several reasons the predicted relations may not prevail.

First, the Enron crisis may not have resulted in an information-related shock for other firms,

despite widespread claims in the press at the time. Second, the link between financial disclosure

and the cost of capital may not exist in the way predicted by theory. Third, it is conceivable that

managers do not expect that they are able to address the transparency concerns via increased

disclosure, and thus they do not respond in this way.


3.       Empirical proxies and descriptive statistics

3.1 Sample

         The sample includes all firms on Compustat that have fiscal year ends on December 31st

and non-missing values for total assets and earnings announcement dates in each of the three

years from 1999 – 2001. We exclude firms with non-December fiscal-year ends to align firms

with respect to the timing of their disclosures. We exclude REITS, Limited Partnerships, Trusts

and Funds from the sample. In addition, we eliminate 233 firms that likely were significantly

influenced by the events of September 11, 2001. First, we exclude all airlines and insurance

carriers from our sample. Carter and Simkins (2004) and Doherty et al. (2003) show that the

events of September 11 had a significant effect on airlines (SIC 45) and insurance carriers,

respectively. Second, we eliminate firms that file an 8-K between September 11 and the peak of

our event period (November 8) that mentions the terrorist attacks, suggesting that the events of

7
 Note that if firms provide additional disclosures in response to the Enron debacle but not necessarily to the cost of
capital shocks, our analysis of subsequent changes in the cost of capital is still useful and valid as long as the Enron
shock produces exogenous variation in firms’ disclosure choices.



                                                                                                                    -12-
September 11 had a material impact. While our event period does not start until mid October,

excluding these firms mitigates the concern that the returns and beta estimates for these firms

reflect ongoing valuation adjustments associated with the terrorist attacks.

       We require data for 1999 and 2000 to create control variables and also benchmarks to

measure changes in disclosure. The final sample contains 1,868 firms for which we have return

data to compute the cost of capital shocks, Compustat data to compute the primary control

variables, and 10-K filings data to create the disclosure proxies.


3.2 Event window

       We consider seven different window specifications to define the pre-event period, the

event period, and the pre-report period (see Appendix A.2). In all cases, the pre-event window

starts on May 1, 2001, which for firms with December fiscal-year ends is after the year 2000

annual report season, and runs through August 31, 2001. This period precedes the market

closings caused by the terrorist attacks on September 11. These events are excluded from the

event period, which starts at the earliest on October 15, 2001. The pre-report period ends either

on January 15, 2002 or January 28, 2002, prior to the annual earnings announcement season.

Choosing the later date increases the length of the pre-report period and hence the power to

measure systematic risk, but it is more likely that the beta estimates include the effects of early

earnings announcements. Similarly, the choice among the different windows involves trading

off a longer event period, which allows us to more precisely measure the Enron shock, against a

shorter pre-report period, which makes it more difficult to accurately measure the beta prior to

the 10-K filing.

       Throughout the paper, we present results for Window 1, which is centered on November

8 and has an event-period length of 39 days. The pre-report period ends on January 15, 2002.



                                                                                              -13-
The Appendix provides evidence to justify this choice. The results are robust to alternative

windows and generally stronger if we focus on those windows that maximize the length of the

period over which the respective betas are estimated. The post-report period is consistently

defined across all analyses as May 1, 2002 to August 31, 2002.


3.3      Disclosure proxies

         Our main proxy for a change in disclosure is the percent change in the page count of the

10-K for 2001 from 2000 (% ΔPAGES ).                   Page count data are from the Global Securities

Information (GSI) database, which covers all SEC filings that are available in the EDGAR

database. We eliminate all filings with less than 10 pages. Most of these observations are

references to a fuller document and not the page count of the 10-K.8 The page counts are for the

body of the 10-K (i.e., Items 1 through 15), which includes the exhibits and financial statement

schedules in Item 15. The page counts exclude separate exhibits and appendices to the 10-K

filing beyond Item 15. While those exhibits and appendices could include useful information

(e.g., material contracts), they are not sufficiently standardized in format and content to provide a

meaningful proxy for variation in information content or disclosure.

         We also measure page count changes for three key sections within the 10-K.                             The

variable %ΔMDA is the percent change in pages for Item 7, Management’s Discussion and

Analysis of Results of Operations and Financial Condition (MD&A). The variable %ΔFS is the

percent change in the pages of 10-K sections that commonly include the financial statements and

notes. The sections used to create this proxy are Item 6 (Selected Financial Data), Item 8

(Financial Statements and Supplementary Data), and Item 15 (Exhibits, Financial Statement


8
 Fifty-six sample firms switch from (to) filing a 10-K to (from) a 10-KSB. Using a different form likely affects the
page count. However, the results are virtually the same if we drop these firms.



                                                                                                                -14-
Schedules, and Reports on Form 8-K). The variable %ΔDISCUSS is the percent change in the

pages of 10-K sections that commonly include important narrative discussions and information.

The sections used to create this proxy are Item 1 (Business), Item 2 (Properties), and Item 7

(MD&A). These three proxies for key subsections address concerns that the page changes for

the entire 10-K occur in less important parts.                  By combining multiple items, %ΔFS and

%ΔDISCUSS further mitigate problems associated with small numbers of pages in the

individual sections and with rearranging the location of information within the 10-K, which are

more likely to arise for %ΔMDA .9

         For all of the percent change variables, the benchmark is the page count in the prior year.

We create an alternative proxy that uses the average of the 1999 and 2000 page counts. Results

are very similar for this alternative variable and are not presented. We truncate % ΔPAGES

above the 98th percentile and below the 2nd percentile. For the other percentage change variables,

we have manually screened for a number of issues that could produce outliers (such as

rearranging of information within the 10-K) and hence we truncate only above the 99th percentile

and below the 1st percentile to conserve sample size.10 Winsorizing rather than truncating the

variables yields similar results.

         Table 1, Panel A reports descriptive statistics for the page count variables. The average

10-K in 2001 has 64 pages ( PAGES2001 ), which is almost a 17% increase over 2000. This

increase is statistically different from zero and far exceeds the average page change from 1999 to
9
  For all three variables, we attempt to exclude observations that appear to have rearranged the location of
information within the 10-K. Observations that report an item in the current year that was incorporated by reference
in the previous year (or vice versa) are eliminated under this criterion. We identify observations that potentially
rearranged the 10-K using various data filters. For these observations, we examine the 10-K to verify that
disclosures within the 10-K were rearranged across various sections.
10
   Truncating the percentage change in total pages at the 99th and 1st percentile does not materially alter our results.
However, the 43 additional observations that are gained due to the milder truncation at the 1% level are flagged by
common outlier procedures. The inspection of these observations for the 10-K part analysis also confirms this
assessment, which is why we choose to truncate at the 98th and 2nd percentile.



                                                                                                                   -15-
2000, which equals only 3.4% (untabulated). The difference between the increase from 1999 to

2000 and the increase from 2000 to 2001 is statistically significant, suggesting that firms

significantly expanded their 10-K filings in 2001 beyond the normal rate.

        We investigate whether this increase in pages could be due to new disclosure

requirements or accounting standards. For the fiscal 2001 reporting year, a search of SEC

actions affecting 10-K reporting yields two noteworthy changes. First, the SEC required firms to

include an additional table in the 10-K related to components of its equity compensation plan. In

terms of page increases, this requirement should have increased 10-K filings of all firms by one

page. Second, the SEC issued new guidance for the MD&A suggesting that firms pay particular

attention to discussions of off-balance-sheet arrangements, certain investment trading activities

and related-party transactions. This guidance appears to be a direct response to the issues that

arose for Enron. In addition, the FASB issued three new accounting standards during the

period.11 All of the new standards likely affected only the disclosures of firms that had an

impairment loss on their assets. Such losses are generally reflected as special items in the

income statement. We therefore check that our results are robust to a specification that controls

for special items in Section 4.2. In sum, it seems unlikely that the substantial increase in 10-K

disclosures from 2000 to 2001 is primarily the result of new accounting or disclosure

requirements. But even if new requirements were the primary impetus, our analysis that relates

cross-sectional variation in the new disclosures to firms’ cost of capital shocks is still valid as

long as firms’ responses to the new standards are not also closely aligned with the beta shocks.




11
  Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) No. 142, “Goodwill and other intangible assets;” SFAS No.
143, “Accounting for asset retirement obligations;” and SFAS No. 144, “Accounting for the impairment or disposal
of long-lived assets.”



                                                                                                           -16-
         Turning to the sub-sections of the 10-K filing, the MD&A section in 2001 has on average

13.3 pages, which is a 39% increase over 2000. The section with narrative discussions (financial

tables and footnotes) has on average 27 (34) pages, which represents an increase of 22% (18%)

over year 2000. The MD&A, narrative, and financial sections are longer than in 2000 for over

75% of the sample observations.

         Because the Enron scandal involved special purpose vehicles and partnerships that were

run by corporate insiders, we also create a proxy for disclosure changes about related-party

transactions. In doing so, we face two challenges.12 First, while the 10-K requires disclosures on

related-party transactions (Item 13), firms generally satisfy this requirement with a reference to

their proxy statement. We therefore examine both the 10-K and the proxy statement and select

the page count from the appropriate document for each year before computing a change.

Second, disclosures on related-party transactions are often only one or two pages long, which can

create a small-denominator problem when computing percentage changes. Moreover, it creates

the issue that changes of plus or minus one page can produce substantial percentage changes,

even though they are essentially measurement error. For example, a one-page related-party

section that starts at the top of a page is counted as one page, but if it starts in the middle of the

page next year, it may count as two pages. We therefore classify page changes of -1 and +1 as a

zero change.

         After these adjustments, we compute the percentage change in the number of pages

relative to the fiscal 2000 related-party disclosure section ( %ΔREL_PAR ). The page counts are

derived from the 2001 10-K or the proxy statement with a filing date between December 31,

2001 and June 30, 2002. We delete extreme percentage changes that are in the 1st or the 99th
12
  In addition, there is the issue that a very meaningful (but short) disclosure may be to simply state that the firm has
or had no related-party transactions.



                                                                                                                   -17-
percentile. Table 1, Panel A shows that the average related-party disclosure has 5 pages, but the

median is equal to one page only. From 2000 to 2001, the related-party disclosures increase by

19.4% which is statistically different from zero.

        Our next disclosure proxy is the change in the number of words of the fiscal 2001

earnings announcement relative to the fiscal 2000 earnings announcement (%ΔWORDS). The

number of words in each announcement is determined based on a manual search of earnings

announcements for our sample firms on Dow Jones Interactive. We use only announcements on

Business Wire or PR Newswire, as these two sources furnish unmodified press releases. We

delete extreme changes in the word count that are in the 1st and 99th percentile. Panel A of Table

1 reports that the average earnings announcement has 2,003 words (WORDS2001), which is a

15.5% increase over the number of words in the prior year fourth-quarter earnings

announcement.

        The next disclosure proxy is constructed from 8-K filings. Firms are required to use the

form 8-K to notify investors of any unscheduled material event that is important to shareholders

or the SEC. The SEC defines required reportable events (e.g., shutting down a plant), and it also

requires more generally that firms use the 8-K form to disclose material information and to

update any information provided in previous SEC filings.                    Short-window abnormal returns

around 8-K filings suggest that they are informative (e.g., Beneish et al., 2005). In our context,

8-K filings could be used to respond to the Enron shock and alleviate transparency concerns.13



13
   For example, on December 5, 2001, American Express filed an 8-K, which simply reported: “In view of the
situation involving Enron, the company is analyzing its exposure, but preliminarily believes any impact will not be
material.” Another 8-K followed on February 6, 2002 and stated: “First, in terms of the financial impact of Enron's
bankruptcy, back in early December we filed an 8-K indicating that we preliminarily believed the impact from
Enron would not be material. Having now completed our review, this statement is still true. Second, we have also
reviewed our business and accounting practices in light of Enron's recent issues. Based on this review, we can see
no parallels between our businesses and what we understand the practices were at Enron. Here are a few specifics.”



                                                                                                               -18-
        We count each firm’s 8-K filings during the period from October 15, 2001, which is the

beginning of our event period using Window 1, to March 31, 2002 and the same period one year

earlier (8KCOUNT). In these counts, we exclude filings related to the terrorist attacks on

September 11, deleting those that refer to this date or include related words like “terrorist.” We

then compute the difference in the 8K counts from 2000 to 2001 (Δ8KCOUNT). We set all

differences that are larger than three in absolute value equal to 3 and -3, respectively. Table 1,

Panel A shows that sample firms file on average about one 8-K during the period, although the

median number of filings is zero. Excluding 8-K filings related to the events of September 11,

the average change in the number of filings is close to zero.

        Our last disclosure proxy is based on changes in the number of conference calls. As for

the 8-K filings, we count the number of conference calls from October 15, 2001 to March 31,

2002 (CONFCALL) and compute the difference relative to the same window the year earlier

(ΔCALL). Increases (decreases) that are larger than three in absolute value are set equal to 3 (–

3).   Table 1, Panel A shows that, on average, firms hold one conference call over the

measurement period and the number of calls decreases slightly relative to the prior year.

        Table 1, Panel B presents descriptive statistics for the control variables in the analyses.

We use proxies for firm characteristics that are commonly viewed as determinants of firms’

disclosures, i.e., firm size, performance, financing needs and growth opportunities (e.g., Lang

and Lundholm, 1993; Leuz and Wysocki, 2008). We truncate all control variables at the 1st

percentile and the 99th percentile and measure them as of the beginning of the fiscal year, unless

noted otherwise. In untabulated regressions, we confirm that the levels of our disclosure proxies

exhibit meaningful associations with the control variables.

The 8-K continues with a discussion of special purpose entities, off-balance-sheet financing, and employee conflict
of interest, all three of which were problems at Enron.



                                                                                                               -19-
3.4       Cost of capital shocks

          To construct measures of systematic risk in the pre-event period, the event period, and the

pre-report period, we employ a regime-switching model suggested by Lockwood and Kadiyala

(1988).     The method, which nests traditional methods, permits event-induced changes in

systematic risk and provides period-specific beta estimates, which we then use to construct cost

of capital shocks. Separately, we estimate the post-report period beta after the annual report

season from May 1, 2002 to August 31, 2002 using a standard market model.

          Following Lockwood and Kadiyala (1988) and Cyree and DeGennaro (2002), the model

specification is:

                                                 Rit = ai + bit Rmt + ε it                                      (B1)

                      bit = bi1 + bi 2 (T 1 − t )(t − T 2) D1it + bi 3 [(T 2 − T 1) D 2 it + (t − T 1) D1it ]   (B2)


where Rit is the daily holding period return for firm i from CRSP on day t (including dividends)

and Rmt is the value-weighted return on the market from CRSP for day t. Systematic risk varies

as a function of the trading day t (equation B2). T1 and T2 define the event period. They are

specified as the number of trading days in the event period relative to day t. For window 1, our

event period extends from October 15 through December 5 (inclusive), which contains 39 CRSP

trading days, and it is centered on November 8 (t = 0), with T1 set at -19 and T2 set at +19. D1

and D2 are indicator variables that equal one if a trading day falls into the event period or the

pre-report period, respectively.14


14
   The event window includes the third quarter earnings announcement period. We repeat the estimation excluding
return observations on the earnings announcement date and the previous day. The estimates of bˆi1 and bˆi 3 are
virtually identical. The exclusion of returns on these days has a bigger impact on bˆi 2 but even then it is
economically small (at the 5th digit) and the estimates are not significantly different. The results presented in the
paper are based on the estimates that include the returns on the third quarter earnings announcement date.



                                                                                                                 -20-
       From the model parameters, we create separate cost of capital measures for the pre-event,

event, and pre-report periods. First, systematic risk for the pre-event period (BETA_PRE) is

equal to bˆi1 . This parameter is a constant throughout the pre-event period. This estimate serves

as a benchmark for the firm’s beta prior to the transparency shock. During the event period,

when D1 = 1 and D2 = 0, systematic risk is determined by the parameter estimates for

bˆi1 , bˆi 2 , and bˆi 3 . The quadratic specification allows for the initial shock to the cost of equity

capital to be either positive or negative. The parameter bˆi 2 captures the direction and the

curvature of the initial shock. The quadratic specification also allows for (but does not require) a

recovery of the shock during the event period. Thus, the quadratic form of the regime-switching

model can accommodate the impact of interim disclosure responses on firms’ costs of capital

during the event period.      We confirm in Section 5 that the curvature and firms’ interim

disclosures are, in fact, related as hypothesized.

       We compute the event beta (BETA_EVT) at day t = 0, which represents the peak given

the quadratic specification. This beta is computed from (B2) by setting t = 0 and recognizing

that our event window is symmetric and hence T2 = -1*T1:


                                βˆi 2 = bˆi1 + bˆi 2 (T 2) 2 + bˆi 3T 2                             (B3)


       After the shock and during the pre-report period, systematic risk is given by:


                                βˆ i 3 = bˆi1 + bˆi 3 (T 2 − T 1)                                   (B4)


       Like the pre-event beta, the pre-report or remaining beta (BETA_REM) is constrained to

be a constant across the period.




                                                                                                    -21-
         To provide intuition for the parameters, Figure 1 illustrates time-series patterns of

systematic risk for the pre-event period, the event period, and the pre-report period under

alternative estimates for bˆi 2 and bˆi 3 . Panels A through C illustrate the behavior of systematic risk

in the cases of HIGH positive bˆi 2 (equals 0.100), LOW positive bˆi 2 (equals 0.002), and negative

bˆi 2 (equals -0.002), respectively. Within each panel, we present estimates of systematic risk in

the pre-report period for five levels of bˆi 3 . In all three panels, the pre-event beta estimates are

constant over the period. The pre-report betas also are constant throughout the period, but they

can be higher or lower than the pre-event beta. When bˆi 3 is positive, the pre-report beta is higher

than the pre-event beta. Furthermore, the pre-report beta can be higher than the event beta, even

when bˆi 2 is positive, if bˆi 3T 2 > bˆi 2 (T 2) 2 .

         Before computing the shocks, we truncate the beta estimates in each period at the 1st and

the 99th percentile. In addition, we drop observations for which the beta appears to unstable as

indicated by a significantly positive estimate in the pre-event period but a significantly negative

estimate in the post period (or vice versa). This criterion eliminates 20 observations but does not

materially affect our results. We then use beta level estimates over the three periods to create

proxies for changes in firms’ cost of capital (i.e., shocks) as a result of the Enron events. We

define the initial shock (INIT_SHOCK) as the difference between the event beta in (B3) and the

pre-event beta: INIT_SHOCK = BETA_EVT - BETA_PRE. Recalling that BETA_EVT is the

peak of the quadratic beta estimate, the initial shock metric captures the extent to which a firm’s

systematic risk increases during the Enron crisis.               We define the remaining shock

(REM_SHOCK) as the difference between the pre-report beta and the pre-event beta, i.e.,

REM_SHOCK = BETA_REM - BETA_PRE. The remaining shock captures the extent to which



                                                                                                    -22-
a firm’s systematic risk continues to be elevated after the Enron crisis and the firm’s immediate

responses, but before the 10-K is filed.

       Table 2, Panel A, provides descriptive statistics for the parameter estimates, systematic

risk and the beta shocks based on Window 1. The average pre-event beta for the sample firms is

0.670 (and close to 1 computing a value-weighted average).         The shock variables exhibit

considerable cross-sectional variation and a reasonable parameter range. As the average (value-

weighted) beta for the economy is by definition equal to 1 at any given point in time, it is

expected that the average shock is relatively close to zero. Nevertheless, firms with negative

beta shocks may experience an increase in the cost of capital if the equity risk premium

increases. Regardless, the beta shocks provide an appropriate cross-sectional ranking.

       Panel B reports the average initial shock (INIT_SHOCK) and the average remaining

shock (REM_SHOCK) by 2-digit SIC industry code and the proportions of positive observations

in each industry. The industries with the largest initial shocks are Furniture (SIC 25), Building

products (SIC 15), and Auto dealers/gas stations (SIC 55). Industries that have a high proportion

(i.e., greater than 80%) of firms with positive remaining shocks are Furniture (SIC 25),

Building/Construction (15), Personal services (72), Apparel (SIC 23), Oil and gas extraction

(SIC 13), Motion Pictures (78), and Water transportation (SIC 44). In the Appendix, we further

characterize the shock variables and conduct various validity checks.


4.     Analysis of disclosure responses to the cost of capital shocks

4.1    Main results

       The first analysis relates the percentage changes in the 10-K page count to the cost of

capital shocks. We implement the following specification of the general model in equation (1):




                                                                                            -23-
                    %ΔPAGES = α + β S SHOCK + β E BETA _ PRE +
                                                                                                                 (2)
                                     δ 1 SIZE + δ 2 ROA + δ 3 DERATIO + δ 4 MB + δ 5 PPE + ε PGS


        We estimate the model including either the initial shock (INIT_SHOCK) or the

remaining shock (REM_SHOCK).                  Based on Section 2, we predict a positive association

between the initial shock or the remaining shock and the percent change in pages.15

        We include the pre-event beta (BETA_PRE) to account for the possibility that firms with

higher pre-period systematic risk are simply more responsive. In addition, we include control

variables for commonly cited determinants of disclosure such as firm size, performance, leverage

and financing needs (Lang and Lundholm, 2000; Leuz and Wysocki, 2008). The proxies for

these constructs are the natural log of total assets at December 31, 2000 (LASSETS2000); return

of operating income on average assets for the year ended December 31, 2000 (ROA2000); the

debt-equity ratio at December 31, 2000, which is the book value of long-term debt scaled by the

market value of equity plus the book value of long-term debt and preferred shares

(DERATIO2000); the market-book ratio at December 31, 2000 (MB2000) where observations with

a negative book value of equity are set to missing; and the ratio of property, plant and equipment,

net, to total assets (PPE/TA2000) as a proxy for capital intensity. An extended model also

includes changes in several of these variables from 2000 to 2001. All models include industry-

fixed effects based on one-digit SIC codes and a separate indicator variable for firms in Enron-

related industries (defined as SIC2 equal to 13, 29 or 49).

        Table 3, Panel A presents results for eight model specifications. As the Enron shock is

likely to affect firms in an industry similarly, our inferences are based on standard errors that are


15
  The relation between the initial shock and 10-K disclosure changes may be attenuated if firms address the shocks
in the interim. This issue, which does not arise for the remaining shock, is discussed in more detail in Section 5.



                                                                                                               -24-
clustered at the two-digit SIC level.16 The results for models (1) - (4), which include the initial

shock variable and four variations of control variables, show a positive and significant relation

between the initial shock (INIT_SHOCK) and the percentage change in the page count of the 10-

K. The results for models (5) - (8), which include the remaining shock variable and four

variations of control variables, show that the relation between the remaining shock

(REM_SHOCK) and page count changes also is significantly positive. These results are robust

to alternative sets of control variables. In particular, the results are similar and the inferences the

same if we use the market value in computing firm size, employ contemporaneous, rather than

lagged controls, and include only changes in the control variables in the model.

           The positive associations for the initial and remaining shock with the disclosure changes

in the 10-K are consistent with our hypotheses and the notion that firms’ disclosures reduce their

cost of capital. Although we do not make ex-ante predictions about the control variables, the

results are consistent across all eight models and accord with our intuition. Firms with higher

pre-event period betas, deteriorating operating performance, and with greater and growing firm

size increase their 10-K disclosures more.

           Standard computations of the marginal effect of the cost of capital shock on 10-K page

changes from Models 2 and 4 suggest that an initial shock (or remaining shock) equal to the

inter-quartile range of the pre-event beta is associated with an increase in 1.2 pages, which is 2%

of the median number of 10-K pages. While this effect may appear small, we emphasize that

judging the increase against the total number of pages may not be appropriate because the 10-K

contains many pages that are boilerplate and hence uninformative. Thus, a 2% increase in the

page count could represent a substantial increase in relevant information to investors. In fact, as


16
     Alternatively, we cluster our standard errors by auditor and obtain very similar inferences.



                                                                                                    -25-
a percentage, the page increase is much larger if we gauge it against key (or relevant) subsections

of the 10-K (e.g., DISCUSS2001, FS2001 in Table 1) or compute the marginal effect for key

subsections (e.g., %ΔFS in Table 3, Panel B). Moreover, the beta shocks are likely to be quite

noisy, which could substantially attenuate the coefficient magnitudes. To gauge the effect of

measurement error on the coefficients, we follow common practice and run reverse regressions,

essentially switching the independent and dependent variables. These regressions (not tabulated)

suggest that a 10% change in beta alone could explain the average page change in our sample.

Thus, there are several pieces of evidence suggesting that the disclosure changes we observe are

economically significant.17

         We next analyze the determinants of page count increases in specific sections of the 10-K

that are likely to contain important relevant disclosures: %ΔMDA , %ΔFS , %ΔDISCUSS and

%ΔREL_PAR (see Section 3.3 for details). Table 3, Panel B, presents the results for models of

these four disclosure change variables on the initial shock (INIT_SHOCK) or the remaining

shock (REM_SHOCK) and the levels of the same control variables and industry dummies as in

Panel A (Model 2).18 We find that the initial shock is positively associated with the page count

changes for all four disclosure variables but the relation is statistically significantly for % ΔFS

only. However, the coefficients are still fairly close to the coefficient on the initial shock in

Panel A (Model 2) and, for %ΔMDA and %ΔDISCUSS , the p-values of the coefficients are

close to conventional significance levels, suggesting that the reduced sample size and lack of

power account for the drop in significance. The remaining shock is significantly associated with

three of the four disclosure changes, i.e., % ΔFS , % ΔDISCUSS and %ΔREL_PAR .

17
   In addition, we document in Section 6 that firms’ disclosure changes are associated with economically significant
beta declines (and also abnormal volume reactions around the 10-K filings).
18
   The results are similar but stronger when we use model 1 and weaker but consistent when we include changes in
the control variables (model 3).



                                                                                                                -26-
       Next, we estimate the same models as in Table 3 using the percentage change in the word

count of the earnings announcement in 2001 relative to 2000 (%ΔWORDS) as our disclosure

response variable. In these regressions, the cost of capital shocks do not exhibit a positive

relation, are generally insignificant and the p-values are often far from conventional significance

levels. For brevity, we do not tabulate these results. We subject the word count proxy to

numerous refinements, e.g., we adjust the word counts for the occurrence of unusual corporate

events and by industry; we convert the percentage changes into a simple variable indicating

increases, decreases and approximately no change in the size of the earnings announcement; we

focus on large changes only, drop small earnings announcements (< 500 words), and use log

changes. These refinements do not change the conclusion that the shocks do not exhibit a

positive association. Thus, it does not appear that noise in the earnings announcement proxy

generates this (non-)result. While we are cautious about interpreting this finding, it is possible

that earnings announcements are simply not well suited to address the transparency concerns that

arose from the Enron collapse. They tend to be rather brief and they are not audited or subject to

the same enforcement as official SEC filings. Another (but more minor) issue is that firms’

earnings announcements and our pre-report beta estimation may overlap, which could result in

confounding effects.


4.2    Robustness tests

       We subject the results in the previous section to a large battery of robustness tests to

address a number of potential concerns. First, in an effort to rule out spurious correlations as an

explanation for the results, we examine whether the initial shock and remaining shock variables

have any explanatory power for the percent change in page counts from 1999 to 2000. They do

not; the coefficients of interest in these “placebo” regressions are close to zero, as they should be.



                                                                                                 -27-
        Second, in Panel C of Table 3, we address a number of concerns about the use of betas to

measure cost of capital shocks. For brevity, we report only the key coefficients of interest, but

the models include the full set of control variables from Models 2 and 6 in Panel A. In the first

model, we use beta shocks derived from a linear market model. While quadratic beta estimates

over the event period are conceptually preferred and better suited for our setting (e.g., to capture

interim responses), we obtain similar results using linear beta estimates, which is reassuring.19

        Another potential concern is that beta estimates for infrequently traded stocks are

downward biased (Scholes and Williams, 1977). As a result, the estimated beta shocks may in

part reflect differences in liquidity, which matters because liquidity and corporate disclosure are

known to be related (e.g., Welker, 1995; Healy et al., 1999; Leuz and Verrecchia, 2000). To

address this potential issue, we examine the relation between %ΔPAGES and the two beta

shocks for the subsample of stocks with a share price above $5 as they are less likely to have

non-synchronous returns. As reported in Panel C, the $5 restriction reduces the sample size to

1,387 observations, but the results are very similar and the inferences are the same (see Model

2). The results are also robust to controlling for the log of average daily volume as a proxy for

the downward bias in the beta estimates (not tabulated).20

        Next, we address the concern that changes in the market’s expectations about future cash

flows as a result of the Enron scandal or the September 11 terrorist attacks unduly affect our

findings. By using changes in beta, rather than abnormal returns, we should in principle separate

cost of capital changes and updated assessments of future cash flows. Furthermore, our primary


19
  See Kumar et al. (2008) for a similar analysis of pre- and post-event betas using a linear market model.
20
  Another way to gauge the issue is to analyze the correlation between the residuals from the switching regime
model and volume. This analysis (untabulated) reveals that the correlation is on average small, approximately 5-6%,
with approximately 20-30% of the correlations being significant and positive and 5-15% of the correlations being
significant and negative. The correlations are similar across the pre-event, event, and pre-report periods.



                                                                                                              -28-
sample excludes firms that potentially had severe cash flow shocks due to the September 11

terrorist attacks. Nevertheless, we include the revision in the analysts’ consensus forecast for

next year’s earnings, computed from August 2001 to December 2001, as a proxy for changes in

cash flow expectations. The coefficient estimate on this variable is significantly negative,

indicating that firms with larger downward revisions provide more disclosures.                             However,

controlling for the forecast revisions does not alter our inferences for the beta shocks and, more

importantly, including this proxy for changes in cash flow expectations does not attenuate the

coefficients on INIT_SHOCK and REM_SHOCK as it would if our results were primarily driven

by changes in cash flow expectations.21

         Model 4 in Panel C includes a control variable for idiosyncratic return volatility to

address the concern that (a) the quadratic beta model insufficiently separates systematic and

idiosyncratic components of risk and (b) that stocks with higher volatility are simply also more

responsive in their disclosures. We measure idiosyncratic volatility as the standard deviation of

the residual from a linear market model over the pre-event period. The results are similar and the

inferences the same if we use raw volatility over the pre-event period or idiosyncratic volatility

over the event period as controls.

         We also perform several robustness checks related to specific variable definitions (results

not tabulated). First, we adjust the changes in page count and word count for the existence of

events that may reflect a fundamental change in the firm’s operations during the period that is

correlated with both its beta and its required disclosures. For example, discontinued operations

may be associated with changes in systematic risk and it is likely to be associated with changes

in page counts given the SEC disclosure requirements associated with discontinued operations.

21
  This result also holds if we use the two-year ahead consensus forecast revision, rather than next year’s revision.
Simply controlling for analyst following does not alter our findings or inferences either.



                                                                                                                  -29-
Our reviews of financial statements as well as SEC disclosure requirements suggest that the

existence of the following irregular items (IRREGITEM) in the current year and two previous

years can affect the length of the financial statements: discontinued operations, new segments,

extraordinary items, accounting changes, certain special items (specifically litigation reserves or

restructuring charges), and acquisition activity. We create seven indicator variables equal to one

if the firm has evidence of these events based on Compustat data for the three years 1999, 2000,

and 2001. We regress the changes in the page count on these indicator variables and use the

residuals from the following model (firm subscripts omitted) as dependent variable in our

regressions in Table 3, Panel A:


                                              2001    7
                           %ΔPAGES = d +      ∑ ∑k
                                             y =1999 j =1
                                                            jy   IRREGITEM jy



       While these adjustments provide a useful sensitivity check, it is a priori not obvious that

the adjusted proxies dominate the unadjusted page (or word) changes.            The transparency

concerns after Enron and the cost of capital shocks may have induced firms to make decisions

that would result in such items. For instance, “coming clean” on certain transactions is likely to

result in extraordinary or special items.    Nevertheless, our results are unaffected by these

adjustments. That is, the positive association between the cost of capital shocks and the page

changes continues to be significant and, more importantly, the coefficients of key interest are not

materially altered, indicating that unusual corporate events and fundamental changes in the firm

are not responsible for our findings.

       Finally, we include controls for past performance, specifically for past losses as they may

trigger additional language in firms’ earnings announcements and 10-K filings (Li, 2008).

Models (2) and (6) already include both ROA2000 and other models in Panel A of Table 3 include


                                                                                              -30-
the change in ROA from 2000 to 2001. But given that operating performance generally lags

stock returns, we expand these models to include the cumulative stock return over the pre-event

period, the event or the pre-report period. In addition, we include an indicator variable for loss

firms (in 2001 and, alternatively, 2000). The results are robust to the inclusion of these variables

and the inferences remain the same.


4.3    Cross-sectional analysis of the 10-K responses

       In this section, we present a cross-sectional analysis of firms’ 10-K responses. As noted

previously, we predict cross-sectional variation in the expected benefits to expanding the 10-K

disclosures, which should lead to cross-sectional variation in firms’ disclosure responses.

Exploiting this cross-sectional heterogeneity should improve identification and increase the

confidence in our earlier findings.

       We argue in Section 2 that we expect the strongest disclosure response for firms that have

high external financing needs and larger growth opportunities. These firms are more likely to be

sensitive to shocks to their cost of capital as they are expected to be more frequently accessing

capital markets. We also expect firms with positive shocks to respond more strongly, as the cost

savings to decreasing disclosure may be small, and disclosure decreases may in fact increase

expected litigation costs.

       Therefore, we estimate our main page change model separately for firms with positive

shocks and a high sensitivity to cost of capital shocks vs. the (residual) sample of firms that have

either a negative shock or low financing needs. This specification allows the control variables to

vary across subsamples and hence is more general than an interaction term. We use two proxies

to identify firms that are more likely to be sensitive to cost of capital shocks because they have

high financing needs: 1) Firms with an above-median investment cash flow during fiscal 2001



                                                                                               -31-
scaled by total assets, and 2) firms with an above-median difference between the average growth

rate over two years and the maximum growth rate that can be financed by internal funds.

Following Demirgüc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998), we compute the maximum internally-

financed growth as ROA/(1–ROA). We consider alternative partitioning variables for firms’

financing needs and growth opportunities, e.g., splitting by the market-to-book ratio, and obtain

similar results. There are 946 (820) observations with a positive initial (remaining) shock and

922 (1,048) observations with a negative one. We do not have data for the financing needs

variables for all firms and hence have fewer observations than in Table 3. All models include the

same control variables as specifications (2) and (6) in Table 3. The coefficients for the control

variables are not presented to conserve table space.

       Table 4, Panel A presents the cross-sectional results for %ΔPAGES.            Columns (1)

through (4) present results using above-median investment cash flow to identify firms that are

more sensitive to positive cost of capital shocks. Columns (5) through (8) present results using

above-median external financing needs to identify high-sensitivity firms.         The coefficient

estimates on INIT_SHOCK in models (1), (2) and (6) are significant at the 10% level or better.

The coefficient estimate on REM_SHOCK is significant in model (7). More importantly, the

coefficients on the shock variables, INIT_SHOCK and REM_SHOCK, for the group with

positive shocks and high financing needs are much larger in magnitude than either the

coefficients for the residual group or the coefficients on the shocks in Panel A of Table 3. We

test whether the differences in the coefficients on the shocks are statistically significant across

the two subsamples and can reject the null hypothesis for models (7) and (8). For models (1) and

(2), the p-value is close to conventional significance levels (0.14), especially when considering

that we cluster our standard errors at the industry level and hence draw conservative inferences.




                                                                                              -32-
        In Panel B, we report the same model specifications for the page changes in the MD&A.

We observe the same patterns for the coefficients on %ΔMDA as for the 10-K page changes.

That is, the estimated coefficient on %ΔMDA for firms with positive shocks and high financing

needs exceeds the respective coefficient for the residual group in all cases. With the exception of

the first model, the shock coefficients and their differences are not statistically significant but

their magnitudes far exceed those in Panel B of Table 3, suggesting that the small sample size

and hence lack of power are primarily responsible for the low t-statistics.

        On November 29, 2001, the SEC expanded its investigation to include Enron’s auditor,

Arthur Andersen LLP (AA). The audit firm was indicted for obstruction of justice in 2002 and

eventually went out of business as a result of the Enron collapse. We predict that AA clients are

more likely to experience shocks to their cost of capital because of concerns over AA’s

credibility and hence are more likely to respond by increasing their disclosure.22 Consistent with

this expectation, Panel C shows that AA clients exhibit larger coefficients on the initial shock

using %ΔPAGES, %ΔΜDA and %ΔREL_PAR. The difference in the coefficients between AA

clients and non-AA clients is statistically significant for the 10-K page changes and the related

party disclosure changes.

        In a final set of cross-sectional tests (untabulated), we drop the beta shocks and the pre-

event beta from the models in Panel A of Table 4 and re-estimate the page change models

splitting the sample into firms with high and low financing needs. We then compare the

constants across the subsamples. The idea behind this analysis is to test whether firms that ex

ante are predicted to be more affected by the Enron shock do in fact increase their disclosures

22
  As discussed in Ball (2009), the Enron scandal was a more severe blow to the credibility of AA audit clients than
prior financial reporting scandals had been for other audit firms because AA’s reputation was already tarnished by
prior scandals including Waste Management and Sunbeam, and because there were allegations that the Enron audit
deficiencies involved top level management at AA and not just individuals.



                                                                                                               -33-
more than other firms. This analysis does not rely on the beta shocks and is merely built on the

premise that the Enron scandal posed an exogenous transparency shock. We find that firms with

larger financing needs, as measured by the same proxies as in Panel A, exhibit significantly

larger disclosure increases, which supports our inferences.


5.     Analysis of the role of interim disclosures

       In this section, we analyze the relation between the cost of capital shocks and firms’

interim disclosure responses. First, we include proxies for firms’ interim disclosures as controls

in our 10-K page changes regressions. We use changes in 8-K filings, conference call activity,

the length of the earnings announcement as well as a summary measure of the firm’s response to

the Enron shock derived from the regime switching model, i.e., the parameter estimate for bˆi 2 . If

interim disclosures and 10-K filings are complements, we expect a positive relation between the

interim disclosure and the 10-K page changes. Moreover, introducing the interim disclosures

should strengthen the relation between the remaining shock and the 10-K page response if the

two disclosures are complements because the decline in beta due to the interim disclosure occurs

with the expectation that firms still respond at the 10-K. Thus, controlling for the interim

disclosures should help the relation between REM_SHOCK and %ΔPAGES.

       We expand Models (2) and (6) from Table 3 to include proxies for the four interim

disclosure proxies. Table 5 reports the results from these regressions. Models (1) and (2)

include Δ8KCOUNT and Models (3) and (4) include ΔCALL. The coefficient estimates on

INIT_SHOCK and REM_SHOCK are comparable to Table 3 and remain significant in both

cases. The change in the number of 8-K filings is positively associated with the percentage

change in 10-K pages. The association between the change in the number of conference calls

and the change in the 10-K page counts is negative but not significant. Models (5) and (6)


                                                                                               -34-
include the percent change in word count in the annual earnings announcement (%ΔWORDS).

The association between this change and the change in the 10-K page count is positive but again

not significant. This result is consistent with our earlier analyses relating changes in firms’

earnings announcements to the beta shocks and suggests that changes in earnings announcements

are not suited to address investors’ transparency concerns as a result of the Enron collapse.

       Model (7) includes the bˆi 2 parameter from the regime-switching model as a proxy for

firms’ immediate responses to the initial shock and, hence, we estimate this model for the

remaining shock only. As illustrated in Figure 1, bˆi 2 captures the direction of the beta shock and

the curvature of quadratic event beta. One explanation for this curvature is that a firm has

responded to the initial shock, for example, through interim disclosures or other actions that

enhance a firm’s credibility, such as a change in dividend policy. In this sense, bˆi 2 is a summary

measure of a firm’s responses to the initial shock and should capture the effects of all actions the

firm takes during the event period, regardless of whether we can separately identify or measure

them. The downside of this measure, however, is that bˆi 2 may also capture changes in the cost

of capital unrelated to a firm’s actions, including recoveries in the cost of capital due to

information transfers from other firms.      However, as long as these other changes are not

systematically biased, they should introduce only noise into our analysis.

       The percent change in 10-K pages has a positive and significant association with bˆi 2 ,

indicating that there are complementarities between a firm’s immediate responses to the shock

and the disclosure response in the 10-K filing. Moreover, including bˆi 2 significantly increases

the coefficient on REM_SHOCK (using a Chow test), which is expected if interim responses and

the 10-K are complements.




                                                                                                -35-
         Next, we directly examine the relation between firms’ interim disclosure responses and

the cost of capital shocks. Table 6 is the analog to the analysis of the 10-K responses in Table 3

using the two immediate disclosure responses as dependent variables. Model (1) in Table 6

shows that the association between changes in firms’ 8-K filings and the initial shock is positive

and significant, suggesting that firms respond to the shock with the release of 8-K filings. As the

measurement of the change in 8-K filings and the event period overlap, we re-run the model

measuring the change in 8-K filings starting in the middle of the event period (i.e., November 8),

so that the shock is measured largely before the disclosure response. Again, the association

between the shock and the 8-K response is positive and significant. Next, to see whether the

additional 8-K filings help mitigate the cost of capital shocks, we restrict the change in 8-K

filings to those that occur over the second-half of the event period, i.e., after the peak of the event

period beta and up to the start of the pre-event period (i.e., December 6, 2001). Model (2) shows

that the coefficient on REM_SHOCK is negative and significant, consistent with the idea that

immediate 8-K responses mitigate the initial shock.23

         Models (3) and (4) perform the same tests for the change in the number of conference

calls. We do not find a positive association with the initial shock, but the coefficient on the

remaining shock is negative and close to conventional significance levels (p=0.185, two-sided),

which is consistent with the results for the 8-K findings. Moreover, the latter association is

significantly negative at the 1% level if we use changes in the conference calls over the entire

event window, i.e., from October 15 to December 6, 2001.24



23
   We also confirm that the decline in the beta from the event period peak to the pre-report beta is significantly
related to the change in 8-K filings.
24
   We also estimate seemingly unrelated regressions using both interim disclosure variables simultaneously to
account for dependencies among them and obtain the same inferences.



                                                                                                                     -36-
           Models (5) and (6) estimate the relation between the interim disclosure responses and the

bˆi 2   parameter from the regime switching model to see whether the curvature in the quadratic

event beta is indeed related to firms’ interim responses. Models (5) and (6) show a positive

association for both interim disclosures, consistent with the idea that the curvature reflects

among other things firms’ immediate responses, but the relation is significant only for the

additional 8-K filings. The weaker findings for the conference calls could stem from the fact that

they are purely voluntary and not subject to SEC review.

           Taken together, the results in Tables 5 and 6 suggest that some firms respond

immediately to the cost of capital shocks and that these interim responses are complements to

10-K disclosures. The results also highlight that using a quadratic beta estimate during the event

period is an important feature of our analysis. We intentionally define the event period to be

long enough to capture the series of Enron-related events that led to the transparency crisis.

However, an extended event period increases the likelihood of confounding events, in particular,

due to firms’ responses to the initial shock. Our regime-switching model addresses this issue by

being flexible enough to capture these interim responses in the beta estimation.


6.         Analysis of market reactions to 10-K filings

           In our final set of analyses, we examine whether firms’ disclosure changes have

subsequent market reactions and whether they address mitigate the cost of capital shocks.

Finding such reactions would corroborate the results for firms’ interim disclosures in Table 6 and

address the concern that firms simply increase disclosures to reduce litigation risk or to thwart

future regulation but do not provide information that is useful to investors. In relating changes in

disclosure to subsequent changes in the cost of capital, the tests in this section are similar to




                                                                                               -37-
those in traditional disclosure studies, except that the disclosure changes in our study are induced

by an exogenous information-related shock.

        We analyze both post 10-K filing changes in systematic risk and short-window abnormal

volume responses to the 10-K filing. We begin with the beta response. We define the beta

response (BRESPONSE) as the change in systematic risk from the event period to the post-filing

period. We estimate the post-filing period beta (BETA_POST) after the annual report season

from May 1, 2002 to August 31, 2002 using a standard market model. Thus, BRESPONSE =

BETA_EVT - BETA_POST. A positive value of the beta response variable suggests a greater

recovery of the beta relative to the peak level of systematic risk during the event period. We are

able to estimate BRESPONSE for 1,797 observations.

        The measure of abnormal volume is a firm-specific measure (Asthana et al., 2004) that

has been applied specifically in the context of 10-K filings. We define abnormal volume

( ABN _ VOLit ) for firm i on day t as:


                                              VOLit − μ i ( VOLid )
                                  ABN _ VOL =i

                                                σ i ( VOLid )
                                             t




where VOLit represents daily trading volume for firm i on day t. Consistent with Asthana et al.

(2004), we define the non-filing period as the 45-day window from 49 days before to five days

before the 10-K filing date. We measure the mean (μ) and standard deviation (σ) of daily trading

volume for each firm i over this non-filing period and compute abnormal volume for a five-day

event window around the 10-K filing date (-1,+3).

        Table 7, Panel A presents the analysis for the beta response using various combinations

of control variables. We use firm characteristics that are usually related to the cost of capital,



                                                                                               -38-
such as size, the market-to-book ratio and leverage as controls (in both levels and changes). We

find that the percentage change in the 10-K page is significantly related to the decline in beta for

all three models. Gauging the magnitude of the effects suggests that the mean page increase is

associated with a 5% decline in beta. These findings are consistent with the interpretation that

the 10-K disclosure responses are useful to investors and alleviate the beta shocks.

       Table 7, Panel B presents the analysis of abnormal volume. The models include control

variables consistent with Asthani et al. (2004). In particular, we control for last year’s abnormal

volume response to the 10-K to ensure that any effect for %ΔPAGES stems indeed from the

increase in pages and not a cross-sectional difference in firms’ volume responses to the 10-K.

Furthermore, we include a control variable capturing the delay in the filing of the 10-K, which

Asthana et al. (2004) document as being related to the abnormal volume response. We find that

the %ΔPAGES is significantly related to the abnormal volume reaction in all three models. This

finding is consistent with the interpretation that the additional disclosures in the 10-K are

informative to investors and hence lead to greater turnover at the filing of the 10-K.


7.     Conclusions

       In this paper, we analyze the relation between disclosure and the cost of capital using an

exogenous, information-related cost of capital shock created by the Enron scandal in Fall 2001.

We begin with tests that have the opposite structure of the typical research design. In reversing

the tests and using an exogenous shock, we mitigate endogeneity concerns in traditional cross-

sectional disclosure studies, especially with respect to omitted factors that jointly determine

firms’ disclosure choices and their cost of capital. Our analysis is based on an event-study

technique that allows us to estimate shocks to firms’ betas as well as accommodate subsequent

changes in beta due to firms’ interim responses to the transparency crisis.


                                                                                               -39-
       Our analysis shows that beta shocks around the Enron scandal are associated with

increased disclosure. Firms expand the number of pages of their annual 10-K filings, notably the

sections containing the narrative disclosures like the MD&A and related-party transactions as

well as the financial statements and footnotes.       The increase in disclosure is particularly

pronounced for firms that have positive cost of capital shocks and larger financing needs and for

firms that have larger credibility issues. We also find that firms respond with additional interim

disclosures (e.g., 8-K filings), which have an immediate impact on the firm’s cost of capital. We

document that the 10-K disclosures are complementary to the interim disclosures; firms provide

them even though the interim disclosures already reduce the beta shock. Finally, we show that

firms’ 10-K disclosure responses have significant subsequent market reactions (e.g., abnormal

volume) and are effective in reducing the cost of capital shocks.

       These results complement prior disclosure studies by explicitly linking information-

related cost of capital shocks to firms’ disclosure responses. In doing so, we increase the

empirical support for the fundamental link between disclosure and firms’ cost of capital. Our

study also provides novel evidence that firms respond to shocks to the credibility of their

financial reports. This evidence is important as it shows that firms can mitigate the impact of a

wider transparency crisis and that firm-specific disclosures can influence the cost of capital. We

emphasize, however, that this result should not be used to justify additional disclosure

requirements as firms that voluntarily responded more to the cost of capital shock were those

with the greatest hypothesized benefits.




                                                                                             -40-
                                           Appendix

       Section A.1 describes Enron-related events between October 16, 2001 and January 26,

2002. From these, we identify seven potential sets of pre-event – event – pre-report windows

that are outlined in Section A.2. The final section of the Appendix reports the results of an ex

post analysis of the beta estimates over the various windows to assess their validity.


A.1 Event dates related to Enron

       We identify potentially significant events from published timelines of the Enron scandal

(e.g., Platts, 2002; Washington Post, 2002), and from independent searches of news reports.

Potentially important event dates in the context of our study are those that changed investors’

prior beliefs about the likelihood or magnitude of private information about the sample firm.

       We identify three types of event dates. First, we identify six Enron-specific events that

are also indicators that financial reporting or corporate governance problems may be widespread.

Oct. 16: Enron first announces its huge losses and hints of conflict-of-interest problems with its
         partnerships.
Oct.22: Enron announces that the SEC has launched an inquiry.
Oct 29: The SEC moves its inquiry to DC signaling a higher likelihood of securities violations.
Oct 31: The SEC initiates a formal investigation.
Nov 8: Enron restates earnings back to 1997.
Nov 29: The SEC’s investigation is expanded to include Arthur Andersen LLP.

       These events are specific to Enron, but they are not necessarily the most significant for

Enron based on an analysis of its stock returns. This set does not include events such as a credit

rating downgrade of Enron’s debt or a takeover offer of Enron which are significant for Enron

but unlikely (in our view) to have broad implications for information problems at other firms.

       Second, we identify events that directly indicate that the information problems at Enron

are expected to be systemic.




                                                                                                -41-
Nov 19: Representative John Dingell requests that the Public Oversight Board (POB) review
        Andersen’s audits of Enron
Nov 29: SEC Chairman Harvey Pitt calls pro forma earnings "unstructured and undisciplined"
        and suggests that the SEC is focusing attention on misleading financial reporting.
Dec 4: The Big-five firms pledge to work together to address financial reporting problems.
Jan. 7: It is reported that the Big Five have petitioned the SEC to improve disclosure
        regulation.
Jan 9:  The Senate Banking Committee, headed by Sen. Paul Sarbanes, announces its plans to
        hold a hearing Feb. 12 to examine accounting and investor protections. The US Justice
        Department's fraud section also announces that it will form a special task force to
        examine the collapse of Enron.

         Third, we identify financial press discussions that suggest that the Enron scandal was not

an isolated problem but rather an indicator of corporate transparency and corporate governance

problems.

Nov 5:  “What Enron’s Financial Reports Did – and Didn’t – Reveal --- Auditor Could Face
        Scrutiny on Clarity of Financial Reports” (Wall Street Journal, p. C1)
Nov 8: In a DJ Newswire column, the author speculates that Enron’s partnership accounting
        problems, which resulted in significant earnings restatements, could push the FASB to
        prioritize its projects on SPEs from having standards of ownership including
        provisions for minimum ownership by unaffiliated outsiders to control-based
        standards. The article also questions Arthur Andersen’s responsibilities given the
        restatements.
Nov 26: Business Week cover story is “CONFUSED ABOUT EARNINGS? You're not alone.
        Here's what companies should do--and what investors need to know.”
Jan 26: “Trying not to be the next Enron, companies scrutinize practices” appears on p.1 of
        the New York Times Saturday business section.

         These articles are not events per se. However, it is possible (or even likely) that the

articles affected public opinion about the systemic nature of the transparency problem. Existing

research has shown that articles in the financial press do affect investor opinions (e.g., Foster,

1979; Foster, 1987; Chang and Suk, 1998; Pruitt et al. 2000; Huberman and Regev, 2001). It is

also possible that the articles reflect public opinion rather than create it, which is another reason

to search for and consider these dates. We end our search for such articles in January 2001

because that is the start of the earnings announcement season.




                                                                                                   -42-
A.2 Identification of event windows

       Figure A1 shows the value-weighted and equal-weighted index from August 1, 2001

through February 28, 2002 and provides some context for the window selection. The figure

illustrates the high volatility period associated with the September 11th terrorist attacks. The

arrows point to the start dates and the end dates that we consider for the event period.


                                    Figure A1: Index returns




       We identify seven combinations of windows to estimate systematic risk for the pre-event

period (BETA_PRE), the event period (BETA_EVT), and the pre-report period (BETA_REM).

In the timelines below, T1 and T2 define the endpoints of the event period. The center date of

the event period is noted for each window. In all scenarios, the end of the pre-event period is

August 31, 2001. There is a discontinuity between the end of the pre-event period and the

beginning of the event period ranging from 44 to 62 days. The discontinuity allows us to avoid




                                                                                           -43-
the week-long trading halt and subsequent high volatility period associated with September 11.

In addition, the discontinuity is advantageous because the pre-event period is not contaminated

when we do not properly identify the start of the event period. The discontinuity does not affect

the estimation procedure.

                              Alternative Windows for the Beta Estimation

                                          T1                          T2
                 −−−−−−−β1−−−−−−          −−−−−−−−−β2−−−−−−−−−−        −−−−−−−−β3−−−−−−−−
  Window 1:                                         Nov 8
                  05/01/01–8/31/01            10/15/01–12/05/01            12/06/01 – 01/15/02

  Window 2:                                         Nov 12
                  05/01/01–8/31/01             10/19/01–12/05/01           12/06/01 – 01/15/02

  Window 3:                                            Nov 19
                  05/01/01–8/31/01                11/02/01–12/05/01        12/06/01 – 01/15/02

  Window 4:                                           Nov 27
                  05/01/01–8/31/01               10/15/01-01/10/02               1/11/02-01/28/02

  Window 5:                                            Nov 29
                  05/01/01–8/31/01                10/19/01–01/10/02              1/11/02-01/28/02

  Window 6:                                         Nov 20
                  05/01/01–8/31/01             10/15/01-12/31/01                1/01/02-01/28/02

  Window 7:                                          Nov 23
                  05/01/01–8/31/01              10/19/01–12/31/01               1/01/02-01/28/02



       We consider three start dates for the event window: October 15, October 19, and

November 2, 2001. October 15 is day t-1 relative to Enron’s announcement that it lost $618

million, which provided the first indication of possible conflict-of-interest questions related to

the Fastow-run partnerships and the “quality” of Enron’s prior-period earnings. October 19 is

trading day t-1 relative to Enron’s announcement of an SEC investigation of the partnerships and

of suspicions by analysts that Enron will release additional bad news (October 22). November 2

is the start date that makes November 19 the center of the event window. November 19 is

significant because on that day it is first reported that Representative John Dingell requested that


                                                                                                    -44-
the Public Oversight Board (POB) review Andersen’s audits of Enron (and Waste Management).

The public oversight Board declines to review specific cases but indicates that it will consider a

systemic review.

        We consider two end dates for the event window. The end date in windows 1-3 is

December 5, which is day t+1 relative to the pledge by the big-five firms to work together to

address financial reporting problems, especially related to SPEs and market risks. The event

periods in these windows include all of the Enron-specific events and all but three of the

systemic and financial press events. The pre-report period begins December 6 and ends on

January 15, 2002, which is the first percentile of fourth quarter earnings announcement dates.

        In windows 4 and 5, the event period extends to January 10, 2002, which is day t+1

relative to the last systemic event and it includes all but the last financial press event. Because of

the longer event period, we are forced to extend the length of the pre-report period to January 28

in order to have a sufficiently long pre-report period to estimate the model.                        January 28

represents the first quartile of earnings announcement dates. In windows 6 and 7, we arbitrarily

set the end of the event window at December 31, 2001. This specification provides more

equally-sized windows for the event-period and the pre-report period.


A.3 Analysis of beta estimates

        We use beta estimates from window 1.25 In choosing among the windows, the primary

trade-off is that a longer event window, which is more inclusive of important events,




25
   There is no ex-post diagnostic tool that establishes the best window. Lockwood and Kadiyala (1988) estimate the
model for every combination of event windows with a start date within 30 days prior to the one day event (T1) and
an end date within 30 days after the event (T2). The window (T1, T2 combination) that maximizes the log
likelihood function is chosen as the best firm-specific model. However, they have firm-specific events whereas we
have a common event to all firms.



                                                                                                             -45-
mechanically shortens the pre-report window given that the report date (either the earnings

announcement date or the 10-K date) is fixed.

       Several analyses favor the shorter event periods (windows 1-3). The means (medians) of

the adjusted R2s from the model estimation are higher for these windows than for the other

windows (although the differences are not significant). Windows 1-3 also produce the smallest

number of negative bˆi1 estimates (regardless of the start date). Finally, the residuals for windows

1, 2 and 3 are mean zero during the pre-event period and the event period. They are significantly

positive during the pre-report period (at approximately the 10% level). In windows 4-7, the

residuals during the event (pre-report) period are positive (negative) and significant. None of the

analyses indicate a difference between windows 1-3. Thus, we report results for the window that

allows the earliest possible start date, i.e., window 1.

       The beta shocks estimated from window 1 have associations and exhibit cross-sectional

variation that support their validity. For example, the median initial shock for the 45 firms that

have Enron-related 8-Ks is 0.21, which is significantly greater than the median initial shock for

the remaining 2,056 firms of 0.006. The median remaining shocks also are greater (0.18 vs.

0.10), but the difference is not significant. The median initial shocks for the Arthur Andersen

clients are not significantly different (0.04 for AA clients vs. 0.005 for non-AA clients), but the

remaining shocks are significantly higher by 0.043 at the 10% level. This pattern is consistent

with the fact that Arthur Andersen was not implicated in the scandal until later in the event

window. There is a significant positive correlation between the initial shock and firm size

(measured either by market capitalization or total assets) and leverage (measured by the debt-

equity ratio). There is a significant positive correlation between the remaining shock and firm

size, leverage, and operating leverage (measured by the ratio of PPE/total assets), and a



                                                                                               -46-
significant negative correlation between analyst following and the initial shock. This last result

suggests that firms with ex ante better information environments have smaller shocks to the

Enron-related transparency crisis.




                                                                                             -47-
                                         References

Amihud, Y. and H. Mendelson, 1986. The Effects of Beta, Bid-Ask Spread, Residual Risk and
   Size on Stock Returns. Journal of Finance, 479-486.
Asthana, S., S. Balsam, and S. Sankaraguruswamy, 2004, Differential Response of Small versus
    Large Investors to 10K Filings on Edgar, Accounting Review 79, 571-589.
Ball, R., 2009, Market and Political/Regulatory Perspectives on the Recent Accounting Scandals,
     Journal of Accounting Research 47, forthcoming.
Barry, C., and S. Brown, 1984, Differential Information and the Small Firm Effect, Journal of
    Financial Economics 13, 283-294.
Barry, C., and S. Brown, 1985, Differential Information and Security Market Equilibrium,
    Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 20, 407-422.
Beneish, M., P. Hopkins, I. Jansen, and R. Martin, 2005, Do Auditor Resignations Reduce
    Uncertainty About the Quality of Firms’ financial reporting?, Journal of Accounting and
    Public Policy 24, 357-390.
Botosan, C., 1997, Disclosure Level and the Cost of Equity Capital, The Accounting Review 72,
    323-349.
Botosan, C., and M. Plumlee, 2002, A Re-Examination of Disclosure Level and the Expected
    Cost of Equity Capital, Journal of Accounting Research 40, 21-40.
Brown, S., 1979, The Effect of Estimation Risk on Capital Market Equilibrium, Journal of
    Financial and Quantitative Analysis 15, 215-220.
Carter, D., and B. Simkins, 2004, The Market's Reaction to the Unexpected, Catastrophic
    Events: The Case of Airline Stock Returns and the September 11th Attacks, Quarterly
    Review of Economics and Finance 44, 539-558.
Chang, S., and D. Suk, 1998, Stock Prices and the Secondary Dissemination of Information: The
    WSJ's Insider Trading Spotlight Column, Financial Review 33, 115-128.
Clarkson, P., and R. Thompson. 1990. Empirical Estimates of Beta When Investors Face
    Estimation Risk. Journal of Finance 45, 431–53.
Coles, J., and U. Loewenstein, 1988, Equilibrium Pricing and Portfolio Composition in the
    Presence of Uncertain Parameters and Estimation Risk, Journal of Financial Economics 22,
    279-303.
Coles, J., U. Loewenstein, J. Suay, 1995, On equilibrium pricing under parameter uncertainty,
    The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 30, 347-374.
Cyree, K.,. and R. DeGennaro, 2002, A Generalized Method for Detecting Abnormal Returns
    and Changes in Systematic Risk, Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting 19, 399-
    416.
Demirguc-Kunt, A., and V. Maksimovic, 1998, Law, Finance, and Firm Growth, Journal of
   Finance, 2107-2137.
Diamond, D., and R. Verrecchia, 1991, Disclosure, Liquidity, and the Cost of Capital, Journal of
    Finance 46, 1325-1359.


                                                                                           -48-
Doherty, N., J. Lamm-Tennant, and L. Starks, 2003, Insuring September 11th: Market Recovery
   and Transparency, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 26, 179-199.
Easley, D., S. Hvidkjaer , and M. O’Hara , 2002, Is Information Risk a Determinant of Asset
    Returns?, Journal of Finance 57, 2185-2221.
Easley, D., and M. O’Hara, 2004, Information and the Cost of Capital, Journal of Finance, 59,
    1553-1583.
Foster, G., 1979, Briloff and the capital market, Journal of Accounting Research 17, 262-274.
Foster, G., 1987, Rambo IX: Briloff and the capital market, Journal of Accounting, Auditing and
    Finance 2, 409-430.
Francis, J., LaFond, R., Olsson, P., and Schipper, K., 2004. Costs of Equity and Earnings
    Attributes. The Accounting Review 79, 967-1010.
Francis, J., LaFond, R., Olsson, P., and Schipper, K., 2005. The Market Pricing of Accruals
    Quality. Journal of Accounting and Economics 39, 295-327.
Garleanu, N., and L. Pedersen, 2004, Adverse Selection and the Required Return. Review of
    Financial Studies 17, 643-665.
Grullon, G., R. Michaely, and B. Swaminathan, 2002, Are Dividend Changes a Sign of Firm
    Maturity? Journal of Business 75, 387–424.
Handa, P., and S. Linn, 1993, Arbitrage Pricing with Estimation Risk. Journal of Financial and
   Quantitative Analysis, 28, 81–100.
Healy, P., A. Hutton, and K. Palepu, 1999, Stock Performance and Intermediation Changes
    Surrounding Sustained Increases in Disclosure, Contemporary Accounting Research 16,
    485-520.
Huberman, G., and T. Regev, 2001, Contagious Speculation and a Cure for Cancer: A Non-
   Event that Made Stock Prices Soar, Journal of Finance, 56, 387-396.
Klein, R., and V. Bawa, 1976, The Effect of Estimation-Risk on Optimal Portfolio Choice,
    Journal of Financial Economics 3, 215–31.
Klein, R. and V. Bawa, 1977, Effect of limited information and estimation risk on optimal
    portfolio diversification, Journal of Financial Economics 5, 89-l11.
Kumar, P., S. Sorescu, R. Boehme, and B. Danielsen, 2008, Estimation Risk, Information, and
   the Conditional CAPM: Theory and Evidence. Review of Financial Studies, 21, 1037-1075.
Lambert, R., C. Leuz, and R. Verrecchia, 2007, Accounting Information, Disclosure, and the
   Cost of Capital, Journal of Accounting Research 45, 385-420.
Lambert, R., and R. Verrecchia, 2008, Cost of Capital in Imperfect Competition Settings,
   Working Paper.
Lang, M. and R. Lundholm, 2000, Voluntary Disclosure and Equity Offerings: Reducing
    Information Asymmetry or Hyping the Stock?, Contemporary Accounting Research 17,
    623.
Lettau, M. and S. Ludvigson, 2001, Resurrecting the (C)CAPM: A Cross-Sectional Test When
     Risk Premia Are Time-Varying, Journal of Political Economy 6, 1238-1287.


                                                                                            -49-
Leuz, C., and R. Verrecchia, 2000, The Economic Consequences of Increased Disclosure,
    Journal of Accounting Research 38, 91-124.
Leuz, C., and P. Wysocki, 2008, Economic Consequences of Financial Reporting and Disclosure
    Regulation: A Review and Suggestions for Future Research, University of Chicago Working
    Paper.
Li, F., 2008, Annual report readability, current earnings, and earnings persistence, Journal of
     Accounting and Economics 45, 221-247.
Lockwood, L., and K. Kadiyala, 1988, Risk Measurement For Event-Dependent Security
    Returns, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 6, 43-49.
Platts, 2002, The collapse of Enron: Timeline of events, www.platts.com.
Pruitt, S., B. Van Ness and R. Van Ness, 2000, Clientele Trading in Response to Published
     Information: Evidence from the 'Dartboard' Column, Journal of Financial Research 23, 1-13.
Reinganum, M., and J. Smith, 1983, Investor Preference for Large Firms: New Evidence on
    Economies of Size, Journal of Industrial Economics, Blackwell Publishing 32, 213-227.
Scholes M., and J. Williams, 1977, Estimating betas from nonsynchronous data, Journal of
    Financial Economics 5, 309-327.
Schrand, C., and R. Verrecchia, 2005, Information Disclosure and Adverse Selection Explanations
    for IPO Underpricing, Working paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Wang, K., 2003, Asset Pricing with Conditioning Information: A New Test, Journal of Finance
   57, 161–96.
Washington Post, 2002, Timeline of Enron’s Collapse, February 25, www.washingtonpost.com.
Welker, M., 1995, Disclosure Policy, Information Asymmetry, and Liquidity in Equity Markets,
   Contemporary Accounting Research 11, 801-827.




                                                                                          -50-
Table 1
Descriptive statistics on disclosure proxies and firm characteristics
The sample comprises a maximum of 1,868 firms with a December 31 fiscal year end and sufficient data to estimate
subsequent models. We eliminate airlines, insurance carriers, and firms that are majorly affected by the September
11th terrorist attacks. Panel A provides descriptive statistics for the disclosure proxies in our analyses. It presents
counts of the number of pages for the entire 10-K in 2001 (PAGES2001); the management discussion and analysis
(MDA2001) section (Item 7); the sum of Items 6 (Selected Financial Data), 8 (Financial Statements and
Supplementary Data), and 15 (Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, and Reports on Form 8-K), which
commonly include financial tables (FS2001); and the sum of Items 1 (Business), 2 (Properties), and 7 (MD&A),
which commonly include narrative discussions about the firm (DISCUSS2001). We also present the percent changes
(%Δ) in these variables relative to the year 2000. We select the disclosures on related-party transactions from the
10-K or the proxy statement. REL_PAR2001 is the number of pages of this section. %ΔREL_PAR is the percentage
change in these pages counts from 2000 to 2001, after setting changes of plus or minus one page to zero.
WORDS2001 is the word count for the fourth quarter and annual 2001 earnings announcement and %ΔWORDS is the
percent change in the word count relative to the prior year. The preceding change variables are truncated at the 1st
and 99th percentile, except %ΔPAGES, which is truncated at 2nd and 98th percentile. 8ΚCOUNT is the number of 8-
K filings between October 15, 2001 and March 31, 2002, but excluding filings related to the September 11th terrorist
attacks. Δ8ΚCOUNT is the difference in the count over the same period in 2000, winsorized at +3 and –3.
CONFCALL is the number of conference calls from October 15, 2001 to March 31, 2002. ΔCALL denotes the
difference in the number of calls relative to the same period one year earlier, winsorized at +3 and –3.
*** (†††) and * (†) indicate that the mean (median) change in the respective variable is significantly different from
zero at the 1% and 10% level, respectively.
Panel A: Disclosure proxies
                                     N            Mean          Std dev          p25          Median          p75
10-K Page counts
    PAGES2001                      1,868         63.619          29.720           44             62             79
    MDA2001                        1,116         13.320           8.574            7             11             18
    DISCUSS2001                    1,163         26.693          13.793           17             25             34
    FS2001                         1,163         34.013          16.995           25             32             40
    %ΔPAGES                        1,868        16.6%***         31.5%           0.0%         9.0%†††         23.6%
    %ΔMDA                          1,116        38.7%***         44.7%          10.0%        30.4%†††         57.1%
    %ΔDISCUSS                      1,158        22.2%***         32.1%           3.7%        17.6%†††         35.0%
    %ΔFS                           1,145        17.6%***         56.6%           0.0%         8.0%†††         22.6%

Proxy statement counts
    REL_PAR2001                    1441            4.822          9.003            0              1              4
    %ΔREL_PAR                      1312         19.4%***         99.5%             0              0              0

EA Word counts
   WORDS2001                       1,788         2,003           1,262          1,197         1,706           2,446
   %ΔWORDS                         1,715        15.5%***         32.2%          -5.1%         9.0%†††         28.9%

8-K counts
    8KCOUNT                        1,868           0.904          1.771            0              0              1
        (without Sept 11)          1,868           0.760          1.568            0              0              1

    Δ8KCOUNT                       1,868           0.052*         1.220            0              0              0
       (without Sept 11)           1,868           0.004          1.159            0              0              0

Conference Call
   CONFCALL                        1,868           1.140          0.955            0              1              2
   ΔCALL                           1,868        -0.074***         0.642            0              0              0
Table 1 (continued)
Descriptive statistics on disclosure proxies and firm characteristics
Panel B provides descriptive statistics on firm characteristics that we use as control variables in subsequent models.
TOTASS is the book value of total assets (in millions). SIZE is the market value of common equity plus the book
value of preferred stock and long-term debt (in millions). ROA is return on assets using the operating income after
depreciation and amortization and scaling it by the average of total assets at the beginning and the end of the fiscal
year. CUMRET is the cumulative return from May 1, 2001 to August 31, 2001. DERATIO is long-term debt scaled
by total assets at the end of the fiscal year. MB is the market-to-book ratio of common shareholders’ equity, setting
the ratio to zero for book value < 0. PPE/TA is the book value of net property, plant and equipment scaled by total
assets. FCSTREV is the change in the mean (consensus) analyst forecast of next-fiscal-year annual earnings during
the period from August 2001 to December 2001 scaled by price. FIRMRETVOL is the firm’s idiosyncratic risk
during the pre-event period, where idiosyncratic risk is the standard deviation of the residual from a linear market
model that includes the CRSP value-weighted return on the market. ABN_VOL is a firm-specific measure of
abnormal volume computed as described in Section 6. All variables are reported for the fiscal year 2001 and
truncated at the 1th and 99th percentile of the respective distribution.
Panel B: Firm characteristics
                                  N            Mean          Std dev          p25          Median            p75

    TOTASS                      1,868         3,585.4        30,600.3          94.3         372.9          1,325.5
    SIZE                        1,864         3,389.3        19,644.6          99.5         371.0          1,383.1
    ROA                         1,842          -0.002          0.189          -0.020         0.032           0.097
    CUMRET                      1,837           0.032          0.300          -0.143         0.039           0.187
    DERATIO                     1,849           0.270          0.257           0.023         0.201           0.466
    ΜΒ                          1,763           3.777          3.557           1.904         2.909           4.441
    PPE_TA                      1,828           0.238          0.235           0.049         0.158           0.354
    FCSTREV                     1,257          -0.011          0.045          -0.011        -0.001           0.000
    FIRMRETVOL                  1,867           0.035          0.021           0.020         0.030           0.045
    ABN_VOL                     1,480           0.105          0.724          -0.377        -0.110           0.352
Table 2
Descriptive statistics on model parameter estimates, systematic risk and beta shocks
Panel A reports descriptive statistics for the parameter estimates from the regime switching beta model in equations
(B1) and (B2), measures of systematic risk over four time periods and the beta shocks. The pre-event period beta is
equal to bˆi1 (BETA_PRE). During the event period, βˆ i 2 = bˆi1 + bˆi 2 (T 1 − t )(t − T 2) + bˆi3 (t − T 1) . We compute the
event period beta (BETA_EVT) at day t = 0. The pre-report period beta (BETA_REM) is βˆi 3 = bˆi1 + bˆi3 (T 2 − T1) . We
report parameter and beta estimates choosing T1 and T2 according to Window 1 in Appendix A.2. During the post-
report period, systematic risk (BETA_POST) is estimated using a market model from May 1, 2002 to August 31,
2002. The initial shock (INIT_SHOCK) is BETA_EVT - BETA_PRE. The remaining shock (REM_SHOCK) is
BETA_REM - BETA_PRE.
Panel A:
                                        N         Mean           Std dev           p25           Median           p75
Model parameters

bˆi1                                  1,868      0.66684         0.6898         0.18972         0.53558         0.95633
bˆi2                                  1,868      -0.00029        0.00268        -0.00168        -0.00021        0.00107
bˆi 3                                 1,868       0.002          0.02398        -0.00936        0.00289         0.01457


Estimates of systematic risk

BETA_PRE                              1,868      0.66684         0.6898         0.18972         0.53558         0.95633
BETA_EVT                              1,868      0.59982         0.97357        -0.00566        0.54162         1.12409
BETA_REM                              1,868      0.74266         1.01538        0.08332         0.68691         1.27465
BETA_POST                             1,797      0.67755         0.47763        0.30236         0.67339         0.97329


Estimates of shocks

INIT_SHOCK                            1,868      -0.06702        0.94982        -0.56727        -0.01294        0.42015
REM_SHOCK                             1,868      0.07582         0.91106        -0.35574        0.10998         0.55355
Table 2 (continued)
Descriptive statistics on model parameter estimates, systematic risk and beta shocks
Panel B reports the means for the initial and the remaining shock by industry as well as the proportions of positive
initial and remaining shocks in each industry. We report only industries with more than 5 sample observations.
Panel B:
SIC                                          N      INIT_SHOCK         % POS        N     REM_SHOCK        % POS
 25 Furniture and Fixtures                     6           0.6402       0.8333        6        0.5301       0.8333
 55 Auto Dealers, Gas Stations                 9           0.5488       0.7778        9        0.2675       0.7778
 15 Bldg Cnstr-Gen Contr, Op Bldr             10           0.5215       0.8000       10        0.3981       0.9000
 24 Lumber and Wood Pds, Ex Furn               7           0.4201       0.7143        7        0.1426       0.7143
 23 Apparel & Other Finished Pds               6           0.3861       0.6667        6        0.2990       0.8333
 72 Personal Services                          7           0.3260       0.5714        7        0.7008       1.0000
 57 Home Furniture & Equip Store               6           0.2949       0.6667        6       -0.3993       0.3333
 82 Educational Services                       6           0.2640       0.6667        6        0.1451       0.6667
 29 Pete Refining & Related Inds               8           0.2596       0.3750        8       -0.1416       0.7500
 34 Fabr Metal, Ex Machy, Trans Eq            29           0.2083       0.6207       29        0.2081       0.6552
 31 Leather and Leather Products               9           0.1957       0.6667        9        0.4491       0.7778
 40 Railroad Transportation                    6           0.1714       0.6667        6        0.2418       0.6667
 65 Real Estate                               20           0.1324       0.5500       20        0.1214       0.4500
 37 Transportation Equipment                  35           0.1151       0.6571       35        0.1690       0.5714
 49 Electric, Gas, Sanitary Serv              59           0.0988       0.5593       59        0.0746       0.4746
 20 Food and Kindred Products                 36           0.0848       0.5278       36        0.0638       0.4722
 79 Amusements, Recreation                    16           0.0715       0.5000       16        0.1330       0.6250
 30 Rubber & Misc Plastics Prods              22           0.0622       0.6364       22       -0.1174       0.5455
 62 Security & Commodity Brokers              21           0.0618       0.6667       21        0.3465       0.7143
 61 Nondepository Credit Instn                17           0.0591       0.5294       17        0.5249       0.6471
 17 Construction-Special Trade                 6           0.0540       0.6667        6       -0.0408       0.3333
 64 Ins Agents, Brokers & Service              8           0.0471       0.3750        8       -0.0381       0.3750
 48 Communications                            59           0.0398       0.5932       59        0.3605       0.6441
 27 Printing, Publishing & Allied             24           0.0311       0.5417       24        0.2801       0.7083
 58 Eating and Drinking Places                24           0.0205       0.4167       24        0.1284       0.7083
 60 Depository Institutions                  252           0.0162       0.5278      252        0.1332       0.6071
 67 Holding, Other Invest Offices             29          -0.0213       0.5862       29        0.0816       0.5517
 35 Indl,Comml Machy, Computer Eq             93          -0.0294       0.5807       93       -0.0468       0.5484
 80 Health Services                           39          -0.0440       0.4359       39       -0.2189       0.3590
 26 Paper and Allied Products                 17          -0.0767       0.5882       17        0.1145       0.5294
 38 Meas Instr; PhotoGds; Watches             96          -0.0816       0.4167       96       -0.0812       0.4896
 32 Stone, Clay, Glass, Concrete Pd           15          -0.0823       0.5333       15        0.2790       0.7333
 39 Misc Manufacturing Industries             15          -0.0933       0.4667       15       -0.4003       0.4667
 33 Primary Metal Industries                  27          -0.1140       0.3704       27        0.3667       0.6296
 36 Electr, Oth Elec Eq, Ex Cmp              113          -0.1332       0.4336      113        0.0753       0.5487
 13 Oil and Gas Extraction                    71          -0.1358       0.4366       71        0.4118       0.8028
 73 Business Services                        217          -0.1411       0.4839      217        0.0467       0.5438
 50 Durable Goods-Wholesale                   49          -0.1631       0.4082       49        0.2468       0.5306
 47 Transportation Services                    6          -0.2330       0.3333        6        0.0114       0.5000
 51 Nondurable Goods-Wholesale                22          -0.2421       0.4091       22        0.2576       0.6818
 28 Chemicals & Allied Products              163          -0.2812       0.4110      163       -0.2656       0.3742
 10 Metal Mining                              10          -0.2854       0.5000       10        0.3835       0.7000
 42 Motor Freight Trans, Warehouse            21          -0.2957       0.3810       21        0.1334       0.6667
 59 Miscellaneous Retail                      19          -0.3042       0.3684       19        0.0181       0.6842
 70 Hotels, Other Lodging Places              17          -0.3445       0.2941       17       -0.0311       0.5294
 87 Engr, Acc,Resh, Mgmt, Rel Svcs            53          -0.3662       0.3396       53       -0.3568       0.3208
 44 Water Transportation                      10          -0.4219       0.4000       10        0.3883       0.8000
 78 Motion Pictures                            6          -0.5024       0.5000        6        0.7753       1.0000
 16 Heavy Constr; not Bldg Cntractrs           8          -0.5086       0.2500        8        0.4448       0.5000
 22 Textile Mill Products                      8          -0.7936       0.5000        8        0.0101       0.5000
Figure 1
Illustrations of the time-series patterns in the systematic risk estimates for the pre-event period, the event period, and the pre-report period for alternative values
of bˆi 2 . Panels A through C illustrate levels of systematic risk in the case of a HIGH positive bˆi 2 (equals 0.100), a LOW positive bˆi 2 (equals 0.002), and a
negative bˆi 2 (equals -0.002), respectively. Within each panel, we present estimates of systematic risk in the pre-report period for five levels of bˆi 3 .




Panel A: HIGH Positive bˆi 2                                                                                                                        Panel B: LOW Positive bˆi 2          Panel C: Negative bˆi 2


                                                                                                                                               2

    40

                                                                                                                                                                                  2.5
                                                                                                                                             1.5
    35


                                                                                                                                                                                    2
    30                                                                                                                                         1



    25                                                                                                                                                                            1.5
                                                                                                                                             0.5

                                                                                                                               b3 = -0.046
    20
                                                                                                                               b3 = -0.015                                          1
                                                                                                                               b3 = -0.006
                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                               b3 = 0.002
    15
                                                                                                                               b3 = 0.020
                                                                                                                                               01 1
                                                                                                                                               01 9
                                                                                                                                               01 7
                                                                                                                                               01 5
                                                                                                                                               01 5
                                                                                                                                               01 3
                                                                                                                                               01 1
                                                                                                                                               01 9
                                                                                                                                               01 0
                                                                                                                                               01 8
                                                                                                                                               01 6
                                                                                                                                               01 3
                                                                                                                                                01 3
                                                                                                                                                01 1
                                                                                                                                                01 9
                                                                                                                                                01 7
                                                                                                                                                01 1
                                                                                                                                                01 1
                                                                                                                                                01 9
                                                                                                                                                01 7
                                                                                                                                                01 5
                                                                                                                                                01 2
                                                                                                                                                01 2
                                                                                                                                                01 0
                                                                                                                                                01 9
                                                                                                                                                01 7
                                                                                                                                                01 7
                                                                                                                                                02 6
                                                                                                                                                02 4
                                                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                             20 050
                                                                                                                                             20 050
                                                                                                                                             20 051
                                                                                                                                             20 052
                                                                                                                                             20 060
                                                                                                                                             20 061
                                                                                                                                             20 062
                                                                                                                                             20 062
                                                                                                                                             20 071
                                                                                                                                             20 071
                                                                                                                                             20 072
                                                                                                                                             20 080
                                                                                                                                             20 081
                                                                                                                                             20 082
                                                                                                                                             20 082
                                                                                                                                             20 090
                                                                                                                                             20 092
                                                                                                                                             20 100
                                                                                                                                             20 100
                                                                                                                                             20 101
                                                                                                                                             20 102
                                                                                                                                             20 110
                                                                                                                                             20 111
                                                                                                                                             20 112
                                                                                                                                             20 112
                                                                                                                                             20 120
                                                                                                                                             20 121
                                                                                                                                             20 122
                                                                                                                                             20 010
                                                                                                                                                  01
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                               01
                                                                                                                                             20




    10                                                                                                                                       -0.5

                                                                                                                                                                                    0
     5




                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E 7
                                                                                                                                                                                        7
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                     +0
                                                                                                                                                                                  2E
                                                                                                                                              -1
                                                                                                                                                                                  -0.5
     0

20010501
    20010509
        20010517
            20010525
                20010605
                    20010613
                        20010621
                            20010629
                                20010710
                                    20010718
                                        20010726
                                            20010803
                                                20010813
                                                    20010821
                                                        20010829
                                                            20010907
                                                                20010921
                                                                    20011001
                                                                        20011009
                                                                            20011017
                                                                                20011025
                                                                                    20011102
                                                                                        20011112
                                                                                            20011120
                                                                                                20011129
                                                                                                    20011207
                                                                                                        20011217
                                                                                                            20011226
                                                                                                                20020104
                                                                                                                    20020114
                                                                                                                                             -1.5
     -5                                                                                                                                                                            -1
Table 3
Relation between 10-K disclosure changes and cost of capital shocks
The sample comprises a maximum of 1,868 firms with a December fiscal year end and sufficient data to estimate
subsequent models. We eliminate airlines, insurance carriers, and firms that are majorly affected by the September 11th
terrorist attacks as described in Section 3. Panel A reports results for eight models regressing the percent change in page
counts (%ΔPAGES) on combinations of initial shock (INIT_SHOCK), remaining shock (REM_SHOCK), pre-event beta
(BETA_PRE), and control variables. LASSETS is natural log of total assets. ROA is the return on assets. DERATIO is
long-term debt scaled by total assets. MB is the market-to-book ratio. PPE/TA is the book value of net PPE scaled by total
assets. The control variables are measured as of fiscal year 2000. The changes in the control variables are measured from
2000 to 2001, except in for the market-to-book ratio which uses the market values of equity. The regression models
include, wherever noted, industry-fixed effects based on one-digit SIC codes and a separate dummy for firms in Enron-
related industries (defined as SIC2 equal to 13, 29 or 49). The t-statistics are reported in parentheses and based on standard
errors that are clustered at two-digit SIC level. *** {**} (*) indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, 10% level (two-sided).
Panel A:
                                                             Model specification
                        (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)          (7)           (8)
Constant            0.1072***    0.1015*       0.0697      0.1274*** 0.1057***         0.1067**       0.0602      0.1173***
                      (4.17)      (1.92)       (1.27)        (3.02)       (4.02)         (2.03)       (1.11)        (2.93)
INIT_SHOCK          0.0289***   0.0259***    0.0231***     0.0255***
                      (4.25)      (3.88)       (3.56)        (3.68)
REM_SHOCK                                                              0.0237***       0.0242***     0.0174*       0.0207**
                                                                          (2.88)         (3.15)       (1.85)         (2.23)
BETA_PRE            0.0501***   0.0434**      0.0431**     0.0463*** 0.0429***         0.0368**      0.0359*       0.0401**
                      (3.21)      (2.36)        (2.27)       (2.81)       (2.80)         (2.03)       (1.87)         (2.38)
LASSETS2000           0.0055    0.0078**      0.0080**                    0.0062       0.0085**     0.0092**
                      (1.19)      (2.10)        (2.29)                    (1.32)         (2.13)       (2.30)
ROA2000               0.0089     0.0006        -0.0524                    0.0074         0.0006      -0.0515
                      (0.40)      (0.03)        (1.48)                    (0.33)         (0.03)       (1.56)
DERATIO2000          -0.0180     0.0017         0.0068                   -0.0239         0.0014       0.0054
                      (0.54)      (0.05)        (0.19)                    (0.74)         (0.04)       (0.15)
MB2000                          -0.0004*       -0.0006                                  -0.0003      -0.0006
                                  (1.77)        (0.76)                                   (1.61)       (0.75)
PPE/TA2000                       0.0432         0.0433                                   0.0316       0.0337
                                  (0.68)        (0.64)                                   (0.50)       (0.50)
ΔASSETS                                       0.0573**      0.0506**                                0.0607**       0.0544**
                                                (2.15)        (2.03)                                  (2.35)         (2.24)
ΔROA                                          -0.1826**     -0.1423*                                -0.1718**       -0.1294
                                                (2.40)        (1.71)                                  (2.29)         (1.54)
ΔDERATIO                                        0.0217        0.0372                                  0.0179         0.0324
                                                (0.29)        (0.52)                                  (0.24)         (0.46)
ΔMB                                             0.0147       0.0177*                                  0.0151        0.0175*
                                                (1.26)        (1.71)                                  (1.35)         (1.77)
Industry controls      NO          YES           YES           YES          NO            YES          YES            YES

Observations         1,868        1,793        1,687         1,707         1,868        1,793         1,687         1,707
R-squared            0.0169       0.0245       0.0253        0.0236        0.0147       0.0237        0.0236        0.0218
Table 3 (continued)
Relation between 10-K disclosure changes and cost of capital shocks
Panel B reports results for regression models of percent changes in page counts for three sections of the 10-K and one section from the proxy statement on
combinations of initial shock (INIT_SHOCK), remaining shock (REM_SHOCK), pre-event beta (BETA_PRE), and control variables (described in Panel A).
The percentage changes in the page counts refer to the management discussion & analysis (%ΔMDA), the sections that are generally narrative (%ΔDISCUSS)
and the sections that include financial tables (%ΔFS). See Table 1, Panel A for more details. The regression models include industry-fixed effects based on one-
digit SIC codes and a separate dummy for firms in Enron-related industries (defined as SIC2 equal to 13, 29 or 49). The t-statistics are reported in parentheses
and based on standard errors that are clustered at two-digit SIC level. *** {**} (*) indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, 10% level (two-sided).
Panel B:
                                                                              Dependent variable
                      %ΔMDA          %ΔDISCUSS             %ΔFS          %ΔREL_PAR         %ΔMDA             %ΔDISCUSS            %ΔFS          %ΔREL_PAR
Constant              0.3903***        0.1394***           0.0631           0.4637        0.3916***           0.1325***           0.0791          0.4513
                        (3.49)           (2.85)            (0.98)           (1.56)           (3.60)             (2.72)            (1.23)          (1.50)
INIT_SHOCK              0.0166           0.0193          0.0343***         0.0343
                        (1.37)           (1.63)            (2.84)           (0.98)
REM_SHOCK                                                                                    0.0086             0.0181*          0.0492*           0.0473*
                                                                                             (0.62)              (1.88)           (1.70)            (1.72)
BETA_PRE                0.0352            0.0149         0.0640**          0.0037            0.0278              0.0091           0.0594            0.0008
                        (1.37)            (0.58)           (2.06)           (0.07)           (1.08)              (0.38)           (1.62)            (0.02)
LASSETS2000             0.0110            0.0102           0.0108          -0.0065           0.0122              0.0108           0.0104           -0.0068
                        (1.23)            (1.10)           (1.19)           (0.38)           (1.39)              (1.30)           (0.98)            (0.44)
ROA2000                -0.0160           0.0611**          0.0172          -0.1202          -0.0184             0.0570*           0.0080           -0.1212
                        (0.35)            (2.04)           (0.44)           (1.15)           (0.40)              (1.97)           (0.21)            (1.13)
DERATIO2000           -0.1149**          -0.0627          -0.0060          0.0448          -0.1185**            -0.0625           0.0038           0.0500
                        (2.03)            (1.31)           (0.08)           (0.36)           (2.01)              (1.38)           (0.05)            (0.39)
MB2000                  0.0000           -0.0003         -0.0009**         0.0008            0.0001             -0.0003         -0.0009**          0.0007
                        (0.07)            (1.00)           (2.30)           (0.21)           (0.09)              (1.06)           (2.27)            (0.20)
PPE/TA2000             -0.0176          -0.0989**          0.1003          -0.1234          -0.0224            -0.1074**          0.0819           -0.1428
                        (0.28)            (2.02)           (1.03)           (0.69)           (0.36)              (2.23)           (0.90)            (0.80)
Industry controls       YES               YES               YES              YES              YES                 YES              YES               YES

Observations           1,069             1,109             1,096            1,257              1,069             1,109            1,096             1,257
R-squared              0.0505            0.0411           0.0163            0.0107             0.0496            0.0405           0.0192            0.0114
Table 3 (continued)
Robustness analysis with respect to the beta shocks
Robustness analysis of the results presented in Table 3. All of the models regress the percent change in page counts (%ΔPAGES) on either the initial shock or
remaining shock, the pre-event beta, and the control variables from Models (3) and (7) in Table 3. In Model 1, INIT_SHOCK, REM_SHOCK, and the pre-event
beta are estimated using coefficient estimates from a linear market model that includes the CRSP value-weighted return on the market, rather than from the
quadratic model described in Table 2. In Model 2, the sample excludes firms with a stock price at December 31, 2001 of less than $5. In Model 3, we include an
additional control variable that measures the change in the mean (consensus) analyst forecast of next-fiscal-year annual earnings during the period from August
2001 to December 2001 scaled by price (FCSTREV). In Model 4, we include an additional control variable that measures the firm’s idiosyncratic risk during the
pre-event period (FIRMRETVOL). Idiosyncratic risk is the standard deviation of the residual from the linear market model that includes the CRSP value-
weighted return on the market. The t-statistics are reported in parentheses and are based on standard errors that are clustered at the two-digit SIC level. *** {**}
(*) indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, 10% level (two-sided).
Panel C:
                                                (1)                             (2)                              (3)                              (4)
                                       Shocks computed using        Sample excludes stocks with      Model includes control for       Model includes control for
                                     linear market-model betas              price < $5                analyst forecast revision       idiosyncratic risk volatility
                                                                                                               activity

Constant                              0.0593          0.0506          0.1054          0.0910          0.1624***       0.1694***       0.0438            0.0479
                                     (1.12)          (0.97)          (1.62)          (1.45)          (2.85)          (2.90)          (0.71)            (0.80)
INIT_SHOCK                            0.0428***                       0.0308***                       0.0276***                       0.0248***
                                     (3.82)                          (3.34)                          (2.70)                          (3.54)
REM_SHOCK                                             0.0211***                       0.0323***                       0.0327***                         0.0229***
                                                     (3.29)                          (2.74)                          (3.24)                            (3.00)
Additional control variables:

FCSTREV                                                                                                 -0.2652*        -0.2935*
                                                                                                          (1.68)          (1.89)
FIRMRETVOL                                                                                                                               0.9826**          0.9967**
                                                                                                                                          (2.10)            (2.18)

All controls                            YES              YES             YES             YES             YES             YES             YES               YES

Observations                           1,784           1,784            1,387           1,387           1,220           1,220            1,792            1,792
R-squared                              0.0282          0.0245          0.0219          0.0224          0.0180          0.0194           0.0265           0.0257
Table 4
Cross-sectional analysis of the relation between disclosure changes and cost of capital shocks
Panels A and B present results on the relation between the beta shocks and firms’ disclosure choices for firms with a positive beta shock and high financing
needs. The first four columns present results partitioning the sample based on a positive initial or remaining shock and high financing needs (POS&HIGH=1),
where the latter is defined as having a cash flow from investing activities scaled by total assets above the sample median. The last four columns present results
partitioning the sample based on a positive initial or remaining shock and high financing needs (POS&HIGH=1), where the latter is defined as having external
financing needs above the median for the sample. External financing needs are measured as the difference between a firm’s average asset growth rate over two
years and the maximum growth it can finance internally, which is ROA/(1-ROA), where ROA is income before extraordinary items over total assets. Panel A
presents results for the percent change in the page counts of the 10-K (%ΔPAGES). Panel B presents results for the percent change in the page counts in the
MD&A (%ΔMDA). The regression models include control variables as defined for Models (2) and (6) in Table 3 and industry-fixed effects based on one-digit
SIC codes and a binary indicator for Enron-related industries. The coefficients of the control variables are not presented. The t-statistics are reported in
parentheses and based on standard errors that are clustered at two-digit SIC level. *** {**} (*) indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, 10% level (two-sided). The
last row presents the p-value of a (Chow) test whether the coefficients on the beta shock are statistically different across the two subsamples.
                                           (1)               (2)              (3)           (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)         (8)
Proxy for financing needs:                             Cash flow from Investment                                           External financing needs
                                               POS&HIGH                          POS&HIGH                        POS&HIGH                        POS&HIGH
                                           =1                =0               =1            =0               =1               =0               =1          =0
Panel A: % page changes in the 10-K
Constant                                 0.1563          0.1155**         -0.0149       0.0946**           0.0482          0.1097*          -0.0224     0.0034
                                         (1.12)            (2.52)          (-0.22)        (2.49)           (0.72)           (1.83)          (-0.32)      (0.08)
INIT_SHOCK                             0.0521**          0.0167**                                          0.0348         0.0202**
                                         (2.04)            (2.25)                                          (1.44)           (2.34)
REM_SHOCK                                                                  0.0495         0.0108                                           0.0669**     0.0101
                                                                            (1.31)        (1.27)                                             (2.53)      (1.02)
All controls                              YES               YES              YES            YES              YES              YES             YES         YES

Observations                             376              1,127            433          1,070          444            1,349              512            1,281
R-squared                              0.0285            0.0286          0.0498        0.0237         0.0347         0.0249             0.0466         0.0260
p-value for difference                             0.1401                          0.3075                        0.5743                          0.0389
Panel B: % page changes in MDA
Constant                               0.6157          0.2729***         0.6980       0.2747***      0.2116*        0.2994***         0.2564**        0.3096***
                                        (1.32)           (3.44)          (1.50)         (3.52)        (1.82)          (4.08)            (2.54)          (4.25)
INIT_SHOCK                            0.1121**          -0.0049                                      0.0509          -0.0144
                                        (2.03)           (-0.35)                                      (1.07)          (-1.01)
REM_SHOCK                                                                0.0447        -0.0117                                          0.0106         0.0031
                                                                         (0.90)         (-0.71)                                         (0.28)         (0.19)
All controls                            YES                YES             YES            YES           YES             YES               YES            YES

Observations                             232               695             232           695           280            789                280            789
R-squared                              0.1066            0.0249          0.0968        0.0255         0.0627         0.0589             0.0600         0.0581
p-value for difference                             0.0478                          0.2718                        0.1515                          0.8585
Table 4 (continued)
Cross-sectional analysis of the relation between disclosure changes and cost of capital shocks
Panel C results on the relation between the beta shocks and firms’ disclosure choices for Arthur Andersen audit clients versus other firms. The first two columns
use %ΔPAGES as dependent variable. The next columns focus on page changes in the MD&A and the last two columns report results for regressions using
%ΔREL_PAR. The regression models include control variables as defined for Models (2) and (6) in Table 3 and industry-fixed effects based on one-digit SIC
codes and a binary indicator for Enron-related industries. The t-statistics are reported in parentheses and based on standard errors that are clustered at two-digit
SIC level. *** {**} (*) indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, 10% level (two-sided). The last row presents the p-value of a (Chow) test whether the coefficients on
the beta shock are statistically different across the two subsamples.
Panel C: Split by auditor
                                                %ΔPAGES                                      %ΔΜDA                                    %ΔREL_PAR
                                   AA clients        Non-AA clients             AA clients       Non-AA clients              AA clients      Non-AA clients
Constant                             0.1307               0.0211                0.3094**           0.3931***                   0.1515          0.4364**
                                     (1.20)                (0.38)                 (2.07)             (5.01)                    (0.34)            (2.00)
INIT_SHOCK                         0.0612***             0.0193**                0.0241              0.0149                  0.2990***          -0.0222
                                     (2.74)                (2.11)                 (0.75)             (0.91)                    (3.66)            (0.66)
BETA_PRE                             0.0519             0.0434***                0.0044              0.0319                   0.2084*           -0.0435
                                     (1.54)                (3.01)                 (0.09)             (1.19)                    (1.65)            (0.81)
All controls                          YES                   YES                    YES                YES                       YES               YES

Observations                          333                   1,460                   206                   863                    249                   1,008
R-squared                           0.0764                 0.0205                 0.0755                0.0644                 0.1083                 0.0104
p-value for difference                           0.0439                                      0.6963                                        0.0016
Table 5
Relation between 10-K disclosure changes and cost of capital shocks controlling for interim disclosure changes
Results from regressions of the percent change in pages (%ΔPAGES) on the cost of capital shocks and proxies for firms’ interim disclosures. The interim
disclosure proxies are: Δ8KCOUNT, which equals the change in the number of 8-K filings from 2000 to 2001; ΔCALL, which equals the change in the number
of conference calls; %ΔWORDS, which is the percentage change in the number of words in the fourth quarter 2001 earnings announcement; and a market-based
measure of interim disclosure, the parameter b̂ i 2 from the regime-switching model. See Tables 1 and 2 for more details on these variables. All models include
control variables as defined for Models (2) and (6) in Table 3 and industry-fixed effects based on one-digit SIC codes and a binary indicator for Enron-related
industries. The t-statistics are reported in parentheses and based on standard errors that are clustered at two-digit SIC level. *** {**} (*) indicate significance at
the 1%, 5%, 10% level (two-sided), respectively.
                                (1)                  (2)                 (3)                  (4)                 (5)                  (6)                  (7)
Constant                     0.0990*              0.1040*             0.1019*             0.1070**              0.0603               0.0486             0.1110**
                              (1.88)               (1.98)              (1.93)               (2.03)              (1.07)               (0.88)               (2.12)
INIT_SHOCK                  0.0254***                                0.0258***                                0.0259***
                              (3.78)                                   (3.87)                                   (3.84)
REM_SHOCK                                        0.0244***                                0.0241***                                0.0299***           0.0334***
                                                    (3.24)                                  (3.15)                                   (3.56)              (3.78)
BETA_PRE                     0.0431**             0.0369**            0.0434**            0.0368**             0.0477**            0.0423**            0.0495**
                               (2.34)               (2.04)              (2.36)              (2.03)               (2.41)              (2.14)              (2.47)
LASSETS2000                  0.0084**             0.0091**            0.0078**            0.0085**             0.0092**            0.0095**              0.0061
                               (2.21)               (2.23)              (2.10)              (2.13)               (2.39)              (2.30)              (1.53)
ROA2000                       -0.0013              -0.0016             0.0005               0.0005              -0.0133             -0.0155              0.0011
                               (0.06)               (0.08)              (0.02)              (0.02)               (0.58)              (0.66)              (0.05)
DERATIO2000                    0.0008               0.0006             0.0016               0.0012               0.0034              0.0037              0.0083
                               (0.02)               (0.02)              (0.05)              (0.04)               (0.09)              (0.10)              (0.24)
MB2000                       -0.0004*              -0.0003            -0.0003*             -0.0003              -0.0003             -0.0003             -0.0004*
                               (1.78)               (1.65)              (1.69)              (1.53)               (1.45)              (1.40)              (1.89)
PPE/TA2000                     0.0439               0.0325             0.0427               0.0312               0.0446              0.0323              0.0362
                               (0.69)               (0.52)              (0.68)              (0.50)               (0.66)              (0.48)              (0.58)
Industry controls               YES                  YES                 YES                 YES                  YES                 YES                 YES
Δ8KCOUNT                     0.0080*              0.0092*
                               (1.77)               (1.96)
ΔCALL                                                                  -0.0032             -0.0027
                                                                        (0.45)              (0.39)
%ΔWORDS                                                                                                         0.0154               0.0163
                                                                                                                (0.68)               (0.72)
b i2                                                                                                                                                   8.4903***
                                                                                                                                                         (3.63)
Observations                   1,793                1,793               1,793               1,793               1,646                1,646               1,793
R-squared                     0.0253               0.0249              0.0245               0.0238              0.0275               0.0288              0.0279
Table 6
Relation between interim disclosures and cost of capital shocks
The first four columns of the table present results from four regression models of proxies for interim disclosures on
combinations of initial shock (INIT_SHOCK), remaining shock (REM_SHOCK), pre-event beta (BETA_PRE), and
control variables. Column 1 presents results for changes in the number of 8-K filings as defined in Table 1
(Δ8KCOUNT). In Column 2, we restrict the analysis to changes in the number of 8-K filings during the second-half of
the event period and hence before the pre-report period during which the remaining shock is measured. Column 3
presents results for changes in the number of conference calls as defined in Table 1 (ΔCALL). In Column 4, we restrict
the analysis to changes in the number of conference calls during the second-half of the event period. Columns 5 and 6
present results from regressing b̂ i 2 on Δ8KCOUNT and ΔCALL, respectively, relating the curvature of the quadratic
beta estimate to firms’ immediate disclosure responses. The control variables are measured as of fiscal year 2000. The
models include industry-fixed effects based on one-digit SIC codes and a binary indicator for Enron-related industries.
The t-statistics are reported in parentheses and based on standard errors that are clustered at two-digit SIC level.
*** {**} (*) indicates significance at the 1%, 5%, 10% level in a two-sided test, respectively.
                               Δ8KCOUNT                              ΔCALL                           b̂ i 2
                           (1)                (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)                  (6)
Constant               0.3157***        0.1103***          0.1143        0.0333*          -0.0049              -0.0009
                         (3.21)           (3.56)           (1.39)         (1.69)           (0.18)               (0.03)
INIT_SHOCK             0.0637**                           -0.0136
                         (2.19)                            (0.71)
REM_SHOCK                               -0.0220**                         -0.0085
                                          (2.25)                           (1.34)
BETA_PRE                 0.0412          -0.0154         -0.0157          0.0029        -0.1128***            -0.1127***
                         (0.76)           (1.28)          (0.44)           (0.29)          (16.15)               (15.72)
LASSETS2000           -0.0724***       0.0211***         -0.0114          0.0013        0.0177***             0.0186***
                         (3.98)           (3.52)          (0.82)           (0.32)           (3.95)                (4.15)
ROA2000                  0.2421        -0.1069***        -0.0434          -0.0081          0.0021               -0.0035
                         (1.36)           (3.39)          (0.79)           (0.33)           (0.07)                (0.12)
DERATIO2000              0.1102          -0.0581         -0.0437           0.0269         -0.0426               -0.0457
                         (0.81)           (1.60)          (0.66)           (0.85)           (1.47)                (1.57)
MB2000                  -0.0001           0.0010         0.0029*           0.0006          0.0004                0.0005
                         (0.03)           (1.17)          (1.95)           (1.04)           (1.26)                (1.35)
PPE/TA2000              -0.0967           0.0001         -0.1373          -0.0136        -0.0852**             -0.0867**
                         (0.67)           (0.00)          (1.38)           (0.28)           (2.19)                (2.23)
Δ8KCOUNT                                                                                 0.0247**
                                                                                            (2.63)
ΔCALL                                                                                                           0.0080
                                                                                                                (0.57)
Industry controls         YES              YES             YES             YES             YES                   YES
Observations             1,793            1,793           1,793           1,793           1,793                 1,793
R-squared                0.0204           0.0335          0.0122          0.0085          0.0770                0.0745
Table 7
Analysis of market responses to the changes in the 10-K filings
Panel A presents an analysis of beta response from the event period to the post-report period: BRESPONSE =
BETA_EVT - BETA_POST. The models include page changes in the 10-K (%ΔPAGES) and control variables.
LSIZE is the natural log of firm size as defined in Table 1. DERATIO is long-term debt scaled by total assets and
MB is the market-to-book ratio as defined in Table 1. The control variables are measured as of fiscal year 2001.
The changes in the controls are measured from 2000 to 2001. The t-statistics are reported in parentheses and based
on standard errors that are clustered at the firm level. *** {**} (*) indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, 10% level
(two-sided).
Panel A: Post 10-K beta response
                                         (1)                            (2)                           (3)
Constant                             -0.2543**                     -0.2957***                     -0.2062*
                                       (2.32)                         (2.66)                        (1.77)
%ΔPAGES                              0.1726***                     0.1767***                     0.1649***
                                       (2.82)                         (2.81)                        (2.58)
LSIZE2001                              0.0106                         0.0106                        0.0166
                                       (1.03)                         (0.93)                        (1.43)
DERATIO2001                                                           0.0353                       -0.0133
                                                                      (0.35)                        (0.13)
MB2001                                                               -0.0003                       -0.0013
                                                                      (0.04)                        (0.19)
ΔLSIZE                                                                                             -0.0438
                                                                                                    (0.65)
ΔDERATIO                                                                                            0.3148
                                                                                                    (1.36)
ΔMB                                                                                                 0.0609
                                                                                                    (0.88)
Industry controls                       YES                           YES                            YES

Observations                           1,794                         1,700                         1,641
R-squared                              0.0168                        0.0178                        0.0201
Table 7 (continued)
Analysis of market responses to the changes in the 10-K filings
Panel B presents models the short-window abnormal volume response around the 10-K filing on the percentage
change in 10-K pages and control variables. Abnormal volume is defined as stated in Section 6. We include the
abnormal volume generated by last year’s 10-K filing as a control (ABN_VOL). FIL_DELAY measures the number
of days the 10-K filing is delayed relative to the filing dates in 2000, adjusted for its delay relative to 1999. LSIZE is
the natural log of firm size as defined in Table 1, DERATIO is long-term debt scaled by total assets and MB is the
market-to-book ratio as defined in Table 1. The control variables are measured as of fiscal year 2001. The
regression models include industry fixed effects. The t-statistics are reported in parentheses and based on standard
errors that are clustered at the firm level. *** {**} (*) indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, 10% level (two-sided).
Panel B: Short-window abnormal volume response to the 10-K
                                      (1)                                  (2)                            (3)
Constant                            1.0010                               0.9116                         0.8903
                                    (1.62)                               (1.34)                         (1.47)
%ΔPAGES                            0.1040*                              0.1127*                        0.1138*
                                    (1.66)                               (1.71)                         (1.83)
ABN_VOL2000                         0.0465                               0.0316                         0.0323
                                    (1.62)                               (1.10)                         (1.15)
FIL_DELAY0199                      -0.0015                              -0.0013                        -0.0022
                                    (0.86)                               (0.66)                         (1.29)
LSIZE2001                         -0.0242**                            -0.0265**
                                    (2.46)                               (2.30)
MB2001                                                                   0.0037
                                                                         (0.39)
DERATIO2001                                                                                            0.1379
                                                                                                        (1.47)
LASSETS2001                                                                                          -0.0357***
                                                                                                        (2.89)
ROA2001                                                                                                0.1681
                                                                                                        (1.36)
Industry controls                         YES                             YES                            YES

Observations                             1,389                          1,316                           1,361
R-squared                                0.0173                         0.0174                          0.0205
