                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     GENDER INTERACTIONS WITHIN HIERARCHIES:
                       EVIDENCE FROM THE POLITICAL ARENA

                                        Stefano Gagliarducci
                                        M. Daniele Paserman

                                        Working Paper 14893
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14893


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2009




We thank seminar participants at Boston University, Carlos III, CEMFI, Cornell University, ESSLE
CEPR 2008, Harvard University, MILLS Milan, MIT and SAE 2008 for their insightful comments.
We are also grateful to Fabio Albiani from the Italian Ministry of Interior for excellent assistance in
data collection. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Stefano Gagliarducci and M. Daniele Paserman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Gender Interactions within Hierarchies: Evidence from the Political Arena
Stefano Gagliarducci and M. Daniele Paserman
NBER Working Paper No. 14893
April 2009
JEL No. J16,M54

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper studies gender interactions within hierarchical organizations using a large data set on the
duration of Italian municipal governments elected between 1993 and 2003. A municipal government
can be viewed as a hierarchy, whose stability over time depends on the degree of cooperation between
and within ranks.

We find that in municipalities headed by female mayors, the probability of early termination of the
legislature is higher. This result persists and becomes stronger when we control for municipality fixed
effects as well as non-random sorting of women into municipalities using regression discontinuity
in gender-mixed electoral races decided by a narrow margin.

The likelihood that a female mayor survives until the end of her term is lowest when the council is
entirely male, and in regions with less favorable attitudes towards working women. The evidence is
suggestive that female mayors are less able at fostering cooperation among men, or alternatively, that
men are more reluctant to be headed by women. Other interpretations receive less support in the data.
Our results may provide an alternative explanation for the underrepresentation of women in leadership
positions.


Stefano Gagliarducci
CEMFI
Casado de Alisal 5
28014 Madrid, Spain
gagliarducci@cemfi.es

M. Daniele Paserman
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and Hebrew University
and also NBER
paserman@bu.edu
1         Introduction

Despite the substantial increase in female labor force participation over the past 40 years,
and the narrowing of the gender gap in wages, women are still underrepresented in leader-

ship positions, in the corporate world, in academia, in government and in other prestigious

professions.1 Most of the existing research has focused on trying to explain the reasons for
this phenomenon. However, relatively little is known about how women actually fare once

they have reached the top of an organization. In this paper, we attempt to ﬁll this gap by
investigating the performance of one particular type of leaders, elected politicians in mu-

nicipal governments. Speciﬁcally, we use a unique and very rich data set on the universe

of Italian municipal governments elected between 1993 and 2003, and we ask whether the
probability that the elected administration survives until the end of its mandate depends on

the gender of the chief of the executive.

        The Italian municipal system is a parliamentary system, with the government organized
as a hierarchy. The mayor, who is directly elected, is appointed to run the executive, and

members of the assembly endorse or oppose the proposed policies. As in any organization,
the stability and success of the municipal government depends on the degree of cooperation

between and within ranks. A mayor who cannot muster a majority of assembly members in

support of his or her policies can be forced out of oﬃce by a simple no-conﬁdence vote in
the council. This leads to the immediate termination of the mandate and to new elections.

Hence, the chief of the executive’s survival in oﬃce will depend on the ability to forge and
maintain stable majorities that will endorse the proposed policies. Our research question,

then, is about the relative ability of male and female mayors to foster cooperation among

the assembly members, and especially those in the governing coalition.
        Our main ﬁnding is that the probability of early termination of the legislature is between

3 and 5 percentage points higher when the mayor is a woman. This is also true after control-
    1
    Bertrand and Halloc (2001) document that women represent only 2.5% of the top paid executives in
U.S. corporate ﬁrms.



                                                  1
ling for a large number of observable characteristics of the mayor and the council, and for
municipality ﬁxed eﬀects. We ﬁnd an even larger eﬀect when controlling for non-random sort-

ing of women across municipalities using a regression discontinuity design in gender-mixed

electoral races decided by a narrow margin (between 6 and 8 percentage points).
   We discuss a number of possible explanations for these ﬁndings. Perhaps female leaders

are discriminated against by their predominantly male subordinates, who dislike the idea of

being led by a woman. This hypothesis receives some support in the data, since the likelihood
that a female mayor survives until the end of her term is lowest when the mayor interacts

with an entirely male council, and in the Southern regions, where unfavorable attitudes
towards working women prevail. Alternative explanations receive less support in the data.

For example, if women are less combative, they may choose to resign spontaneously, rather

than be forced out of oﬃce by a no-conﬁdence vote or by resignation of the city council.
However, the opposite holds true: female mayors are signiﬁcantly more likely to be ousted

from oﬃce by resignation of the city council, but are no more likely to resign spontaneously.
We also ﬁnd no evidence that female mayors encounter more resistance because they are

likely to be perceived as reformers: the gender diﬀerence in survival probability is robust to

the inclusion of a large number of personal characteristics of the elected mayor (including age
and previous experience in municipal government), while there are essentially no diﬀerences

between male and female mayors in policies enacted.

   Our study presents a unique opportunity to analyze the interaction between the gender
of team members and the team leader in an important real world setting, where we can

credibly measure performance. The size and the dynamics of a municipal council are similar
to those of a company’s board of directors: our analysis can therefore shed light on the role

of cooperativeness in settings that go beyond the political arena.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the related literature.
In Section 3, we describe the data. In Section 4, we present the results showing the eﬀect

of the mayor’s gender on the probability of early termination. In Section 5 we discuss the


                                               2
possible interpretations of our ﬁndings. We conclude with Section 6.



2         Related Literature

This paper is related diﬀerent strands of research. First, it is connected to the recent research

aimed at understanding the underrepresentation of women in leadership roles and at the very
top of the occupational distribution. Some have hypothesized that this phenomenon may

be due to gender diﬀerences in competitive environments. Men are more likely to select into
more competitive compensation schemes (Dohmen and Falk, 2006; Niederle and Vesterlund,

2007; Niederle and Yestrumskas, 2008; Booth and Nolen, 2009), they tend to raise their

performance in competitive settings (Gneezy, Niederle and Rustichini, 2003; Gneezy and
Rustichini, 2004) and are better able to maintain high levels of performance in high pressure

situations (Lavy, 2008a; Paserman 2008; Örs, Palomino and Peyrache, 2008).2

        However, in the setting that we are examining it is actually cooperative attitudes, more
than competitive ones, that probably matter most. Popular wisdom has it that women, while

perhaps lacking in competitive spirit, are actually better able at fostering cooperation among
subordinates and, more generally, at bringing people together to work towards a common

goal. The experimental evidence on this issue, however, is mixed: some studies showing

that women are more concerned for the outcome of other party (Andreoni and Vesterlund,
2001; Eckel and Grossman, 1996 and 1998; Nowell and Tinkler, 1994), but others ﬁnding

no eﬀects (Croson and Buchan, 1999), or eﬀects of the opposite sign (Brown-Kruse and
Hummels, 1993).3

        This paper is also related to the large and expanding literature on the choices and per-

formance of female politicians. A series of recent articles has highlighted important gender
    2
     On the other hand, Lavy (2008b) ﬁnds no gender diﬀerences in performance in a tournament in which
contestants have more time to prepare and plan their strategies, and Manning and Saidi (2008) argue that
gender diﬀerences in the incidence of pay-for-performance schemes can account for only a small fraction of
the gender gap in the United Kingdom.
   3
     See Croson and Gneezy (2008) for a survey of the experimental literature on gender diﬀerences in
competitive and cooperative environments.



                                                    3
diﬀerences in preferences for policies. Female leaders invest more in public goods more closely
linked to women’s concerns, like water provision (Chattopadhyay and Duﬂo, 2004), educa-

tion (Clots-Figueras, 2008), health (Rehavi, 2007), and environmental protection (Funk and

Gathman, 2008). This evidence is in line with the rich literature in political science that has
investigated gender diﬀerences in legislators’ voting behavior, using mostly data from the

U.S. Congress. Studies have found that women tend to be more liberal than men (Welch,

1985; Norton, 1995), and more likely to support and promote women’s issues (Swers, 1998,
Vega and Firestone, 1995). Another strand of the literature has examined whether female

legislators are as eﬀective as their male colleagues in sponsoring bills that are eventually
turned into law (Bratton and Haynie, 1999; Jeydel and Taylor, 2003).4

        With respect to the existing literature, the contribution of our paper is twofold. First, we

shed new light on gender interactions within hierarchical environments. To the best of our
knowledge, this aspect has been almost neglected in previous economic research, probably

because of the absence of ﬁeld data that allows the analysis of gender interactions in relatively
small teams. Second, we analyze an additional dimension of politicians’ eﬀectiveness, which

had not received much attention previously.



3         The Data

We use an administrative data set containing all the Italian mayoral terms elected from 1993

to 2008. The data set contains information on gender, age, highest educational attainment,
political aﬃliation, and previous job of the elected mayor, of all the losing mayoral candidates,

of the members of the executive committee, and of the members of the council (divided into

those belonging to the mayor’s coalition, and those who do not). It also contains information
on the legislature, such as the exact duration and the reasons of early termination, and the
    4
     Other aspects of gender diﬀerences in politics include studies of gender stereotypes of candidates (Huddie
and Terklidsen, 1993; Sanbonmatsu, 2002), and their interplay with campaign strategies (Herrnson, Lay and
Stokes-Brown, 2003); gender diﬀerences in electoral behavior (Sapiro and Conover, 1997), and the evolution
of the political gender gap (Box-Steﬀensmeier, De Boef and Lin, 2004; Edlund and Pande, 2002).



                                                      4
electoral results for the ﬁrst and the second ballot, including turnout rates by gender. We
also have yearly information at the municipality level on population,.on total revenues and on

expenditure (both in total and by components). Finally we have a number of demographic

and economic indicators as of 2005: disposable income after taxes per capita, the labor force
participation rate, the number of productive units per capita and the old-age index,5


3.1       The Italian Institutional Framework

The Italian municipal administration (Comune) is headed by a Mayor (Sindaco), who su-

pervises the Executive Committee (Giunta), and a Council (Consiglio Comunale) which en-

dorses the policies proposed by the mayor with majority rule. The functions of a municipal
administration include the provision of public transportation, some welfare (like assistance

to elderly people, nursery schools, and public housing), contracting for public works and

managing public utilities.
       In 1993 the mayoral electoral system was changed from a party-ballot to an individual-

ballot election of the mayor, with some diﬀerences depending on the size of the city. If the
population size is smaller than 15,000 inhabitants, elections are held with a single ballot and

plurality rule and the winning candidate is awarded a majority premium of at least two-

thirds of the seats in the council. In municipalities with population above 15,000, elections
are held with a double ballot (one for the mayor, and one for the party list), and a runoﬀ

election is held only if none of the candidates in the ﬁrst round obtained an absolute majority
of the votes. The winning candidate is awarded a majority premium of at least 60 percent

of the seats in the council.6 Mayors are subject to a two-terms limit, unless one of the two
   5
     The labor force participation rate is the ratio of active population (15-64) over the whole population.
The old-age index is deﬁned as the ratio of population above age 65 over population below age 14. All the
data were provided by the Statistical Oﬃce of the Italian Ministry of Interiors.
   6
     Some institutional features diﬀer in the regions with special autonomy (Regioni Autonome a Statuto
Speciale), namely Sicily, Val D’Aosta and Trentino Alto Adige (but not Friuli-Venezia-Giulia and Sardinia,
which followed the national legislation). In Sicily the majority premium is 60 percent and elections are held
with double ballot no matter the size of the municipality, although in municipalities with more than 10,000
inhabitants 30 percent of the seats are assigned with party-ballot. In Val D’Aosta the majority premium is
60 percent no matter the size of the municipality. Finally, in Trentino Alto Adige the majority premium is



                                                     5
terms lasted for less than two years. In 2000 the statutory duration of the legislature was
extended from four to ﬁve years.

   What makes the Italian municipal government peculiar is that it has some features of

both the parliamentary and the presidential systems coexisting together. In fact, in the case
of early resignation of the mayor or of at least 50 percent of the councilors, anticipated

elections are called without the possibility of forming a new governing coalition.


3.2     Descriptive Statistics

3.2.1    Diﬀerences by Gender

We have data on more than 8,000 municipalities and 18,000 mayoral terms, 6.7 percent
of which were headed by a female mayor.7 As we can see in Table 1, female mayors are

substantially younger and less experienced (either as mayors or in other positions in municipal

government), and more likely to have been not employed previously. On the other hand,
they are markedly more educated than their male counterparts. Municipalities with female

mayors are less likely to be in the South, have a higher labor force participation rate, more

economic activity, and are richer, but they are no diﬀerent in size relative to municipalities
with male mayors. Female mayors tend to serve in councils with a slightly higher female

representation, and there are also more females in the mayor’s coalition. Unsurprisingly, this
also means that councilors and coalition members are less experienced when the mayor is

female. There are no diﬀerences, however, in the average educational attainment of the city

councilors.8
60 percent and municipalities with less than 3,000 inhabitants in the province of Trento (less than 15,000
inhabitants in the province of Bolzano) have a single ballot, while the others have a double ballot.
   7
     A detailed description of mayors’ and cities’ characteristics can be found in Tables A1 and A2.
   8
     One possible concern whe using a non-random subsample of the population, such as mayors, is that the
process of selection into politics might be diﬀerent between men and women, and this might prejudice the
external validity of our results. However, comparing the elected mayors in our sample with a random sample
of the Italian population (obtained from the Bank of Italy’s Survey on Household Income and Wealth –
SHIW) reveals that there are only small diﬀerences in key observable characteristics (age, education, and
employment status). Moreover, there does not seem to be any diﬀerential pattern of selection by gender.




                                                    6
3.2.2    Deﬁning the Dependent Variable

Our main outcome of interest is a dummy variable indicating whether the municipal leg-
islature failed to complete its term for one of the following reasons: a) the resignation of

the mayor (27.56 percent of the cases); or b) the resignation of the majority of the council
or a no-conﬁdence vote in the council (56.41 percent).9 Other technical reasons for early

termination include, among other, the death of the mayor (8.54 percent), or the mayor being

charged for a crime (0.92 percent).10 Since these latter events are not related to the ability
of a mayor to forge and maintain a political coalition, but rather idiosyncratic events, we

code them as zeros.11

    The resignation of the mayor is usually anticipated by higher resignation rates among
the members of the executive committee (16.7 percent, against 10.3 percent in case of no

resignation of the mayor), as well as among the councilors in the mayor’s coalition (5.8
percent, against 4.1 percent). However, since withdrawing councilors are replaced with the

next candidates in the electoral list, this phenomenon is not important for our analysis unless

it concerns at least 50 percent of the council, in which case anticipated elections are called
and the dependent variable is coded as 1.

    One potential concern with our dependent variable is that it may have little to do with
cooperation between the mayor and the city councilors. Rather, a mayor may choose strategi-

cally to resign early and run for re-election, in order to obtain a larger (and more manageable)

majority in the subsequent election. We do not view this scenario as particularly likely: ﬁrst,
the two-term limit, the cost of campaigning, and the possibility to lose the mayoral monthly

salary (which ranges from 1,300 to 8,000 euros according to population size) act to reduce

the incentives of mayors to resign voluntarily.12 Second, in the case of early termination (and
   9
     In 0.05 percent of these cases, the mayor was then elected in the national parliament; in 5.5 percent in
the regional government; and in 0.6 percent in the provincial government.
  10
     The remaining reasons of early termination include the fusion of the municipality with another one, the
annulment of the election for administrative reasons, and upcoming incompatibilities.
  11
     In doing this we follow Diermeier and Stevenson (1999). The results are not sensitive to excluding all
observations in which the legislature terminated early because of one of these reasons.
  12
     Mayors can keep their private job while appointed. However, in case the mayor works as an employee,


                                                     7
no binding term limit), the percentage of mayors who will then run for re-election is only 37
percent; and, while about 58 percent succeed in being reelected, there is no evidence that

they are able to increase the size of their majority, or to change the equilibrium within their

coalition (the fraction of seats in the mayor’s party decreases from 36 to 34 percent, but the
diﬀerence is not statistically signiﬁcant).

    In Table 2, we present the mean of the dependent variable, separately by gender and

by a number of important covariates. Even though we have data up to the end of 2008,
we restrict the sample only to those mayoral terms appointed between the 1993 electoral

reform, for which we have the electoral and budget information, and December 2003, for
which we can know with certainty whether the legislature was terminated before completing

its full term. First, we note that experience matters a great deal in securing a complete

mandate. Mayors in their ﬁrst term or with less than 5 years in municipal politics are
about 60 percent more likely to be forced into early resignation. There are also important

diﬀerences by region and by type of municipality: the probability of early termination is
much higher in the South and in large municipalities, and is smaller in municipalities with

per capita income above the median (this last variable in part captures the large regional

diﬀerences in per capita income). Large municipalities are probably more diﬃcult to manage,
as are municipalities in the relatively impoverished and crime-infested Italian South. The

probability of early termination increases monotonically as the number of parties represented

in the council rises: governments are less stable when there are a large number of conﬂicting
interests. Finally, it appears that the probability of early termination is highest for mayors

aﬃliated with right and center-right parties, and (to a lesser extent) with separatist and
regional movements (such as the Northern League).

    Strikingly, in almost all of the above subcategories we ﬁnd that women are more likely

to resign early than men. The last grouping of variables is especially informative: the
probability of early resignation decreases monotonically with the proportion of women in
the salary is cut by half unless the mayor asks for a leave-of-absence for the duration of the mandate.



                                                     8
the council, regardless of the gender of the mayor. However, the gap between male and
female mayors becomes dramatically large when there are no female councilors at all.

    Overall, these results suggest that the gender of the mayor and the councilors plays an

important role in determining the probability of early termination of the legislature. We next
move to regression analysis to study whether these diﬀerences are robust to the inclusion of

other mayor and municipality characteristics.



4     Empirical Findings

4.1     Basic OLS Results

In Table 3 we present the results of our basic regression analysis. We include in the sample
all observations with non- missing data on the gender, age and experience of the mayor.

To maximize sample size, we keep observations with missing values on the educational level,

occupation and place of birth of the mayor, and include a dummy variable indicating missing
status for these variables. Similarly, we assign the sample mean to other variables with

missing data (municipality characteristics, fraction of seats in the mayor’s coalition, and

female share of voters), and include a dummy for missing status for these variables. These
procedures increase our sample size by about 15 percent and allow us to obtain more precise

estimates.13 We estimate the following linear model for the probability of early termination:


                        EarlyTjt = α + βF emalejt + γ1 Xjt + δt + ηj + jt ,                             (1)


where EarlyTjt is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the legislature t in municipality j, terminates

before the statutory end of the term, F emalejt is equal to 1 if the mayor was a woman and
0 otherwise, Xjt is a vector of municipality and mayor characteristics, δt is a time eﬀect, ηj

is a municipality ﬁxed eﬀect, and jt is an idiosyncratic error term (which may also depend
 13
    All the results are qualitatively and quantitatively robust to the exclusion of all observations with any
missing data.


                                                     9
on unobserved caracteristics of the mayor elected in municipality j at time t). The last
two terms are all assumed for the moment to be orthogonal to F emalejt. The parameter β

represents the eﬀect of an average elected woman, everything else equal, on the probability

of early termination. Being this a linear probability model, standard errors are made robust
to heteroskedasticity and are clustered at the municipality level. We concentrate on the

coeﬃcient on the female dummy β, and assess how it changes in size and signiﬁcance as we

include additional controls.
   The ﬁrst column of Table 3 presents the coeﬃcient of the simple regression of the prob-

ability of early termination on the female dummy. The coeﬃcient indicates that female
mayors are 1.7 percentage points more likely resign before the end of the term, and it is

marginally statistically signiﬁcant at the 10 percent level. However, the simple inclusion of

regional dummies (column 2) doubles the size of the coeﬃcient, and makes it signiﬁcant at
the 1 percent level. This simply reﬂects the fact that women are less likely to become mayors

in the more unstable municipalities in the Southern regions.
   In column 3 we include other mayor characteristics, municipality, election and council

characteristics and year eﬀects as additional control variables. Most of the coeﬃcients have

the expected sign and are consistent with the patterns observed in the simple bivariate
analysis of Table 2. The probability of early resignation increases with age and decreases with

experience of the mayor, and is lower for local-born mayors. The education and occupation

dummies are each jointly insigniﬁcant, and are not reported in the table. City size increases
the probability of early termination, while income per capita and the labor force participation

rate (indicators of the economic health of the locality) lower it; however, the number of
productive units per capita (another indicator of economic activity) is positively correlated

with early termination. Predictably, city councils that are larger and have more parties are

more diﬃcult to manage, and hence experience more early terminations. Also, if the mayor’s
party controls a large number of seats in the council, the probability of early termination

decreases. This is not surprising: members of the same political party as the mayor are


                                              10
probably more closely aligned with the mayor’s preferences, and less likely to vote against
the mayor’s poposed policies. Surprisingly, though, the probability of early termination is

not correlated with the size of the mayor’s coalition. Finally, the probability of survival is

higher for left and center-left mayors, and lower for right and center-right mayors relative to
the omitted category of independents.

   As we have seen from the previous tables, female mayors tend to be younger and less

experienced, and more likely to serve in economically healthy municipalities: hence it is
possible that inclusion of these variables will knock oﬀ the female coeﬃcient. This is not

the case, however: the coeﬃcients drops only very slightly, to 0.028, and remains strongly
statistically signiﬁcant.

   We can also exploit the multiple elections per municipality over time to include a full

set of municipality ﬁxed eﬀects. It may be the case, in fact, that women are more likely
to be appointed in municipalities which are perceived to be structurally unstable, perhaps

because parties or voters believe they are better at reconciling diﬀerences between fractious
council members. Or it may be, instead, that they are more likely to be elected in cities

where the political environment is known to be historically untroubled, because voters do not

trust their capacity to conciliate a riotous municipal government. In all these situations, the
orthogonality assumption between F emalejt and ηj would not hold anymore. In column 5 we

present the estimates including city ﬁxed eﬀects. Identiﬁcation is obtained from variation

in the gender of the mayor within a municipality across diﬀerent elections. We now ﬁnd
that the female coeﬃcient is substantially larger: once we control for all ﬁxed municipality

characteristics, females are 5.1 percentage points more likely to resign early. The increase
in the coeﬃcient relative to the speciﬁcation without ﬁxed eﬀects is consistent with the

hypothesis that women dislike competition, and are more likely to enter electoral races (and

be elected) in relatively stable municipalities where their probability of completing the term
is relatively high. Taken together, these results show that female mayors have a probability




                                              11
of early resignation that is between 17 percent and 51 percent higher relative to men.14


4.2    Gender Composition of the Council and Mayor’s Coalition

The probability that a municipal legislature survives until the end of its term depends on

the mayor’s ability to foster cooperation, and also on the individual councilors’ propensity
to cooperate with the mayor. It may therefore be of direct interest to study the eﬀect

of the gender composition of the council or of the mayor’s coalition on the probability of
early termination. Moreover, if female mayors are more likely to be surrounded by a high

proportion of female councilors, and there are gender diﬀerences in the propensity to act

cooperatively, then including the proportion of women in the council may also aﬀect the
estimated eﬀect of the mayor’s gender on the probability of early termination. It is also

worth investigating whether any eﬀect of the proportion of women in the council is driven

by coalition councilors that “stab the mayor in the back” (or refrain from doing so), or by
opposition councilors that happen to be particularly combative in their eﬀorts to oust the

mayor from oﬃce.
   The analysis is carried out in Table 4. In column 1 we estimate a regression analogous

to equation (1) with the full set of control variables (see column 4 in Table 3), but we add

the proportion of females in the council, as well as the other average characteristics of the
city councilors (age, experience, level of education, proportion not employed previously, and

proportion local born). In column 2 we further separate between the proportion of women
in the mayor’s coalition and the proportion of women in opposing parties. The sample sizes

are somewhat smaller, since we only keep observations for which we observe demographic

characteristics for all city councilors (column 1), or for which we can identify with certainty
party aﬃliation (column 2).

   The results show quite clearly that a higher proportion of women in the council is asso-
  14
    In order to exclude the possibility that some women may have resigned because of maternity leave,
we run the same analysis on the sample of mayors who are more than 40 years old. Results were both
qualitatively and quantitatively invariant to this sample restriction.



                                                 12
ciated with a lower probability of early termination. A 10 point increase in the percentage
of women in the council (roughly a one standard deviation increase) reduces the probability

of early termination by 0.7 percentage points, while the coeﬃcient on the female dummy

is essentially the same as that estimated in Table 3. Strikingly, the eﬀect is driven almost
entirely by women in the mayor’s coalition, while the proportion of women in other lists

has no eﬀect on the probability of early termination. However, inclusion of a full set of

municipality ﬁxed eﬀects (columns 3 and 4) makes the eﬀect of proportion women in the
council or in the mayor’s coalition become positive and insigniﬁcant. Overall, it appears that

municipalities that are inherently more stable are more likely to have women in the council
and in the mayor’s coalition.15

    We defer to the next section the analysis of the interaction between the mayor’s gender

and the gender composition of the council. Before that, though, we use a regression disconti-
nuity design to explore whether the eﬀect of a female mayor is driven by a diﬀerent selection

of male and female candidates into municipalities that are more or less diﬃcult to manage.


4.3     RDD Results

The speciﬁcation we used in equation (1) ignored that the political environment might vary

from one election to another within the same municipality depending on contingent factors,
and that this might inﬂuence the choice of a female rather than a male candidate. In other

words, F emalejt might be correlated with the transitory error component jt . If so, ﬁxed
eﬀects estimates at municipality level may not be enough to remove this source of bias,

and β will no more identify the eﬀect of an average woman, everything else equal, on the

probability of early termination. To this purpose, we implement a Regression Discontinuity
  15
     To address the potential endogeneity of the percentage of female councilors, we also ran 2SLS regres-
sions exploiting an institutional feature of the 1993 electoral reform. The 1993 law prescribed that on any
electoral list there could be no more than 60% representatives of either gender. In 1995, this provision was
unexpectedly deemed unconstitutional, and it was eliminated.
   We therefore used the presence of the gender quotas as an instrument for the proportion of women in
the council. The results show that the gender quotas signiﬁcantly raised the number of women both in the
mayor’s coalition and in the council by about 6-7 percent. However, while all the ﬁrst stage diagnostics were
satisfactory, the estimates were somewhat unconvincingly large.


                                                     13
Design (RDD) by focusing on mixed-gender electoral races decided by a narrow margin.16
If the outcome of an electoral race between a man and a woman is uncertain, the winner is

determined by elements which are beyond the candidates’ control (e.g., weather on election

day, breaking news), and the gender of the elected mayor is therefore exogenous with respect
to cities’ observable and unobservable characteristics.

    It is important to recognize that RDD comes with high internal validity, but low external

validity. Without strong assumptions justifying extrapolation to other subpopulations (e.g.,
homogeneity of the treatment eﬀect), the RDD never allows to estimate the eﬀect of the

treatment for values of the running variable that are far from the threshold. We discuss be-
low the conditions under which the RDD estimate can correctly identify the average gender

diﬀerence in the probability of early termination. We should also mention, however, that in

our study local identiﬁcation may actually be of ﬁrst-order relevance, as it may be intrinsi-
cally important to understand the role of the mayor’s characteristics speciﬁcally when the

majority detained by the mayor in the council is small, and hence cooperation within the
council matters the most.


4.3.1    Identiﬁcation

In the spirit of Rubin (1974), we deﬁne EarlyTj (1) as the potential outcome of municipality
j if the mayor is a woman, and EarlyTj (0) as the potential outcome of the same municipality

if the mayor is a man, at a speciﬁc point in time t. Our identiﬁcation strategy relies on the
fact that in mixed-gender races there is a man running against a woman, with voters deciding

whether a municipality will have a female or a male mayor.17 Assignment to treatment can
  16
     See Imbens and Lemieux (2008) and Van der Klaauw (2008) for a survey on RDD. See also Lee, Moretti
and Butler (2004) and Lee (2008) for empirical studies that have exploited the assignment mechanism
generated by the margin of victory in single-member plurality elections. Closer to our spirit, Rehavi (2007)
and Clots-Figueras (2008) use the share of districts won by a female candidate in a close election against a
male politician, to identify the eﬀect of female representatives on educational and other policies, respectively
in the U.S. and in India.
  17
     For the sake of the simplicity, we assume for the moment that there are no other candidates. We also
do not consider the case in which there is more than one gender-mixed race within the same municipality
over time t, or with the same mayor i.



                                                      14
then be speciﬁed as:
                                  F emalej = 1[MVj ≥ 0],                                (2)

where MVj is the margin of victory and 1[.] the indicator function. The margin of victory
is deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the vote share of the female and the male candidate.

This is an example of sharp RDD, as the probability of receiving the treatment has a sharp

discontinuity equal to 1 at the threshold MVj = 0.
   The margin MVj can be seen as a random variable depending on observable and unob-

servable city characteristics, as well as on general occurrences on election day. Deﬁne Uj
as a term representing the municipality unobservable characteristics aﬀecting EarlyTj (1),

EarlyTj (0), MVj , and the observed municipality characteristics Xj at the same time, where

Xj also includes the policy that will be implemented by the candidate if elected. The rela-
tionship between Uj and MVj is assumed to satisfy the following condition.


Assumption 1 Deﬁne F (MVj |Uj = u) as the cumulative distribution function of MVj
conditional on Uj and, for each u in the support of Uj , assume that:


  a. 0 < F (0|Uj = u) < 1;

  b. F (MVj |Uj = u) is continuously diﬀerentiable in MVj at MVj = 0.


   Assumption (1) states that even if candidates can partially aﬀect the electoral outcome
(i.e., there might be some partial manipulation of the running variable), their margin of

victory includes some random element, so that the probability of a woman or a man winning

the election is never equal to 0 or 1 (condition a). Furthermore, when MVj = 0 voters
are indiﬀerent between the two candidates, and each candidate has the same probability of

winning or losing by a narrow margin (condition b).
   Lee (2008) shows that under Assumption (1):


                         lim E(Uj |MVj = ) = lim E(Uj |MVj = )                        (3)
                          ↑0                     ↓0


                                             15
                         lim E(Xj |MVj = ) = lim E(Xj |MVj = ).                          (4)
                         ↑0                      ↓0


that is, when MVj = 0 cities’ observable and the unobservable characteristics are identical,

independently on whether the elected candidate is a man or a woman (in the next subsection
we discuss how candidates’ characteristics behave around the threshold). It follows that:


         lim E(EarlyTj (0)|F emalej = 0, MVj = ) = lim E(EarlyTj |MVj = )                (5)
          ↑0                                             ↑0

         lim E(EarlyTj (1)|F emalej = 1, MVj = ) = lim E(EarlyTj |MVj = ).               (6)
          ↓0                                             ↓0



Therefore, the quantity [lim↓0 E(EarlyTj |MVj = ) − lim↑0 E(EarlyTj |MVj = )] has the

causal interpretation of the average treatment eﬀect at the threshold:


                     AT Erdd ≡ E(EarlyTj (1) − EarlyTj (0)|MVj = 0).                       (7)


4.3.2   Interpretation

The main reason for implementing a regression discontinuity design is that it allows us to

control for any potential correlation between time-varying unobservable characteristics at the
municipality level and the gender of the mayor. This is probably the type of selection that

is of ﬁrst-order importance, and the RD design is helpful in taking account of it. However,
as is clear from equation (7), the RRD can only identify the local treatment eﬀect of the

mayor’s gender in races decided by a narrow margin. To understand whether this parameter

is informative about the average gender diﬀerence in the population, we need to consider the
underlying voting process that determines whether an electoral race will be closely contested.

   In interpreting our results, we build on the model of partisan politicians (Alesina, 1988).

In this model, political parties care not only about being elected, but also about the policy
they will implement if they win the election. Rational voters anticipate that parties cannot

credibly commit to any announced policy other than their preferred one, and will have an
incentive to deviate towards their preferred policy after the election. Hence, the only time-


                                             16
consistent equilibrium is the one in which the two parties follow their most preferred policies,
and there is no convergence in policies towards the median voter. We introduce here the

possibility that the elected mayor will not be able to implement the desired policy and will

be ousted from power before the end of the term.
    Consider ﬁrst as a benchmark the case in which voters care only about the announced

policies, but do not care about the probability that the policy will be implemented.18 The

share of votes going to any one party is simply a function of the preferred policies (which
are assumed to be exogenous) and of the distribution of preferences in the population.19 We

make the natural assumption that the more closely contested the electoral race, the less likely
is the government to survive until the end of the term (because the majority in the council

will be narrower). If women are less likely to enter closely contested races, then the OLS

estimate over the whole sample of races will underestimate the average gender diﬀerence in
the probability of survival. However, if the type of race in which women enter is unrelated to

the characteristic of the candidate (i.e., high ability women are just as likely to enter closely
contested races as non closely contested races), the RDD estimate will provide an unbiased

estimate of the average gender diﬀerence in the population.

    More plausibly, there might be selection in the type of races entered by candidates with
diﬀerent abilities, both observed (experience, age, education) and unobserved (charisma,

personality, ability to foster cooperation). If high ability candidates of both genders are more

likely to enter closely-contested races, then the RDD estimate will capture the diﬀerence in
the probability of survival between high ability men and high ability women. The relationship

between this parameter and the average gender diﬀerence will depend on what we are willing
to assume about the eﬀect of “ability” on the probability of survival for the two genders. If
  18
     Alternatively, it may be the case that voters have no information about the candidates’ ability to realize
the policy, and there is no way to credibly signal one’s ability.
  19
     More recent “citizen-candidate” models (Osborne and Slivinski, 1996; Besley and Coate, 1997; Chat-
tophadyay and Duﬂo, 2004) endogenize the candidates’ policy platforms. These models have the feature
that in a two-candidate equilibrium, the two candidates will exactly split the vote. This is unappealing for
our analysis, because it implies that all races should be “closely contested,” while our focus is precisely on
the contrast between closely and non-closely contested races.



                                                      17
ability matters more for women than for men (e.g., it requires women with a “tough skin” to
survive in a male-dominated environment), then the RDD estimate will be an underestimate

of the average gender diﬀerence in the probability of survival. Similarly, if the pattern of

selection by ability in close races diﬀers by gender, with women running in close races being
more selected in terms of ability, the RDD estimate would also be an underestimate of the

average gender diﬀerence.

   Consider now the case where voters care not only about policies, but also about the
politicians’ ability to successfully implement them. Moreover, voters know that women may

be less likely to survive until the end of the term. Then, in close electoral races female
candidates must compensate for this disability, i.e., they must be either (a) perceived to

be more stable in terms of other observed characteristics (age, experience, etc.) and unob-

served characteristics (charisma, personality, etc.); or (b) closer to the “median voter” in
terms of their preferred policy than their male opponent.20 The ﬁrst case has some testable

implications: ﬁrst, we should observe divergence in candidates’ observable characteristics as
the race becomes close, with female candidates being superior in terms of characteristics

that are positively correlated with stability; second, we should observe ex-post no diﬀerence

in government stability, because voters have compensated the lower perceived stability of
the female candidate with other characteristics that make her more stable. If some ex-post

diﬀerence in government stability is detected, this will be an underestimate of the average

gender diﬀerence in the population.
   On the other hand, it is diﬃcult to assess whether female candidates in close races choose

policies that are closer to those of the median voter (i.e., they choose policies such that, if
there were no diﬀerences in perceived stability, they would garner a comfortable majority of

the votes). However, if being closer to the median voter has no eﬀect on the ex-post survival

probability, the same reasoning used in the case of indiﬀerent or uninformed voters applies
also here: what the RDD estimate can capture depends on the selection of women and men
  20
    By “median voter” we refer to the median voter in a race in which the candidates do not diﬀer in terms
of perceived stability.


                                                   18
into diﬀerent types of electoral races. If instead the fact of being closer to the median voter
increases government stability, the RDD estimate would be again an underestimate of the

average gender diﬀerence in the population.

   To sum up, the RDD delivers an estimate of β which is free of any bias related to
both time-varying and time-invariant speciﬁcities of the cities in which women are elected.

RDD estimates can potentially identify the average gender diﬀerence in the population, but

this will depend on the assumptions about the selection of candidates by gender into close
electoral races, and on the voters’ informational set.21 Under most plausible assumptions

about the type of selection of candidates into close races, it is likely that the RDD coeﬃcient
represents an underestimate of the average gender diﬀerence in the population.


4.3.3   Estimation

Various estimation methods have been proposed to implement equation (7), which requires

estimating the boundary points of two regression functions. In particular, we apply two

methods: the local linear regression (LLR) proposed by Imbens and Lemieux (2008), and
the split polynomial approximation used by Lee, Moretti, and Butler (2004) and Lee (2008).

   The ﬁrst method restricts the estimation to a compact support, and ﬁts two separate

linear regression functions within a distance h on either side of the threshold. This method is
particularly attractive because it is not sensitive to outcome values for observations far away

from the threshold. In other words, it restricts the sample to an interval MVj ∈ [−h, +h] to
estimate the model:


                  EarlyTj = α + βF emalej + γMVj + δF emalej · MVj + j ,                         (8)


using OLS. The bandwidth h can be selected applying the cross-validation method proposed
by Imbens and Lemieux (2008).
  21
    The same is true for other empirical designs, like the experimental framework implemented in Chat-
topadhyay and Duﬂo (2004), where randomly chosen cities were assigned a female mayor but there was no
control over candidates’s selection.


                                                 19
    The second method uses the whole sample, choosing a ﬂexible speciﬁcation to ﬁt the
relationship between EarlyTj and MVj on either side of the threshold:


                 EarlyTj = α + βF emalej + (γ1 MVj + ... + γp MVjp ) +

                                 (δ1F emalej · MVj + ... + δpF emalej MVjp) + j ,                     (9)


which is then estimated with OLS. As MVj is equal to zero at the threshold, the coeﬃcient
β identiﬁes the AT Erdd .


4.3.4    Results

The sample of mixed-gender electoral races is made of 2,255 electoral terms, 1,237 of which

elected with a margin of victory smaller than 10 percentage points, 665 smaller than 5, and

144 smaller than 1. The sample is similar to the sample of all races in many respects (the
average population is 8,369, 22 percent of cities are in the South, and the average income per

capita is 13,954), including the average probability of early termination which is 10 percent.22
    We start with a graphical representation in Figure 1, which reports the running-mean

smoothing (separately on either side of the threshold) of the probability of early termination.

To account for the presence of other rivals in the electoral race, MVj is divided by the sum
of the share of the ﬁrst two candidates in the decisive ballot.23 Male mayors have values

of MVj below 0, while female mayors above 0. The jump is clearly visible and positive,
meaning that in the neighborhood of the threshold municipalities with a female mayor are

more unstable. It is also worth noting that the higher the distance from the threshold, the

lower the probability of early termination, which is consistent with the idea that a signiﬁcant
majority of seats in the city council guarantees more stable governments.

    More formal RDD estimates on the probability of early termination are reported in Table
  22
    We excluded the uncontested races, and the races with the ﬁrst two candidates of the same gender.
  23
    Over the sample of contested mixed-gender electoral races, 48.45 percent had two candidates only, 29.43
had three (the ﬁrst two being a man and a woman), 12.21 had four, and 9.91 percent more than four. In
case the election is decided at the second ballot, the number of candidates is by deﬁnition equal to two.


                                                    20
5. To begin with, the ﬁrst row presents OLS estimates of the probability of early termination
on the sample of mixed-gender races. Compared to the sample of all races, mixed-gender

races do not deliver substantially diﬀerent regression results, the eﬀect of a female mayor

on the probability of early termination being positive (0.036) and statistically signiﬁcant.
Numbers almost double when we run a separate estimation on both sides of the discontinuity

point. When using a local linear regression on the whole sample of mixed-gender races, the

eﬀect of having a female mayor on the probability of early termination is 0.065, which rises
to 0.076 when the electoral race is made of two candidates only. When we use instead a

local linear regression speciﬁcation with an optimal bandwidth of 25 percentage points, the
coeﬃcient for a female mayor is 0.061, while with a second order polynomial approximation it

is 0.060.24 Results are not sensitive to the choice of the bandwidth (the local linear regression

estimate with half optimal bandwidth is 0.063), as well as to the use of mixed-gender races
with two candidates only (and an optimal bandwidth of 29 percentage points).

   Taken together, these results show that municipalities headed by female mayors have a
probability of early resignation that is between 60 percent and 80 percent higher relative

to men. These numbers are signiﬁcantly higher than the regression results over the entire

sample in Table 3 and 6. In particular, they are higher than the regression results over
the sample of mixed-gender races, which may be interpreted as evidence that either female

candidates sort into electoral races that are not closely contested (i.e., more stable), or that

they face more diﬃculties at governing when there is a narrow majority.
   The validity of our estimation strategy can be assessed with diﬀerent testing procedures.

In Figure 2 we ﬁrst investigate the validity of assumption 1 about the continuity of the
running variable. Even though male candidates seem to have an electoral advantage when

running against a woman, a visual inspection of MVj at the discontinuity point rejects

the hypothesis that there might be complete manipulation of the running variable. The
density is in fact smooth and well behaved (up to some small sample noise) around the
 24
      Results are qualitatively similar when using higher order polynomials.



                                                      21
threshold, with male and female candidates sharing the same probability of winning when
the electoral race is tight. A formal density test (McCrary, 2008) further rejects the presence

of a statistically signiﬁcant jump in the running variable at the discontinuity point (the

estimated log-diﬀerence is -0.090, with a standard error of 0.090).25
    In Table 6 we analyze the behavior of the available pre-treatment covariates in the neigh-

borhood of the threshold. As we can see, all the municipality characteristics are well bal-

anced, as well as the political environment characteristics (mayor’s party, gender of the
voters).26 As a matter of fact, Figures 3 and 4 show that as the electoral race becomes tight

there is equalization between municipalities where men and women are elected, which is not
the case for less contested races. This is compelling evidence in support of the randomization

induced by tight electoral competitions.27 We ﬁnd instead some diﬀerences between male

and female winning candidates: women elected in close races are younger, more educated,
less experienced and more likely to be not employed than their male counterpart.28 We also

compute an index of “perceived instability” by predicting the ex-post survival probability
using all the observable characteristics available to the voters (the same as in Table 6). We

do not ﬁnd any diﬀerence in this index around the threshold: although elected women and

men are not observationally equivalent, voters do not perceive them as diﬀerent in terms of
ex-post stability. It is also worth noting that there is no evidence of divergence in candidates’

observable characteristics as far as the race becomes close (see Figure 5): instead, women

elected with a small margin are older, less likely to be not employed, and less likely to be
born in a diﬀerent province than their average.
  25
     The optimal bin size and bandwidth for the sample of all the mixed-gender races were 0.583 and 16.043
respectively. Figures are identical for the sample of races with only two candidates.
  26
     In principle, the old-age index, the per-capita income and the labor force participation rate refer to 2005,
and could not be considered as pre-treatment. However, as far as there is some degree of resilience, they
cannot be easily aﬀected by the mayor and we can consider them as a permanent city characteristic.
  27
     We also implemented placebo tests by estimating jumps at points of the running variable where there
should be no eﬀect (the median of the two subsamples on either side of the cutoﬀ value), and found that
jumps at fake thresholds are never statistically diﬀerent from zero. Finally, we run a falsiﬁcation test by
using the pre-treatment outcome of the municipality, i.e., whether the previous legislature terminated early
despite it was not headed by a female mayor, and found that in the pre-treatment period the municipalities
which will later have a female mayor did not behave diﬀerently.
  28
     We ﬁnd very similar ﬁgures when comparing losing and winning candidates.


                                                       22
    Following the discussion in section 4.3.2, we can interpret this evidence in two ways:
either voters do not anticipate that women will be more likely to resign after election; or,

alternatively, even if they know a diﬀerence exists, this is compensated in other dimensions

of candidates’ policy platform, rather than of candidates’ characteristics. In both cases,
the RDD estimate represents at least an underestimate of the average gender diﬀerence in

the population, the true diﬀerence being even larger. Furthermore, the fact that the RDD

point estimates in Table 5 are invariant to the inclusion of all covariates (including mayors’
characteristics) is further evidence of the robustness of the estimation strategy.



5      Interpretation of the Results

The analysis up to this point has shown fairly robust evidence that female mayors are

more likely to be forced into early resignation. We now consider a number of possible

explanations for this result. For simplicity, we conduct all our analysis using OLS and ﬁxed
eﬀects regressions. To gain in sample size, we will also focus on the gender composition of

the council rather than the mayor’s coalition.29
    Discrimination by male councilors. A natural hypothesis is that female mayors face

more diﬃculties in keeping their coalition together, because of resistance on the part of male

councilors, who dislike being led by a woman. This is consistent with the notion of employee
discrimination à la Becker (1971).30 We conduct two tests to assess to what extent our

results can be driven by the unfavorable attitudes of male councilors toward fenale leaders.
    First, we look at whether the eﬀect of a female mayor is larger when there is a relatively

larger share of men in the council. The results are presented in Table 7. The ﬁrst column

is a simple OLS regression similar to the speciﬁcation in Table 4, where we add a linear
  29
     All the following results are qualitatively unchanged if we use the proportion of women in the mayor’s
coalition (see also Table 4).
  30
     While employee discrimination features prominently in every textbook discussion of discrimination, there
has been surprisingly little empirical research on the subject. Exceptions include Ragan and Tremblay (1988)
and Buﬀum and Whaples, (1995).




                                                     23
interaction between the mayor gender dummy and the proportion of women in the council.31
The coeﬃcient on the interaction is negative, consistent with the hypothesis of discrimination

on the part of male councilors, but not statistically signiﬁcant. Compared to the results in

Table 4, the coeﬃcient on the main eﬀect of gender rises to 0.048. This is the implied eﬀect
of a female mayor at the head of an entirely male council. Evaluated at the mean of the

proportion female in the council, the eﬀect of a female mayor on the probability of early

termination is 3.1 percentage points, and statistically signiﬁcant. Column 2 includes a full
set of municipality ﬁxed eﬀects. The interaction eﬀect becomes larger but not statistically

signiﬁcant, while the main eﬀect and the implied eﬀect at the mean of proportion female in
the council rises and remains signiﬁcant.

    In columns 3 and 4 we include the proportion female in the council as a piecewise constant

function, and we interact this function with the gender dummy. We ﬁnd now an even
larger eﬀect of a female mayor in entirely male council, both in the OLS and the ﬁxed

eﬀects speciﬁcation. The remaining coeﬃcients are all negative and almost all statistically
signiﬁcant (except in the speciﬁcation with ﬁxed eﬀects), but do not reveal a clear pattern

of the female mayor eﬀect becoming smaller as the proportion of women in the council

increases. In columns 5 and 6 we include just a dummy for whether there were any women
in the council. The main eﬀect of gender is essentially the same as in column 3 and 4: in

entirely male coalitions, female mayors are between 13.4 and 15.1 percentage points more

likely to resign early. If there is at least one woman in the coalition, the eﬀect of a female
mayor on the probability of early termination drops to between 2.4-5.5 percentage points.

    Summing up, a female mayor heading a male-only council has a much lower probability
of survival than her male counterpart. This result suggests that male councilors may act less

cooperatively when the government is headed by a female, and that this element is enhanced

when the council is made up entirely of men. We can view this result as a “political glass
  31
    Table 4 highlighted that it is primarily the proportion of women in the mayor’s coalition (and not in
other lists) that is correlated with the probability of early termination. To preserve sample size, we look here
at the interaction between the proportion of women in the council and the mayor’s gender. All the results
in Table 7 are essentially the same if we use proportion women in the mayor’s coalition instead.


                                                      24
ceiling,” so to speak: women may struggle to reach the upper echelons of management or
the political arena, because they encounter resistance and lack of cooperativeness from the

(predominantly male) group that they are supposed to lead.32 Interestingly, we do not ﬁnd

that any additional increases in the proportion of female councilors (beyond having at least
one female councilor) raises the survival probability of female-headed councils. The extent

of discrimination does not increase linearly with the fraction of male councilors. Rather,

it appears that there may be a latent resistance of men to be led by a woman, which only
manifests itself when there is not at least one female councilor that can keep it in check.

   Our second test for the presence of discrimination involves comparing the eﬀect of a
female mayor across diﬀerent Italian regions, and exploiting the large geographical diﬀerences

in attitudes towards women. The ﬁrst two columns of Table 8 show that the eﬀect of a female

mayor is concentrated almost exclusively in the Southern regions (as compared to the regions
in the Center), where traditional gender norms prevail. At the same time, municipalities in

the South may be more diﬃcult to manage for reasons that are unrelated to gender norms
(organized crime, low tax revenues, worse infrastructure).

   To focus our attention on gender norms, we collected data from the 1999 wave of the Eu-

ropean Values Survey (EVS), and constructed for each region an index of favorable attitudes
towards working women.33 The index is normalized to have mean 0 and standard deviation

1 in the sample of the 20 Italian regions. Columns 3 and 4 show that the interaction between

the female mayor dummy and this index is negative and signiﬁcant in the OLS speciﬁca-
tion, and of roughly similar magnitude but statistically not signiﬁcant in the ﬁxed eﬀects

speciﬁcation. In columns 5 and 6 we replace the index with the actual female labor force
  32
     Gender stigmas, but of the opposite sign, are also documented by Bagues and Esteve-Volart (2007), who
ﬁnd that female candidates to the Corps of the Spanish Judiciary are signiﬁcantly less likely to be hired
when randomly assigned to a committee where the share of female evaluators is relatively large.
  33
     The index was constructed by taking the ﬁrst principal component of male respondents’ answers (on a
four point scale) to the following six questions: a) A mother who works outside of the home can establish
a warm and safe relationship with her children as much as a mother who does not work; b) It’s likely that
a pre-school child suﬀers if the mother works outside the home; c) It is OK to work outside the home, but
what the majority of women really want is a home and children; d) Being a housewife is as fulﬁlling for a
woman as working for pay; e) Having a job is the best way for a woman to be independent; f) Both the
husband and the wife should contribute to family earnings.


                                                   25
participation rate in the year the municipal council was elected, computed using the Bank of
Italy’s Survey on Household Income and Wealth (SHIW). This allows to dispel concerns that

the index is only capturing some regional eﬀects that are constant over time and correlated

with the probability of early termination. The interaction of the gender dummy and female
labor force participation is negative and marginally statistically signiﬁcant in column 5 (not

in column 6, when we include municipality ﬁxed eﬀects), indicating that even within regions

a higher proportion of working women makes the eﬀect of a female mayor become smaller.
   Overall, while the evidence in Tables 9 and 10 cannot be viewed as conclusive, it does

suggest that part of the lower survival probability of female mayors can be attributed to
discriminating attitudes on the part of male councilors who resist being led by a woman.

   Diﬀerences in combativeness. An alternative hypothesis, inspired by the notion that

women dislike competition and may choose to opt out of very competitive settings, holds
that women may be less combative, and may choose to resign early when encountering

diﬃculties in handling a riotous municipal council. It may also be possible that this eﬀect is
more pronounced in councils in which the mayor is the only woman or in regions with more

traditional gender roles, consistent with the ﬁndings of Tables 9 and 10.

   This hypothesis implies that type of early resignation should be aﬀected by the gender of
the mayor. Speciﬁcally, female mayors should be more likely to actively resign, while there

may be no gender diﬀerences in the proability of early termination because of a no-conﬁdence

vote or because of resignation of the council. We test this hypothesis in Table 9. In the ﬁrst
2 columns the dependent variable is a dummy for whether the mayor actively resigns, and in

the next two columns the dependent variable is a dummy for whether early termination of the
council was forced by the council’s resignation or by a no-conﬁdence vote. The hypothesized

gender diﬀerence in combativeness does not receive any support in the data: both in the

whole sample (top panel), and in the South only (bottom panel), we ﬁnd that female-headed
councils are more likely to be terminated because of the council’s resignation rather than

because of the mayor’s resignation. These results are conﬁrmed in the multinomial logit


                                             26
speciﬁcation of columns 5 and 6. The fact that early termination apparently originates in
the council, and that the eﬀect is stronger in Southern regions, reinforces the idea that

discrimination plays an important role.

    Women as reformers. Perhaps women mayors have more diﬃculties in surviving until
the end of their term not because of gender per se, but because women are more likely to be

reformers, and face more obstacles in trying to implement their reforms. We do not view this

hypothesis as particularly credible. First, in all of our regressions we control for an extensive
set of background characteristics, including the age and previous experience of the mayor in

municipal government. These variables capture to some extent the likelihood that the mayor
is a “new face” in municipal politics. The basic result is very robust to the inclusion of all

these controls. In fact, when we restrict the sample to only young or inexperienced mayors,

we still ﬁnd a large and signiﬁcant gender coeﬃcient.
    We can also probe further the “women as reformers” hypothesis by directly examining

the policies enacted in each municipality. We have information on a limited, but important,
set of policy instruments, namely the size of the budget deﬁcit, revenues per capita, and the

share of government expenditures on education, welfare and security.34 Columns 1 to 6 of

Table 10 show the results from regressing these policy variables on the female dummy and
on the full set of control variables used in our base speciﬁcation. We ﬁnd that the gender of

the mayor has essentially no eﬀect on either the budget deﬁcit or on log revenue per capita.

There is some small positive eﬀect on the expenditure for education in the entire sample (see
also Chattopadhyay and Duﬂo, 2004; Clots-Figueras, 2008a and 2008b; Funk and Gathman,

2008; Rehavi, 2007), but not if we limit attention to Southern regions.
    In Table 11 we present the results from the estimation of the basic model with controls

for the policy variables. Predictably, given the results in Table 10, the gender dummy

coeﬃcient is unaﬀected by the inclusion of the policy variables. Some of the policy variables
  34
    The percentage budget deﬁcit is computed as the absolute deﬁcit divided by the total revenues. Welfare
expenditure also includes the expenditure for transportation, since until 1999 the two items were classiﬁed
together. All budget variables computed as the mean over the term, excluding election years.



                                                    27
are statistically signiﬁcant and have the expected signs: higher revenues and higher budget
deﬁcits lower the probability of early termination, suggesting that the legislature is more

stable when there is more money to go around, and when ﬁscal policy is more lax, suggesting

that the mayor can secure the support of council members by spending more proﬂigately.
Education expenditure is associated with lower chances of early termination, while police

expenditure increases it (perhaps police expenditure serves as a proxy for the incidence of

organized crime), but these eﬀects disappear when we include municipality ﬁxed eﬀects.
Overall, there does not seem to be much evidence that gender diﬀerences in the probability

of early termination are due to diﬀerences in the policies enacted by male and female mayors.
   Other explanations. Other explanations for the gender diﬀerences are more diﬃcult

to confute with the data at hand. One possibility is that female mayors are more diﬃcult

at fostering cooperation in general, and not speciﬁcally when the coalition is predominantly
male. This appears to be inconsistent with the large eﬀect of a female mayor in entirely

male coalitions, and with the large eﬀect in regions with more conservative attitudes towards
working women. It is true that a female mayor is more likely to resign even if there is at

least one woman in the coalition (Table 7, columns 5 and 6), but one should keep in mind

that on average less than a ﬁfth of council members are women: in general, female mayors
operate in an environment where men represent a substantial majority.

   It could also be that female mayors are in fact less eﬀective in running the municipal

government, and that this diﬀerence in government “productivity” is the reason for the gap
in the probability of early termination. While this explanation is at odds with the lack of

gender diﬀerences in enacted policies, these are clearly imperfect measures of government
output. One possible measure of the success of a city is population growth (Glaeser et

al., 1995). However, in contrast to the hypothesis of female mayors being less productive,

we actually ﬁnd that population growth is higher in cities headed by a female mayor (2.21
percent overall, 0.76 percent annualized growth rate) rather than a male mayor (1.63 percent

overall, 0.43 percent annualized), even though this diﬀerence is not statistically signiﬁcant.


                                              28
   One result that emerged from Table 2 is that the gender diﬀerence in the probability of
early termination vanishes among more experienced mayors. This result persists even when

we control for all the other mayor and municipality characteristics. This can lead one to

think that women view their experience in politics as an exploration of a new career path,
and those who ﬁnd out that they are a bad match leave early to pursue other aspirations,

while those who remain in municipal government are equally eﬀective as men. We view this

explanation as complementary to our preferred story based on gender dynamics within the
city council. It is possible that inexperienced female leaders are more susceptible to hostility

on the part of male councilors, and this leads them to be more likely to resign early. We
should also note that, even holding constant previous experience in municipal government,

the eﬀect of a female mayor is larger in the South and in municipalities with no female

councilors, lending support to a story based on discrimination within the council.
   Finally, the female mayor eﬀect may be the result of expected discrimination on the

part of voters, rather than something related to the group dynamics within the council.
According to this hypothesis, coalition members who expect that a woman candidate will be

discriminated against in the upcoming elections operate to remove her from oﬃce in order to

improve their electoral chances. We don’t view this explanation as very plausible. First, a
woman mayor had been elected in the ﬁrst place, so it is diﬃcult to argue that discrimination

will only manifest itself in subsequent elections. In fact, Beaman et al. (2008) argue that

exposure to female political leaders improves perceptions of female leader eﬀectiveness and
weakens stereotypes about gender roles in public and domestic spheres. Second, we have

shown that female mayors implement policies that are essentially no diﬀerent from their male
counterparts, so it is unlikely that voters will lobby to remove a female mayor but not a male

one. Lastly, we did not ﬁnd any evidence that female mayors suﬀer any electoral penalty

(relative to men) after having been forced to resign, even though the sample size may be too
small to detect meaningful diﬀerences.




                                              29
6      Conclusion

In this paper we present one of the ﬁrst pieces of evidence on the eﬀect of politicians’ gender
on government stability. Using a large sample of Italian municipalities, we show that the

probability of early termination of a city council increases when the mayor is a woman.

The result is robust to the inclusion of a large set of controls and municipality ﬁxed eﬀects,
and to a regression discontinuity analysis that controls for the potential selection of women

candidates into diﬀerent types of electoral races. In fact the latter analysis shows that
the gender gap in the probability of early termination is even higher in mixed-gender races

decided by a narrow margin. This suggests that women are less likely to run for oﬃce in

municipalities that are relatively diﬃcult to manage.
    We discuss a number of potential explanations for these ﬁndings. The fact that the

“female mayor eﬀect” is more pronounced when the mayor heads an entirely male coalition,

and is concentrated in regions with less favorable attitudes towards working women suggests
that part of eﬀect can be attributed to discriminating attitudes on the part of male councilors

who resist being led by a woman. Other explanations receive less support in the data.
    These results could be used to understand gender dynamics in other hierarchical environ-

ments with which the municipal political arena (more even than the national arena) shares

many features. For example, in corporate ﬁrms the CEO is elected by shareholders and is
appointed to run the company for a limited term together with a board of directors, which

resembles a municipal council in both size and dynamics.
    Of course, our empirical exercise cannot say anything about whether the gender dif-

ferences we observe are the result of individual’s innate qualities (nature) or of personal

experiences (nurture).35 Still, it raises a challenge for empirical research aimed at assessing
the existence of gender diﬀerences over a broader array of dimensions.



  35
   See Gneezy, Leonard and List (2008) for an exercise which uses experimental evidence to provide insights
about the determinants of the observed gender diﬀerences.


                                                    30
References

Alesina, Alberto. 1988. Credibility and Policy Convergence in a Two-Party System with
    Rational Voters. American Economic Review, 78, 796-806.

Andreoni, James and Vesterlund, Lise. 2001. Which is the Fair Sex? Gender Diﬀerences in
    Altruism. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 293-312.

Bagues, Manuel and Esteve-Volart, Berta. 2007. Can Gender Parity Break the Glass Ceiling?

    Evidence from a Repeated Randomized Experiment. FEDEA Working Paper 2007/15.

Beaman, Lori, Chattopadhyay, Raghabendra, Duﬂo, Esther, Pande, Rohini and Topalova,

    Petia. 2008. Powerful Women: Does Exposure Reduce Prejudice? Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, forthcoming.

Becker, Gary S. 1971. The Economics of Discrimination, 2nd ed., Chicago: University of

    Chicago Press.

Bertrand, Marianne and Hallock, Kevin F.. 2001. The Gender Gap in Top Corporate Jobs.

    Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 5, 3-21.

Besley, Timothy, and Coate, Stephen. 1997. An Economic Model of Representative Democ-
    racy. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 85-114.

Booth, Alison L. and Nolen, Patrick J.. 2009. Choosing to Compete: How Diﬀerent Are
    Girls and Boys? IZA Discussion Paper 4027.

Box-Steﬀensmeier, Janet M., De-Boef, Suzanna and Lin, Tse-Min. 2004. The Dynamics of

    the Partisan Gender Gap. American Political Science Review, 98, 515-528.

Bratton, Kathleen A. and Haynie, Kerry L. 1999. Agenda Setting and Legislative Success

    in State Legislatures: The Eﬀects of Gender and Race. Journal of Politics, 61, 658-679.




                                            31
Brown-Kruse, Jamie and Hummels, David. 1993. Gender Eﬀects in Laboratory Public
    Goods Contribution: Do Individuals Put Their Money Where Their Mouth Is? Journal

    of Economic Behavior and Organization. 22, 255-267.

Buﬀum, David and Whaples, Robert. 1995. Fear and Lathing in the Michigan Furniture

    Industry: Employee-Based Discrimination a Century Ago. Economic Inquiry, 33 234-
    252.

Chattopadhyay, Raghabendra and Duﬂo, Esther. 2004. Women as Policy Makers: Evidence
    from a Randomized Policy Experiment in India. Econometrica, 72, 1409-1443.

Clots-Figueras, Irma. 2008. Are Female Leaders Good for Education? Evidence from India.

    Mimeo, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid.

Croson, Rachel and Buchan, Nancy. 1999. Gender and Culture: International Experimental

    Evidence from Trust Games. American Economic Review, 89, 386-391.

Croson, Rachel and Gneezy, Uri. 2008. Gender Diﬀerences in Preferences. Journal of
    Economic Literature, forthcoming.

Diermeier, Daniel and Stevenson, Randolph T.. 1999. Cabinet Survival and Competing
    Risks. American Journal of Political Science, 43, 1051-1068.

Dohmen, Thomas and Falk, Armin. 2006. Performance Pay and Multi-dimensional Sorting:

    Productivity, Preferences and Gender. IZA Discussion Paper 2001.

Eckel, Catherine and Grossman, Philip J.. 1996. The Relative Price of Fairness: Gender

    Diﬀerences in a Punishment Game. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization,
    30, 143-58.

Eckel, Catherine and Grossman, Philip J.. 1998. Are Women Less Selﬁsh than Men? Evi-

    dence from Dictator Games. Economic Journal, 108, 726-735.



                                            32
Edlund, Lena and Pande, Rohini. 2002. Why Have Women Become Left-Wing? The
    Political Gender Gap and the Decline in Marriage. Quarterly Journal of Economics,

    117, 917-961.

Funk, Patricia and Gathmann, Christina. 2008. Gender Gaps in Policy Making: Evidence
    from Direct Democracy in Switzerland. Mimeo, Stanford University.

Glaeser, Edward L., Scheinkman, Jos A. and Shleifer, Andrei. 1995. Economic Growth in
    a Cross Section of Cities. Journal of Monetary Economics, 36(1), August 1995, pp.

    117-143.

Gneezy, Uri, Leonard, Kenneth L. and List, John A.. 2008. Gender Diﬀerences in Competi-

    tion: Evidence from a Matrilineal and a Patriarchal Society. Econometrica, forthcoming.

Gneezy, Uri, Niederle, Muriel and Rustichini, Aldo. 2003. Performance in Competitive
    Environments: Gender Diﬀerences. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 1049-1074.

Gneezy, Uri and Rustichini, Aldo. 2004. Gender and Competition at a Young Age. American
    Economic Review, 94, 377-381.

Herrnson, Paul S. , Lay, J. Celeste and Stokes-Brown, Atiya Kai. 2003. Women Running as
    Women: Candidate Gender, Campaign Issues and Voter Targeting Strategies. Journal

    of Politics, 65, 244-25.

Imbens, Guido and Lemieux, Tomas. 2008. Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide to
    Practice. Journal of Econometrics, 142, 615-635.

Jeydel, Alana and Taylor, Andrew J. 2003. Are Women Legislators Less Eﬀective? Evidence
    from the U.S. House in the 103rd-105th Congress. Journal of Politics, 56, 19-27.

Lavy, Victor. 2008a. Do Gender Stereotypes Reduce Girls’ or Boys’ Human Capital Out-
    comes? Evidence from a Natural Experiment. Journal of Public Economics, forthcom-

    ing.

                                            33
Lavy, Victor. 2008b. Gender Diﬀerences in Competitiveness in a Real Workplace: Evidence
    from Performance-Based Pay Tournaments among Teachers. Mimeo, Hebrew University.

Lee, David S., Moretti, Enrico and Butler, Matthew J.. 2004. Do Voters Aﬀect or Elect
    Policies? Evidence from the U.S. House. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 807-859.

Lee, David S.. 2008. Randomized Experiments from Non-random Selection in the U.S.

    House Elections. Journal of Econometrics, 142, 675-697.

Manning, Alan and Saidi, Farzad. 2008. Understanding the Gender Pay Gap. What’s

    Competition Got to Do with It? CEP Discussion Paper 0898.

McCrary, Justin. 2008. Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Disconti-
    nuity Design: A Density Test. Journal of Econometrics, 142, 698-714.

Niederle, Muriel and Vesterlund, Lise. 2007. Do Women Shy Away from Competition? Do
    Men Compete too Much? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 1067-1101.

Niederle, Muriel and Yestrumskas, Alexandra H.. 2008. Gender Diﬀerences in Seeking

    Challenges: The Role of Institutions. NBER Working Paper 13922.

Norton, Noelle H.. 1995. Uncovering the Dimensionality of Gender Voting in Congress.

    Legislative Studies Quarterly, 24, 65-86.

Nowell, Cliﬀord, and Tinkler, Sarah. 1994. The Inﬂuence of Gender in the Provision of a
    Public Good. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 25, 25-36.

Osborne, Martin J., and Slivinski, Al. 1996. A Model of Political Competition with Citizen-

    Candidates. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 65-96.

Ors, Evren, Palomino, Frederic and Peyrache, Eloic. 2008. Performance Gender Gap: Does

    Competition Matter? CEPR Discussion Paper 6891.




                                                34
Paserman, Daniele. 2008. Gender Diﬀerences in Performance in Competitive Environments:
    Evidence from Professional Tennis Players. Mimeo, Boston University.

Ragan, James F., Jr. and Tremblay, Carol Horton. 1988. Testing for Employee Discrimina-
    tion by Race and Sex. Journal of Human Resources, 23(1), 123-37.

Rehavi, M. Marit. 2007. Sex and Politics: Do Female Legislators Aﬀect State Spending?

    Mimeo, University of California, Berkeley.

Rubin, Donald. 1974. Estimating Causal Eﬀects of Treatments in Randomized and Non-

    Randomized Studies. Journal of Educational Psychology, 66, 688-701.

Sanbonmatsu, Kira. 2002. Gender Stereotypes and Vote Choice. American Journal of
    Political Science, 46, 20-34.

Sapiro, Virginia and Conover, Pamela Johnston. 1997. The Variable Gender Basis of Elec-
    toral Politics: Gender and Context in the 1992 US Election. British Journal of Political

    Science, 27(4), 497-523.

Swers, Michele L.. 1998. Are Women More Likely to Vote for Women’s Issue Bills Than

    Their Male Colleagues? Legislative Studies Quarterly, 23, 435-448.

Van der Klaauw, Wilbert. 2008. Regression-Discontinuity Analysis: A Survey of Recent
    Developments in Economics. Labour, 22, 219-245.

Vega, Arturo and Firestone, Juanita M.. 1995. The Eﬀects of Gender on Congressional

    Behavior and the Substantive Representation of Women. Legislative Studies Quarterly,

    20, 213-222.

Welch, Susan. 1985. Are Women More Liberal than Men in the U.S. Congress? Legislative
    Studies Quarterly, 10, 125-134.




                                            35
                                           Figure 1: Early termination by margin of victory




                                            .25
                                                                                                                                                                  34




      early termination (smooth average)
                                            .2
                                                                                                                     4
                                                                 −34                                         0
                                                                                                                         6




                                            .15                                                                              8
                                                                                                                                                          28
                                                                                                                                      14
                                                                                                 −8  −2          2               10
                                                                                             −12                                                       26
                                            .1


                                                                             −26          −16 −10 −6
                                                                       −30                                                             16
                                                                                         −18
                                                                                            −14                                   12              22
                                                                      −32                                                                       20
                                                                                                    −4
                                            .05




                                                                                                                                           18
                                                                                  −24 −20

                                                        −46
                                                         −44
                                                           −42
                                                             −40−36         −28    −22                                                               24        3032 36 38
                                                                                                                                                                        40
                                            0




                                                  −50     −40         −30          −20       −10         0               10                20             30           40         50

                                                                             relative % votes female candidate

                                                                        winning man                                                         winning woman
                                                                        observed values


 Note: The solid line is a running-mean smoothing (least squares), separate on
 either side of the threshold.




Figure 2: Frequency of margin of victory, mixed-gender races
                                           200
                                           150
   absolute frequency
                                           100
                                           50




                                                        −40     −30               −20        −10             0                   10             20               30          40

                                                                             relative % votes female candidate

                                                                        bandwidth=2%                                                        bandwidth=1%
                                                                        bandwidth=0.5%




                                                                                                   36
                              Figure 3: Balance tests, city characteristics




    .3 .4 .5 .6




                                                                                                                 .05.1.15.2.25.3
    north−west




                                                      .1.15.2.25.3
                                                      north−east




                                                                                                                     center
                        −40 −20      0     20    40                       −40 −20      0     20    40                              −40 −20      0     20    40
                          relative % votes female                           relative % votes female                                  relative % votes female




                                                      0 .05 .1 .15
    .1 .2 .3




                                                                                                                   population
                                                                                                                 5000 15000
                                                        islands
    south
           0



                        −40 −20      0     20    40                       −40 −20      0     20    40                              −40 −20      0     20    40
                          relative % votes female                           relative % votes female                                  relative % votes female




                                                      active population




                                                                                                                         15500
              2.4




                                                        .4 .42 .44 .46
    old−age index




                                                                                                                   income pc
        1.822.2




                                                                                                                     14500
      1.6




                                                                                                                 13500
    1.4




                        −40 −20      0     20    40                       −40 −20      0     20    40                              −40 −20      0     20    40
                          relative % votes female                           relative % votes female                                  relative % votes female


                                            winning man                                                         winning woman
                                            observed values


Note: The solid line is a running-mean smoothing (least squares), separate on
either side of the threshold. population is the resident population at election.
old-age index defined as 100 times the ratio of population above age 65 over
population below age 14, as of 2005. active population defined as the ratio of the
active population (15-64) over the whole population, as of 2005. income pc is the
gross per capita income, as of 2005.




                            Figure 4: Balance tests, political environment
    .505 .51 .515 .52




                                                                                              1
      Prop. female voters




                                                                                       .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                                                                                           center−left




                            −40   −20        0        20                        40                       −40   −20        0        20                      40
                                  relative % votes female                                                      relative % votes female
                 .15
    center−right
     .05    .1
             0




                            −40   −20        0        20                        40
                                  relative % votes female


                                            winning man                                                         winning woman
                                            observed values


Note: The solid line is a running-mean smoothing (least squares), separate on
either side of the threshold. center-right and center-left is the party to which the
mayor belongs.




                                                                                   37
                    Figure 5: Balance tests, mayor characteristics




         50




                                                                                                                  .9
                                                                    15
                                                 years of schooling
         48




                                                                                                         .6 .7 .8
                                                              14




                                                                                                       local born
    44 46
     age




                                                   12   13
         42




                                                                                                                  .5
         40




                                                          11




                                                                                                                  .4
                   −40 −20      0     20    40                           −40 −20      0     20    40                              −40 −20      0     20    40
                     relative % votes female                               relative % votes female                                  relative % votes female




                                                          2.5
         .4




                                                                                                                             .4
                                                                                                       perceived instability
                                                 terms in office
    not employed
              .3




                                                                                                                      .3
                                                          2
         .2




                                                                                                               .2
                                                 1.5
    .1




                                                                                                          .1
         0




                                                                                                                  0
                   −40 −20      0     20    40                           −40 −20      0     20    40                              −40 −20      0     20    40
                     relative % votes female                               relative % votes female                                  relative % votes female


                                       winning man                                                     winning woman
                                       observed values


Note: The solid line is a running-mean smoothing (least squares), separate on
either side of the threshold. local born is 1 if the mayor is born in the same
province. terms in oﬃce as mayor only. perceived instability computed predicting
the ex-post survival probability using all the observable characteristics available
to the voters.




                                                                                  38
                                 Table 1: Mayor Characteristics by Gender
                                                                                                           Std. error of
                                                               Male        Female         Difference        difference

Individual:

Age                                                           47.019       44.256           -2.763 ***         0.275

Term limit binding                                            0.256         0.195           -0.061 ***         0.013

Terms in office                                               1.618         1.330           -0.288 ***         0.023

Years of experience                                           6.451         4.398           -2.053 ***         0.141

Local born                                                    0.865         0.785           -0.079 ***         0.010

Education: primary                                            0.033         0.014           -0.018 ***         0.005

Education: lower secondary                                    0.123         0.081           -0.041 ***         0.010

Education: upper secondary                                    0.437         0.424           -0.013             0.015

Education: college                                            0.408         0.481            0.073 ***         0.015

Previous occup.: not employed                                 0.117         0.207            0.090 ***         0.010

Municipality:

Population                                                    7,771         7,866                95            1,346

South                                                         0.249         0.143           -0.106 ***         0.012

Prop. population in labor force (in 2005)                     0.407         0.419            0.012 ***         0.002

Firms per capita (in 2005)                                    0.077         0.079            0.002 ***         0.001

Old-age index (in 2005)                                       1.864         1.901            0.038             0.045

Income per capita (in 2005, euros)                            13,388       14,122              709 ***         91.738

Prop. female voters                                           0.511         0.512            0.001 **          0.000

Right and center-right party                                  0.075         0.062           -0.013 *           0.008

Left and center-left party                                    0.651         0.715            0.064 ***         0.014

Council:

Total seats in council                                        15.039       15.014           -0.025             0.144

Average age in council                                        40.944       41.258            0.314 ***         0.117

Average experience in council                                 2.588         2.422           -0.167 ***         0.046

Prop. college in council                                      0.198         0.203            0.005             0.004

Prop. female in council                                       0.177         0.188            0.011 ***         0.003

Mayor's coalition:

Prop. seats in mayor's coalition                              0.697         0.690           -0.007 ***         0.003

Average age in mayor's coalition                              40.516       40.628            0.113             0.129

Average experience in mayor's coalition                       2.420         2.224           -0.196 ***         0.052

Prop. college in mayor's coalition                            0.180         0.186            0.006             0.005

Prop. female in mayor's coalition                             0.192         0.203            0.011 ***         0.004

Observations                                                  17,626        1,256
Note: Population is the resident population at election. Old-age index is the ratio of population above 65 over population
below 14. Prop. population in labor force is the ratio of active population (15-64) over the whole population. Income per
capita is the disposable income after taxes. Terms in office as mayor, including the current one. Years of experience in a
municipal elective office. Local born is 1 if the mayor is born in the same province. Party is the party to which the mayor
belongs.
                Table 2: Mean of Dependent Variable: 1 if Early Termination
                                           Male                     Female                        All

Incumbency status
First term                                 0.119                      0.138                     0.120
Second term or more                        0.074                      0.060                     0.074
Term limit binding                         0.086                      0.071                     0.086
Experience

Less than 5 years                          0.121                      0.136                     0.123
More than 5 years                          0.076                      0.072                     0.076

Region
North-West                                 0.050                      0.061                     0.051
North-East                                 0.070                      0.084                     0.071
Center                                     0.089                      0.106                     0.090
South                                      0.191                      0.327                     0.196
Islands                                    0.127                      0.157                     0.129

Population

Less than 5,000                            0.069                      0.080                     0.069
More than 5,000                            0.178                      0.192                     0.179
Income per capita
Below median                               0.130                      0.175                     0.132
Above median                               0.070                      0.081                     0.070
Number of parties in council
One                                        0.076                      0.091                     0.077
Two                                        0.078                      0.092                     0.079
Three                                      0.091                      0.112                     0.093
Four                                       0.095                      0.088                     0.094
Five or more                               0.188                      0.232                     0.190
Political affiliation
Right and center-right                     0.100                      0.117                     0.101
Separatists and regionals                  0.166                      0.429                     0.181
Center                                     0.085                      0.094                     0.086
Left and center-left                       0.085                      0.105                     0.086
Others                                     0.123                      0.133                     0.123

Prop. female in council

0%                                         0.169                      0.275                     0.174
0-10 %                                     0.141                      0.155                     0.142
10-20%                                     0.100                      0.122                     0.101
20-30%                                     0.070                      0.063                     0.069
> 30%                                      0.054                      0.085                     0.056

All                                        0.100                      0.117                     0.101
Observations                              17,626                      1,256
Note: Population is the resident population at election. Experience in a municipal elective office. Local born is
1 if the mayor is born in the same province. Income per capita is the disposable income after taxes, as of 2005.
Political affiliation is the party to which the mayor belongs.
            Table 3: Effect of Individual and Municipality Characteristics on Early Termination
                                                               (1)                 (2)                  (3)                 (4)
Female                                                       0.017*             0.032***             0.028***            0.051***
                                                             [0.010]             [0.010]              [0.009]             [0.018]
Selected mayor characteristics
Age                                                                                                  0.002***            0.002***
                                                                                                      [0.000]             [0.001]
Local born                                                                                          -0.017***             -0.009
                                                                                                     [0.006]              [0.012]
Term limit binding                                                                                    -0.001             0.038***
                                                                                                      [0.007]             [0.013]
Terms in office                                                                                       -0.001              -0.013
                                                                                                      [0.004]             [0.008]
Years of experience                                                                                 -0.004***            -0.003***
                                                                                                     [0.001]              [0.001]
Selected municipality characteristics
Log population                                                                                       0.019***              0.035
                                                                                                      [0.003]             [0.027]
Log income per capita (in 2005, euros)                                                              -0.097***
                                                                                                     [0.017]
Old-age index (in 2005)                                                                             -0.006***
                                                                                                     [0.001]
Prop. population in labor force (in 2005)                                                           -0.381***
                                                                                                     [0.060]
Firms per capita (in 2005)                                                                           0.304***
                                                                                                      [0.110]
Selected election and council characteristics
Total seats in council                                                                               0.005***             -0.017*
                                                                                                      [0.001]             [0.010]
Prop. seats in mayor's party                                                                           0.017               0.047
                                                                                                      [0.022]             [0.032]
Prop. seats in mayor's coalition                                                                      -0.011               0.000
                                                                                                      [0.007]             [0.010]
Number parties in mayor's coalition                                                                  0.013***             0.010*
                                                                                                      [0.004]             [0.006]
Prop. female voters                                                                                   -0.079              0.750**
                                                                                                      [0.126]             [0.373]
Political affiliation (omitted category: no political affiliation)
Right and center-right                                                                               0.029**               0.011
                                                                                                     [0.012]              [0.017]
Separatists and regionals                                                                            0.077***              0.055
                                                                                                      [0.025]             [0.035]
Center                                                                                                -0.008              -0.013
                                                                                                      [0.009]             [0.014]

Left and center-left                                                                                 -0.017**            -0.023**
                                                                                                      [0.007]             [0.011]
Macro-region dummies (4)                                                            3                   3                   3
Year of election dummies (10)                                                                           3                   3
Education dummies (3)                                                                                   3                   3
Previous occupation dummies (4)                                                                         3                   3
Municipality fixed effects                                                                                                  3
Observations                                                 18,120              18,120               18,120              18,120
N. municipalities                                            8,078               8,078                8,078               8,078
R-squared                                                    0.000               0.037                0.092               0.061
Note: Population is the resident population at election. Old-age index is 100 times the ratio of population above 65 over population
below 14. Prop. population in labor force is the ratio of the active population (15-64) over the whole population. Income per capita is
disposable income after taxes. Terms in office as mayor, including the current one. Years of experience in a municipal elective
office. Local born is 1 if the mayor is born in the same province. Political affiliation is the party to which the mayor belongs. Robust
standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the municipality level, in brackets.
                   Table 4: Mayor's Gender, City Councillors' Gender, and Early Termination
                                                          (1)                   (2)                    (3)                    (4)

Female                                                 0.030***              0.029***               0.064***               0.077***
                                                        [0.010]               [0.011]                [0.019]                [0.023]

Prop. female in council                               -0.067***                                       0.029
                                                       [0.022]                                       [0.037]
Prop. female in mayor's coalition                                            -0.051***                                       0.019
                                                                              [0.019]                                       [0.035]
Prop. female in other lists                                                    0.003                                         0.039
                                                                              [0.015]                                       [0.025]

Municipality fixed effects                                                                              3                      3

Observations                                           16,563                 12,959                 16,563                 12,959
N. municipalities                                       7,988                  7,369                  7,988                  7,369
R-squared                                              0.094                  0.093                   0.070                  0.080

Note: All regressions include mayor demographic characteristics (age, education dummies, years of experience in an elective
municipal office, dummy for term limit, number of terms as mayor, previous occupation dummies) municipality characteristics (macro-
region dummies, log population at election, log disposable income per capita, old-age index, labor force participation rate, firms per
capita, all as of 2005), election and council characteristics (number of seats in the council, proportion seats in the mayor's party,
proportion seats in the mayor's coalition, number of parties in the mayor's coalition, female share of voters), year dummies, political
party dummies, and average demographic characteristics of councilors in mayor's coalition and other lists (age, education dummies,
number of previous years in office, proportion not-employed). Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the municipality level, in
brackets.
                          Table 5: Regression Discontinuity Results, Mixed-Gender Races
                                                                      Dependent variable: 1 if early termination
                                                         Coefficient on Female at the
                                                             discontinuity point       Controls Observations R-squared

Mean of the dep. var.                                                  0.102
Linear regression                                                     0.036**                      3            2,255            0.109
                                                                      [0.014]

Linear regression on both sides of                                   0.065***                                   2,255            0.015
discontinuity                                                         [0.025]

Linear regression on both sides of                                   0.071***                      3            2,255            0.112
discontinuity                                                         [0.023]

Two candidates, linear regression on both                             0.076**                                   1,084            0.013
sides of discontinuity                                                [0.034]
Two candidates, linear regression on both                             0.066**                      3            1,084            0.130
sides of discontinuity                                                [0.033]
Optimal bandwidth, linear regression on both                          0.061**                                   2,037            0.017
sides of discontinuity                                                [0.027]

Optimal bandwidth, linear regression on both                         0.069***                      3            2,037            0.114
sides of discontinuity                                                [0.026]
Two candidates, optimal bandwidth, linear                             0.070**                                   1,028            0.020
regression on both sides of discontinuity                             [0.035]

Two candidates, optimal bandwidth, linear                             0.062*                       3            1,028            0.134
regression on both sides of discontinuity                             [0.034]

Half optimal bandwidth, linear regression on                          0.063*                                    1,412            0.008
both sides of discontinuity                                           [0.036]

Half optimal bandwidth, linear regression on                          0.064*                       3            1,412            0.115
both sides of discontinuity                                           [0.034]

Second order polynomial on both sides of the                          0.060*                                    2,255            0.017
discontinuity point                                                   [0.034]

Second order polynomial on both sides of                              0.070**                      3            2,255            0.112
discontinuity                                                         [0.032]

Two candidates, second order polynomial on                            0.080*                                    1,084            0.018
both sides of discontinuity                                           [0.046]

Two candidates, second order polynomial on                             0.068                       3            1,084            0.132
both sides of discontinuity                                           [0.043]

Note: All regressions include mayor demographic characteristics (age, years of schooling, number of terms as mayor, previously not
employed), municipality characteristics (macro-region dummies, log population at election, log disposable income per capita, old-age
index, labor force participation rate, firms per capita, all as of 2005), female share of voters, and political party dummies. The optimally
chosen bandwidth is 0.25 (0.29 when only two candidates). Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the municipality level, in
brackets.
                              Table 6: LLR Balance Tests, Mixed-Gender Races
                                                            Coefficient on Female at the discontinuity point
                                                                                      Two candidates, optimal
Dependent variable:                                       Optimal bandwidth                  bandwidth

North-West                                                         0.035                                 0.027

North-East                                                        -0.001                                 0.018

Center                                                            -0.022                                 -0.019

South                                                             -0.022                                 -0.006

Islands                                                            0.010                                 -0.021

Population                                                         2,500                                  366

Old-age index (in 2005)                                            0.003                                 0.046

Prop. population in labor force (in 2005)                          0.001                                 -0.007

Income per capita (in 2005, euros)                                  320                                   631

Prop. female voters                                               -0.001                                 -0.001

Left and center-left party                                         0.078                                 0.052

Right and center-right party                                      -0.023                                 -0.010

Age                                                              -3.443***                             -3.124***

Years of education                                               0.831***                               1.147***

Previously not employed                                          0.086***                               0.090**

Local born                                                        -0.037                                -0.124**

Terms in office                                                  -0.125**                              -0.218***

Perceived Instability                                              0.003                                 0.011

Observations                                                       2,037                                 1,028

Note: Linear regression on both sides of discontinuity point. The optimally chosen bandwidth is 0.25 (0.29 when only two
candidates). Population is the resident population at election. Old-age index is the ratio of population above 65 over
population below 14. Prop. population in labor force is the ratio of the active population (15-64) over the whole population.
Terms in office as mayor, including the current one. Local born is 1 if the mayor is born in the same province. Party is the
party to which the mayor belongs. Perceived Instability computed predicting the ex-post survival probability using all the
observable characteristics available to the voters. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the municipality level, in
brackets.
            Table 7: Interactions between Mayor's Gender and Gender Composition of Council
                                                                   Dependent variable: 1 if early termination

                                                      (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)

Female                                             0.048**        0.092***       0.134**        0.154**        0.134**       0.151**
                                                   [0.024]         [0.035]       [0.058]        [0.071]        [0.058]       [0.071]

Female * Prop. female in council                    -0.094        -0.159
                                                    [0.102]       [0.138]
Implied effect of a female mayor at the            0.031***      0.064***
mean of Prop. female in council                     [0.010]       [0.019]
Female * (Prop. female in council > 0)                                                                         -0.110*        -0.096
                                                                                                               [0.059]        [0.072]
Implied effect of a female mayor when                                                                         0.024**        0.055***
Prop. female in council > 0                                                                                   [0.010]         [0.019]
Female * (Prop. female > 0 and ≤ 0.1)                                            -0.114*        -0.085
                                                                                 [0.063]        [0.079]

Female * (Prop. female > 0.1 and ≤ 0.2)                                          -0.092         -0.076
                                                                                 [0.060]        [0.074]
Female * (Prop. female > 0.2 and ≤ 0.3)                                          -0.140**      -0.148**
                                                                                  [0.060]       [0.075]
Female * (Prop. female > 0.3)                                                    -0.103*        -0.100
                                                                                 [0.062]        [0.076]

Municipality fixed effects                                           3                             3                             3

Observations                                        16,563        16,563         16,563         16,563         16,563         16,563
N. municipalities                                    7,988         7,988          7,988          7,988          7,988          7,988
R-squared                                            0.094         0.071          0.095          0.072          0.095          0.071

Note: All regressions include also the main effects of the variables that are interacted with the gender of the mayor. Other controls:
mayor demographic characteristics (age, education dummies, years of experience in an elective municipal office, dummy for term
limit, number of terms as mayor, previous occupation dummies) municipality characteristics (macro-region dummies, log population
at election, log disposable income per capita, old-age index, labor force participation rate, firms per capita, all as of 2005), election
and council characteristics (number of seats in the council, percentage seats in the mayor's party, percentage seats in the mayor's
coalition, number of parties in the mayor's coalition, female share of voters), year dummies, political party dummies, and average
demographic characteristics of the councilors (age, education dummies, number of previous years in office, proportion not-
employed). Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the municipality level, in brackets.
                        Table 8: Differences by Region and by Attitudes towards Working Women
                                                                          Dependent variable: 1 if early termination
                                                      (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)               (6)
Mean of the dep. var.                               0.100            0.100             0.100             0.100            0.100             0.100

Female                                              0.025             0.047           0.030***         0.062***          0.035***         0.065***
                                                   [0.026]           [0.048]           [0.010]          [0.019]           [0.011]          [0.019]

Female * South                                     0.114**           0.161**
                                                   [0.047]           [0.073]
Female * Islands                                    0.011            -0.025
                                                   [0.045]           [0.073]
Female * North-West                                -0.013            -0.015
                                                   [0.031]           [0.062]
Female * North-East                                -0.021            -0.021
                                                   [0.028]           [0.054]
Female * index of positive attitudes                                                 -0.033***          -0.023
towards working women                                                                 [0.013]           [0.026]
Female * female labor force                                                                                              -0.225*           -0.233
participation (demeaned)                                                                                                 [0.124]           [0.188]
Municipality fixed effects                                              3                                  3                                 3
Region fixed effects                                                                                                        3                3
Observations                                       16,563            16,563            16,563           16,563            16,491           16,491
N. municipalities                                  7,988             7,988             7,988            7,988             7,985            7,985
R-squared                                          0.095             0.073             0.095            0.071             0.101            0.074
Note: All regressions include mayor demographic characteristics (age, education dummies, years of experience in an elective municipal office,
dummy for term limit, number of terms as mayor, previous occupation dummies) municipality characteristics (macro-region dummies, log
population at election, log disposable income per capita, old-age index, labor force participation rate, firms per capita, all as of 2005), election and
council characteristics (number of seats in the council, proportion seats in the mayor's coalition, number of parties in the mayor's coalition,
proportion of councillors in the mayor's party, female share of voters), year dummies, political party dummies, proportion of female councilors, and
average demographic characteristics of the councilors (age, education dummies, number of previous years in office, proportion not-employed). The
macro-region of comparison is the Center. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the municipality level, in brackets.
                                        Table 9: Gender Differences by Type of Early Termination
                                                                                       Dependent variable
                                               (1)                  (2)                  (3)                 (4)                        (5)
                                             Mayor                Mayor               Council             Council              Mayor          Council
                                          resignation          resignation          resignation         resignation         resignation     resignation
                                              OLS                  OLS                  OLS                 OLS                  Multinomial logit

A: Whole Sample

Mean of the dep. var.                         0.032                0.032               0.067                0.067               0.032             0.067

Female                                        -0.003               0.006              0.033***             0.058***             -0.065           0.524***
                                              [0.005]             [0.011]              [0.009]              [0.017]             [0.201]           [0.122]
                                                                                                                               {-0.002}          {0.026}

Prop. female in council                       -0.009               0.016              -0.058***             0.013               -0.487           -1.130***
                                              [0.014]             [0.023]              [0.018]             [0.030]              [0.533]            [0.386]
                                                                                                                               {-0.011}           {-0.044}

Municipality fixed effects                                           3                                        3
Observations                                  16,563              16,563               16,563              16,563                      16,563
N. municipalities                              7,988               7,988                7,988               7,988                       7988
                                                                                                                                           2
R-squared                                      0.024               0.027                0.085               0.054                 Pseudo R : 0.128

B: South Only

Mean of the dep. var.                         0.048                0.048               0.142                0.142               0.048             0.142

Female                                        -0.009              -0.008              0.128***             0.199***              0.103           0.869***
                                              [0.018]             [0.034]              [0.039]              [0.052]             [0.415]           [0.234]
                                                                                                                               {-0.001}          {0.108}

Prop. female in council                        0.008               0.018              -0.112**             -0.009               -0.050           -1.341***
                                              [0.035]             [0.055]              [0.055]             [0.090]             [0.930]             [0.619]
                                                                                                                               {0.007}            {-0.123}

Municipality fixed effects                                           3                                        3
Observations                                  3,972                3,972                3,972               3,972                      3,972
N. municipalities                             1,774                1,774                1,774               1,774                      1774
                                                                                                                                          2
R-squared                                     0.033                0.041                0.106               0.103                 Pseudo R : 0.123

Note: All regressions include mayor demographic characteristics (age, education dummies, years of experience in an elective municipal office, dummy for
term limit, number of terms as mayor, previous occupation dummies) municipality characteristics (log population at election, log disposable income per
capita, old-age index, labor force participation rate, firms per capita, all as of 2005), election and council characteristics (number of seats in the council,
percentage seats in the mayor's coalition, number of parties in the mayor's coalition, percentage of councillors in the mayor's party, female share of
voters), year dummies, political party dummies, and average demographic characteristics of the councilors (age, education dummies, number of previous
years in office, proportion not-employed). Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the municipality level, in brackets.
                                    Table 10: Mayor's Gender and Budget Variables
                                                                           Dependent Variable
                                            (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)                 (5)
                                         % budget          Log (revenue       % expenditure       % expenditure       % expenditure
                                          deficit           per capita)         education            welfare             police

A: Whole Sample

Mean of the dep. var.                       1.558               7.048               7.905              31.221               2.232
Female                                     -0.019               0.004              0.363**             -0.065              -0.043
                                           [0.179]             [0.014]             [0.153]             [0.379]             [0.049]

Prop. female in council                    -0.105              -0.021               0.547              -0.446              -0.050
                                           [0.444]             [0.035]             [0.374]             [1.038]             [0.136]

Observations                               15,641              15,641              15,641              15,641              15,641
N. municipalities                           7,627               7,627               7,627               7,627               7,627
R-squared                                   0.043               0.422               0.288               0.196               0.220
B: South Only

Mean of the dep. var.                       0.788               6.978               7.453              29.600               2.982
Female                                     -0.333               0.026               0.408               0.405              -0.027
                                           [0.310]             [0.041]             [0.391]             [0.907]             [0.137]
Prop. female in council                    -0.549               0.014              -1.140              -1.263              -0.133
                                           [1.255]             [0.079]             [0.707]             [2.174]             [0.316]

Observations                                3,918               3,918               3,918               3,918               3,918
N. municipalities                           1,756               1,756               1,756               1,756               1,756
R-squared                                   0.043               0.340               0.331               0.220               0.198
Note: All regressions include mayor demographic characteristics (age, education dummies, years of experience in an elective
municipal office, dummy for term limit, number of terms as mayor, previous occupation dummies) municipality characteristics (macro-
region dummies, log population at election, log disposable income per capita, old-age index, labor force participation rate, firms per
capita, all as of 2005), election and council characteristics (number of seats in the council, proportion seats in the mayor's coalition,
number of parties in the mayor's coalition, proportion of councillors in the mayor's party, female share of voters), year dummies,
political party dummies, and average demographic characteristics of the councilors (age, education dummies, number of previous
years in office, proportion not-employed). % Budget deficit computed as the absolute budget deficit divided by the total revenues. %
expenditure welfare also includes expenditure for local transports. All budget variables computed as the mean within the term,
excluding election years. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the municipality level, in brackets.
                          Table 11: Effect of Budget and Mayor's Gender on Early Termination
                                                              (1)                    (2)                    (3)                    (4)
                                                         Whole Sample           Whole Sample            South Only             South Only

Mean of the dep. var.                                          0.096                 0.096                  0.184                 0.184

Female                                                        0.032***              0.061***               0.102**                0.141**
                                                               [0.010]               [0.021]               [0.040]                [0.061]

Prop. female in council                                       -0.059**               -0.023                -0.112*                -0.017
                                                               [0.023]               [0.040]               [0.063]                [0.101]

% Budget deficit                                             -0.131***              -0.261***              -0.067                -0.247**
                                                              [0.046]                [0.065]               [0.091]                [0.115]

Log (revenue per capita)                                      -0.011*               -0.058***              -0.013                -0.083***
                                                              [0.007]                [0.014]               [0.017]                [0.031]

% Expenditure for education (÷ 100)                           -0.099*                 0.001                -0.096                 -0.102
                                                              [0.051]                [0.087]               [0.174]                [0.255]

% Expenditure for welfare (÷ 100)                             -0.012                 -0.036                -0.096*                -0.081
                                                              [0.019]                [0.030]               [0.049]                [0.067]

% Expenditure for police (÷ 100)                              0.418**                -0.336                1.133***                0.577
                                                              [0.162]                [0.331]                [0.430]               [0.811]

Municipality fixed effects                                                              3                                            3

Observations                                                  15,641                 15,641                 3,918                  3,918
N. municipalities                                                                    7,627                                         1,756
R-squared                                                      0.094                 0.075                  0.124                  0.105

Note: All regressions include mayor demographic characteristics (age, education dummies, years of experience in an elective municipal
office, dummy for term limit, number of terms as mayor, previous occupation dummies) municipality characteristics (macro-region dummies,
log population at election, log disposable income per capita, old-age index, labor force participation rate, firms per capita, all as of 2005),
election and council characteristics (number of seats in the council, proportion seats in the mayor's coalition, number of parties in the mayor's
coalition, proportion of councillors in the mayor's party, female share of voters), year dummies, political party dummies, proportion of female
councilors, and average demographic characteristics of the councilors (age, education dummies, number of previous years in office,
proportion not-employed). % Budget deficit computed as the absolute budget deficit divided by the total revenues. % expenditure welfare
also includes expenditure for local transports. All budget variables computed as the mean within the term, excluding election years. Robust
standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the municipality level, in brackets.
                               Table A1: Municipalities - Summary Statistics
                                                    Observations         Mean        Std. Dev.        Min           Max

"Fixed" municipality characteristics
Population                                               8,080           7,021         42,140          31        2,733,908
North-West                                               8,080           0.379         0.485            0             1
North-East                                               8,080           0.183         0.387            0             1
Center                                                   8,080           0.124         0.330            0             1
South                                                    8,080           0.221         0.415            0             1
Islands                                                  8,080           0.093         0.290            0             1

Prop. population in labor force (in 2005)                7,959           0.410         0.058          0.16         0.609
Firms per capita (in 2005)                               7,959           0.078         0.028         0.018         0.418
Old-age index (in 2005)                                  7,959           1.889         1.545            0            35
Income per capita (in 2005, euros)                       7,959           13,547        3,048         5,013        44,949
Mayoral term characteristics
Number of seats in council                              18,881           15.038        4.921            9            60
Prop. women in council                                  18,649           0.177         0.109            0             1
Number of parties in council                            18,882           2.916         2.402            1            18
Prop. seats in mayor's coalition                        17,117           0.697         0.097         0.446            1

Note: Population is the resident population as of 1993. Prop. population in labor force is the ratio of active population (15-
64) over the whole population. Old-age index is the ratio of population above 65 over population below 14. Income per
capita is the disposable income after taxes.
                              Table A2: Mayors - Summary Statistics
                                         Observations        Mean       Std. Dev.       Min          Max
Female                                       18,882          0.067        0.249           0            1
Age                                          18,882         46.836        9.456          21           84
Term limit binding                           18,882          0.252        0.434           0            1
Terms in office                              18,882          1.599        0.799           1            5
Years of experience                          18,882          6.314        4.844           0         18.047
Local born                                   18,565          0.859        0.348           0            1
Education
Primary                                      18,515          0.031        0.174           0            1
Lower secondary                              18,515          0.120        0.325           0            1
Upper secondary                              18,515          0.436        0.496           0            1
College                                      18,515          0.413        0.492           0            1
Previous occupation
Not employed                                 18,416          0.123        0.328           0            1
Professional                                 18,416          0.419        0.493           0            1
Entrepreneur                                 18,416          0.330        0.470           0            1
White-Collar                                 18,416          0.043        0.202           0            1
Others                                       18,416          0.085        0.279           0            1

Note: Terms in office as mayor, including the current one. Years of experience in a municipal elective office.
Local born is 1 if the mayor is born in the same province.
