NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EFFICIENT SEARCH ON THE JOB AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE
Guido Menzio
Shouyong Shi
Working Paper 14905
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14905

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2009

We are grateful for comments received from participants at the Search Theory conference held at the
University of Quebec in Montreal (April 2007), the Society for Economic Dynamics Meeting in New
Orleans (January 2008), the Econometric Society Meeting in Pittsburgh (June 2008), the Society for
Economic Dynamics Meeting in Cambridge (July, 2008), the Vienna Macroeconomic Workshop (October,
2008), the NBER Summer Institute in Cambridge (July, 2008), and at the macroeconomic seminars
at the Michigan, Stanford, the Bank of Canada, the Hoover Institution, Boston University, Princeton,
and Wisconsin. Discussions with Rudi Bachmann, Gadi Barlevy, Mike Elsby, Jason Faberman, Bob
Hall, Nir Jaimovich, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, Pete Klenow, Narayana Kocherlakota, Dale Mortensen, Giuseppe
Moscarini, Thijs van Rens, and Marcelo Veracierto led to significant improvements in the paper. We
thank Frank Diebold, Jason Faberman, Giuseppe Moscarini, Eva Nagypál, David Neumark and Daniel
Polsky for generously sharing their data with us. Menzio gratefully acknowledges the financial support
and the hospitality of the Hoover Institution. Shi gratefully acknowledges the financial support from
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada and from the Bank of Canada Fellowship.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Guido Menzio and Shouyong Shi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Efficient Search on the Job and the Business Cycle
Guido Menzio and Shouyong Shi
NBER Working Paper No. 14905
April 2009
JEL No. E32
ABSTRACT
We build a directed search model of the labor market in which workers' transitions between unemployment,
employment, and across employers are endogenous. We prove the existence, uniqueness and efficiency
of a recursive equilibrium with the property that the distribution of workers across employment states
affects neither the agents' values and strategies nor the market tightness. Because of this property,
we are able to compute the equilibrium outside the non-stochastic steady-state. We use a calibrated
version of the model to measure the effect of productivity shocks on the US labor market. We find
that productivity shocks generate procyclical fluctuations in the rate at which unemployed workers
become employed and countercyclical fluctuations in the rate at which employed workers become
unemployed. Moreover, we find that productivity shocks generate large countercyclical fluctuations
in the number of vacancies opened for unemployed workers and even larger procyclical fluctuations
in the number of vacancies created for employed workers. Overall, productivity shocks alone can account
for 80 percent of unemployment volatility, 30 percent of vacancy volatility and for the nearly perfect
negative correlation between unemployment and vacancies.

Guido Menzio
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
467 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
gmenzio@econ.upenn.edu
Shouyong Shi
University of Toronto
Department of Economics
150 St. George Street
Toronto, Ontario
Canada, M5S 3G7
shouyong@chass.utoronto.ca

1

Introduction

1.1

Motivation

From December 1969 to November 1970, the US unemployment rate increased from 3.5 to 6.1
percent. During this period, unemployment increased partly because the workers’ transition
rate from unemployment to employment (henceforth, the UE rate) dropped from 51 to 44
percent per month, and partly because the workers’ transition rate from employment to
unemployment (henceforth, the EU rate) increased by 30 percent.1 Similarly, during the
1953, 1957, 1979 and 1981 recessions, the unemployment rate increased because of both a
significant decline in the UE rate and a significant increase in the EU rate.
From January 2001 to November 2001, the US vacancy rate fell by approximately 30
percent. During this period, the number of workers moving from unemployment to employment declined from 3.25 to 3.23 millions per month (a 1 percent decline). In contrast, the
number of workers moving from one employer to the other declined from 4.5 to 3.7 millions
per month (a 17 percent decline).2 More generally, over the period between January 1994
and June 2006 (i.e., the period for which we have data on workers’ transitions from employer to employer), the correlation between the vacancy rate and the workers’ flow from
unemployment to employment is -0.3, while the correlation between the vacancy rate and
the workers’ flow across employers is 0.49.
The first set of observations suggests that, in order to study the cyclical fluctuations
of the unemployment rate, an economist should use a model in which both the UE and
EU rates are endogenous. The second set of observations suggests that, in order to study
the fluctuations of the vacancy rate, an economist should use a model in which the hiring
flows of both unemployed and employed workers are endogenous. When taken together,
these observations suggest that, in order to study the dynamics of the labor market at the
business cycle frequency, an economist should use a model that endogenizes the UE rate, the
1

In Section 5.1, the reader will find the definitions of the workers’ transition rate from unemployment to
employment, from employment to unemployment, and from employer to employer. Moreover, he will find
the definitions of the unemployment and the vacancy rate.
2
We measure the number of workers moving from unemployment to employment as the product between
civilian unemployment and the workers’ transition rate from unemployment to employment (as defined in
Section 5.1). Similarly, we measure the number of workers moving from one employer to the other as the
product between civilian employment and the workers’ trasition rate from employer to employer (as defined
in Section 5.1).

2

EU rate, and the rate at employed workers move from one employer to the other (henceforth,
the EE rate).

1.2

Summary

In the first part of this paper, we construct and analyze a search-theoretic model of the
labor market in which the workers’ transitions between employment, unemployment and
across diﬀerent employers are all endogenous. In the second part of the paper, we calibrate
the model in order to match the fundamental features of worker’s turnover in the US labor
market. In the last part of the paper, we use the calibrated model to measure the contribution
of aggregate productivity shocks to the cyclical volatility of US unemployment, vacancies and
other labor market variables over the period 1951 (I) - 2006 (II).
In our model, the labor market is populated by ex-ante homogeneous workers, each
endowed with one indivisible unit of labor, and ex-ante homogeneous firms, each operating
a technology that uses labor to produce final goods. Moreover, in our model labor market,
trade is the outcome of a search-and-matching process. In particular, firms choose how many
vacancies to open and how much to oﬀer to the workers who fill them. Simultaneously,
workers choose how much to demand for filling a vacancy. Then, some of the workers and
the firms who agree on the terms of trade successfully match and begin to produce the
final good. We assume that the productivity of a match is the sum of an aggregate and an
idiosyncratic component.
In equilibrium, firms are indiﬀerent between opening diﬀerent types of vacancies, because
the vacancies that oﬀer relatively more generous terms of trade have higher filling rates at
the expense of lower ex post profits. Workers, however, have strict preferences over diﬀerent
types of vacancies. In particular, unemployed workers prefer to search for vacancies that
oﬀer less generous terms of trade and are easier to find (because they attract fewer workers),
while employed workers prefer to search for vacancies that oﬀer more generous terms of trade
but are harder to find. Similarly, workers who are employed in more productive jobs prefer
to search for vacancies that oﬀer better terms of trade. In equilibrium, an employed worker
becomes unemployed when the idiosyncratic component of the productivity of his match
falls below an endogenous job-destruction threshold.

3

When there is a positive shock to the aggregate component of labor productivity, firms
have incentive to open more vacancies per worker at all diﬀerent terms of trade. In response
to the increase in the vacancy/worker ratio, unemployed workers and (on average) employed
workers search for vacancies that not only oﬀer more generous terms of trade, but are also
easier to find. Also, after a positive shock to the aggregate component of productivity,
workers and firms find it optimal to keep some of the matches that they would have destroyed
previously. Overall, a positive shock to the aggregate component of productivity tends to
increase the UE and EE rates, and to decrease the EU rate.
In the second part of the paper, we calibrate the model to the US data. In particular,
we calibrate the parameters that describe the search technology so that the workers’ average
transition rates between employment, unemployment and across employers are the same in
the model as in the data. We calibrate the stochastic process for the idiosyncratic component of productivity to approximate the empirical distribution of workers across diﬀerent
tenure lengths. Finally, we calibrate the stochastic process for the aggregate component of
productivity so that the average productivity of labor has the same statistical properties in
the model and in the data.
In the third part of the paper, we use the calibrated model to measure the contribution
of aggregate productivity shocks to the cyclical fluctuations of the US labor market. We
find that aggregate productivity shocks account for 40 percent of the observed volatility
of the UE rate, and for approximately all of the observed volatility of the EU rate. As
a result, aggregate productivity shocks alone can account for more than 80 percent of the
observed volatility of unemployment. Moreover, we find that productivity shocks generate
countercyclical fluctuations in the number of vacancies created for unemployed workers and
larger procyclical fluctuations in the number of vacancies created for employed workers.
Overall, aggregate productivity shocks alone can account for more than 30 percent of the
cyclical volatility of the vacancy rate and for their nearly perfectly negative correlation with
unemployment. In light of these findings, we conclude that aggregate productivity shocks
may well be the fundamental cause of labor market volatility in the postwar US.
In the last part of the paper, we measure the contribution of aggregate productivity
shocks to the cyclical volatility of the US labor market using a version of our model in

4

which the UE rate remains endogenous, but the EU and EE rates are exogenous because
matches are constrained to be homogeneous and workers are constrained to search only oﬀ
the job. This constrained version of our model coincides with the canonical search model
formulated by Pissarides (1985, 2000) and Shimer (2005). We find that, when an economist
uses the constrained model, he not only ignores the eﬀect of productivity shocks on the EU
rate, but also underestimates the eﬀect of productivity shocks on the UE rate because he
mismeasures the elasticity of the matching function with respect to vacancies. Moreover,
when an economist uses the constrained model, he not only ignores the eﬀect of productivity
shocks on the number of vacancies created for employed workers, but also mismeasures the
eﬀect of productivity shocks on the number of vacancies created for unemployed workers.
Finally, when an economist uses the constrained model, he underestimates the magnitude
of productivity shocks in the postwar US. For all of these reasons, he incorrectly concludes
that aggregate productivity shocks account for less than 10 percent of the cyclical volatility
of unemployment and for less than 20 percent of the cyclical volatility of vacancies. These
findings confirm our initial conjecture that, in order to understand the behavior of unemployment and vacancies over the business cycle, an economist needs a model in which not
only the UE, but also the EU and EE rates are endogenous.
In this paper, we make two modeling choices that are relatively unusual in the on-the-job
search literature. First, we choose to model the search process as directed in the sense that
workers can direct their search towards vacancies that oﬀer particular terms of trade, rather
than random in the sense that workers have no information about the terms of trade oﬀered
by diﬀerent vacancies. We make this modeling choice because directed search seems a more
realistic description of a modern labor market. For example, in a recent survey of the US labor
market, Hall and Krueger (2008, Table 1) find that 84 percent of white, male, non-college
workers either “knew exactly” of “had a pretty good idea” about how much their current
job would pay at the very early stages of their application process (namely, the time of their
first interview). Another piece of evidence in support of directed search comes from Holzer,
Katz and Krueger (1991). Using data from the 1982 Employment Opportunity Pilot Project
Survey, they find that firms in high-wage industries attract more applicants per vacancy than
firms in low-wage industries. Second, we choose to model employment contracts as complete.

5

We find this modeling choice compelling because a complete employment contract guarantees
that the worker-firm pair does not leave any gains from trade unexploited.
Because of directed search and complete contracts, our model has several useful properties. In particular, we can establish existence, uniqueness and eﬃciency of an equilibrium
in which the multi-dimensional distribution of workers across employment states (i.e. unemployment and employment at diﬀerent jobs) does not aﬀect the agents’ value and policy
functions. We refer to this equilibrium as a Block Recursive Equilibrium (henceforth, BRE).
The existence of a BRE is an intuitive result. Under directed search, workers in diﬀerent employment states choose to look for diﬀerent vacancies because they have diﬀerent preferences
over the probability of finding a job and the value of the job. Therefore, the distribution of
workers across employment states does not aﬀect the firm’s benefit from opening a vacancy
oﬀering particular terms of trade, the equilibrium applicant/vacancy ratio, and, ultimately,
the agents’ equilibrium values and strategies.3 The eﬃciency of a BRE is also intuitive.
Under the assumption of complete contracts, a worker internalizes the eﬀect that his search
strategy has on his current employer. Under the assumption of directed search, a worker
internalizes the eﬀect that his search strategy has on his prospective employer. The uniqueness of the BRE follows from the uniqueness of the eﬃcient allocation. In fact, all eﬃcient
equilibria (including those that are not block recursive) must have the same allocation as
that in the BRE.
These properties of the BRE are very useful for carrying out the type of quantitative
analysis of labor market fluctuations that we perform in this paper. First, since the distribution of workers across diﬀerent employment states does not aﬀect the agents’ value and
policy functions, the BRE of our model can be solved in a stochastic environment without
incurring into the “curse of dimensionality” that typically aﬀects models with heterogeneous
agents. Second, since the BRE is unique, we can calibrate our model and use it for counterfactual analysis without having to worry about equilibrium selection (within the class of
3

Under the alternative assumption of random search, a BRE does not exist unless workers in diﬀerent
employment states (unemployment, and employment at diﬀerent jobs) all have the same reservation value
when they meet a vacancy. In the models of random search on the job by Burdett and Mortensen (1998),
Barlevy (2002), Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002), Burdett and Coles (2003) employed workers can return to
their job after meeting a vacancy. Therefore, these models do not admit a BRE. In the models by Mortensen
(1994) and Pissarides (1994, 2000), workers are not allowed to return to their previous employment position
after meeting a vacancy. Therefore, these models do admit a BRE.

6

BRE).

1.3

Related Literature

In this paper, we contribute to the directed search literature by developing a model of directed
search in which workers can search oﬀ and on the job and labor contracts are complete. For
this model, we prove the existence, uniqueness and eﬃciency of a BRE, and characterize
the dynamics of this equilibrium in an environment with aggregate productivity shocks.
Montgomery (1991), Peters (1991), Shimer (1996), Moen (1997), Acemoglu and Shimer
(1999), Burdett, Shi and Wright (2001) developed the earliest models of directed search.
These models diﬀer from ours because they abstract from on-the-job search. Delacroix and
Shi (2006) were the first to study a model of directed search on the job. Their model diﬀers
from ours because it assumes that labor contracts are incomplete (i.e. labor contracts can
only specify a constant wage) and, hence, the equilibrium transitions of workers between
employment states are not eﬃcient. Moreover, the analysis in Delacroix and Shi (2006) is
restricted to the properties of the steady-state equilibrium, while the focus of our paper is
on business cycle dynamics. Shi (2008) was the first to establish the existence of a BRE for
a model of directed search on the job. His model diﬀers from ours because it assumes that
contracts are incomplete (i.e. they can only specify wage as a function of tenure). In our
model contracts are complete and, for this reason, we can establish not only existence of a
BRE, but also uniqueness and eﬃciency.4 As mentioned above, uniqueness of the equilibrium
is a particularly important result because it allows us to calibrate the model and use it for
counterfactual analysis without having to worry about equilibrium selection. Moreover, Shi
(2008) establishes existence of a BRE in a deterministic environment, while in this paper we
prove existence of such equilibrium in an environment with aggregate shocks.
In this paper, we also contribute to the literature that studies business cycles using
4

Moen and Rosen (2004) develop a model with on-the-job learning and on-the-job search in which the
search process is partially directed. In this model, workers in diﬀerent employment states (e.g. workers with
diﬀerent human capital or with diﬀerent wages) are required to search in diﬀerent segments of the labor
market but, within their segment, workers are allowed to direct their search towards particular vacancies.
For this model, Moen and Rosen (2004) establish the eﬃciency of the steady-state equilibrium. They also
argue that the eﬃciency of the steady-state equilibrium depends on the assumption of market segmentation.
Our paper suggests that this need not be the case. In our model, the equilibrium is eﬃcient (in and out
of the steady state) and the search process is completely directed (i.e. workers can choose to apply to any
vacancy they like).

7

search-theoretic models of the labor market. In particular, we are the first to measure the
contribution of aggregate productivity shocks to the volatility of the labor market by using
a search model of the labor market in which UE, EU, EE transitions and vacancy creation
are all endogenous and eﬃcient. Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) were the first to develop
a model of the labor market in which the UE and EU transitions are endogenous. However,
their model abstracts from EE transitions. Moreover, Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) do
not use the model to measure the eﬀect of aggregate productivity shocks on the UE and EU
rate. Rather, they choose the parameters of the model so that aggregate productivity shocks
account for all of the observed volatility in unemployment and job creation, and they show
that the model can account for the covariance between unemployment, job creation and job
destruction.
Mortensen (1994) and Pissarides (1994, 2000) were the first to develop models of the
labor market in which the UE, EU and EE transitions are endogenous. These models diﬀer
from ours because they assume that the search process is random. Moreover, they assume
that wages are determined as the outcome of a bargaining game in which the worker’s threat
point is always unemployment (independently of the worker’s employment state). Because
they make diﬀerent assumptions, these models have diﬀerent predictions about the eﬀect of
aggregate productivity shocks. For example, the assumption on wage determination implies
that a firm-worker pair extracts an ineﬃciently small fraction of the surplus generated by an
employer-to-employer transition. Therefore, a positive shock to productivity (which increases
the EE rate) generates a smaller increase in the value of a match (and, hence, in the UE
rate) in these models than in ours. Moreover, none of these papers performs the same
measurement exercise that we carry out in our paper. Pissarides (1994, 2000) does not
perform any quantitative analysis. Mortensen (1994) chooses the parameters of the model
so that productivity shocks account for all of the observed volatility of unemployment and
job creation and, then, he shows that the model can account for the covariance between
unemployment, job creation and job destruction. Finally, in a paper contemporaneous to
ours, Ramey (2008) used the model by Mortensen (1994) to measure the eﬀect of productivity
shocks. His measurement exercise diﬀers from ours because he chooses the parameters of the
model so that productivity shocks account for all of the volatility in the EU rate.5
5

In the last four years, a number of search-theoretic models of the business cycle have been developed,

8

2

The Model

2.1

Physical Environment

Time is discrete and continues forever. The economy is populated by a continuum of workers
with measure one and by a continuum of firms with positive measure. Each worker has
P∞ t
the von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function
t=0 β ct , where ct ∈ R is the worker’s

consumption in period t and β ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor. Each firm has the von
P
t
Neumann-Morgenstern utility function ∞
t=0 β π t , where π t ∈ R is the firm’s profit in period

t. In this economy, the labor market is organized in a continuum of submarkets indexed by
x ∈ R, where x denotes the value oﬀered to a worker in that submarket (explained further
below). In submarket x, the ratio between the number of jobs that are vacant and the
number of workers who are searching is denoted by θ(x) ∈ R+ . We refer to θ(x) as the
tightness of submarket x.6

At the beginning of each period, the state of the economy can be summarized by the
triple (y, u, g) ≡ ψ ∈ Ψ. The first element of ψ denotes the aggregate component of labor
productivity, y ∈ Y = {y1 , y2 , ...yNy }, where Ny ≥ 2. The second element denotes the
measure of workers who are unemployed, u ∈ [0, 1]. The last element is a function g : Z →
[0, 1], with g(z) denoting the measure of workers who are employed at a job with idiosyncratic
P
productivity z ∈ Z = {z1 , z2 , ...zNz }, where Nz ≥ 2.7 Clearly, u + i g(zi ) = 1.
Each period is divided into four stages: separation, search, matching and production.

During the first stage, an employed worker becomes unemployed with probability τ ∈ [δ, 1],
calibrated, and used to measure the eﬀect of aggregate productivity shocks on the labor market. Hall (2005)
considers a model of random search oﬀ the job in which wages are assumes to be rigid. Using a calibrated
version of the model, he finds that aggregate productivity shocks can generate large fluctuations in vacancies
and unemployment. Menzio (2005) and Kennan (2008) develop random search models in which wages are set
as the outcome of an asymmetric information bargaining game between firms and workers. In these models,
wages are sticky because the informational rents of the firms are procyclical. Menzio and Moen (2008)
develop an alternative theory of wage stickiness. Nagypal (2007) develops a model of random search on the
job in which workers have private information about the amenity value of their jobs. Using a calibrated
version of the model, she finds that productivity shocks can account for a large fraction of the cyclical
volatility of vacancies and unemployment. Krause and Lubik (2007) reach similar conclusions using a model
of segmented search on the job with two diﬀerent types of vacancies. Clearly, these models are very diﬀerent
from ours.
6
In submarkets that are not visited by any workers, θ(x) is an out-of-equilibrium conjecture that helps
determine equilibrium behavior.
7
Note that the assumption that Y and Z are finite sets is not necessary for establsihing any of the
theoretical results in this paper. We make this assumption only to simplify the notation.

9

where τ is determined by the worker’s labor contract. The lower bound on τ denotes the
probability of exogenous job destruction, δ ∈ (0, 1).
During the second stage, a worker gets the opportunity of searching for a job with a
probability that depends on his recent employment history. In particular, if the worker was
unemployed at the beginning of the period, he can search with probability λu ∈ [0, 1]. If
the worker was employed at the beginning of the period and did not lose his job during the
separation stage, he can search with probability λe ∈ [0, 1]. If the worker lost his job during
the separation stage, he cannot search. Conditional on being able to search, the worker
chooses which submarket to visit. Also, during the second stage, a firm chooses how many
vacancies to create and where to locate them. The cost of maintaining a vacancy for one
period is k > 0. Both workers and firms take the tightness θ(x) parametrically.8
During the third stage, the workers and the vacancies in submarket x come together
through a frictional matching process. In particular, a worker finds a vacant job with probability p(θ(x)), where p : R+ → [0, 1] is a twice continuously diﬀerentiable, strictly increasing,
strictly concave function which satisfies the boundary conditions p(0) = 0, p(θ̄) = 1. Similarly, a vacancy finds a worker with probability q(θ(x)), where q : R+ → [0, 1] is a twice

continuously diﬀerentiable, strictly decreasing function such that q(θ) = θ−1 p(θ), q(0) = 1,

and limθ→∞ q(θ) = 0. The properties of the functions p and q are meant to capture the realistic feature that, the tighter is the submarket, the higher is the probability that a worker
finds a vacancy and the lower is the probability that a vacancy finds a worker.9
When a firm and a worker meet in submarket x, the firm has to oﬀer to the worker an
employment contract that is worth x in lifetime utility. If the worker rejects the oﬀer of the
firm (an event that does not occur along the equilibrium path), he returns to his previous
employment state (unemployment, or employment at some other firm). If the worker accepts
the oﬀer, he leaves his previous employment state and starts an employment relationship with
the firm. After the relationship has started, the worker and the firm observe the idiosyncratic
8

That is, workers and firms treat the tightness θ(x) just like households and firms treat prices in a
Walrasian Equilibrium.
9
In this paper, we assume that the labor market is organized in a continuum of submarkets indexed by
x, where x denotes the value oﬀered to a worker in that submarket. Moreover, we assume that workers
choose which submarket to visit and that firms choose where to locate their vacancies. This model of the
search-and-matching process generates the same equilibrium conditions as the more naturalistic model in
which firms post employment contracts for their vacancies and workers choose where to apply for a job.

10

productivity z̃ ∈ Z of their match, where z̃ is a random variable with a density function
f : Z → [0, 1]. The idiosyncratic component of productivity is constant throughout the

duration of the match.10

During the last stage, an unemployed worker produces and consumes b units of output.
A worker employed at a job z produces y + z units of output and consumes w of them, where
w is specified by the worker’s labor contract. At the end of the last stage, nature draws next
period’s aggregate productivity ŷ from the probability distribution φ(ŷ|y), φ : Y ×Y → [0, 1].
Throughout this paper, the caret indicates variables or functions in the next period.

2.2

Contractual Environment

In this paper, we assume that employment contracts are complete. That is, an employment
contract prescribes the wage paid by the employer to the employee, the probability that the
employee becomes unemployed, and the submarket where the employee looks for alternative
employment opportunities. These prescriptions are contingent on calendar time and on the
entire history of the match between the employer and the employee. We assume that contracts are complete because they guarantee that an employer and an employee will manage
to exploit all the possible gains from trade. This seems the most natural outcome in an
unregulated labor market like the US’s, even though this outcome may very well be implemented with (explicit or implicit) contracts that look diﬀerent from the complete contracts
that we consider here.
To specify the contracts, let the history of a match be a vector {z; y t } ∈ Z × Y t , where

z is the match-specific component of productivity and y t = {y1 , y2 , ...yt } is the sequence of

realizations of the aggregate component of productivity since the inception of the match.11

An employment contract a ∈ ANz is an allocation {wt , τ t , nt }∞
t=0 . The first element of a
10

We assume that the worker must leave his previous employment state before observing the productivity
of the new match in order to capture (in an admittedly stark way) the idea that it takes time to learn about
the quality of a new employment relationship. We could easily relax this assumption by letting the worker
observe a noisy signal about the quality of the new match before he has to choose where to work. Also, we
could easily relax the assumption that the idiosyncratic productivity of a match is constant over time.
11
In general, a complete contract should specify w, τ , and n as functions of the match-specific component
of productivity z and the sequence of realizations of the aggregate state of the economy since the inception of
the match, ψ t = {ψ 1 , ψ 2 , ...ψ t }. However, in this paper, we are interested in equilibria in which the tightness
function θ(x) depends on the aggregate state of the economy ψ = (y, u, g) only through y and not through
the entire distribution of workers across employment states. In these equilibria, the history {z; y t } provides
enough contingencies for a contract to be eﬃcient.

11

denotes the wage as a function of the worker’s tenure t and the history of the match {z; y t },

where wt : Z ×Y t → R. The second element denotes the separation probability as a function

of the tenure t and the history {z, y t+1 }, where τ t : Z × Y t+1 → [δ, 1]. The last element
denotes the submarket where the worker searches while on the job as a function of the tenure
t and the history {z, y t+1 }, where nt : Z × Y t+1 → R.

In the remainder of the paper, we let a(z; y t ) ∈ A denote the allocation prescribed by

the employment contract a after the history {z; y t } is realized. Note that a(z; y t ) is equal to
{wt (z; y t ), τ t (z; y t , ŷ), nt (z; y t , ŷ)} ∪ a(z; y t , ŷ).

3

Block Recursive Equilibrium

In this paper, we are interested in Block Recursive Equilibria, i.e. equilibria in which the
agents’ values, optimal strategies, and the market tightness depend on the aggregate state
of the economy, ψ, only through the aggregate state of the economy, y, and not through the
multi-dimensional distribution of workers across diﬀerent employment states, (u, g).

3.1

Worker’s Problem

Consider a worker who has received the opportunity to look for a job at the beginning
of the search stage. Let θ(x; y) denote the equilibrium tightness of submarket x. If the
worker visits submarket x, he succeeds in finding a job with probability p(θ(x; y)), and he
fails with probability 1 − p(θ(x; y)). If he succeeds, he enters the production stage in a
new employment relationship which gives him the lifetime expected utility x. If he fails, he
enters the production stage in the same employment position that he previously held, which
gives him the lifetime expected utility υ. Therefore, conditional on visiting submarket x, the
worker’s lifetime expected utility at the beginning of the search stage is υ +p(θ(x; y)) (x − υ).

Conditional on choosing x optimally12 , the worker’s lifetime expected utility is υ + D(υ; y),
where
D(υ; y) = maxx p(θ(x; y))(x − υ).

(R1)

Denote m(υ; y) as the solution for x to the maximization problem in (R1).
12

This qualification is relevant. When the worker is unemployed, he chooses x to maximize his lifetime
utility. However, when the worker is employed, he chooses x according to the prescriptions of his labor
contract, rather than to maximize his lifetime utility.

12

Next, consider an unemployed worker at the beginning of the production stage, and
denote as U(y) his lifetime utility. In the current period, the worker produces and consumes
b units of output. In the next period, the worker enters the search stage without a job and
has the opportunity to look for one with probability λu . Therefore, the worker’s lifetime
utility U(y) is equal to
U (y) = b + βE[U(ŷ) + λu D(U (ŷ); ŷ)].

(R2)

Throughout this paper, E denotes the conditional expectation on ŷ, calculated with the
distribution φ(ŷ|y).

3.2

Joint Value of a Match

Consider a firm and a worker who are matched at the beginning of the production stage. The
history of their match is {z, y t }. The allocation prescribed by their employment contract

after the history {z; y t } has realized is a = {w, τ , n} ∪ â. Denote as W (z; y|a) the lifetime
utility of the worker, and as J(z; y|a) the lifetime profits of the firm.

In the current period, the worker consumes w units of output. During the next separation
stage, the worker loses his job with probability τ , and keeps it with probability 1 − τ . In the
first case, the worker enters the search stage unemployed and does not have the opportunity
to look for a new job. In the second case, the worker enters the search stage employed and,
with probability λe , he has the opportunity to look for an alternative job in submarket n.
Therefore, the worker’s lifetime utility W (z; y|a) is equal to
W (z; y|a) = w + βE{τ (ŷ)U(ŷ) + [1 − τ (ŷ)]W (z; ŷ|â(ŷ))}+
+βE {[1 − τ (ŷ)]λe p(θ(n(ŷ); ŷ)) [n(ŷ) − W (z; ŷ|â(ŷ))]} .

(R3)

In the current period, the firm’s profit is y + z − w. During the next separation stage,
the firm loses the worker with probability τ . During the next matching stage, the firm loses
the worker with probability (1 − τ )λe p(θ(n)). The probability that the firm keeps the worker
until the next production stage is (1−τ ) (1−λe p(θ(n))). Therefore, the firm’s lifetime profits
J(z; y|a) are equal to
J(z; y|a) = y + z − w + βE {[1 − τ (ŷ)] [1 − λe p(θ(n(ŷ); ŷ))] J(z; ŷ|â(ŷ))} .
13

(R4)

Now, consider the hypothetical problem of choosing the allocation a in order to maximize
the sum of the worker’s lifetime utility and the firm’s lifetime profits from the match. As we
prove in the appendix, the maximized joint value of the match V (z; y) is
V (z; y) = max y + z + βE{τ (ŷ)U(ŷ) + [1 − τ (ŷ)] V (z; ŷ)}+
w,τ ,n

+βλe E{[1 − τ (ŷ)] p(θ(n(ŷ); ŷ))[n(ŷ) − V (z; ŷ)]},

w ∈ R,

τ : Y → [δ, 1] ,

(R5)

n : Y → R.

From equation (R5), we can immediately derive the properties of the allocation a∗ (z; y) =
∗
{wt∗ , τ ∗t , n∗t }∞
t=0 that maximizes the joint value of the match. At the separation stage, a (z; y)

specifies that the worker and the firm should voluntarily break up if and only if the sum of
their values is greater when they are apart than when they are together. That is, τ ∗t−1 (y t ) = 1
iﬀ U(yt ) is greater than V (z; yt ) + λe D(V (z; yt ), yt ), and τ ∗t (yt ) = δ otherwise. At the search
stage, the allocation specifies that the worker should visit the submarket that maximizes
the product of the probability of finding a job and the worker’s and firm’s joint value from
finding a job, i.e. n∗t−1 (y t ) = m(V (z; yt ); yt ). Finally, since the wage is just a transfer from
the firm to the worker and both parties are risk neutral, the allocation may specify any
∗
{wt∗ }∞
t=0 . Therefore, the allocation a (z; y) may attain any division of the joint value of the

match V (z; y) between the firm and the worker.

3.3

Firm’s Problem

When a firm meets a worker in submarket x, it chooses an employment contract that maximizes its expected profits subject to providing the worker with the lifetime utility x. Formally,
the firm solves the problem
maxa∈ANz
s.t.

P

i

P

J(zi ; y|a(zi ))f (zi ),

i W (zi ; y|a(zi ))f (zi ) = x.

(R6)

What is the solution to (R6)? First, consider a generic contract a. Conditional on any
realization z of the idiosyncratic component of productivity, the firm’s profits J(z; y|a(z))
cannot be greater than the diﬀerence between the maximized joint value of the match,
V (z; y), and the worker’s lifetime utility, W (z; y|a(z)). Therefore, if the contract a provides
the worker with the expected lifetime utility x, the firm’s expected profits cannot be greater
P
than i V (zi ; y)f (zi ) − x. Next, consider the contract a∗ = {a∗ (zi ; y)}i . Conditional on any
14

realization z of the idiosyncratic component of productivity, the firm’s profits J(z; y|a∗ (z; y))
are equal to the diﬀerence between the maximized joint value of the match, V (z; y), and the
worker’s lifetime utility, W (z; y|a∗ (z; y)). Therefore, for the appropriate selection of wages,
the contract a∗ provides the worker with the expected lifetime utility x and the firm with the
P
expected profits i V (zi ; y)f (zi ) − x. These observations lead to the following proposition.

Proposition 1 (Optimal Contract) (i) The firm’s value from meeting a worker in submarket
P
x is i V (zi ; y)f (zi ) − x. (ii) Any employment contract that solves the firm’s problem (R6)
prescribes the allocation: (a) nt−1 (z; y t ) = m(V (z; yt ); yt ), for all {z; y t } ∈ Z × Y t , t =

1, 2, ...; (b) τ t−1 (z; y t ) = d(z; yt ), for all {z; y t } ∈ Z × Y t , t = 1, 2, ..., where d(z; y) = 1 iﬀ

U(y) > V (z; y) + λe D(V (z; y); y) and d∗ (z; y) = δ otherwise.
Proof. In Appendix B.

¥

In the remainder of the paper, we are going to describe the prescriptions of the optimal employment contract with the policy functions {d(z; y), m(υ; y)}, rather than with the
sequence {τ t , nt }∞
t=0 .

3.4

Market Tightness

During the search stage, a firm chooses how many vacancies to create and where to locate them. The firm’s benefit of creating a vacancy in submarket x is the product between the probability of meeting a worker, q(θ(x; y)), and the value of meeting a worker,
P
i V (zi ; y)f (zi ) − x. The firm’s cost of creating a vacancy in submarket x is k. When the

benefit is strictly smaller than the cost, the firm’s optimal policy is to create no vacancies in
x. When the benefit is strictly greater than the cost, the firm’s optimal policy is to create
infinitely many vacancies in x. And when the benefit and the cost are equal, the firm’s
profits are independent from the number of vacancies it creates in submarket x.
In any submarket that is visited by a positive number of workers, the tightness θ(x; y) is
consistent with the firm’s optimal creation strategy if and only if
q(θ(x; y)) [

P

i

V (zi ; y)f (zi ) − x] ≤ k,

(R7)

and θ(x; y) ≥ 0, with complementary slackness. In any submarket that workers do not visit,
the tightness θ(x; y) is consistent with the firm’s optimal creation strategy if and only if
15

P
q(θ(x; y)) · [ i V (zi ; y)f (zi ) − x] is smaller or equal than k. However, following the rest of

the literature on directed search on the job (i.e. Shi 2008 and Menzio and Shi 2009), we
restrict attention to equilibria in which the tightness θ(x; y) satisfies condition (R7) in every
submarket.13

3.5

Laws of Motion

From the optimal policy functions, we can compute the probability that a worker transits
from one employment state to the other. First, consider a worker who is unemployed at the
beginning of the period. Let θu (y) denote θ(m(U (y); y); y). Then, at the end of the period,
the worker is still unemployed with probability 1 − λu p(θu (y)), and he is employed at job of
type ẑ with probability λu p(θu (y))f (ẑ). Next, consider a worker who is employed at a job of
type z at the beginning of the period. Let θz (z; y) denote θ(m(V (z; y); y); y). Then, at the
end of the period, the worker is unemployed with probability d(z; y). He is employed at a
job of type ẑ 6= z with probability [1 − d(z; y)] λe p(θz (z; y))f (ẑ), and at a job of type z with
probability [1 − d(z; y)] {1 − λe p(θz (z; y))[1 − f (z)]}.
From these transition probabilities, we can compute the laws of motion for the measure
of unemployed workers and for the measure of workers employed at each idiosyncratic productivity z. In particular, the measure of workers who are unemployed at the end of the
period is:
û = u(1 − λu p(θu (y))) +

P

i

d(zi ; y)g(zi ).

(R8)

Similarly, the measure of workers who, at the end of the period, are employed at a job with
idiosyncratic productivity z is:
ĝ(z) = h(ψ)f (z) + (1 − d(z; y))(1 − λe p(θz (z; y)))g(z).

(R9)

The function h(ψ) denotes the measure of workers who are hired during the matching stage
13

The literature on directed search oﬀ the job (e.g. Moen 1997, Acemoglu and Shimer 1999, Menzio 2007)
assumes that, in a submarket that is not active in equilibrium, the tightness is such that a worker would be
indiﬀerent between visiting that submarket and the submarket that he visits in equilibrium. In models with
directed search on the job, workers are heterogeneous and, hence, it is more convenient to use the firm’s
indiﬀerence condition (R7) to pin down the tightness of inactive submarkets.

16

and is given as follows:
h(ψ) = uλu p(θu (y)) +

3.6

P

i (1

− d(zi ; y))λe p(θz (zi ; y))g(zi ).

Definition of Block Recursive Equilibrium

The previous paragraphs motivate the following definition of equilibrium.
Definition 1: A Block Recursive Equilibrium (BRE) consists of a market tightness function
θ∗ : R×Y → R+ ; a search value function D∗ : R×Y → R, and policy function m∗ : R×Y →
R; an unemployment value function U ∗ : Y → R; a match value function V ∗ : Z × Y → R;

a separation function d∗ : Z × Y → R; and the laws of motion û∗ : Ψ → [0, 1], and
ĝ ∗ : Z × Ψ → [0, 1] for unemployment and employment. These functions are such that:

(i) θ∗ satisfies (R7) for all (x, ψ) ∈ R × Ψ;

(ii) D∗ satisfies (R1) for all (V, ψ) ∈ R × Ψ, and m∗ is the associated policy function;
(iii) U ∗ satisfies (R2) for all ψ ∈ Ψ;

(iv) V ∗ satisfies (R6) for all (z, ψ) ∈ Z × Ψ, and d∗ is the associated policy function;

(v) û∗ and ĝ ∗ satisfy (R8) and (R9) for all ψ ∈ Ψ.

In a Block Recursive Equilibrium, the agent’s value and policy functions and the market tightness function depend on the aggregate state of the economy, ψ, only through the
aggregate component of productivity, y, and not through the entire distribution of workers
across diﬀerent employment states, (u, g). Therefore, solving the BRE amounts to solving
a simple system of functional equations in which the unknown functions have either one or
two arguments (independently from the cardinality of Z). This is the same type of system
that economists routinely solve to find the equilibrium of representative agent models.

4

Existence, Uniqueness and Eﬃciency

In this section, we prove existence, uniqueness and eﬃciency of a Block Recursive Equilibrium. To this aim, we first formulate the problem of the social planner and characterize
its solution. Next, we prove that, if a Block Recursive Equilibrium exists, then it generates
the same allocation that solves the planner’s problem. Moreover, we prove that a BRE can

17

always be built from the solution to the planner’s problem. We conclude the section by
providing a qualitative characterization of the equilibrium in and out of the steady state.

4.1

Social Planner’s Problem

At the beginning of the period, the social planner observes the state of the economy ψ =
{y, u, g}. At the separation stage, he chooses the destruction probability d(z) for matches
with idiosyncratic productivity z, d : Z → [δ, 1]. At the search stage, he chooses the tightness
θu for the submarket where he sends unemployed workers to look for jobs, θu ∈ R+ , and
the tightness θz (z) for the submarket where he sends workers employed on jobs of type z to
look for better jobs, θz : Z → R+ . The choices of d, θu and θz determine the distribution
of workers across employment states at the production stage and, hence, at the beginning
of next period. The social planner’s objective is to maximize the sum of current and future
aggregate consumption discounted at the rate β. Denote the planner’s value function as
s0 (ψ). The planner’s problem is
s0 (ψ) = maxd,θu ,θz F (d, θu , θz |ψ) + βEs0 (ψ̂)
P
s.t. û = u [1 − λu p(θu )] + i d(zi )g(zi ),

ĝ(z) = h(ψ)f (z) + [1 − d(z)] [1 − λe p(θz (z))] g(z),
P
h(ψ) = λu p(θu )u + λe i [1 − d(zi )] p(θz (zi ))g(zi ),

(P1)

where F is the current period’s aggregate consumption given by
F (d, θu , θz |ψ) = ûb +

P

i (y

+ zi )ĝ(zi ) − k[λu uθu + λe

P

i (1

− d(zi ))g(zi )θz (zi )].

The planner’s value function s0 (ψ) is linear in both the measure u of workers who are
unemployed and the measure g(z) of workers who are employed at jobs with idiosyncratic
productivity z. That is,
s0 (ψ) = s0u (y)u +

P

0
i sz (zi ; y)g(zi ).

(P2)

The coeﬃcient s0u (y) can be interpreted as the diﬀerence between the present value of output
produced by a worker who is currently unemployed and the present value of output invested
in creating vacancies for him. Similarly, the coeﬃcient s0z (z; y) can be interpreted as the
present value of net output produced by a worker who is currently employed at a job of type
z. In line with basic economic intuition, the coeﬃcient s0z (z; y) is increasing in z. These
18

properties of the planner’s value function are established in the following proposition.
Proposition 2 (Social Planner’s Problem) (i) The value of the plan s0 : Ψ → R is the

unique solution to the functional equation (P1). (ii) There exist functions s0u : Y → R and
P
s0z : Z ×Y → R such that the value of the plan s0 (y, u, g) is equal to s0u (y)u+ i s0z (zi ; y)g(zi ).

(iii) The function s0z (zi ; y) is non-decreasing in z.
Proof. In Appendix C.

¥

The planner’s assignment of vacancies to the submarket with unemployed workers is
optimal only if
k ≥ p0 (θu ){y − b + βE[

P

0
i sz (zi ; ŷ)f (zi )

− s0u (ŷ)]}

(P3)

and θu ≥ 0, with complementary slackness. This condition is easy to understand. The left
hand side of (P3) is the cost of assigning an extra vacancy to the submarket with unemployed
workers. The right hand side of (P3) is the expected benefit from such an extra vacancy, given
by the product of two terms. The first term, p0 (θu ), is the number of unemployed workers
who find a job because of the extra vacancy. The second term is the diﬀerence between the
present value of net output produced by an employed and an unemployed worker, measured
at the production stage. Notice that, since the left hand side is independent from θu and
the right hand side is strictly decreasing, the optimality condition (P3) admits a unique
solution in each aggregate state ψ. Moreover, since (P3) depends on the aggregate state of
the economy only through y, the optimal policy is a function θ0u : Y → R+ .
The planner’s assignment of vacancies to the submarket with workers who are employed
at jobs of type z is optimal only if
k ≥ p0 (θz (z)){−z + βE[

P

0
i sz (zi ; ŷ)f (zi )

− s0z (z; ŷ)]}

(P4)

and θz (z), with complementary slackness. The interpretation of the optimality condition
(P4) is similar to that of (P3), except that the extra vacancy is assigned to a submarket
populated by workers who are employed at jobs with idiosyncratic productivity z rather
than unemployed. As it is the case for (P3), the optimality condition (P4) admits a unique
solution for θz (z) in each aggregate state ψ. Moreover, since (P4) depends on the aggregate
state of the economy ψ only through y, the optimal policy is a function θ0z : Z × Y → R+ .
19

The planner’s choice of the destruction probability for matches with idiosyncratic productivity z is optimal if and only if d(z) = 1 whenever
£
¤
b + βEs0u (ŷ) > −λe kθ0z (z; y) + 1 − λe p(θ0z (z; y)) [y + z + βEs0z (z; ŷ)] +
P
+λe p(θ0z (z; y)) {y + βE [ i s0z (zi ; ŷ)f (zi )]} ,

(P5)

and d(z) = δ otherwise. The interpretation of this condition is straightforward. The left
hand side of (P5) is the present value of net output produced by a worker who is unemployed
at the beginning of the production stage. The right hand side of (P5) is the present value of
net output produced by a worker who is employed at a job with idiosyncratic productivity z
at the beginning of the search stage. Clearly, the optimality condition (P5) admits only one
solution for d(z) in each aggregate state ψ. Moreover, since (P5) depends on the aggregate
state of the economy ψ only y, the optimal policy is a function d0 : Z × Y → [δ, 1].
Finally, the derivative of the social planner’s value function with respect to the measure
of unemployed workers is:
£
¤
s0u (y) = −kλu θ0u (y) + 1 − λu p(θ0u (y)) [b + βEs0u (ŷ)] +
P
+λu p(θ0u (y)) {y + βE [ i s0z (zi ; y+ )f (zi )]} .

(P6)

Similarly, the derivative of the social planner’s value function with respect to the measure
of workers employed at jobs of type z is:
s0z (z; y) = d0 (z; y) [b + βEs0u (ŷ)] − [1 − d0 (z; y)] kλe θ0z (z; y)+
£
¤
+ [1 − d0 (z; y)] 1 − λe p(θ0z (z; y)) [y + z + βEs0z (z; ŷ)] +
P
+ [1 − d0 (z; y)] λe p(θ0z (z; y)) {y + βE [ i s0z (zi ; ŷ)f (zi )]} .

4.2

(P7)

Equilibrium Allocation

Denote with {D∗ , m∗ , U ∗ , V ∗ , d∗ , θ∗ } a Block Recursive Equilibrium. The market tightness
function θ∗ (x; y) is derived from the equilibrium condition (R7). In particular, let x̃(y)

denote the diﬀerence between the firm’s and worker’s joint value of a match and the cost of a
P
vacancy, i.e. x̃(y) ≡ i V ∗ (zi ; y)f (zi ) − k. In all of the submarkets where workers are oﬀered
less than x̃(y), the equilibrium tightness is strictly positive and such that the firm’s benefit

from opening a vacancy is equal to the cost. As the lifetime utility oﬀered to the workers
approaches x̃(y), the equilibrium tightness converges towards zero. In all of the submarkets

20

where workers are oﬀered more than x̃(y), θ∗ (x; y) is equal to zero. Formally, the equilibrium
market tightness is:
∗

θ (x; y) =

½

P
q −1 (k/( i V ∗ (zi ; y)f (zi ) − x)) if x ≤ x̃(y),
0
if x > x̃(y).

(E1)

The search policy function m∗ (υ; y) satisfies the equilibrium condition (R1). That is,
m∗ (υ; y) maximizes the product between the worker’s probability of finding a job, i.e.
p(θ∗ (x; y)), and the worker’s value of taking the job and leaving his previous employment
position, i.e. x − υ. Equation (E1) implies that the worker’s probability of finding a
job is zero in all submarkets x > x̃(y). Equation (E1) also implies that, in all submarkets x ≤ x̃(y), the worker’s value of a job is equal to the diﬀerence between the worker’s
and firm’s joint value of a match and the firm’s expected cost of creating a match, i.e.
P
x = i V ∗ (zi ; y)f (zi ) − k/q(θ∗ (x; y)). Therefore, the search policy function is:
P
m∗ (υ; y) ∈ arg max{−kθ∗ (x; y) + p(θ∗ (x; y)) [ i V ∗ (zi ; y)f (zi ) − υ]}.
x

(E2)

In equilibrium, whenever an unemployed worker has the opportunity to search, he visits
submarket m∗ (U ∗ (y); y). Let θ∗u (y) denote the tightness of this submarket. In equilibrium,
whenever a worker employed at a job with idiosyncratic productivity z has the opportunity
to search, he visits submarket m∗ (V ∗ (z; y); y). Let θ∗z (z; y) denote the tightness of this
submarket. From equation (E2), it follows that the tightness θ∗u (y) satisfies the condition
P
k ≥ p0 (θ∗u (y)) [ i V ∗ (zi ; y)f (zi ) − U ∗ (y)]

(E3)

and θ∗u (y) ≥ 0, with complementary slackness. Similarly, from equation (E2), it follows that
the tightness θ∗ (z; y) satisfies the condition

P
k ≥ p0 (θ∗ (x; y)) [ i V ∗ (zi ; y)f (zi ) − V ∗ (z; y)]

(E4)

and θ∗z (z; y) ≥ 0, with complementary slackness.

In equilibrium, the lifetime utility of an unemployed worker is U ∗ (y) at the beginning
of the production stage. Let s∗u (y) denote the lifetime utility of an unemployed worker at
the beginning of the separation stage, i.e. s∗u (y) = U ∗ (y) + λu D(U ∗ (y); y). In equilibrium,
the worker’s and firm’s joint value of a match is V ∗ (z; y) at the beginning of the production
21

stage. Let s∗z (z; y) denote the worker’s and firm’s joint value of a match at the beginning
of the separation stage, i.e. s∗z (z; y) equals the sum between d∗ (z; y) · U ∗ (z; y) and (1 −
d∗ (z; y))[V ∗ (z; y) + λe D∗ (V ∗ (z; y); y)]. Then, the equilibrium condition (R2) implies that
s∗u (y) = −kλu θ∗u (y) + [1 − λu p(θ∗u (y))] [b + βEs∗u (ŷ)] +
P
+λu p(θ∗u (y)) {y + βE [ i s∗z (zi ; ŷ)f (zi )]} .

(E5)

And the equilibrium condition (R5) implies that

s∗z (z; y) = d∗ (z; y) [b + βEs∗u (ŷ)] − [1 − d∗ (z; y)] kλe θ∗z (z; y)+

+ [1 − d∗ (z; y)] [1 − λe p(θ∗z (z; y))] [y + z + βEs∗z (z; ŷ)] +
P
+ [1 − d∗ (z; y))λe p(θ∗z (z; y))] {y + βE [ i s∗z (zi ; ŷ)f (zi )]} .

(E6)

where d∗ (z; y) is equal to 1 if

b + βEs∗u (ŷ) > −λe kθ∗z (z; y) + [1 − λe p(θ∗z (z; y))] [y + z + βEs∗z (z; ŷ)] +
P
+λe p(θ∗z (z; y)) {y + βE [ i s∗z (zi ; ŷ)f (zi )]} ,

(E7)

and d∗ (z; y) = δ, otherwise.

At this point, the reader may have recognized that the equilibrium objects {d∗ , θ∗u , θ∗z , s∗u , s∗z }
satisfy the same system of equations that is satisfied by the solution to the social planner’s
problem {d0 , θ0u , θ0z , s0u , s0z }. This system of equations admits only one solution. Therefore, a
BRE is unique and is eﬃcient. Moreover, the equations (E3)—(E7) are not only necessary
for a BRE, but they are also suﬃcient. Therefore, a BRE can always be constructed from
the solution to the social planner’s problem. We summarize these findings in the following
theorem.
Theorem 3 (Existence, Uniqueness and Eﬃciency) (i) A Block Recursive Equilibrium exists. (ii) Let {D∗ , m∗ , U ∗ , V ∗ , d∗ , θ∗ } be a Block Recursive Equilibrium. Let θ∗u (y) denote
θ∗ (m∗ (U ∗ (y); y); y), and let θ∗z (z; y) denote θ∗ (m∗ (V ∗ (z; y); y); y). Then, the equilibrium al-

location {θ∗u , θ∗z , d∗ } is equal to the social planner’s allocation {θ0u , θ0z , d0 }.
Proof: In the Appendix D.

¥

The existence of a BRE is an intuitive result. Under directed search, workers in diﬀerent employment states choose to apply for diﬀerent vacancies because they have diﬀerent
preferences over the probability of getting a job and the value oﬀered by a job. For this
reason, the distribution of workers across diﬀerent employment states does not aﬀect the
22

firm’s expected benefit from meeting an applicant in submarket x. Moreover, the firm’s
cost from opening a vacancy in submarket x is independent from the distribution of workers
across employment states. Therefore, the firm’s probability of meeting an applicant (and,
hence, the vacancy/applicant ratio) must also be independent from the workers’ distribution. In turn, this implies that the agents’ values and strategies are independent from the
workers’ distribution. The eﬃciency of a BRE is an intuitive result as well. Under complete
contracts, a worker internalizes the eﬀect that his decisions have on his current employer.
Under directed search, the value to a worker from filling a vacant job is equal to the diﬀerence between the worker’s and firm’s joint value of the job and the firm’s cost of creating
the job. For this reason, under directed search, a worker also internalizes the eﬀect of his job
application decision on his prospective employer. Finally, the uniqueness of a BRE follows
from the uniqueness of the eﬃcient allocation. Note that since we established uniqueness
of the eﬃcient allocation without requiring the allocation to be block recursive, all eﬃcient
equilibria (including those that are not block recursive) must have the same allocation as
that in the BRE.

4.3

Characterization of Equilibrium

Now, we are in the position to characterize the equilibrium of our model economy. Equation
(E3) implies that the tightness of the submarket visited by an unemployed worker is an
P ∗
increasing function of the diﬀerence between the value of a new match, i.e.
V (zi ; y)f (zi ),
and the value of unemployment, i.e. U ∗ (y). Equation (E4) implies that the tightness of the

submarket visited by an employed worker is an increasing function of the diﬀerence between
the value of a new match and the value of his current match. Since the value of a match is
increasing in the idiosyncratic component of its productivity, θ∗z (z; y) is a decreasing function
of z.
Equation (E7) characterizes the workers’ transitions from employment to unemployment.
In particular, an employed worker becomes unemployed with probability 1 if the value of his
match at the beginning of the separation stage is smaller than the value of unemployment.
Otherwise, he becomes unemployed with probability δ. Since the value of a match is strictly
increasing in the idiosyncratic component of productivity, there exists a z eu (y) such that

23

d∗ (z; y) = 1 for all z < z eu (y) and d∗ (z; y) = δ for all.z ≥ z eu (y).
Even though we are not able to characterize analytically the relationship between {d∗ , θ∗u , θ∗z }
and y, we can easily compute it. For the parameter values in Table 2, the diﬀerence between
the value of a match and the value of unemployment is increasing in the aggregate component
of productivity. On the one hand, this implies that the tightness of the submarket visited
by unemployed workers is an increasing function of y. On the other hand, this implies that
the probability that a worker employed at a job of type z is a decreasing function of y.
For the parameter values in Table 2, the diﬀerence between the value of a new match
and the value of a match with a relatively low idiosyncratic productivity is increasing in y.
The diﬀerence between the value of a new match and a relatively high productivity match
is decreasing in y. Therefore, the eﬀect that a positive shock to aggregate productivity has
on the tightness of the submarket visited by an employed worker depends on the quality of
his job.

5

Calibration

We begin this section by describing the dataset that we are going to use to calibrate our
model. This dataset includes all the information used by Shimer (2005) to calibrate the
textbook search model of Pissarides (1985). However, since our model has more parameters
than Pissarides’, the dataset contains additional information about the job-to-job transition
rate and the tenure distribution. In the second part of the section, we describe and motivate
the calibration strategy. In particular, we explain why we can recover the distribution of
idiosyncratic productivities from the tenure distribution. In the last part of the section, we
report the results of the calibration.

5.1

Data

We measure quarterly productivity as the CPS output per worker in the non-farm business
sector, and unemployment as a 3-month average of the CPS monthly rate of unemployment
in the civilian population. We construct the cyclical component of these two variables as
the diﬀerence between the log of the raw data and an HP trend (with the usual smoothing
parameter 1600). Over the period between 1951(I) and 2006(II), the average of our measure
24

of productivity is 82 (100 being productivity in 1992) and the average of our measure of
unemployment is 5.6 percent. Over the same period, the cyclical components of productivity
and unemployment move together. However, cyclical unemployment is more than 10 times
as volatile as productivity. These and other statistics are reported in Table 1.
We measure the rate at which employed workers become unemployed (the EU rate) as
well as the rate at which unemployed workers become employed (the UE rate) using the
methodology developed by Shimer (2005).14 Specifically, we measure the EU rate in month
s
s
t as heu
t = ut+1 /(1 − ut ), where ut+1 is the CPS short-term unemployment rate in month

t + 1, and ut is the CPS unemployment rate. We measure the UE rate in month t as
s
hue
t = 1 − (ut+1 − ut+1 )/ut . Then, we construct the quarterly transition rates by taking

ue
3-month averages of heu
t and ht . Over the period between 1951(I) and 2006(II), the average

EU rate is 2.6 percent, and the average UE rate is 45 percent. Over this period, the cyclical
component of the EU rate is positively correlated with cyclical unemployment and it is
approximately 60 percent as volatile. The cyclical component of the UE rate is negatively
correlated with unemployment and it is approximately 65 percent as volatile.
The rate at which workers move from employer to employer is measured by Nagypál
(2008) from the CPS microdata. Specifically, she measures the EE rate in month t as
ee
ee
hee
t = ft /et , where ft is the number of workers who are employed at diﬀerent firms in

months t and t + 1, and et is the number of workers who are employed in month t. Over
the period between 1994(I) and 2006(II), the average EE rate is 2.9 percent. Over the
same period, the cyclical component of the EE rate is negatively correlated with cyclical
unemployment and it is approximately 30 percent as volatile. Prior to 1994, Nagypál’s
14

There are three diﬀerences between the measures of the UE and EU transition rates used by Shimer (2005)
and those used in this paper. First, in order to correct for the change in the measurement of unemployment
duration caused by the 1994 redesign of the CPS, Shimer multiplies the oﬃcial short-term unemployment
by 1.1 in each month from February 1994 on. In this paper, we follow Elsby, Michaels and Solon (2009) who
argue that the appropriate correction coeﬃcient for short-term unemployment is not 1.1 but 1.15. Second,
Shimer corrects the raw measures of worker’s transition rates for time aggregation bias. The extent of this
bias, as well as the appropriateness of the corrections suggested by Shimer, is based on the hypothesis that
a worker’s transition rate from one state to the other does not depend on how long he has been in that
state. However, in our model, the worker’s transition rates are duration dependent and Shimer’s corrections
are not appropriate. (Indeed, if one takes our monthly model literally, there is no aggregation bias at all.)
Therefore, in this paper, we do not correct the workers’ transition rates. Nevertheless, as a robustness check,
we performed our measurement exercise using Shimer’s corrections (both in the data and in the model) and
our findings did not change much. Finally, Shimer computes the cyclical component of the log of quarterly
workers’ transition rates by using an HP-filter with a smoothing parameter of 100,000. In this paper, we use
an HP-filter with the more standard smoothing parameter of 1600.

25

measure of the EE rate cannot be constructed because the CPS did not collect data on
job-to-job transitions.
We measure vacancies with the Conference Board Help-Wanted Index. Over the period
1951(I)-2006(II), the contemporaneous correlation between cyclical vacancies and cyclical
unemployment is -.92. Over the same period, the standard deviation of cyclical vacancies is
10 percent higher than the standard deviation of cyclical unemployment.
Finally, in order to calibrate the probability distribution of the match-specific component
of productivity, we use information about the duration of employment relationships in the
US labor market. In particular, we use the measure of the distribution of workers across
tenure lengths that Diebold, Neumark and Polsky (1997) have constructed from the 1987
CPS tenure supplement. This tenure distribution is plotted in Figure 1.

5.2

Calibration Strategy

With the data described in the previous paragraphs, we need to calibrate the household’s
preferences {b, β}, the search technology {λu , λe , p, δ}, and the production technology {k, Z, f, Y, φ}.
For the sake of simplicity, we restrict attention to job-finding probability functions of the
form p(θ) = min{1, θγ }, γ ∈ (0, 1). We also restrict the distribution of the idiosyncratic
component of productivity to be a 1,000 point approximation of a Weibull distribution with
mean μz , scale σ z , and shape αz .15 The aggregate component of productivity obeys a 3-state
Markov process with unconditional mean μy , standard deviation σ y , and autocorrelation ρy .
Without loss of generality, we normalize μy to 1 and μz to 0.
We choose one month as the length of a model period. We set β so that the annual
interest rate in the model is 5 percent. We set the vacancy cost k, the scale parameter in
the distribution function of the idiosyncratic component of productivity σ z , and the search
probability λe so that the average UE, EU and EE rates are the same in the model as in the
15

The Weibull density function is:
f (z) =

αz
σz

µ

z − μz
+Γ
σz

µ

¶¶αz −1
∙ µ
µ
¶¶αz ¸
1
z − μz
1
+1
exp −
+Γ
+1
,
αz
σz
αz

where Γ is the gamma function.With this distribution, we will be able to use αz in matching the tenure
distribution and σz in matching the EU rate. In contrast, if f (z) is the normal or the lognormal distribution,
one parameter (i.e., the standard deviation) is forced to serve both roles in the calibration.

26

data (see Table 1). We set the search probability λu to 1 because it is diﬃcult to identify it
separately from k and λe .
Our strategy for calibrating the remaining parameters is less standard and deserves some
discussion. In the model, the parameter γ determines the elasticity of the UE rate with
respect to the tightness of the submarket visited by unemployed workers, θu . Moreover,
since a disproportionate number of vacancies are created in this submarket, the parameter
γ is positively correlated with the elasticity of the UE rate with respect to the ratio between
total vacancies and unemployment. Therefore, even without data on θu , we are able to
identify γ from the coeﬃcient of log(v/u) in the regression of log hue .
In the model, the shape parameter in the density function of idiosyncratic productivity,
αz , and the exogenous separation rate, δ, aﬀect the shape of the hazard/tenure profile, i.e.,
the probability that a worker leaves his job as a function of tenure. A higher αz reduces the
skewness of the probability distribution of the match-specific component of productivity. In
turn, this tends to reduce the hazard rate at short tenures (1 to 2 years) and to increase it
at medium tenures (2 to 4 years). In contrast, a higher δ increases the hazard rate at all
tenures, including long ones (more than 4 years). Therefore, we are able to identify both αz
and δ by minimizing the distance between the tenure distribution generated by the model
and its empirical counterpart.16
In the model, the ratio between the productivity of labor at home and in the market is
P
b/(y + i zi g(zi )). In the US economy, Hall and Milgrom (2008) estimate the ratio between

labor productivity at home and in the market to be 71 percent. Therefore, we can identify the

parameter b by equating the productivity ratio in the model and in the data17 . Finally, we
choose σ y and ρy so that the average productivity of labor has the same standard deviation
and autocorrelation in the model and in the data.
16

Moscarini (2003) uses the same strategy and the same data to calibrate an on-the-job search model in
which workers and firms receive noisy signals about the unobservable quality of their match.
17
Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008) set b so that the average cost of recruiting a worker is the same in
the model and in the data. Given this calibration target, Hagedorn and Manovskii find that the relative
productivity of labor at home and in the market is approximately 90 percent. If we were to set the productivity ratio to 0.90 rather than 0.71, our model would predict an even larger response of unemplyoment and
vacancies to a given shock to the aggregate component of productivity.

27

5.3

Calibration Outcomes

Column a in Table 2 contains the results of our calibration. Most notably, we find that
employed workers have the opportunity of searching the labor market nearly as often as
unemployed workers (λe = 0.83, λu = 1). Yet, the rate at which employed workers move
from one employer to the other is 20 times smaller than the rate at which unemployed workers
become employed because the latter seek jobs that oﬀer less generous terms of trade and are
easier to find.
We also find that there is a great deal of uncertainty about the productivity of a new
match. At the ninetieth percentile of the probability distribution f (z), the productivity of a
match is twice as large as at the tenth percentile. However, because the survival probability
of a match is endogenous, not all of this uncertainty translates into dispersion in the crosssectional productivity distribution g(z). At the ninetieth percentile of g(z), the productivity
of a match is only 1.3 times as large as at the tenth percentile. This process of endogenous
selection also creates a large wedge between the expected productivity of a new match
and the average of the cross-sectional productivity distribution. In particular, the expected
P
productivity of a new match, μy + zi f (zi ), is equal to 1, while the cross-sectional average
P
productivity of a match, apl = (1 − u)−1 (μy + zi )g(zi ), is 1.37.

6

Business Cycle Analysis

In this section, we use the calibrated model to measure the contribution of aggregate productivity shocks (henceforth, y-shocks) to the cyclical volatility of US unemployment, vacancies
and other labor market variables. Then, we compare these measurements with those that an
economist would obtain if he were to use a version of the model in which the EU and EE rates
are exogenous. From this comparison, it will be clear that, in order to properly measure the
contribution of shocks to the cyclical volatility of the US labor market, an economist needs
a model in which not only the UE, but also the EU and EE rates are endogenous. These
two measurement exercises are carried out in the second and third part of the section. In
the first part of the section, as a preliminary step, we use the calibrated model to measure
the response of the US labor market to a 1 percent increase in the aggregate component of
productivity.
28

6.1

Response to a Productivity Shock

In order to study the response of the labor market to a 1 percent increase in the aggregate component of productivity, we first compute the Block Recursive Equilibrium of our
calibrated model. Then, we feed into the model the sequence of realizations of aggregate
component of productivity {yt }, where yt = μy for all t ≤ 9, 000 and yt = 1.01 · μy for
all t > 9, 000. Finally, we calculate the percentage change in unemployment, vacancies
and other labor market variables in response to the increase in the aggregate component of
productivity.
The firm’s and worker’s joint value of a match increases when the aggregate productivity
shock hits the economy. In response to the increase in the value of a match, firms open
more vacancies per applicant in every submarket x. In response to the increase in the labor
market tightness, unemployed workers choose to visit submarkets in which vacancies oﬀer
more generous terms of trade and the probability of trade is higher. Similarly, employed
workers choose, on average, to visit submarkets in which both the terms-of-trade and the
probability of trade are higher. Therefore, the UE and EE rates increase. In contrast, the
EU rate decreases because the increase in the aggregate component of productivity induces
workers and firms to keep matches that previously they would have destroyed. Since the rate
at which workers flow out of unemployment decreases and the rate at which workers flow
into unemployment increases, the unemployment rate unambiguously falls. More precisely,
a 1 percent increase in the aggregate component of productivity leads to a 2 percent increase
in the UE rate, a 6 percent increase in the EE rate, a 6 percent decrease in the EU rate, and
an 8 percent decrease in the unemployment rate (see Figure 3).
When the aggregate productivity shock hits the economy, firms open more vacancies for
each unemployed worker. However, since the number of workers who are unemployed falls
so much, firms end up opening fewer vacancies for this group of workers. Similarly, when
the shock hits the economy, firms create more vacancies for each employed worker. Since the
number of employed workers increases, firms increase the number of vacancies opened for
this second group of workers. Overall, vacancies increase by approximately 3 percent (see
Figure 4).
When the shock to the aggregate component of productivity hits the economy, the distrib29

ution of employed workers across jobs with diﬀerent match-specific productivities is subject
to two opposing forces. On the one hand, the increase in aggregate productivity induces
firms and workers to keep some low productivity matches that they would have previously
destroyed. This first force tends to worsen (in the stochastic dominance sense) the distribution of match-specific productivities. On the other hand, in response to the shock, workers
employed at low-productivity jobs search in tighter submarkets. This second force tends to
improve the distribution of match-specific productivities. Figures 5 and 6 show that the first
force dominates the second one.
In Figure 5, we plot the impulse response function of the fraction of workers employed at
jobs with idiosyncratic productivity z lower than 0.23 (i.e., the 10th percentile of the ergodic
distribution of match-specific productivities), greater than 0.23 and lower than 0.29 (i.e., the
20th percentile of the ergodic distribution of match-specific productivities), and greater than
0.29. In Figure 5, we see that the fraction of workers employed at the least productive class of
jobs increases by more than 2 percent; the fraction of workers employed at the intermediate
class of jobs increases by 0.5 percent; and the fraction of workers employed at the most
productive jobs decreases by 0.5 percent. Overall, the average of the distribution of matchspecific productivities falls by 0.4 percent in response to the shock. As a consequence, a 1
percent increase in the aggregate component of productivity does not increase the average
productivity of labor by 1 · (μy /apl) = 0.73 percent, but only by 0.65 percent (see Figure 6).

6.2

Productivity Shocks and Business Cycles

How much of the cyclical fluctuations in the US labor market are driven by aggregate productivity shocks? In order to answer this question, we compute the Block Recursive Equilibrium
of our calibrated model. Then, we draw a realization of the calibrated stochastic process
for the aggregate component of productivity y, and we compute the quarterly time series
of unemployment, vacancies and other labor market variables.18 Finally, we pass the log of
these series through an HP-filter with a smoothing parameter 1600.
Table 3 contains a statistical summary of our simulated data. The first lesson that we
draw from these tables is that y-shocks generate fluctuations in the EU transition rate that
18

Since the model is monthly, we measure the quarterly time series of unemployment, vacancy and transition rates by taking 3-months averages of the monthly rates generated by the model.

30

are negatively correlated with the fluctuations in the average productivity of labor and are
approximately 8.5 times as large. In addition, y-shocks generate fluctuations in the UE
transition rate that are positively correlated with average productivity fluctuations and are
3 times as large. As a result, unemployment moves in the opposite direction of average
productivity and it is 10.5 times more volatile.
The second lesson that we draw from Table 3 is that y-shocks generate fluctuations in
the number of vacancies created for unemployed workers that are positively correlated with
the fluctuations in unemployment and are 0.65 times as volatile. Also, y-shocks generate
fluctuations in the number of vacancies created for employed workers that are negatively
correlated with the fluctuations in unemployment and are 1.1 times as volatile. Overall,
total vacancies move in the opposite direction of unemployment and are approximately 0.4
times as volatile.
By comparing Tables 1 and 3, we find that aggregate productivity shocks account for
40 percent of the UE rate volatility that is observed in the US economy over the period
1951(I) - 2006(II); and they account for approximately all of the observed volatility of the
EU transition rate. Overall, aggregate productivity shocks alone can account for more than
80 percent of the observed unemployment volatility. Moreover, we find that y-shocks account
for more than 30 percent of the volatility of vacancies and for the nearly perfectly negative
correlation between unemployment and vacancies (i.e., the Beveridge curve). Finally, we
find that y-shocks can precisely reproduce the matrix of correlations between unemployment,
vacancies and the workers’ transition rates across diﬀerent employment states. In light of
these findings, we conclude that aggregate productivity shocks may well be the fundamental
source of cyclical fluctuations in the US labor market.
However, aggregate productivity shocks cannot be the only cause of the US business
cycles. First of all, y-shocks alone generate a counterfactually strong correlation between
average labor productivity and other labor market variables (e.g. unemployment, vacancies,
etc.).19 Second, y-shocks alone generate too much unemployment volatility through fluctuations in the EU rate and too little of it through fluctuations in the UE rate. Finally, y-shocks
19

Mortensen and Nagypal (2007) make a similar point. They argue that, since the empirical correlation
between unemployment and labor productivity is significantly smaller than 1, the “true model” of the labor
market must be such that productivity shocks account for only a fraction of the cyclical fluctuations in
unemployment.

31

leave more than half of the observed volatility of vacancies unexplained.

6.3

Comparisons with the Canonical Search Model

At the beginning of this paper, we conjectured that, if an economist wants to properly
measure the contribution of aggregate productivity shocks to the cyclical fluctuations of
unemployment and vacancies, he should use a model in which not only the UE rate, but also
the EU and EE rates are endogenous.
In order to test this conjecture, we add the constraints σ z = 0 and λe = 0 to our model.
The first constraint states that the idiosyncratic component of productivity is the same for
all matches and, hence, it implies that the EU transition rate is exogenous. The second
constraint states that employed workers do not have the opportunity of searching for better
jobs and, hence, it implies that the EE transition rate is exogenous. As it turns out, the
constrained version of our model coincides with the canonical search model of Pissarides
(1985, 2000), and Shimer (2005). We then recalibrate the constrained version of our model
using the same targets that we used in Section 5.2, with the obvious exclusion of the EE
transition rate and the tenure distribution. The results of this calibration are reported as
column b in Table 2. Finally, we solve for the Block Recursive Equilibrium of the constrained
model, draw a realization for the stochastic process of y, and compute the time series for
unemployment, vacancies and other labor market variables. The results of this simulation
are reported in Table 4.
According to the constrained model, y-shocks generate fluctuations in the unemployment
rate that are negatively correlated with the fluctuations in the average productivity of labor
and are 0.6 times as volatile. Also, according to the constrained model, y-shocks generate
fluctuations in the vacancy rate that are positively correlated with the fluctuations in the
average productivity of labor and are 2.5 times as volatile. By comparing these statistics
with those reported in Table 3, we conclude that, if an economist uses a version of our model
in which the EU and EE rates are exogenous (i.e., if an economist uses the canonical search
model), he is going to dramatically underestimate the fraction of the cyclical volatility of
unemployment and vacancies that is caused by aggregate productivity shocks.
Next, we want to understand why the canonical search model and ours produce such
32

diﬀerent estimates of the contribution of aggregate productivity shocks to the cyclical fluctuations of vacancies and unemployment. First, in our model, when a positive productivity
shock hits the economy, the EU transition rate falls because workers and firms become less
selective about the idiosyncratic productivity of the matches that they are willing to keep.
In the canonical search model, when a positive productivity shock hits the economy, the EU
transition rate does not change because all matches are constrained to be identical. For this
reason, the same productivity shock tends to generate a smaller decline in unemployment in
the canonical search model than in ours (see Figures 3 and 7).
Second, in our model, a positive shock to the aggregate component of productivity leads
to a decline in the number of vacancies that are created for unemployed workers and to an
increase in the number of vacancies that are created for employed workers. In contrast, in the
canonical search model, a positive y-shock leads to an increase in the number of vacancies
that firms open for unemployed workers, because the unemployment rate decreases much
less than in our model. Moreover, in the canonical search model, a positive y-shock does
not aﬀect the number of vacancies created for employed workers because λe = 0. Therefore,
the canonical search model distorts in opposite directions the estimates of the eﬀect that a
y-shock has on the number of vacancies created for unemployed and employed workers. As a
result, the canonical search model distorts only marginally the estimated eﬀect of a y-shock
on the total vacancy rate (see Figures 4 and 8).
Third, in our model, a 1 percent increase in the aggregate component of productivity
does not increase the average productivity of labor by 1 · (μy /apl) = 0.73 percent, but only
by 0.65 percent because workers and firms become less selective about the quality of the
matches that they are willing to keep. In the canonical search model, a 1 percent increase in
the aggregate component of productivity translates into a 0.73 percent increase in average
productivity because all matches are identical. Since both models are calibrated to match
the empirical volatility of the average productivity of labor, y-shocks are approximately 12
percent smaller in the canonical model than in ours. In turn, smaller y-shocks generate
smaller fluctuations in unemployment and vacancies.
Fourth, the eﬀect of productivity shocks in the two models diﬀers because the calibrated
elasticity of the job-finding probability is diﬀerent. That is, the two models have diﬀerent

33

values of the parameter γ in the job-finding probability function p(θ) = min{θγ , 1}. In both
models, the calibrated value of γ is such that the elasticity of the UE rate with respect to the
vacancy/unemployment ratio is the same in the model as in the data, namely 0.22. Therefore,
in both models, the calibrated value of γ is equal to 0.22 · [∆ log(v/u)/∆ log θu ], where θu
is the tightness of the submarket visited by unemployed workers. In our model, because
the number of vacancies created for employed workers moves together with θu , ∆ log(v/u) is
greater than ∆ log θu . As a result, the calibrated value of γ is 0.65. In the canonical model,
because workers are not allowed to search on the job, v/u is equal to θu and so γ is equal to
0.22.20 In turn, a smaller γ implies that the EU rate (and, consequently, the unemployment
rate) is less responsive to a given shock to the aggregate component of productivity.
From this discussion, it is clear that, in order to properly measure the contribution of yshocks to the cyclical fluctuations of the US labor market, an economist needs to endogenize
both the EU and the EE rate along with the UE rate. For example, if an economist uses
a version of our model in which the UE and EU rates are endogenous, but the EE rate
is exogenous (because λe is constrained to be 0), he underestimates the elasticity of the
job-finding probability with respect to the vacancy/applicant ratio. For this reason, he
underestimates the contribution of y-shocks to the volatility of the UE rate and, consequently,
of the unemployment rate. Moreover, he ignores the eﬀect that y-shocks have on the number
of vacancies created for employed workers. For this reason, he incorrectly concludes that yshocks generate fluctuations in unemployment and vacancies that are positively correlated21 .

7

Conclusions

In the first part of this paper, we have built a directed search model of the labor market
in which the workers’ transitions between employment, unemployment and across employers
are endogenous. For this model, we have proved existence, uniqueness and eﬃciency of
a recursive equilibrium with the property that the distribution of workers across diﬀerent
20

Petrongolo and Pissarides (2001) make a similar point. They consider a reduced-form model of the
labor market in which the log of the measure of workers who search on the job is proportional to the log
of the vacancy/unemployment ratio. In such model, the coeﬃcient of log(v/u) in the regression of log(hue )
provides a (downward) biased estimate of the elasticity γ of the job-finding probability function with respect
to vacancies.
21
All the details about this measurement exercise are available upon request.

34

jobs is a state variable which does not aﬀect the agents’ value and policy functions, or the
tightness function. Because of this property, the computation of the eﬃcient equilibrium is
as simple as the computation of the equilibrium of a model without heterogeneity.
In the second paper of this paper, we have calibrated our model to match the features
of workers’ turnover in the US labor market over the period 1951(I)-2006(II). Then, we
have used the calibrated model to measure the eﬀect of aggregate productivity shocks on the
volatility of unemployment and vacancies. We have found that aggregate productivity shocks
alone account for approximately 50 percent of the cyclical fluctuations in the UE transition
rate and for all of the cyclical fluctuations in the EU transition rate. As a result, productivity
shocks alone can explain more than 80 percent of the cyclical volatility of unemployment.
We have found that productivity shocks generate large countercyclical fluctuations in the
number of vacancies created for unemployed workers and larger procyclical fluctuations in
the number of vacancies created for employed workers. Overall, productivity shocks alone
can account for 30 percent of the cyclical volatility of vacancies, as well as for the strong
negative correlation between vacancies and unemployment.
By comparing these measurements with those derived using the canonical search model
of Pissarides (1985), we have vindicated our initial conjecture. That is, in order to properly
assess the eﬀect of productivity shocks on unemployment and vacancies, an economist needs
a model, such as ours, in which the workers’ transitions between employment, unemployment
and across employers are all endogenous.

References
[1] Acemoglu, D., and R. Shimer. 1999. Eﬃcient Unemployment Insurance. J.P.E. 107:
893-927.
[2] Barlevy, G. 2002. The Sullying Eﬀect of Recessions. Rev. Econ. Studies 69: 65—96.
[3] Burdett, K., and M. Coles. 2003. Equilibrium Wage-Tenure Contracts. Econometrica
71: 1377—404.
[4] Burdett, K., and D. Mortensen. 1998. Wage Diﬀerentials, Employer Size, and Unemployment. I.E.R. 39: 257—73.
[5] Burdett, K., S. Shi, and R. Wright. 2001. Pricing and Matching with Frictions. J.P.E.
109: 1060—85.
35

[6] Delacroix, A., and S. Shi. 2006. Directed Search on the Job and the Wage Ladder. I.E.R.
49: 651—99.
[7] Diebold, F., D. Neumark, and D. Polsky. 1997. Job Stability in the United States. J.
Labor Econ. 15: 206—33.
[8] Elsby, M., R. Michaels, and G. Solon. 2009. The Ins and Outs of Cyclical Unemployment.
A.E.J. Macroeconomics 1: 84—110.
[9] Hagedorn, M., and I. Manovskii. 2008. The Cyclical Behavior of Unemployment and
Vacancies Revisited. A.E.R. 98: 1692—706.
[10] Hall, R. 2005. Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness. A.E.R. 95:
50—65.
[11] Hall, R., and A. Krueger. 2008. Wage Formation between newly Hired Workers and
Employers: Survey Evidence. Manuscript. Stanford Univ.
[12] Hall, R., and P. Milgrom. 2008. The Limited Influence of Unemployment of the Wage
Bargain. A.E.R. 98: 1653—74.
[13] Holzer, H., L. Katz, and A. Krueger. 1991. Job Queues and Wages, Q.J.E. 106: 739—68.
[14] Kennan, J. 2008. Private Information, Wage Bargaining and Employment Fluctuations.
Manuscript. Univ. of Wisconsin at Madison.
[15] Krause, M., and T. Lubik. 2007. On-the-Job Search and the Cyclical Dynamics of the
Labor Market. ECB Working Paper 779.
[16] Menzio, G. 2005. High Frequency Wage Rigidity. Manuscript. Univ. Pennsylvania.
[17] Menzio, G. 2007. A Theory of Partially Directed Search. J.P.E. 115: 748—69.
[18] Menzio, G. and E. Moen. 2008. Worker Replacement. PIER Working Paper 08-040.
[19] Menzio, G. and S. Shi. 2009. Block Recursive Equilibria for Stochastic Models of Search
on the Job. PIER Working Paper 09-005.
[20] Moen, E. 1997. Competitive Search Equilibrium, J.P.E. 105: 694—723.
[21] Moen, E., and A. Rosen. 2004. Does Poaching Distort Training? Rev. Econ. Studies 71:
1143—62.
[22] Montgomery, J. 1991. Equilibrium Wage Dispersion and Interindustry Wage Diﬀerentials, Q.J.E. 106: 163—79.
[23] Mortensen, D. 1994. The Cyclical Behavior of Job and Worker Flows. J. Econ. Dynamics
and Control 18: 1121—42.
[24] Mortensen, D., and E. Nagypál. 2007. More on Unemployment and Vacancy Fluctuations. Rev. Econ. Dynamics 10: 327—47.

36

[25] Mortensen, D., and C. Pissarides. 1994. Job Creation and Job Destruction in the Theory
of Unemployment. Rev. Econ. Studies 61: 397—415.
[26] Moscarini, G. 2003. Skill and Luck in the Theory of Turnover. Manuscript. Yale Univ.
[27] Nagypál, E. 2007. Labor-Market Fluctuations and On-the-Job Search. Manuscript,
Northwestern Univ.
[28] Nagypál, E. 2008. Worker Reallocation Over the Business Cycle: The Importance of
Employer-to-Employer Transitions. Manuscript, Northwestern Univ.
[29] Peters, M. 1991. Ex Ante Price Oﬀers in Matching Games: Non-Steady State. Econometrica 59: 1425-1454.
[30] Petrongolo, B., and C. Pissarides. Looking into the Black Box: A Survey of the Matching
Function. J.E.L. 39: 390—431.
[31] Pissarides, C. 1985. Short-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment, Vacancies and
Real Wages. A.E.R. 75: 676—90.
[32] Pissarides, C. 1994. Search Unemployment with On-the-Job Search. Rev. Econ. Studies
61: 457—75.
[33] Pissarides, C. 2000. Equilibrium Unemployment Theory. MIT University Press, Cambridge, MA.
[34] Postel-Vinay F., and J. Robin. 2002. Equilibrium Wage Dispersion with Worker and
Employer Heterogeneity. Econometrica 70: 2295—350.
[35] Ramey, G. 2008. Exogenous vs. Endogenous Separation. Manuscript, U.C. San Diego.
[36] Shi, S. 2009. Directed Search for Equilibrium Wage-Tenure Contracts. Econometrica,
77, 561-584.
[37] Shimer, R. 1996. Contracts in a Frictional Labor Market. Manuscript M.I.T.
[38] Shimer, R. 2005. The Cyclical Behavior of Unemployment and Vacancies. A.E.R. 95:
25—49.
[39] Stokey, N., R. Lucas, and E. Prescott. 1989. Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

37

Appendix
A

Joint Value of a Match

The definition of V (z; y) is
V (z; y) = maxa∈A [W (z; y|a) + J(z; y|a)].

(A1)

First, notice that the allocation a = {w, τ , n} ∪ â belongs to the set A if and only if w ∈ R,
τ : Y → [δ, 1], n : Y → R, and â : Y → A. Second, notice that the worker’s lifetime utility
W (z; y|a) is equal to the RHS of equation (R2) and the firm’s lifetime profits J(z; y|a) are
equal to the RHS of equation (R3). In light of these observations, we can rewrite (A1) as
V (z; y) =

max y + z + βE {τ (ŷ)U(ŷ) + [1 − τ (ŷ)]λe p(θ(n(ŷ); ŷ))n(ŷ)} +

w,τ ,n,â

+βE {[1 − τ (ŷ)][1 − λe p(θ(n(ŷ); ŷ))] [J(z; ŷ|â(ŷ)) + W (z; ŷ|â(ŷ))]} ,
w ∈ R, τ : Y → [δ, 1], n : Y → R, â : Y → A.

(A2)

Now, notice that both the probability that the match survives during the separation stage,
i.e. 1 − τ (ŷ), and the probability that the match survives during the search stage, i.e.
1 − λe p(θ(n(ŷ); ŷ)), are non negative numbers. In light of this observation, we can rewrite
(A2) as
V (z; y) = max y + z + βE {τ (ŷ)U(ŷ) + [1 − τ (ŷ)]λe p(θ(n(ŷ); ŷ))n(ŷ)} +
w,d,n

+βE{[1 − τ (ŷ)][1 − λe p(θ(n(ŷ); ŷ))] max [J(z; ŷ|â) + W (z; ŷ|â)]},
â∈A

(A3)

w ∈ R, τ : Y → [δ, 1], n : Y → R.
Finally, notice that the maximum of the sum between the worker’s continuation utility
W (z; ŷ|â) and the firm’s continuation profits J(z; ŷ|â) is equal to V (z; ŷ). Therefore, (A3) is
equal to equation (R5) in the main text.

B

¥

Proof of Proposition 1

Let the contract a be a feasible choice for the firm’s problem (R6). First, notice that, for
any realization zi of the idiosyncratic component of productivity, the contract a prescribes
an allocation a(zi ) which may not necessarily maximize the joint value of the match, i.e.
W (zi ; y|a(zi ))+J(zi ; y|a(zi )) is smaller than or equal to V (zi ; y). Second, notice that, since a
38

is feasible, it provides the worker with the lifetime utility x, i.e.

P

i

W (zi ; y|a(zi ))f (zi ) = x.

In light of these observations, it follows that the contract a provides the firm with the
following profits:
P
P
P
i J(zi ; y|a(zi ))f (zi ) ≤
i V (zi ; y)f (zi ) −
i W (zi ; y|a(zi ))f (zi ) =
P
= i V (zi ; y)f (zi ) − x.

(A4)

∗
t
Let a∗ denote the contract {wt∗ , τ ∗t , n∗t }∞
t=0 that has the following properties: (a) τ t−1 (z; y ) =

1 iﬀ U(yt ) > V (z; yt )+λe D(V (z; yt ); yt ) and τ ∗t−1 (z; y t ) = δ otherwise, for all {z; y t } ∈ Z ×Y t ,

t = 1, 2, ...; (b) n∗t−1 (z; y t ) = m(V (z; yt ); yt ), for all {z; y t } ∈ Z × Y t , t = 1, 2, ...; (c) wt∗ (z; y t )
P
is such that i W (zi ; y|a∗ (zi ))f (zi ) = x. First, notice that, for any realization zi of the

idiosyncratic component of productivity, the contract a∗ prescribes an allocation a∗ (zi ) which
maximizes the joint value of the match. Second, notice that a∗ provides the worker with the
lifetime utility x. In light of these two observations, it follows that the contract a∗ provides
the firm with the following profits:
P
P
P
∗
∗
i J(zi ; y|a (zi ))f (zi ) =
i V (zi ; y)f (zi ) −
i W (zi ; y|a (zi ))f (zi ) =
P
= i V (zi ; y)f (zi ) − x.

(A5)

The contract a∗ is a feasible choice for the firm’s problem (R6), and it provides the firm with
more profits than any other feasible choice. Hence, it is optimal.
Finally, the reader can easily verify that, if a contract {wt , τ t , nt }∞
t=0 solves the firm’s problem

(R6), then it maximizes the joint value of the match. Hence, the contract {wt , τ t , nt }∞
t=0

prescribes that (a) τ t−1 (z; y t ) = 1 iﬀ U (yt ) > V (z; yt ) + λe D(V (z; yt ); yt ) and τ t−1 (z; y t ) = δ
otherwise, for all {z; y t } ∈ Z × Y t , t = 1, 2, ...; (b) nt−1 (z; y t ) = m(V (z; yt ); yt ), for all

{z; y t } ∈ Z × Y t , t = 1, 2, ...

C

¥

Proof of Proposition 2

(i) Let Ψ denote the set Y × [0, 1]N(z)+1 . Let C(Ψ) denote the set of bounded continuous
functions r : Ψ → R, with the sup norm. Define the operator T on C(Ψ) by
h
i
(T r)(ψ) = maxd,θu ,θz F (d, θu , θd |ψ) + βE r(ψ̂)
P
s.t. û = u [1 − λu p(θu )] + i d(zi )g(zi ),
ĝ(z) = h(ψ)f (z) + [1 − d(z)] [1 − λe p(θz (z))] g(z),
£ ¤
d : Z → [δ, 1], θu ∈ [0, θ̄], θz : Z → 0, θ̄ .
39

(A6)

For each r ∈ C(Ψ) and ψ ∈ Ψ, the problem in (A6) is to maximize a continuous function
over a compact set. Hence the maximum is attained and the argmax is non-empty. Since
both F and r are bounded, T r is also bounded; and since F and r are continuous, it follows
from the Theorem of the Maximum (see Stokey, Lucas and Prescott 1989, page 62) that T r
is also continuous. Hence, the operator T maps C(Ψ) into itself.
Since the operator T satisfies the remaining hypotheses of Blackwell’s suﬃcient conditions
for a contraction (see Stokey, Lucas and Prescott 1989, page 54), it follows that T has a
unique fixed point s̃ ∈ C(Ψ). And since limt→∞ β t s̃(ψ) = 0 for all ψ ∈ Ψ, it follows that the
fixed point s̃ is equal to the value of the plan s0 .

(ii) Let L(Ψ) denote the set of bounded continuous functions r : Ψ → R that are linear in
the measure u of unemployed workers as well as in the measure g(z) of workers employed at
jobs with idiosyncratic productivity z, i.e.
r(ψ) = ru (y)u +

P

i rz (zi ; y)g(zi ).

Given a function r in L(Ψ), consider the problem (A6). For each ψ ∈ Ψ, the necessary
condition for the optimality of θu is:
k ≥ p0 (θu ){y − b + βE[

P

i rz (zi ; ŷ)f (zi )

− ru (ŷ)]}

(A7)

and θu ≥ 0, with complementary slackness. Since the function p0 (θ) is strictly decreasing in
θ, there is at most one θu that satisfies condition (A7). Hence the optimum is unique. Since
(A7) depends on ψ only through y, the optimal policy is a function θ̃u : Y → [0, θ].
For each ψ ∈ Ψ, the necessary condition for the optimality of θz (z) is:
k ≥ p0 (θz (z)){−z + βE[

P

i rz (zi ; ŷ)f (zi )

− rz (z; ŷ)]}

(A8)

and θz (z) ≥ 0, with complementary slackness. Since p0 (θ) is strictly decreasing in θ, there is
at most one θz (z) that satisfies condition (A8). Hence the optimum is unique. Since (A8)
depends on ψ only through y, the optimal policy is a function θ̃z : Z × Y → [0, θ].
For each ψ ∈ Ψ, the necessary and suﬃcient condition for the optimality of d is d(z) = 1 if
b + βE[ru (ŷ)] > −λe kθz (z) + [1 − λe p(θz (z))] [y + z + βErz (z; ŷ)] +
P
+λe p(θz (z)) {y + βE [ i rz (zi ; ŷ)f (zi )]} ,
40

(A9)

and d(z) = δ otherwise. Since (A9) does not depend on d, there is exactly one d that satisfies
condition (A8). Since (A9) depends on ψ only through y, the optimal policy is a function
d˜ : Z × Y → [δ, 1].
Define the function r̃u : Y → R by

h
i
r̃u (y) = −kλu θ̃u (y) + 1 − λu p(θ̃u (y)) [b + βEru (ŷ)] +
P
+λu p(θ̃u (y)) {y + βE [ i rz (zi ; ŷ)f (zi )]} .

(A10)

And define the function r̃z : Z × Y → R by

˜ y) [b + βEru (ŷ)] − [1 − d(z;
˜ y)]kλe θ̃z (z; y)+
r̃z (z; y) = d(z;
h
i
˜ y)] 1 − λe p(θ̃z (z; y)) [y + z + βErz (z; ŷ)] +
+[1 − d(z;
˜ y)]λe p(θ̃z (z; y)) {y + βE [P rz (zi ; ŷ)f (zi )]} .
+[1 − d(z;
i

(A11)

It is then immediate that

(T r)(ψ) = r̃u (y)u +

P

i r̃z (zi ; y)g(zi ).

Hence, the operator T maps L(Ψ) into itself. Since L(Ψ) is a closed subset of C(Ψ), it follows
that the fixed point s0 of the operator T belongs to L(Ψ) (see Stokey, Lucas and Prescott
1989, page 52).
(iii) Let M(Ψ) denote the set of functions r : Ψ → R such that r ∈ L(Ψ) and rz : Z × Y → R
is non decreasing in z. Given a function r ∈ M(Ψ), let r̃ denote T r. As we proved in part
(ii), the function r̃ belongs to the set L(Ψ). Also as we proved in part (ii), the derivative
r̃z (z; y) is equal to (A10). Using the optimality conditions (A7)—(A9), we can rewrite (A10)
as
r̃z (z, y) = b + βEru (y+ ) + maxd∈[δ,1] {(1 − d)[y + z − b + βE[rz (z, ŷ) − ru (ŷ)]]
P
+ (1 − d) λe maxθ∈R+ [−kθ + p (θ) [−z + βE[ i rz (z, ŷ) f (zi ) − rz (z, ŷ)]]]}.

Since rz (z; y) is non decreasing in z, it follows that r̃z (z2 ; y) ≥ r̃z (z1 ; y) for all z2 ≥ z1 . Hence,
the operator T maps the set M(Ψ) into itself. Since M(Ψ) is a closed subset of L(Ψ), it
follows that the fixed point s0 belongs to M(Ψ) as well.

41

¥

D

Proof of Theorem 3

(i) We want to prove that a Block Recursive Equilibrium exists. To this aim, we first
construct a supposed equilibrium {D∗ , m∗ , U ∗ , V ∗ , d∗ , θ∗ } from the solution to the social
planner’s problem. Then, we verify that the putative equilibrium satisfies conditions (i)—(iv)
in Definition 1.
In the supposed equilibrium, the worker’s value from unemployment U ∗ (y) is set equal to b +
βEs0u (ŷ), where s0u is the derivative of the social planner’s value function s0 with respect to the
unemployment rate. The firm’s and worker’s joint value from a match V ∗ (z; y) is set equal to
y+z+βEs0z (z; ŷ), where s0z is the derivative of the social planner’s value function with respect
P
to g(z). The market tightness function θ∗ (x; y) is set equal to q−1 (k/( i V ∗ (zi ; y)f (zi ) − x))

for all x ≤ x̃(y); and θ∗ (x; y) is set equal to zero for all x > x̃(y). Finally, the worker’s search

value function D∗ (υ; y) and policy function m∗ (υ; y) are set equal to the maximum and the
maximizer of p(θ∗ (x; y)) (x − υ).

By construction, the market tightness function θ∗ satisfies the equilibrium condition (i). Also
by construction, the worker’s search value D∗ and policy m∗ satisfy the equilibrium condition
(ii). As proved in the main text, whenever conditions (i) and (ii) are satisfied, we have that
m∗ (υ; y) ∈ arg maxx {−kθ∗ (x; y) + p(θ∗ (x; y))[

P

i

V ∗ (zi ; y)f (zi ) − υ]},

(A12)

and D∗ (υ; y) is the maximum of the problem in (A12). Hence the tightness θ∗u (y) of the
submarket visited by unemployed workers satisfies the optimality condition (E3); and the
tightness θ∗z (z; y) of the submarket visited by employed workers satisfies the optimality condition (E4). Since U ∗ (y) is equal to b+βEs0u (ŷ) and V ∗ (z; y) is equal to y+z +βEs0z (z; ŷ), the
tightness θ∗u (y) also satisfies the necessary condition (P3) for the optimality of the solution
to the social planner’s problem. Since (P3) admits only one solution, θ∗u (y) is equal to θ0u (y).
Similarly, we can prove that θ∗z (z; y) is equal to θ0z (z; y) and that d∗ (z; y) is equal to d0 (z; y).
Since θ0u (y) is equal to θ∗u (y), the envelope condition (P6) can be written as
s0u (u) = U ∗ (y) + λu D∗ (U ∗ (y); y).

42

(A13)

In turn, (A13) implies that U ∗ (y) is equal to
U ∗ (y) = b + βEs0u (ŷ) = b + βE[U ∗ (ŷ) + λu D∗ (U ∗ (ŷ); ŷ))].

(A14)

Hence U ∗ (y) satisfies the equilibrium condition (iii). Similarly, we can prove that the firm’s
and worker’s joint value from a match V ∗ (z; y) satisfies the equilibrium condition (iv).
(ii) We want to prove that any equilibrium is eﬃcient. To this aim, let {D∗ , m∗ , U ∗ , V ∗ , d∗ , θ∗ }

denote a Block Recursive Equilibrium. Let s∗u (y) denote the worker’s value of unemployment
at the beginning of the separation stage, i.e. U ∗ (y) + λu D∗ (U ∗ (y); y). Let s∗z (z; y) denote
the firm’s and worker’s joint value of a match at the beginning of the separation stage, i.e.
V ∗ (z; y) + λe D∗ (V ∗ (z; y); y). Let θ∗u (y) denote the tightness of the submarket visited by
unemployed workers, i.e. θ∗u (y) = θ∗ (m∗ (U ∗ (y); y); y). And let θ∗z (z; y) denote the tightness
of the submarket visited by workers who are employed at jobs with idiosyncratic productivity
z, i.e. θ∗z (z; y) = θ∗ (m∗ (V ∗ (z; y); y); y).
Define the function r : Ψ → R as ru (y)u +

P

rz (z; y)g(zi ), where ru (y) is equal to s∗u (y)

and rz (z; y) is equal to s∗z (z; y). Given the function r, consider the problem (A6). For each

(y, u, g) ∈ Ψ, the optimal market tightness θ̃u (y) satisfies the condition
k ≥ p0 (θ̃u (y)){y − b + βE[

P

i rz (zi ; ŷ)f (zi )

− ru (ŷ)]}

(A15)

and θ̃u (y) ≥ 0, with complementary slackness. Since rz (zi ; ŷ) = s∗z (zi ; ŷ) and ru (ŷ) = s∗u (ŷ),
θ̃u (y) also satisfies condition (E4). Since (E4) admits only one solution, θ̃u (y) is equal to
θ∗u (y). Similarly, we can prove that the optimal tightness θ̃z (z; y) is equal to θ∗z (z; y). And
˜ y) is equal to d∗ (z; y).
we can prove that the optimal job destruction probability d(z;
Define the function r̃ : Ψ → R as T r. As we proved in Proposition 2, r̃ belongs to the set
L(Ψ). As we also proved in Proposition 2, the derivative r̃u (y) is equal to
h
i
r̃u (y) = −kλu θ̃u (y) + 1 − λu p(θ̃u (y)) [b + βEru (ŷ)] +
P
+λu p(θ̃u (y)) {y + βE [ i rz (zi ; ŷ)f (zi )]} .

(A16)

Since rz (zi ; ŷ) = s∗z (zi ; ŷ), ru (ŷ) = s∗u (ŷ) and θ̃u (y) = θ∗u (y), the right hand side of (A16) is

equal to the right hand side of (E5). Hence r̃u (y) is equal to s∗u (y). Similarly, we can prove

43

that r̃z (z; y) is equal to s∗z (zi ; y). Taken together, these two observations imply that
(T r)(ψ) = s∗u (y)u +

P

∗
i sz (zi ; y)g(zi )

= r(ψ).

(A17)

Since it is a fixed point of the operator T , r is equal to the social planner’s value function
˜ = {θ∗ , θ∗ , d∗ } is equal to the solution to the social planner’s
s0 . And the policy {θ̃u , θ̃z , d}
u z

problem {θ0u , θ0z , d0 }.

¥

44

.

Table 1: U.S. Quarterly Data, 1951:I—2006:II
u

v

hue

Average
.056
63.9
.452
Relative Std
12.2
13.5
7.56
Quarterly Acr
.873
.905
.820
Unemployment
u
1
-.919 -.920
v
–
1
.907
Vacancies
UE Rate
hue
–
–
1
eu
EU Rate
h
–
–
–
EE Rate
hee
–
–
–
apl
–
–
–
Average Prod
Source: Own calculations using data from the

heu

hee

apl

.026
7.03
.692
.777
-.784
-.677
1
–
–
BLS.

.029
4.15
.595
-.631
.661
.664
-.289
1
–

84.2
1
.761
-.250
.410
.258
-.480
.173
1

Table 2: Calibration Outcomes
β
b
λu
λe
γ
k
δ
μz
σz
αz
μy
σy
ρy

Description
discount rate
home productivity
oﬀ the job search prob.
on the job search prob.
elasticity of p wrt θ
vacancy cost
destruction prob.
average idios. prod.
scale idios. prod.
shape idios. prod.
average agg. prod.
std. agg. prod.
autocorr. agg. prod.

(a) Baseline
.996
.987
1
.833
.650
1.77
.011
0
1.17
4
1
1.52
0.76

45

(b) P85
.996
.987
1
–
.220
2.84
.027
.371
–
–
1
1.36
0.76

Target
real interest rate
home/mkt prod.
normalization
EE rate
reg. coef. of v/u on hue
UE rate
tenure distribution
normalization
EU rate
tenure distribution
normalization
std. average prod.
std. average prod.

.

Figure 1: Tenure Distribution
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10+

Years
Data

Model

Figure 2: Job Distribution
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.7

-0.5

-0.3

-0.1

0.1

z
new jobs

46

all jobs

0.3

0.5

0.7

.

Figure 3: Unemployment and Hazard Dynamics
8
6

Percent Deviation

4
2
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

5

6

-2
-4
-6
-8

Quarters
y

UE

EU

EE

U

Figure 4: Vacancies Dynamics
10
8

Percent Deviation

6
4
2
0
0

1

2

3

4

-2
-4
-6

Quarters
y

Vu

47

Ve

V

.

Figure 5: Distribution Dynamics
3
2.5

Percent Deviation

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

-0.5

Quarters
<10

10-20

>20

Figure 6: Productivity Dynamics
1.2
1

Percent Deviation

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2

0

1

2

3

4

5

-0.4
-0.6

Quarters
y

Average Prod.

48

Idiosyncratic Prod.

6

.

Table 3: Productivity Shocks
Relative Std
Quarterly Acr
Unemployment
Vacancies
Vac for Un
Vac for Emp
UE Rate
EU Rate
EE Rate
Average Prod

u
v
vu
ve
hue
heu
hee
apl

u

v

vu

ve

hue

heu

hee

apl

10.5
.837
1
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

4.06
.650
-.812
1
–
–
–
–
–
–

6.74
.771
.877
-.458
1
–
–
–
–
–

11.7
.792
-.974
.890
-.747
1
–
–
–
–

2.98
.775
-.969
.909
-.746
.990
1
–
–
–

8.79
.762
.971
-.894
.749
-.957
-.970
1
–
–

8.66
.792
-.970
.895
-.786
.999
.988
-.954
1
–

1
.778
-.971
.901
-.756
.988
.999
-.972
.986
1

Table 4: Productivity Shocks in P85
Relative Std
Quarterly Acr
Unemployment
Vacancies
UE Rate
EU Rate
EE Rate
Average Prod

u
v
hue
heu
hee
apl

u

v

hue

heu

hee

apl

.667
.826
1
–
–
–
–
–

2.78
.726
-.946
1
–
–
–
–

.742
.770
-.974
.994
1
–
–
–

0
1
0
0
0
1
–
–

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

1
.771
-.974
.994
.999
0
–
1

49

.

Figure 7: Unemployment and Hazard Dynamics in P85
1.5

Percent Deviation

1

0.5

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

5

6

-0.5

-1

Quarters
y

UE

EU

U

Figure 8: Vacancies Dynamics in P85
3
2.5

Percent Deviation

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0

1

2

3

4

-0.5
-1

Quarters
y

Vu, V

50

Ve

