                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE LONG OR SHORT OF IT:
DETERMINANTS OF FOREIGN CURRENCY EXPOSURE IN EXTERNAL BALANCE SHEETS

                                           Philip R. Lane
                                         Jay C. Shambaugh

                                        Working Paper 14909
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14909


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2009




 Prepared for the IMF/WEF Conference on International Macro-Finance (Washington DC, April 24-25
 2008). We thank the anonymous referees, Laura Alfaro, Chris Meissner, Cedric Tille and participants
 in IMF/WEF Conference on International Macro-Finance (Washington DC, April 24-25 2008), the
 second annual CEGE conference at UC Davis, the CGFS-BIS Workshop and a seminar at Dartmouth
 College. Agustín Bénétrix, Vahagn Galstyan, Barbara Pels and Martin Schmitz provided excellent
 research assistance. Email: plane@tcd.ie; Jay.C.Shambaugh@dartmouth.edu. The views expressed
 herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
 Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2009 by Philip R. Lane and Jay C. Shambaugh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
 exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
 © notice, is given to the source.
The Long or Short of it: Determinants of Foreign Currency Exposure in External Balance
Sheets
Philip R. Lane and Jay C. Shambaugh
NBER Working Paper No. 14909
April 2009
JEL No. F31,F32

                                              ABSTRACT

A major focus of the recent literature on the determination of optimal portfolios in open-economy
macroeconomic models has been on the role of currency movements in determining portfolio returns
that may hedge various macroeconomic shocks. However, there is little empirical evidence on the
foreign currency exposures that are embedded in international balance sheets. Using a new database,
we provide stylized facts concerning the cross-country and time-series variation in aggregate foreign
currency exposure and its various subcomponents. In panel estimation, we find that richer, more open
economies take longer foreign-currency positions. In addition, we find that an increase in the propensity
for a currency to depreciate during bad times is associated with a longer position in foreign currencies,
providing a hedge against domestic output fluctuations. We view these new stylized facts as informative
in their own right and also potentially useful to the burgeoning theoretical literature on the macroeconomics
of international portfolios.


Philip R. Lane
The Sutherland Centre
Arts Block
Trinity College Dublin
Dublin 2 IRELAND
plane@tcd.ie

Jay C. Shambaugh
Dartmouth College
Department of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
jay.c.shambaugh@dartmouth.edu
1        Introduction
The rapid expansion of gross cross-border investment positions has stimulated a new wave of
interest in the international balance sheet implications of currency movements. At the same
time, recent advances in macroeconomic theory have provided a more nuanced consideration
of the general equilibrium characteristics of the portfolio allocation problem than was
attained in the earlier wave of “portfolio balance” models (see, amongst others, Devereux
and Sutherland 2006, Tille and van Wincoop 2007 and Engel and Matsumoto 2008).                         A
major concern of this new research programme has been to identify the appropriate currency
exposure of optimal portfolios.
        However, this literature has been constrained by a lack of empirical evidence concerning
the currency exposures that are present in the international balance sheet. In recent work
(Lane and Shambaugh 2009), we have compiled and described the currency composition
of foreign asset and liability positions for a broad set of countries over 1990-2004. In that
work, we established that the currency pro…les of international portfolios show tremendous
variation, both across countries and over time.
        Accordingly, our goal in this paper is to synthesize two recent advances in the literature
— the expansion of knowledge concerning the data on the currency composition of cross-
border portfolios and the advances in theory regarding those positions — to study the
cross-country and cross-time variation in foreign currency exposure.1 We pursue two broad
lines of analysis. First, we provide a decomposition of aggregate foreign currency exposure
into its constituent elements. This is important, since much of the theoretical literature
has focused on particular dimensions of foreign-currency exposure, whereas the valuation
impact of currency movements depends on the aggregate foreign currency position. Second,
we conduct a panel analysis of variation in foreign currency exposure in order to identify
which country characteristics help to explain the cross-sectional and time-series variation
in the level of foreign currency exposure.
        In the decomposition, we divide aggregate foreign-currency exposure into two primary
subcomponents: the net foreign asset position and the level of foreign currency exposure
embedded in a zero net foreign asset position. While some models focus on the latter
component, the data suggest that the net foreign asset position is the most important
determinant of aggregate foreign currency exposure. In addition, the decomposition shows
    1
        We are interested in economy-wide exposure measures, as captured by the international investment
position. There is also an extensive literature on measuring currency exposure at the …rm level (see, for
example, Adler and Dumas 1984 and Tesar and Dominguez 2006).



                                                     1
that the structure of foreign liabilities (across portfolio equity, direct investment, local-
currency debt and foreign-currency debt) is a key determinant of foreign currency exposure,
with the equity share in liabilities more important than the currency composition of foreign
debt liabilities. These …ndings point to the importance of analyzing the full set of foreign-
currency assets and liabilities, rather than focusing on a particular subcomponent of the
data.
   We next analyze the panel variation in foreign currency exposures. We …nd that factors
such as trade openness and the level of development help to explain the cross-sectional
variation in foreign currency exposure: richer, more open economies take longer positions
in foreign currency. This means these countries experience gains when their currency de-
preciates and losses when it appreciates. Once the cross-sectional variation is eliminated by
including a set of country …xed e¤ects in the estimation, we …nd support for a key general
prediction of the theoretical literature: an increase in the propensity for a currency to de-
preciate during bad times is associated with a longer position in foreign currencies, which
acts as a hedge against domestic output ‡uctuations. Our …nal contribution is to show that
there is substantial heterogeneity in the roles of each regressor in explaining the variation
in individual subcomponents of foreign-currency exposure: accordingly, it is important to
take a broad perspective rather than examining individual components in isolation.
   Our work is related to several previous empirical contributions. In relation to develop-
ing countries, the closest is Eichengreen et al (2005) who compiled data on the currency
composition of the external debts of developing countries. However, our approach is more
general in that we calculate the currency composition of the entire international balance
sheet. As such, we go beyond Goldstein and Turner (2004) who extended the empirical ap-
proach of Eichengreen et al (2005) by constructing estimates of net foreign-currency debt
assets for a selected group of countries but did not incorporate the portfolio equity and FDI
components of the international balance sheet. For the advanced economies, Tille (2003)
calculates the foreign currency composition of the international balance sheet of the United
States, while Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007a) calculate dollar exposures for a large number
of European countries, plus Japan and China. Relative to these contributions, we provide
greatly-expanded coverage for a large number of countries and estimate the full currency
composition of the international balance sheet.
   The structure of the rest of the paper is as follows. Section 2 lays out the conceptual
framework for the study, while Section 3 brie‡y describes our dataset. The analysis of
the decomposition of foreign-currency exposure into its constituent elements is presented
in Section 4, with the main econometric analysis reported in Section 5. Section 6 provides

                                             2
a summary of the main stylized facts established by our analysis and …nal conclusions are
o¤ered in Section 7.


2        Analytical Issues

2.1           Conceptual Framework

The role played by nominal exchange rate ‡uctuations in determining the payo¤s to cross-
border holdings and the pattern of international risk sharing has long been recognised
in the literature (see, amongst others, Helpman and Razin 1982, Persson and Svensson
1989, Svensson 1989, Neumeyer 1998 and Kim 2002). In what follows, we present a simple
framework to guide our thinking in terms of the role of currency exposure in determining
the composition of portfolios.2
        Consider a two-period small open economy model. The endowment of the home agent
in period 1 is …xed at y1 but her period-2 endowment y2 is stochastic. In particular, the
process for output is
                                                 y2 = y +      yS   +"                                    (1)

where S is the period-2 rate of exchange rate depreciation,                  y   is the beta from a regression
of y2 on S and " is the orthogonal stochastic component.
        Consumption only takes place in the second period. There are two assets: a domestic-
currency asset D which o¤ers a …xed gross return RD = R and a foreign-currency asset F .
The domestic-currency return on the foreign asset is

                                                RF =   F   +    FS   +                                    (2)

where          F   is the beta from a regression of RF on S and                  is the orthogonal stochastic
component. With this setup, we can derive the equilibrium holdings of F as a function of
 y,       F    and other factors.
        The agent maximises utility over

                                                  1             1
                                    V (c2 ) =                        E exp[ Ac2 ]                         (3)
                                                 1+            A

where          is the discount rate, A is the coe¢ cient of absolute risk aversion and the level of
period-2 consumption is
                                         c2 = y2 + (! D RD + ! F RF )                                     (4)
    2
        The model is an adapted version of Davis, Willen and Nalewaik (2001).



                                                           3
where ! D ; ! F are the domestic and foreign portfolio allocations respectively. The joint
normality of y2 and RF means that we can write the optimality condition for consumption
as
                              ACov(c2 ; RF ) = E(RF )                   RD = RP                     (5)

where RP is the risk premium. That is, the agent chooses portfolio allocations such that
any remaining volatility in consumption that is correlated with the volatility in RF is
compensated through the risk premium.
     With an optimal portfolio allocation, we can write consumption in the format equilib-
rium consumption can be written as

                                        c2 =         +       c RF   +                               (6)

where
                                                       RP
                                             c   =                                                  (7)
                                                     AV (RF )
Accordingly,   c   is the agent’s desired exposure to the foreign-currency asset. If the foreign-
currency asset o¤ers a risk premium, the agent will want some positive exposure to the
foreign-currency asset; if the risk premium is zero, the agent will desire to have a consump-
tion pro…le that has zero foreign-currency risk.
     The agent’s endowed exposure to the foreign-currency asset is                y.   Accordingly, the
optimal portfolio allocation to the foreign-currency asset is

                               !F   =    c           y                                              (8)
                                           RP      Cov(y2 ; S)
                               !F   =      2                                                        (9)
                                        A F V (S)    V (S)
                                          1    RP
                               !F   =               Cov(y2; S)                                     (10)
                                        V (S) A 2F

Accordingly, the optimal portfolio foreign-currency position is increasing in the risk pre-
mium o¤ered on the foreign-currency asset and declining in the volatility of the exchange
rate and the degree of absolute risk aversion A. Importantly, it is decreasing in the covari-
ance between the exchange rate and domestic output. If this covariance is negative (such
that the currency depreciates when the domestic endowment is low), then the optimal
portfolio share is positive even if the risk premium is zero. In contrast, even if the risk
premium is positive, the optimal portfolio foreign-currency position can be negative if the
covariance term is su¢ ciently positive (that is, the currency depreciates when the domestic
endowment is high).


                                                         4
      While we have analysed the determinants of foreign-currency exposure in a highly-
stylized environment, similar themes have been explored in the new wave of macro-…nance
models in which cross-border portfolio positions are endogenously determined. In particu-
lar, several recent contributions have also emphasised the potential role played by nominal
assets and liabilities in contributing to international risk sharing.
      The mechanism varies across models. For instance, Devereux and Saito (2006) con-
sider a single-good ‡exible-price world economy in which home and foreign countries are
subject to shocks to endowments and in‡ation. If it is assumed that the covariance between
productivity and in‡ation is negative (as is empirically the case), a striking result is that
complete risk sharing can be achieved if asset trade is restricted to home and foreign nom-
inal bonds. Since the return on nominal bonds is procyclical in this setting, risk sharing is
accomplished by the home country taking a long position in the foreign currency bond and
a short position in the domestic currency bond — the portfolio payo¤ will be high when
the home endowment is low.
      A similar result is obtained by Devereux and Sutherland (2006a) who consider inde-
pendent shocks to output and money stocks. In their symmetric model, the share of
foreign-currency bonds held by domestic residents (…nanced by an opposite position in
domestic-currency bonds) is
                                                           2
                                                           Y
                                     FC =         2       2 )(1                                      (11)
                                             2(   Y   +   M        Y)

where      2   and    2   are the variances of the output and money shocks,             is the discount
           Y          M
factor and      Y   is the autoregressive parameter for the endowment shock. Accordingly, the
long position in foreign currency (and short position in domestic currency) is increasing in
the relative importance of endowment shocks versus monetary shocks and also increasing in
the persistence of the endowment shock. The intuition is that nominal bonds are better able
to deliver risk sharing, the less important are monetary shocks (Kim 2002 also makes this
point). Moreover, the importance of risk sharing (and hence the gross scale of positions) is
increasing in the volatility and persistence of output shocks.
      An alternative account is provided by Engel and Matsumoto (2008) who provide an
illustrative model featuring a one-period horizon, sticky prices and home bias in consump-
tion. Sticky prices mean that hedging nominal exchange rate movements o¤ers protection
against shifts in the real exchange rate and the terms of trade and a simple foreign-exchange
forward position (achievable through holding a long-short portfolio in foreign-currency and
domestic-currency bonds) can deliver full risk sharing, making trade in equities redundant.3
  3
      In an in…nite horizon model with price adjustment, these authors show that trade in equities is also


                                                      5
In their baseline model, a portfolio position that delivers a payo¤ that is proportional to
the nominal exchange rate achieves full risk sharing, where the elasticity of the payo¤ to
the nominal exchange rate is

                                            1         1
         xt = st ;                =              1        [1   b(1      )] + (1 + )(!       1)b        (12)
                                        2
where xt denotes the portfolio payo¤, st is the domestic-currency price of foreign currency,
  is the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion, (1 + )=2 is the share of home goods in nominal
expenditure, b is the degree of pass through and ! is the elasticity of substitution between
home and foreign goods. It is noteworthy that the optimal strategy in this model is to go
short in foreign currency. Consistent with our stylized model, the short position is driven by
the covariance between the exchange rate and output which is positive here: the exchange
rate depreciates during productivity-driven output expansions (there are no nontradables
in this model).
    Devereux and Sutherland (2007) consider a world economy in which there is a limited
substitutability between home and foreign goods, with shocks to productivity and money
stocks. There is endogenous production of varieties of the goods and prices are sticky in the
format of Calvo-style contracts. In contrast to the other papers, a monetary policy rule is
speci…ed that adjusts the interest rate in response to in‡ation. (Again, a positive domestic
productivity shock causes a nominal exchange rate depreciation - accordingly, the optimal
hedge is for the home country to hold a long position in the domestic-currency bond and
a short position in the foreign-currency bond.) In the case where only nominal bonds are
traded, the authors show that a monetary policy of strict price stability eliminates the
in‡uence of monetary shocks on bond returns and hence allows bond portfolios to fully
deliver risk sharing (whether prices are sticky or ‡exible).
    The overall message from this line of research is that a portfolio exhibiting exposure to
exchange rate movements can play a role in contributing to international risk sharing. A
country will wish to go long on foreign currency if the value of the domestic currency tends
to positively co-moves with domestic output but may wish to go short if the covariance has
the opposite sign.4 Moreover, nominal currency positions are more useful, the less volatile
are monetary shocks. Finally, the gross scale of positions is increasing in the importance
required to deliver full risk sharing. However, even in that case, only limited equity trade may be required
in view of the stabilizing properties of foreign-currency hedges.
   4
     As is emphasised by Pavlova and Rigobon (2007), the pattern of comovement between the exchange rate
and domestic output will depend on the relative importance of ‘demand’and ‘supply’shocks. Accordingly,
the covariance may shift over time. We return to this point in our empirical work.



                                                     6
of sharing risk - that is, the more volatile and persistent are wealth shocks.


2.2       Moving from Theory to Empirics

In terms of empirical approach, we follow Lane and Shambaugh (2009) in de…ning aggregate
foreign currency exposure by

                                                  Ait                    Lit
                          F XitAGG = ! A
                                       it                     !L
                                                               it                                    (13)
                                               Ait + Lit              Ait + Lit
where ! A                                                                          L
        it is the share of foreign assets denominated in foreign currencies, and ! it is de…ned
analogously. F X AGG lies in the range ( 1; 1) where the lower bound corresponds to a
country that has no foreign-currency assets and all its foreign liabilities are denominated in
foreign currencies, while the upper bound is hit by a country that has only foreign-currency
assets and no foreign-currency liabilities. Accordingly, F X AGG captures the sensitivity of
a country’s portfolio to a uniform currency movement by which the home currency moves
proportionally against all foreign currencies. This measure explicitly examines the …nancial
or balance sheet currency exposure; the real side impact of currency movements on trade
‡ows is not considered here.
       In developing an empirical speci…cation, we rely on an adapted version of the basic
speci…cation in equation ( 10).According to equation ( 10), the foreign-currency portfolio
position should depend on the covariance between output and the exchange rate and the
volatility of the exchange rate.5 Both of these variables enter the baseline empirical speci-
…cation. In addition, we control for the volatility of domestic and foreign in‡ation rates, in
order to di¤erentiate between volatility in the real exchange rate and volatility in nominal
price levels. Moreover, nominal volatility at home plausibly limits the ability of domestic
residents to issue domestic-currency assets to foreign investors, while nominal volatility
overseas reduces the willingness of domestic investors to hold foreign-currency bonds. (The
foreign (global) in‡ation rate is absorbed in the time dummy in the regressions.)
       Next, we include two additional factors. First, we also include trade openness as an
additional regressor, since the value of foreign assets in a portfolio is increasing in a country’s
propensity to consume imports (Obstfeld and Rogo¤ 2001).                   Second, we control for the
volatility of output, since the importance of international risk sharing may be greater, the
more volatile is the domestic economy (as in several of the models outlined in the preceding
   5
       The approach is partial equilibrium in nature, especially since we do not model the process for the
exchange rate. While this is a limitation, it is also well understood that we do not have good models that
successfully explain a high proportion of exchange rate variation.



                                                     7
discussion).
   Accordingly, we arrive at the baseline empirical speci…cation by which the desired net
foreign-currency exposure of country i’s balance sheet may be expressed as:



      F XitAGG    =       +   t   +      COV (Yit ; Eit )     'H    V OL(      it )   'F   V OL(Eit )
                      +       OP ENit +           V OL(Yit ) + "it                                      (14)

where Yi is GDP growth, Ei is the nominal exchange rate,                   i   is domestic in‡ation,    F   is
foreign in‡ation and OP ENi is the level of trade openness.
   However, a host of factors may inhibit a country’s ability to attain its desired net foreign-
currency position. The capacity to issue domestic-currency liabilities (whether domestic-
currency debt or equity instruments) is limited by a poor-quality domestic institutional
environment, especially in relation to the treatment of foreign investors. On the other side,
the ability to acquire foreign-currency assets may be limited by capital controls, regulatory
prohibitions on institutional investors, or simply the wealth of the country.
   Accordingly, we also consider an extended speci…cation which allows institutional fric-
tions to shape the level of aggregate foreign currency exposure. Accordingly, the observed
foreign-currency exposure may be characterized by


                                      F XitAGG = F XitAGG        C(Fit )                                (15)

where Fi denotes the set of proxies for the limits on the capacity to issue domestic-currency
liabilities and acquire foreign-currency assets.
   This allows us to write the expanded empirical speci…cation



       F XitAGG =         +   t   +      COV (Yit ; Eit )   'H     V OL(       it )   'F   V OL(Eit )
                      +       OP ENit +          V OL(Yit )        Fit + "it                            (16)

   We consider versions of equations (14) and (16) in our econometric analysis in Section
5 below.
   Finally, we note that the theoretical models outlined in this section have focused on the
determinants of steady-state portfolios. Some recent work has been successful in describ-
ing the dynamics of portfolios in response to various shocks (Tille and van Wincoop 2007,
Devereux and Sutherland 2007). Since our empirical work examines a low-frequency panel



                                                     8
of observations on foreign-currency positions (there are four year gaps between observa-
tions), we base our interpretation on steady-state factors, rather than seeking to capture
the cyclical dynamics of portfolios.


2.3   Components of the Net Foreign Currency Asset Position

Aggregate foreign currency exposure can be decomposed into two primary subcomponents

                        N F Ait                       Lit                    Ait
         F XitAGG =                + !L
                                      itDC                      !A
                                                                 itDC                       (17)
                       Ait + Lit                   Ait + Lit              Ait + Lit
This expression shows that F X AGG is the sum of the net foreign asset position plus the share
of foreign liabilities which are in local currency minus the share of foreign assets which are in
local currency. Accordingly, if all assets and liabilities are in foreign currency, the aggregate
foreign-currency exposure is simply the scaled net foreign asset position. Conversely, if the
net foreign asset position is zero, aggregate foreign-currency exposure is the di¤erence in
the foreign-currency share between the asset and liability sides of the international balance
sheet. Accordingly, we label this second part of the equation F XitAGG;0 and rewrite our
equation as

                                            N F Ait
                             F XitAGG =                 + F XitAGG;0                        (18)
                                           Ait + Lit
where N F Ait is the net foreign asset position (scaled by A + L) and F XitAGG;0 is the
aggregate foreign currency exposure evaluated at a zero net foreign asset position. This
decomposition is useful, since much of the theoretical literature has focused on scenarios in
which the net foreign asset position is zero, even if non-zero net foreign asset positions are
empirically important in determining aggregate foreign currency exposures.
   In turn, it is helpful to make further decompositions of each of these terms


                           AN Rit Lit          F XRit
         F XitAGG =                       +             +
                            Ait + Lit         Ait + Lit
                           P EQLit + F DILit            DEBT LDCit          ADC
                                                                              N Rit
                                                   +                                        (19)
                               Ait + Lit                 Ait + Lit         Ait + Lit

   That is, F X AGG decomposes into two elements of the net foreign asset position (non-
reserve net foreign assets AN R     L, plus foreign-exchange reserves F XR) and three ele-
ments of F X AGG;0 (portfolio equity and direct investment foreign liabilities, plus domestic-
currency debt liabilities minus local-currency debt assets), where all terms are scaled


                                               9
to A + L. This decomposition has several appealing features. First, it clearly di¤erentiates
between the relative contributions of foreign-exchange reserves and non-reserve components
in the overall net foreign asset position. Second, it highlights that F XitAGG;0 is driven by
three separate factors: all else equal, a greater share of equities in foreign liabilities reduces
reliance on foreign-currency …nancing, while the foreign-currency position is more positive,
the greater is the share of domestic currency in foreign debt liabilities and the smaller is
the share of domestic-currency assets in non-reserve foreign assets.6 In our empirical work,
we examine each of these elements in some detail, since diverse strands of the existing the-
oretical and empirical literatures have typically focused on individual elements rather than
the aggregate position.
       Lane and Shambaugh (2009) show that the quantitative impact of a uniform currency
movement is the product of F X AGG and the gross scale of the international balance sheet


                                       N ET F X = F X AGG IF I                                            (20)

where IF I = (A + L)=GDP is the outstanding gross stock of foreign assets and foreign
liabilities. We will examine N ET F X in addition to F X AGG and its subcomponents in our
empirical analysis.
       Finally, we also construct an alternative measure of foreign-currency exposure that only
takes into account debt assets and liabilities. While we view the aggregate position as the
most comprehensive and useful, some models have speci…c predictions for the debt-only
position (see, amongst others, Coeurdacier, Kollman, and Martin 2007). We calculate


                        F XRit + P DEBT AFit C + ODEBT AFit C P DEBT LFit C + ODEBT LFit C
F XDEBTitAGG =
                                                 DebtAit + DebtLit
                                                                                   (21)
where P DEBT and ODEBT denote portfolio and non-portfolio (“other”) debt respec-
tively. The net foreign currency position in the debt portion of the balance sheet is scaled
to the size of the debt-only balance sheet (debt assets plus debt liabilities).
   6
       The domestic-currency share in non-reserve foreign assets will typically be driven by the domestic-
currency share in non-reserve foreign debt assets. The exception are those countries that share a currency
with other countries, such that a proportion of foreign equity assets will be denominated in domestic currency.




                                                      10
3        Data
The construction of the underlying dataset is described in detail in Lane and Shambaugh
(2009).7 Since the focus in this paper is on aggregate foreign-currency exposure, we con…ne
attention to our method for estimating the foreign-currency and domestic-currency com-
ponents of foreign assets and foreign liabilities. Since, for this purpose, we do not depend
on the composition of the foreign-currency component across di¤erent currencies, the cal-
culations here are less taxing than the bilateral currency estimates reported by Lane and
Shambaugh (2009).
        In relation to foreign assets, foreign-exchange reserves are by de…nition denominated
in foreign currencies. For the portfolio equity and direct investment categories, we make
the assumption that an equity position in destination country j carries an exposure to the
currency of country j. In e¤ect, this assumption implies that the home-currency returns on
foreign equity assets can be analyzed as consisting of two components: the foreign-currency
return, plus the exchange rate shift between the foreign and home currencies. So long as the
two components are not perfectly negatively correlated, the home-currency return will be
in‡uenced by currency movements such that the equity category indeed carries a currency
exposure. Thus, for these two categories, we simply need the quantities on the balance
sheet using the External Wealth of Nations dataset reported in Lane and Milesi-Ferretti
(2007b).
        The portfolio debt asset category poses the most severe challenge since many countries
issue debt in multiple currencies, while the propensity to purchase bonds issued in par-
ticular currencies varies across investors of di¤erent nationalities. We make extensive use
of the international securities dataset maintained by the BIS, which reports the currency
denomination of international bonds for 113 issuing countries.8 For some countries (such as
the United States), international bonds are issued mainly in domestic currency; for other
countries, international bonds are typically denominated in foreign currency.
        In order to allow for the propensity of investors to buy international bonds that are
    7
        The dataset and a data appendix are available at http://www.philiplane.org/LSAER/LSAERdata.html.
    8
        Where the BIS data set lacks data on the currency of issue for a country, we rely on the World Bank’s
Global Financial Development database of the currency composition of external debt. This is an imperfect
measure because it includes non portfolio long term debt (such as bank loans), but the countries which
are missing BIS data make up a small fraction of internationally held debt assets. Our dataset focuses
on international bond issues - while foreign investors have become active in the domestic bond markets of
developing countries in very recent years, the international bond issues are more important for the vast bulk
of our sample period.



                                                       11
denominated in their own currency, we exploit the data provided by the United States
Treasury, the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan regarding the currency com-
position of the foreign assets of these regions. The United States reports the currency
denomination of its portfolio debt assets in each destination country (US Treasury 2004).
From the Bank of Japan data, it is clear that Japanese investors purchase (virtually) all
of the yen-denominated debt issued by other countries, while the European Central Bank
data suggests that investors from the euro area hold 66 percent of the euro-denominated
debt issued by other countries (European Central Bank 2005).9 Accordingly, we adjust the
currency weights derived from the BIS data to take into account the portfolio choices by
the investors from the major currency blocs and employ these adjusted weights in working
out the currency composition of the foreign holdings of investors from other countries.10
This procedure delivers estimates of the foreign- and domestic-currency components of the
foreign portfolio debt assets held by each country (in addition to details on the composition
of the foreign-currency component). Finally, in relation to non-portfolio debt assets, we
are able to exploit the BIS locational banking statistics to obtain a breakdown between
home-currency and foreign-currency bank assets.
       The treatment of foreign liabilities is largely symmetric. Portfolio equity and direct
investment liabilities are assumed to be in the home currency, while the BIS databanks
on bank debt liabilities and securities issuance allows us to obtain a breakdown of debt
liabilities between the domestic currency and foreign currency components. (For developing
countries, we use the World Bank’s Global Development Finance database to obtain the
currency breakdown of external debt.)
       As discussed in Lane and Shambaugh (2009), it is possible that some exposure is hedged
using derivatives. It is important to note that any within country derivative sales are moot
as they simply shift exposure across parties within the country’s overall balance sheet. Also,
anecdotal evidence and some country studies suggest cross border hedging is not on the same
scale as the asset and liability positions we examine. Finally, Lane and Shambaugh (2009)
show that that valuation e¤ects that we derive from the …nancially-weighted exchange rate
indices are strong predictors of actual valuation e¤ects, suggesting our measures are good
approximations of actual currency exposure positions.
   9
       Bank of Japan data show the currency composition and amount of Japanese foreign long-term debt
assets. When compared with the BIS currency denomination issuance data set, we see that e¤ectively all
yen-denominated debt issued outside Japan is held by Japanese investors.
  10
     That is, if US, European, and Japanese investors all hold debt in Brazil and Brazil issues debt in local
currency, dollars, euro, and yen, then the US investor most likely holds dollar debt, the Japanese investor
most likely holds more yen debt and the European investor most likely holds more euro debt.


                                                     12
         Our full sample of countries includes 117 countries where we have full data. We eliminate
hyperin‡ation episodes due to their status as outliers, and start a country’s data after
the conclusion of a hyperin‡ation (countries with hyperin‡ations late in the sample are
dropped). Many results examine the variation between 1994 to 2004 (1996 to 2004 in the
regression analysis). These results use a smaller 102 country sample that has full data from
1994 through 2004.11


4         Foreign-Currency Exposure: Decomposition
Table 1 shows some summary statistics for F X AGG , N ET F X and F XDEBT AGG for
di¤erent country groups for 1994 and 2004. The data show a general move towards a more
positive F X AGG position between 1994 and 2004. Table 1 also shows considerable cross-
group variation. For each period, F X AGG is more positive for the typical advanced economy
relative to the typical emerging market economy, while the typical developing country has
a negative F X AGG position. These patterns also broadly apply in relation to N ET F X but
the long position of the typical advanced economy is ampli…ed by the much higher level of
international …nancial integration for this group than for the lower-income groups.
         To put these …gures in context, a negative N ET F X value of minus 16 percent (the
typical developing country) means that a uniform 20 percent depreciation against other
currencies generates a valuation loss of 3:2 percent of GDP, while the same currency move-
ment generates an 8:4 percent of GDP valuation gain for a country with a positive N ET F X
value of 42 percent (the typical advanced economy). These wealth e¤ects are considerable
and demonstrate why the aggregate foreign-currency exposure against the rest of the world
is an important indicator.
         Table 1 also shows positions for F XDEBT AGG . First, we note the mechanical pattern
that debt-only positions are automatically more negative than overall positions. Since FDI
and portfolio equity liabilities are in local currency and foreign equity assets are in foreign
currency, equity positions on either side of the balance sheet makes F X AGG more positive.
    11
         The remaining data come from standard sources. Exchange rate and in‡ation data are from the In-
ternational Monetary Fund’s International Financial Statistics database, while GDP and trade data are
from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators database, and the institutional data comes from
the World Bank’s Worldwide Governance Indicators database (www.govindicators.org). The peg variable is
from Shambaugh (2004), capital controls data come from di Giovanni and Shambaugh (2008) and is a binary
variable summarizing information from the IMF yearbooks (using the alternative indicators developed by
Chinn and Ito (2007) or Edwards (2007) makes nearly no di¤erence and the choice is based on maximising
data availability).



                                                     13
Hence, F XDEBT AGG is more negative than the overall F X AGG in all years. A somewhat
surprising result is that even advanced countries in 2004 have negative F XDEBT AGG
positions. This occurs because so many of their assets are either in local-currency debt
assets or equity assets, even though they have few foreign currency debt liabilities, the net
currency position in foreign bonds is negative.
       Table 2 shows summary statistics for the cross-country distribution of F X AGG and its
various subcomponents (plus N ET F X) for 2004 (the …nal year in the dataset). Across the
full sample, the average country has a roughly-balanced foreign-currency position, (which
implies no foreign currency exposure; balanced changes in the exchange rate would not
a¤ect the aggregate balance sheet), but the range extends from minus 72 percent to plus
66 percent. It is important to note that a positive value of F X AGG is not in itself good
or bad. Instead, the optimal allocation could depend on the factors noted above. While
having a negative F X AGG means losses on the balance sheet if there is a depreciation,
it conversely means gains in the case of an appreciation.12 The typical net foreign asset
position is negative, on the order of 30 percent of assets and liabilities, while the F XitAGG;0
terms tends to partly balance this out, since it is typically positive.13
       As for the subcomponents, the non-reserve component of the net foreign asset position
of most countries is negative but, by de…nition, foreign-exchange reserves are always at
least slightly positive. Portfolio equity and direct investment are on average about 20
percent of liabilities, giving most countries a built-in set of domestic-currency liabilities.
Many countries have no domestic-currency foreign debt liabilities, and even more have no
domestic-currency foreign assets.14 Finally, N ET F X is a more skewed variable with a
much larger standard deviation as some countries have very large ratios of foreign assets
and liabilities to GDP.
       We can re-organize the decomposition of F X AGG into a series of bivariate decompo-
sitions. At the upper level, we decompose F X AGG between N F A (scaled by A + L) and
F X AGG;0 . In turn, we decompose the overall net foreign asset position between non-
  12
       Lane and Shambaugh (2009) provide an extensive discussion of the distribution and trends in this
particular statistic. For context, a negative position of -0.5 suggests that for every 10 percent depreciation
of the currency, the country will face valuation losses of 5 percent times the assets plus liabilities divided by
GDP. For the typical country, this would mean a loss of 10 percent of GDP.
 13                                    AGG;zero
    To exhibit a negative value of F Xit        would require more foreign assets in local currency than
foreign liabilities in local currency. Since most countries have some local currency foreign liabilities (due
to direct investment and portfolio equity) and few countries have local currency foreign assets, only two
                                               AGG;zero
countries actually have a negative value of F Xit        .
  14
     The latter is expressed as a negative number, since it enters the decomposition negatively.



                                                       14
reserve net foreign assets and foreign-exchange reserves and decompose F XitAGG;0 between
the equity share in foreign liabilities and the domestic currency share term (DCSHARE =
DEBT LDC        ADC
                 N R ). Finally, the DCSHARE term can be disaggregated into its two
constituent parts.
     In order to assess the relative contributions of each term in a bivariate decomposition,
we report three statistics. Taking the generic pair Q = N1 + N2 , we generate: (i) the
R2 from a regression of Q on N1 ; (ii) the R2 from a regression of Q on N2 ; and (iii)
 (N1 ; N2 ) = Correl(N 1; N2 ). The pooled estimates are reported in Table 3, while Figures
1-5 show the distributions of these statistics from country-by-country estimation.
     Unless the correlation between N1 and N2 is zero, we cannot make a pure decomposi-
tion of the variance of Q into the part driven by N1 and the part driven by N2 (because
V AR(Q) = V AR(N1 ) + V AR(N2 ) + 2COV (N1 ; N2 )).
     In some cases, researchers look at variance ratios and arbitrarily allocate the covariance
term, frequently just splitting it in half. If the covariance term is zero, the R2 in our
bivariate regression simply equals the variance ratio because the estimated       coe¢ cient on
                                          2
N1 would be equal to 1 and the R2 =           V AR(N1 )=V AR(Q). If the covariance is positive,
the estimated      is biased upwards and is greater than one in both regressions. In these
cases we are e¤ectively allocating the covariance to both variables. Alternatively, if the
covariance is negative, the estimated    is biased towards zero and our R2 will be lower than
a variance ratio. A disadvantage of using simple ratios of variances is that if the correlation
of N1 and N2 approaches negative 1, the variance of Q can approach zero, in which case
the ratio of the variance of either variable to the variance of Q will approach in…nity.
     No technique can purely separate what is driving Q in such a decomposition, but the
technique we follow has the advantage of being bounded between (0; 1). In the case where
the two components are positively correlated, we are saying that either one could be ex-
plaining the movement in Q and if they are negatively correlated, we are saying that neither
explains it particularly well since they cancel one another out. We show both the distribu-
tion of results for within-country analysis in Figures 1-5 and the pooled estimates in Table
3.
     Figure 1 shows the country-by-country decomposition of F X AGG between N F A and
F XitAGG;0 . It shows that both factors independently have high explanatory power for most
countries but with the net foreign asset position typically having the higher bivariate R2 .
In terms of comovement, the sample is evenly split between cases where the net foreign
asset position and F X AGG;0 are positively correlated and those where the correlation is
negative. In the pooled regressions in Table 3, net foreign assets are much more important,

                                                 15
with the R2 from a regression of F X AGG on F X AGG;0 typically close to zero, with the
exception of the emerging market group. This is perhaps the most important result in the
decomposition. To a great extent, the foreign currency exposure of a country is determined
by its status as a debtor or creditor. Examining models where countries hold balanced net
foreign asset positions will miss a large part of what determines currency exposure.
   Figure 2 decomposes the net foreign asset position between the non-reserve net foreign
asset position and foreign-exchange reserves. The former is clearly the dominant factor.
Within countries, a regression of the aggregate net foreign asset position on the non-reserve
net foreign asset position has an R2 close to unity for nearly all countries, while at least
half the sample has an R2 less than 0:5 when the regressor is the level of foreign-exchange
reserves. Again, the split between positive and negative correlations between the two el-
ements is relatively balanced, but is 60-40 in favor of positive cases. Thus, despite an
extensive literature on reserves holdings, the portfolio balance literature’s emphasis on the
private sector appears appropriate. Central banks are not systematically unwinding the
positions of private actors. The non-reserve NFA drives the overall position.
   The pooled regressions in Table 3 emphatically reinforce this point. In the full sample
and all subsamples, the R2 when the non–reserve net foreign asset position is the regressor
is at least 0:9 and the only subsample where reserves appear important is the developing
world. Table 3 shows a negative correlation of reserves and non-reserve NFA in advanced
countries suggesting that reserves could be held as a hedge against losses in the non-reserve
balance sheet, but there is no correlation in the emerging countries and developing countries
actually show a positive correlation. This implies that countries with a positive NFA hold
more reserves, suggesting they are not a hedge of private positions in poor countries.
   Figure 3 powerfully shows that the equity share in liabilities is far more important
than the currency composition of debt assets and liabilities in driving the behaviour of
F XitAGG;0 . Especially in non-advanced countries, there is simply far more variation in the
importance of FDI and portfolio equity liabilities than in domestic-currency foreign debt
liabilities (which is relatively low) or domestic-currency foreign assets (which are almost
always zero), meaning that F X AGG;0 will be almost entirely determined by the extent of
portfolio equity and direct investment liabilities. In terms of comovements, it is interesting
that there is a 60-40 balance in favor of negative cases. In turn, Figure 4 shows the relative
contributions of the liability and asset sides to the currency composition factor and shows
that the liability side has slightly more explanatory power. The correlation is 80-20 in favor
of negative cases as countries with large domestic-currency debt liabilities also have large
domestic-currency non-reserve foreign assets.

                                             16
         Finally, Figure 5 shows the decomposition of N ET F X between F X AGG and IF I.15 It
is interesting that F X AGG has relatively more explanatory power than IF I: the overall
net currency exposure of the economy is driven more by the currency exposure of the
international balance sheet than by the gross scale of asset and liability positions relative
to the economy. There is a reasonably even split between positive and negative correlations
(60 40 in favor of positive). In Table 3, we see that F X AGG is more important than IF I in
the full pooled sample, but their relative importance varies across the various subsamples.
         Our analysis is static in nature, looking at exposure to a change in the exchange rate
based on holdings at a given point in time. One may worry that a collapsing currency (or
fears of one) could lead to a collapsing position if a country is suddenly forced to borrow
extensively in foreign currency. This might mean that apparently safe positions are illusory.
In fact, a change in the exchange rate typically has little impact on F X AGG . Consider a
country with no assets and all foreign currency liabilities. If the exchange rate depreciates,
they face valuation losses but F X AGG is               1 throughout. If assets equaled half of liabilities
and       F X AGG   is   0:5, the same applies. Only if there is an extensive amount of domestic
currency liabilities on the balance sheet can a depreciation shift F X AGG to a more negative
position (by increasing the relative size of the foreign currency liabilities). In fact there is
only a slight decrease in F X AGG in the year prior to a sudden stop and F X AGG on average
does not change at all in the year of a sudden stop.16 Thus we do not view this concern as
particularly problematic, and instead see our measure as a good indicator of the external
balance sheet exposure of countries.


5         Econometric Analysis

5.1         Regression Speci…cation

We begin our analysis with the determinants of aggregate foreign currency exposure, before
moving on to the subcomponents. Table 4 explores a variety of speci…cations to explain
variation in F X agg .
         We adopt a panel framework
                                                                 0
                                           Yit =    +    t   +       Xit + "it                              (22)
    15
         This decomposition is of a slightly di¤erent nature in that N ET F X is the product of F X AGG and IF I,
whereas each of the other decompositions is of a sum.
 16
    Thailand and Korea in 1997 do show declining F X AGG , but the decline is small and is balanced by
countries that show and increasing F X AGG (perhaps due to being forced to pay back foreign loans when
funding dries up).


                                                         17
We consider four speci…cations for X. The baseline speci…cation follows the setup de-
scribed in equation (??) above, which focuses on the types of variables that are identi…ed
as potentially important in a ‘friction free’environment. We include the following variables

         Trade Openness (trade to GDP ratio)

         Volatility of real GDP per capita

         Covariance of real per capita GDP and the nominal e¤ective exchange rate

         Volatility of the nominal e¤ective exchange rate

         Volatility of domestic in‡ation

       The volatility and covariance measures are calculated for the log changes of each variable
over a rolling 15 year window (since the real variables are only available on an annual basis
for many countries). As was discussed in Section 2.3, the importance of using the balance
sheet to hedge domestic risk is increasing in the volatility of domestic wealth (proxied here
by GDP per capita). A critical factor in determining whether F X AGG should be long or
short is the sign of the covariance term between domestic wealth and the nominal exchange
rate, proxied here by the the covariance between GDP and the nominal e¤ective exchange
rate. The higher is the exogenous component in nominal exchange rate volatility, the more
risky are foreign-currency assets17 while domestic in‡ation volatility increases uncertainty
about the real returns on nominal positions. Finally, a time …xed e¤ect is included in
equation (22) to control for global factors, such as time-variation in the volatility of global
in‡ation.
       We also consider an expanded speci…cation that seeks to take into account institutional
and policy factors that may alter the desired optimal net foreign currency position and/or
restrict a country’s ability to attain its desired level. These variables include:

         Institutional Quality

         Capital Controls

         The de facto exchange rate regime

         A marker for being in EMU
  17
       While it is true that if the balance sheet is very large, risky assets could drive exchange rate volatility,
the point is if the exchange rate is volatile, this may dampen a country’s willingness to hold a large foreign
currency portfolio.


                                                         18
   A third set of variables is also considered that are viewed as general control variables

        GDP per capita

        Country size (Population)

   The level of GDP per capita is included, since many of the characteristics listed above
are plausibly correlated with the level of development and we want to be able to ascer-
tain whether these variables have explanatory power even holding …xed GDP per capita.
Country size is a second general control variable, since previous empirical evidence sug-
gests that larger countries are better able to issue domestic-currency liabilities (Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti 2000, Eichengreen et al 2003).
   The regressions use data from three years: 1996, 2000, and 2004. We opt to leave 4
year breaks rather than use every year because of the serial correlation of some variables
and because of the overlapping nature of the 15 year windows. Moreover, the World Bank
governance data are only available in even years and our data is complete for many countries
only starting in 1996. We have 306 observations from a total of 104 countries. Not all the
countries in the full data set used in the decompositions have all the required covariates.
   We begin by reporting the results from pooled estimation of the baseline speci…cation
in column (1) of Table 4; we add the institutional and policy variables in column (2); while
we alternatively add the general control variables in column (3); the full set of regressors
are included in column (4). In order to isolate the time-series variation in the data, we add
country …xed e¤ects in columns (5) and (6); as an alternative (albeit with a drop in the
degrees of freedom), we estimate a ‘long’…rst-di¤erences equation columns (7) and (8) which
examines the changes in the variables between 1996 and 2004. Due to the need to have all
covariates in both 1996 and 2004, we have 98 countries in the di¤erences speci…cations.
   It is worth noting that while we present evidence for the full sample of countries, the
results are strikingly similar even if exclude the set of advanced economies. We explicitly
control for EMU, GDP per capita and use country …xed e¤ects in some speci…cations. These
techniques appear su¢ cient to take into account di¤erences across the advanced, emerging,
and developing samples.


5.2     Results for F X AGG

5.2.1     Pooled Estimation

Table 4 provides the results. In the pooled estimation with year e¤ects (the …rst four
columns), we see that greater trade openness is clearly associated with a more positive

                                             19
value of F X AGG : this is true whether more extensive controls are present or not, although
the estimated coe¢ cient drops in value once additional controls are included in columns
(2)-(4). A positive association between trade openness and foreign currency exposure is
consistent with the notion that the role of foreign assets in portfolios is more important,
the greater is the share of imports in domestic consumption (Obstfeld and Rogo¤ 2001).
       In relation to the other variables in the baseline speci…cation, the estimated coe¢ cients
vary in signi…cance and sign across columns (1)-(4). In terms of signi…cant results, the
volatility of the nominal exchange rate has the expected negative sign in column (1) only.
The volatility of GDP is signi…cant only in column (4) but with a positive sign. Finally,
the covariance of output and the nominal exchange rate enters with a signi…cant positive
sign in column (1), but loses signi…cance and the sign ‡ips when more controls are added.
Accordingly, the results from the pooled estimation do not provide very stable evidence
in terms of the relation between the various volatility indicators and the level of foreign-
currency exposure.
       Turning to the institutional and policy variables, the results in column (2) indicate that a
better institutional environment is associated with a more positive value for F X AGG , while
the estimated coe¢ cient on the exchange rate peg is signi…cantly negative - however, neither
capital controls nor the EM U dummy is signi…cant in column (2).18 However, the inclusion
of GDP per capita as a control in column (4) alters these results: the only policy variable
that is signi…cant is the EM U dummy which enters with a signi…cantly negative coe¢ cient.
Rather, the evidence from columns (3) and (4) is that F X AGG is highly correlated with
the level of development: richer countries have a more positive level of foreign-currency
exposure. We surmise that the ability to issue domestic-currency liabilities and obtain
foreign-currency assets is increasing in institutional dimensions that are highly correlated
with the level of development. Finally, the estimated coe¢ cient on country size in columns
(3) and (4) is positive but not quite signi…cant.
       To obtain a perspective on the quantitative importance of the coe¢ cients, we can con-
sider the magnitudes of the coe¢ cients on trade openness, GDP per capita and the EMU
dummy in column (4). In relation to trade openness, the standard deviation in the sample
is 0.48, such that that a one standard deviation in trade openness would generate a move of
0.05 in F X AGG . The standard deviation of the natural log of GDP per capita in the sample
  18
       In this speci…cation, the EMU dummy re‡ects any extra impact of EMU beyond its stabilising impact
on the nominal e¤ective exchange rate, which is captured by the P EG variable. It turns out that the pattern
that EMU has led to a less positive foreign-currency position for euro area countries has been well timed,
in that the euro has appreciated against other currencies.



                                                    20
is 1.64, thus the coe¢ cient on this variable implies a one standard deviation move implies
a move of 0.21 in F X AGG , a very substantial shift. The EMU indicator is a dummy, thus
being in EMU suggests an F X agg which is 0.14 lower than for other countries, which again
is a non-trivial magnitude. The results show that in simple conditional correlations, many
of the country characteristics highlighted by the literature do not seem to vary with F X agg
in a systematic manner. On the other hand, models should help to explain by richer more
open countries hold longer foreign currency positions.


5.2.2   Time Series Variation

The time series variation in the data is captured in the regressions reported in columns
(5)-(8) of Table 4. The goal is not to study the business cycle ‡uctuations in F X agg , since
our econometric model mainly only considers observations at four year intervals have obser-
vations every four years, while the di¤erences speci…cations look across an eight year gap.
Rather, the goal is to better understand the longer-run determinants by studying lower-
frequency shifts in F X agg . By controlling for country …xed e¤ects, we remove unobservable
country characteristics to see which of our model based determinants a¤ects within-country
shifts in F X agg . The advantage to holding …xed the cross-sectional variation in the data
is that there may be non-observed country characteristics that in‡uence the cross-country
distribution of F X AGG values and reduce our ability to accurately capture the impact of
some of our variables of interest; the drawback is that other variables in our speci…cation
mostly show cross-sectional variation with little time-series variations and these regressors
will play less role in explaining intra-country variation. Thus, a variable losing signi…cance
in these speci…cations does not necessarily signal omitted variable problems, but may simply
represent a lack of time series variation to provide identi…cation.
   In the time series dimension, we see several new results. The most striking …nding
is that, once either country …xed e¤ects are included or the data are di¤erenced across
time, the covariance term now exhibits the expected positive coe¢ cient. Holding …xed
other factors, the value of F X AGG becomes more positive for those countries that have
experienced an increase in the covariance between domestic output growth and the nominal
exchange rate. The result is borderline insigni…cant in the …xed e¤ects speci…cations (p-
value 0.11) and signi…cant at the 99 and 95 percent con…dence levels in the di¤erences
speci…cations.
   This result is not simply driven by a few countries. Figure 6 shows the partial scatter of
changes in F X AGG against changes in the covariance of the exchange rate and GDP using



                                             21
the regression in column 8. We see a clear pattern where those countries with increasingly
positive covariance take a more positive F X AGG position. Returning to the size of the e¤ect,
a one standard deviation move in the size of the change in the covariance term is 0.005.
This implies a one standard deviation shift in the change in the covariance term would
come with an increase of 0.045 in F X AGG . The models which predict this relationship
do so for the level, not the change, but the result appears only in the time series. There
is a considerable amount of cross-sectional variation that remains unexplained. Once it is
controlled for with country …xed e¤ects, we see the expected relationship.
   Conversely, the trade openness result is not signi…cant and GDP per capita weakens
along the time series dimension: it is clear that these variables help to explain the cross-
country variation in the data but are less useful in understanding shifts over time in the value
of F X AGG . In part, though, this simply re‡ects the slow moving nature of trade openness.
Rich more open countries certainly have more positive F X AGG , but GDP per capita and
trade openness are fairly stable over time, and hence changes in these variables are not very
helpful in explaining the changing nature of F X AGG . In contrast, population growth now
shows up as an important variable. The logic is twofold. Controlling for GDP per capita,
a growing population suggests an economy that is growing larger. Thus, when an economy
grows larger, there is a more positive F X AGG . If we instead include population and GDP
directly, however, population is still positive and signi…cant, suggesting the demographics
themselves may matter directly, and that models should include a role for population growth
in the optimal portfolio determinants of countries.
   The global shift to more positive F X AGG positions documented in Lane and Shambaugh
(2009) can be seen in the positive year dummies for 2000 and 2004 (1996 is the excluded
dummy) in columns (1) through (5). Once we consider all controls and include country …xed
e¤ects in column (6), the year dummies are no longer signi…cant: the regressors explain a
substantial component of the shift to a more positive F X AGG position. We also note that
the EMU dummy is negative and signi…cant along the time series dimension, such that the
euro area countries clearly shifted towards a more negative position upon the formation of
the currency union.


5.3   Results for FXDEBTAGG

We have repeated similar regressions for the debt-only measure of exposure, F XDEBT AGG .
Table 5 reproduces the speci…cations in columns (1), (6) and (8) from Table 4 but with
F XDEBT AGG as the dependent variable. The results are nearly identical to those for the



                                              22
overall measure. Without country …xed e¤ects, trade openness and GDP per capita are
positive and signi…cant (with nearly the same magnitude). The only substantial di¤erence
is that the EMU dummy is cut in half and no longer signi…cant when comparing columns (1)
and (2). With the inclusion of country …xed e¤ects, the covariance term is still positive and
signi…cant, and is in fact slightly larger. The variance of the exchange rate is negative and
population is positive and signi…cant and again the EMU dummy has a slightly smaller size,
though in this case it is still statistically signi…cant. Looking at the changes speci…cation,
the regressions for the debt measure show coe¢ cients with a similar direction but larger
size and signi…cance.


5.4   Results for Subcomponents and N ET F X

We can learn more about the mechanisms behind both the cross-country and time-series
variation in the data by examining the various subcomponents of F X AGG ; in addition, it
is useful to also examine whether the results for F X AGG carry over to N ET F X.          The
limitation to this exercise is that the strong patterns of co-variation across the di¤erent
subcomponents that were identi…ed in Section 3 mean that results for F X AGG may not be
easily attributed to the individual subcomponents. For simplicity, we adopt a symmetric
approach, whereby we maintain the same set of regressors for each subcomponent of F X AGG
and N ET F X.
   To conserve space, we focus on the most general speci…cation which includes the full set
of regressors. We report the pooled estimates in Table 6, while the …xed-e¤ects results are
contained in Table 7. To assist in comparing results, column (1) in Table 6 repeats column
(4) from Table 4, while column (1) in Table 7 repeats column (6) from Table 4.
   In relation to the pooled estimates in Table 6, a series of interesting observations arise.
In relation to the two primary subcomponents of F X AGG , the positive e¤ect of GDP per
capita is clearly operating via the net foreign asset position; in contrast, the EM U dummy
a¤ects the F X AGG;0 term. At a lower level of decomposition, GDP per capita a¤ects the
non-reserve net foreign asset position; in addition, it is associated with higher values for the
domestic-currency share of debt liabilities and the domestic-currency share of foreign assets.
The EMU dummy has a similar relation with the domestic-currency share of debt liabilities
and the domestic-currency share of foreign assets; EMU membership is also associated with
a reduction in the level of reserves and a decline in the equity share of liabilities, with both
of these e¤ects acting to reduce F X AGG .
   The other variables that are individually signi…cant in column (1) – trade openness,



                                              23
the volatility of GDP and the covariance term — are not individually signi…cant for either
the net foreign asset position or F X AGG;0 . However, at a lower level of decomposition,
we see that trade openness raises the equity share in foreign liabilities but reduces the
domestic-currency share in foreign debt liabilities, which act in opposite directions.19 The
volatility of GDP is only signi…cant in raising the domestic-currency share of non-reserve
foreign assets (which mechanically reduces the foreign-currency position). An increase in
the covariance between GDP and the nominal exchange rate is associated with a decline
in the non-reserve net foreign asset position, a reduction in the domestic-currency share of
foreign debt liabilities and the domestic-currency share of non-reserve foreign assets.
       The main impact of the institutional/policy variables is seen in columns (7) and (8),
which show that capital controls are associated with a reduction in the domestic-currency
share of foreign debt liabilities and the domestic-currency share of non-reserve foreign assets,
while an exchange rate peg raises the domestic-currency share in foreign debt liabilities.
Larger countries have more positive non-reserve net foreign asset positions and a higher
domestic-currency share in foreign debt liabilities and non-reserve foreign assets. The pat-
tern that country size is positively associated with a higher domestic-currency share in
foreign debt liabilities is consistent with the evidence of Eichengreen et al (2005), who …nd
that original sin is more prevalent for smaller countries.
       Turning to the …xed-e¤ects estimates in Table 7, the positive association between the
covariance term and F X AGG in column (1) cannot be traced to individual components in
columns (2)-(8): although it carries the expected sign for each component (with the excep-
tion of the domestic-currency share in non-reserve foreign assets), none of these e¤ects are
individually signi…cant. In results not reported, we also ran the …rst-di¤erence speci…cation
as in column (8) of Table 4 and found that the covariance term has a positive coe¢ cient
in regressions for both the net foreign asset position and F X AGG;0 but it is larger and
statistically signi…cant in the latter case.
       The pattern for the EMU dummy is very similar to the pooled estimates, with the
exception that it is not signi…cant for the equity share in foreign liabilities once country …xed
e¤ects are introduced. The positive time-series association between population growth and
F X AGG in column (1) is shown to operate via both the reserve and non-reserve components
of the net foreign asset position but does not a¤ect F X AGG;0 or its subcomponents.
       With regard to the variables that are not individually signi…cant in the F X AGG regres-
sion in column (1), several turn out to be signi…cant in regressions for particular subcompo-
  19
       In di¤erent speci…cations, Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001) and Faria et al (2007) also show that trade
openness is positively associated with the equity share in foreign liabilities.


                                                      24
nents. While the pattern of time-series results for trade openness are qualitatively similar
to the pooled estimates, di¤erent patterns obtain for the capital controls and exchange rate
peg variables. In particular, capital account liberalization is associated with an increase in
the net foreign asset position but an o¤setting decline in F X AGG;0 , while moving from a
‡oat to a peg is associated with an increase in F X AGG;0 .
    Finally, column (9) in Tables 6 and 7 report the regression results in explaining N ET F X.
The N ET F X estimates are broadly similar to those for F X AGG but with some exceptions.
In particular, the volatility and covariance terms do not show up as signi…cant in the
pooled estimates for N ET F X, while country size is signi…cant. Along the time series di-
mension, only the volatility of GDP is individually signi…cant for N ET F X but it was not
for F X AGG .


6    Summary of Stylized Facts
Our empirical analysis provides a number of stylized facts regarding the foreign currency
exposure of the external balance sheet. From the decompositions, we learn a number
of important facts. First, the net foreign asset position of a country is the critical driving
component of its aggregate foreign currency exposure. Beyond that, the non-reserve portion
of the balance sheet seems to determine the NFA position with the exception of some
developing countries. Within the currency composition, the leading factor is the equity
share of liabilities. Less than being able to issue debt in one’s currency, it is the share of
liabilities that are in equity and FDI that determines the currency position.
    The panel analysis of F X AGG also provides interesting insights. Richer countries that
trade more are more likely to be long in foreign currency, while euro area countries are
(controlling for other factors) more likely to be short foreign currency. In the time series,
some key …ndings include an observed increase in the propensity to depreciate during bad
times associated with a longer foreign currency position, while an increase in exchange rate
volatility is associated with a move to a shorter position.


7    Conclusions
Advances in the theoretical modelling of optimal portfolio allocations have enriched our un-
derstanding of the potential risk sharing across countries but also raised questions regarding
how country portfolios are actually structured. This paper builds on the data set developed
Lane and Shambaugh (2009) in order to generate a new set of stylized facts regarding the


                                              25
determinants of the aggregate foreign currency exposure embedded in external positions.
In addition, our regression analysis reveals some covariation patterns in the data that may
be helpful in evaluating this new set of models.
   We believe the project generates a number of stylized facts that are both important in
their own right and also of interest to the growing theoretical literature. We highlight that
the net foreign asset position plays a key role in determining aggregate foreign-currency
exposure: looking only at the currency composition of foreign assets and foreign liabilities
misses the fact that the dominant factor for many countries is simply the net balance be-
tween foreign assets and foreign liabilities. Still, composition plays a role but the equity
share in foreign liabilities is quantitatively more important than whether foreign debt lia-
bilities are denominated in domestic currency or foreign currency. Moreover, the pattern
is that many of those countries that issue domestic-currency foreign debt liabilities are
also signi…cant holders of domestic-currency foreign assets, such that the net impact on
aggregate foreign currency exposure is limited.
   In our pooled regression analysis with year …xed e¤ects, we …nd that country character-
istics such as trade openness and GDP per capita are helpful in explaining the cross-country
variation in F X AGG . However, there is considerable unexplained variation along the cross-
sectional dimension, which may help explain why the volatility and covariance measures
suggested in the theoretical literature are either weak or incorrectly signed. Once we elimi-
nate the cross-sectional variation by including country …xed e¤ects, we obtain more support
for the theoretical priors. Most notably, we …nd that an increase in the propensity for a cur-
rency to depreciate during bad times is associated with a more positive value for F X AGG ,
such that a long position in foreign currencies helps to hedge against domestic output ‡uc-
tuations. Our …nal contribution is to show that there is substantial heterogeneity in the
roles of each regressor in explaining the variation in individual subcomponents of F X AGG .
Accordingly, in assessing hypotheses about the determinants of foreign-currency exposures,
it is important to take a broad perspective rather than examining individual components
in isolation.


Appendix
The 117 countries in the dataset are United States, United Kingdom, Austria, Belgium,
Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Canada,
Japan, Finland, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, Australia, New Zealand,
South Africa, Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic, El Sal-


                                             26
vador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Rep. Bol., Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago, Iran, Islamic Republic of, Israel, Jordan, Oman,
Syrian Arab Republic, Egypt, Yemen, Republic of, Bangladesh, Cambodia, Sri Lanka, Hong
Kong, India, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, Thai-
land, Vietnam, Algeria, Botswana, Cameroon, Chad, Congo, Republic of, Benin, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Côte d’Ivoire, Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali,
Morocco, Mozambique, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, Tanzania, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda,
Burkina Faso, Zambia, Fiji, Papua New Guinea, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Albania,
Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova, Russia, China,P.R.: Mainland, Turk-
menistan, Ukraine, Czech Republic, Slovak Republic, Estonia, Latvia, Hungary, Lithuania,
Croatia, Slovenia, Macedonia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Poland and Romania.


References
 [1] Adler, Michael and Bernard Dumas (1984), “Exposure to Currency Risk: De…nition
    and Measurement, ” Financial Management 13, 41-50.

 [2] Chinn, Menzie and Hiro Ito (2007), “A New Measure of Financial Openness,”Journal
    of Comparative Policy Analysis, forthcoming.

 [3] Coeurdacier, Nicolas, Kollman, Robert, and Martin, Philippe (2007), “International
    Portfolios with Supply, Demand and Redistributive Shocks,”NBER International Sem-
    inar on Macroeconomics (ISOM), forthcoming.

 [4] Davis, Steven, Jeremy Nalewaik and Paul Willen (2001), “On the Gains to Trade in
    Risky Financial Assets,” mimeo, University of Chicago.

 [5] Devereux, Michael B. and Alan Sutherland (2006), “Solving for Country Portfolios in
    Open-Economy Macro Models,” mimeo, University of British Columbia.

 [6] Di Giovanni, Julian, and Jay C. Shambaugh (2008), “The Impact of Foreign Interest
    Rates on the Economy: The Role of the Exchange Rate Regime,” Journal of Interna-
    tional Economics 74, 341-361.

 [7] Dominguez, Kathryn and Linda Tesar (2006), “Exchange Rate Exposure,” Journal of
    International Economics 68, 188-218.

 [8] Edwards, Sebastian (2007), “Capital Controls, Capital Flow Contractions, and Macro-
    economic Vulnerability,” Journal of International Money and Finance 26, 814-840.

                                           27
 [9] Eichengreen, Barry, Ricardo Hausmann and Ugo Panizza (2005), “The Mystery of
    Original Sin,”in Other People’s Money: Debt Denomination and Financial Instability
    in Emerging Market Economies (Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann, eds),
    University of Chicago Press.

[10] Engel, Charles and Akito Matsumoto (2008a), “The International Diversi…cation Puz-
    zle when Goods Prices are Sticky: It’s Really about Exchange-Rate Hedging, not
    Equity Portfolios,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.

[11] ___________ (2008b), “International Risk Sharing: Through Equity Diversi…ca-
    tion or Exchange-Rate Hedging?,” mimeo, University of Wisconsin and International
    Monetary Fund.

[12] Faria, Andre, Philip R. Lane, Paolo Mauro and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2007),
    “The Shifting Composition of External Liabilities,” Journal of European Economic
    Association 5, 480-490.

[13] Helpman, Elhanan and Assaf Razin (1982), “A Comparison of Exchange Rate Regimes
    in the Presence of Imperfect Capital Markets,” International Economic Review 23,
    365-388.

[14] Kim, Soyoung (2002), “Nominal Revaluation of Cross-Border Assets, Terms-of-Trade
    Changes, International Portfolio Diversi…cation, and International Risk Sharing,”
    Southern Economic Journal 69, 327-344.

[15] Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2001), “External Capital Structure:
    Theory and Evidence,” In The World’s New Financial Landscape: Challenges for
    Economic Policy (Horst Siebert, ed.), Springer-Verlag, 247-284.

[16] ___________ (2003), “International Financial Integration,” IMF Sta¤ Papers
    50(S), 82-113.

[17] ___________ (2005), “Financial Globalization and Exchange Rates,”CEPR Dis-
    cussion Paper No.4745.

[18] ___________(2007a), “Europe and Global Imbalances,” Economic Policy 22,
    519-573.

[19] ___________(2007b), “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II,” Journal of
    International Economics 73, 223-250.

                                           28
[20] Lane, Philip R. and Jay C. Shambaugh (2009), “Financial Exchange Rates and Inter-
    national Currency Exposures,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

[21] Neumeyer, Pablo Andres (1998), “Currencies and the Allocation of Risk: The Welfare
    E¤ects of a Monetary Union,” American Economic Review 88, 246-259.

[22] Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth S. Rogo¤ (2001), “The Six Major Puzzles in Interna-
    tional Macroeconomics: Is there a Common Cause?,”NBER Macroeconomics Annual
    15, 339-390.

[23] Persson, Torsten and Lars E. O. Svensson (1989), “Exchange Rate Variability and
    Asset Trade,” Journal of Monetary Economics 23, 485-509.

[24] Shambaugh, Jay C. (2004), “The E¤ect of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy,”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 301-352.

[25] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1989), “Trade in Nominal Assets: Monetary Policy, and Price
    Level and Exchange Rate Risk,” Journal of International Economics 26, 1-28.

[26] Tille, Cedric (2003), “The Impact of Exchange Rate Movements on U.S. Foreign Debt,”
    Current Issues in Economics and Finance 9(1).

[27] ________ (2005), “Financial Integration and the Wealth E¤ect of Exchange Rate
    Fluctuations,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Sta¤ Report No. 226.

[28] Tille, Cedric and Eric van Wincoop (2007), “International Capital Flows,” NBER
    Working Paper No. 12856.




                                          29
                    Table 1: Aggregate Foreign Currency Exposure




                                                      1994              2004

                                         mean     median        mean      median


                                                  F X agg

                 All                     -0.23    -0.24         -0.03     -0.01
                 Advanced                0.04     0.08          0.12      0.09
                 Developing & Emerging   -0.30    -0.41         -0.07     -0.09
                 Developing              -0.41    -0.47         -0.14     -0.19
                 Emerging                -0.10    -0.06         0.06      0.06

                                                  F XDEBT agg

                 All                     -0.33    -0.39         -0.12     -0.12
                 Advanced                -0.12    -0.05         -0.07     -0.04
                 Developing & Emerging   -0.38    -0.51         -0.13     -0.16
                 Developing              -0.50    -0.57         -0.19     -0.25
                 Emerging                -0.17    -0.17         -0.01     -0.06



                                                  N ET F X

                 All                     -0.31    -0.24         0.18      -0.002
                 Advanced                0.18     0.08          0.54      0.42
                 Developing & Emerging   -0.44    -0.33         0.07      -0.10
                 Developing              -0.71    -0.58         -0.16     -0.16
                 Emerging                0.05     -0.03         0.44      0.06




Note: F X AGG = ! A sA     ! L sL ; N ET F X = F X AGG          IF I. Sample includes the 102
countries with data from 1994 to 2004. Source: Lane and Shambaugh (2007).




                                                 30
          Table 2: Foreign Currency Exposure (F X AGG ) and Subcomponents



         Variable                  Mean         Std. Dev.   Min     Max    Median


         F X AGG                   -0.03        0.27        -0.72   0.66   -0.03
         (A L)=(A + L)             -0.28        0.28        -0.87   0.55   -0.30
         F X AGG;0                 0.25         0.14        -0.03   0.87   0.23
         (AN R L)=(A + L)          -0.40        0.26        -0.90   0.14   -0.46
         F XR=(A + L)              0.12         0.10        0.00    0.55   0.11
         (P EQL + F DIL)=(A + L)   0.25         0.13        0.03    0.87   0.22
         DEBT LDC =(A + L)         0.03         0.09        0.00    0.45   0.00
         ADC
           N R =(A + L)            -0.03        0.09        -0.42   0.00   0.00
         N ET F X                  0.15         0.87        -0.75   6.25   -0.02
         FXDEBT AGG                -0.12        0.32        -0.85   0.66   -0.12



Summary statistics for 2004.




                                           31
   Table 3: Variance Decomposition of Foreign Currency Exposure: Pooled Analysis




            (F X AGG ; IF I)    (N F A; F X AGG;0 )   (N F AN R ; F XR)   (EQSHL ; DCSHARE)   (DCDEBTL ; ADC
                                                                                                          NR)


 ALL        (0.56,0.34,0.28)    (0.83,0.11,-0.10)     (0.91,0.14,0.08)    (0.94,0.08,0.04)    (0.01,0.16,-0.87)
 ADV        (0.47,0.53,0.29)    (0.65,0.03,-0.43)     (0.97,0.02,-0.33)   (0.66,0.47,0.13)    (0.01,0.30,-0.79)
 EMU        (0.45,0.62,0.25)    (0.37,0.12,-0.53)     (0.92,0.10,-0.58)   (0.40,0.48,-0.12)   (0.00,0.38,-0.76)
 NON-EMU    (0.47,0.76,0.41)    (0.75,0.01,-0.40)     (0.99,0.00,-0.19)   (0.87,0.50,0.41)    (0.36,0.00,-0.78)
 EM         (0.37,0.82,0.43)    (0.86,0.23,0.12)      (0.93,0.05,-0.04)   (1.00,0.02,0.12)    (0.48,0.04,-0.84)
 DEV        (0.65,0.41,-0.21)   (0.76,0.15,-0.11)     (0.92,0.66,0.62)    (1.00,0.00,-0.03)   (1.00,0.00,)


                    2 ; R2 ; [N 1; N 2]) where Q = N 1 + N 2 and R2 denotes the R2 from
Each cell reports (RN 1  N2                                       N1
                           2 denotes the R2 from a regression of Q on N 2, and [N 1; N 2]
a regression of Q on N 1, RN 1
is the correlation between N 1 and N 2. Pooled data over 1994 to 2004.




                                                      32
                      Table 4: Determinants of F X AGG : Panel Estimation

                     (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
                     YFE        YFE        YFE        YFE        CFE,YFE    CFE,YFE


  Trade              0.16       0.10       0.10       0.10       0.00       0.03       0.01       0.05
                     (0.04)**   (0.03)**   (0.03)**   (0.03)**   (0.07)     (0.06)     (0.10)     (0.09)
  V ol(GDP )         -0.79      0.21       0.68       0.65       0.10       -0.21      0.00       -0.49
                     (0.85)     (0.37)     (0.37)+    (0.36)+    (0.61)     (0.61)     (0.74)     (0.82)
  Cov(GDP; E)        3.68       0.24       -1.42      -1.66      5.30       5.82       6.30       9.07
                     (1.79)*    (1.44)     (1.30)     (1.26)     (3.39)     (3.55)     (2.06)**   (4.53)*
  V ol( )            0.22       -0.13      -0.20      -0.26      0.77       0.61       0.91       0.76
                     (0.24)     (0.21)     (0.17)     (0.17)     (0.37)*    (0.36)+    (0.40)*    (0.44)+
  V ol(E)            -1.69      0.19       0.48       0.49       -1.39      -1.04      -1.77      -1.64
                     (0.59)**   (0.50)     (0.47)     (0.44)     (0.72)+    (0.75)     (0.49)**   (0.77)*
  Institutions                  0.17                  0.00                  0.03                  0.06
                                (0.03)**              (0.05)                (0.06)                (0.09)
  Capital controls              -0.05                 -0.02                 0.04                  0.04
                                (0.05)                (0.04)                (0.04)                (0.05)
  Peg                           -0.08                 -0.03                 0.03                  0.06
                                (0.03)*               (0.03)                (0.03)                (0.04)
  EMU                           -0.06                 -0.14                 -0.13                 -0.17
                                (0.05)                (0.04)**              (0.04)**              (0.04)**
  GDP per capita                           0.13       0.13                  0.15                  0.02
                                           (0.01)**   (0.02)**              (0.10)                (0.14)
  POP                                      0.03       0.03                  0.64                  0.62
                                           (0.02)     (0.02)                (0.27)*               (0.29)*
  y2000              0.05       0.06       0.05       0.07       0.07       0.03
                     (0.02)**   (0.02)**   (0.01)**   (0.01)**   (0.01)**   (0.02)
  y2004              0.12       0.16       0.13       0.14       0.15       0.08
                     (0.02)**   (0.02)**   (0.02)**   (0.02)**   (0.02)**   (0.04)+
  Constant           -0.20      -0.25      -1.34      -1.33      -0.18      -3.02      0.15       0.10
                     (0.06)**   (0.05)**   (0.11)**   (0.21)**   (0.06)**   (1.20)*    (0.02)**   (0.05)*

  Obs.               306        306        306        306        306        306        99         98
  R2                 0.19       0.44       0.56       0.58       0.91       0.92       0.07       0.23




Standard errors clustered at the country level in parentheses. + signi…cant at 10%; *
signi…cant at 5%; ** signi…cant at 1% .




                                                      33
                               Table 5: Determinants of F XDEBT AGG .

                        (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)            (5)        (6)
                        F X AGG     F X agg Debt   F X AGG    F X agg Debt   F X AGG    F X agg Debt
                        YFE         YFE            CFE, YFE   CFE, YFE


     Trade              0.10        0.15           0.03       0.00           0.05       0.05
                        (0.03)**    (0.04)**       (0.06)     (0.09)         (0.09)     (0.13)
     V ol(GDP )         0.65        0.87           -0.21      -0.08          -0.49      -0.28
                        (0.36)+     (0.50)+        (0.61)     (0.78)         (0.82)     (1.05)
     Cov(GDP; E)        -1.66       -1.35          5.82       8.53           9.07       12.29
                        (1.26)      (1.87)         (3.55)     (4.81)+        (4.53)*    (6.09)*
     V ol( )            -0.26       -0.23          0.61       1.07           0.76       1.42
                        (0.17)      (0.23)         (0.36)+    (0.47)*        (0.44)+    (0.60)*
     V ol(E)            0.49        0.22           -1.04      -1.64          -1.64      -2.53
                        (0.44)      (0.52)         (0.75)     (0.92)+        (0.77)*    (0.95)**
     Institutions       0.00        -0.07          0.03       0.00           0.06       0.04
                        (0.05)      (0.06)         (0.06)     (0.07)         (0.09)     (0.11)
     Capital controls   -0.02       -0.02          0.04       0.07           0.04       0.08
                        (0.04)      (0.06)         (0.04)     (0.05)         (0.05)     (0.07)
     Peg                -0.03       -0.04          0.03       0.01           0.06       0.06
                        (0.03)      (0.04)         (0.03)     (0.04)         (0.04)     (0.06)
     EMU                -0.14       -0.07          -0.13      -0.12          -0.17      -0.16
                        (0.04)**    (0.06)         (0.04)**   (0.04)**       (0.04)**   (0.05)**
     GDP per capita     0.13        0.14           0.15       0.15           0.02       0.00
                        (0.02)**    (0.03)**       (0.10)     (0.15)         (0.14)     (0.21)
     POP                0.03        0.02           0.64       0.64           0.62       0.61
                        (0.02)      (0.03)         (0.27)*    (0.31)*        (0.29)*    (0.35)+
     y2000              0.07        0.04           0.03       0.02
                        (0.01)**    (0.02)+        (0.02)     (0.03)
     y2004              0.14        0.12           0.08       0.09
                        (0.02)**    (0.03)**       (0.04)+    (0.05)+
     Constant           -1.33       -1.50          -3.02      -3.15          0.10       0.12
                        (0.21)**    (0.27)**       (1.20)*    (1.60)+        (0.05)*    (0.07)+

     Obs.               306         306            306        306            98         98
     R2                 0.58        0.4            0.92       0.9            0.23       0.19



Robust standard errors in parentheses. + signi…cant at 10%; * signi…cant at 5%; ** signif-
icant at 1% .




                                                     34
                    Table 6: Determinants of Subcomponents: Pooled Estimates



                     (1)        (2)        (3)             (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)
                     F X AGG    NF A       F X AGG;zero    AN R   L   F XR       EQSHL      DCDL        DCN RA      N ET F X


 Trade               0.10       0.05       0.05            0.03       0.02       0.06       -0.02       0.01        0.85
                     (0.03)**   (0.03)     (0.02)+         (0.03)     (0.01)     (0.03)*    (0.01)**    (0.01)      (0.29)**
 V ol(GDP )          0.65       0.53       0.13            0.41       0.12       0.12       0.07        -0.06       1.09
                     (0.36)+    (0.37)     (0.18)          (0.28)     (0.15)     (0.17)     (0.05)      (0.03)+     (1.01)
 Cov(GDP; E)         -1.66      -2.23      0.57            -2.77      0.54       0.62       -0.48       0.43        -3.18
                     (1.26)     (1.62)     (1.09)          (1.48)+    (0.62)     (1.08)     (0.26)+     (0.20)*     (3.75)
 V ol( )             -0.26      -0.30      0.04            -0.32      0.02       0.05       -0.04       0.03        -0.38
                     (0.17)     (0.23)     (0.15)          (0.20)     (0.07)     (0.15)     (0.03)      (0.02)      (0.45)
 V ol(E)             0.49       0.37       0.12            0.48       -0.10      0.13       0.01        -0.02       0.93
                     (0.44)     (0.61)     (0.39)          (0.53)     (0.17)     (0.38)     (0.04)      (0.03)      (1.14)
 Institutions        0.00       0.00       0.00            0.01       -0.02      0.00       0.01        0.00        0.09
                     (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.02)          (0.04)     (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.11)
 Capital controls    -0.02      -0.01      -0.01           -0.03      0.02       -0.01      -0.02       0.02        -0.11
                     (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.02)          (0.04)     (0.01)     (0.02)     (0.01)**    (0.01)**    (0.10)
 Peg                 -0.03      -0.03      0.00            -0.01      -0.02      0.00       0.01        0.00        0.05
                     (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.02)          (0.02)     (0.01)     (0.02)     (0.004)+    (0.003)     (0.10)
 EMU                 -0.14      -0.01      -0.13           0.06       -0.07      -0.06      0.18        -0.25       -0.42
                     (0.04)**   (0.04)     (0.05)**        (0.04)     (0.02)**   (0.03)*    (0.03)**    (0.03)**    (0.20)*
 GDP per capita      0.13       0.12       0.01            0.12       0.00       0.01       0.01        -0.01       0.20
                     (0.03)**   (0.03)**   (0.01)          (0.02)**   (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.003)*    (0.003)*    (0.05)**
 POP                 0.03       0.02       0.00            0.03       0.00       0.00       0.01        -0.01       0.13
                     (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.01)          (0.01)+    (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.004)*    (0.003)**   (0.05)**
 y2000               0.07       0.02       0.05            0.02       0.01       0.05       -0.01       0.01        0.07
                     (0.01)**   (0.01)     (0.01)**        (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)**   (0.003)**   (0.003)**   (0.04)+
 y2004               0.14       0.06       0.07            0.04       0.02       0.07       0.00        0.01        0.18
                     (0.02)**   (0.02)**   (0.01)**        (0.02)*    (0.01)**   (0.01)**   (0.003)     (0.003)*    (0.06)**
 Constant            -1.33      -1.38      0.05            -1.45      0.07       0.05       -0.04       0.04        -2.70
                     (0.21)**   (0.23)**   (0.09)          (0.17)**   (0.09)     (0.09)     (0.03)      (0.02)*     (0.61)**

 Obs.                306        306        306             306        306        306        306         306         300
 R2                  0.58       0.5        0.17            0.64       0.15       0.17       0.77        0.86        0.57




Standard errors clustered at the country level in parentheses. + signi…cant at 10%; *
signi…cant at 5%; ** signi…cant at 1% .




                                                      35
                Table 7: Determinants of Subcomponents: Fixed-E¤ects Estimates



                    (1)        (2)       (3)             (4)           (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)        (9)
                    F X AGG    NF A      F X AGG;zero    AN R      L   F XR       EQSHL     DCDL       DCN RA     N ET F X


 Trade              0.03       -0.02     0.05            -0.02         -0.01      0.07      -0.02      0.00       0.54
                    (0.06)     (0.07)    (0.05)          (0.06)        (0.02)     (0.04)    (0.01)*    (0.009)    (0.45)
 V ol(GDP )         -0.21      -0.16     -0.05           0.18          -0.34      -0.08     0.03       0.00       2.77
                    (0.61)     (0.62)    (0.32)          (0.57)        (0.36)     (0.33)    (0.05)     (0.03)     (1.40)+
 Cov(GDP; E)        5.82       3.50      2.31            2.38          1.12       1.82      0.36       0.14       2.28
                    (3.55)     (2.89)    (1.91)          (2.54)        (1.22)     (1.93)    (0.44)     (0.20)     (10.03)
 V ol( )            0.61       0.74      -0.13           0.41          0.33       -0.20     0.06       0.01       1.19
                    (0.36)+    (0.33)*   (0.19)          (0.26)        (0.11)**   (0.18)    (0.04)     (0.02)     (1.03)
 V ol(E)            -1.04      -0.71     -0.33           -0.40         -0.32      -0.23     -0.06      -0.05      -0.13
                    (0.75)     (0.56)    (0.36)          (0.45)        (0.20)     (0.34)    (0.05)     (0.03)     (1.40)
 Institutions       0.03       -0.01     0.04            -0.03         0.02       0.03      0.00       0.01       -0.08
                    (0.06)     (0.06)    (0.03)          (0.05)        (0.02)     (0.03)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.09)
 Capital controls   0.04       0.08      -0.04           0.06          0.02       -0.03     -0.01      0.00       0.03
                    (0.04)     (0.04)*   (0.02)*         (0.03)+       (0.01)+    (0.02)    (0.01)     (0.002)    (0.07)
 Peg                0.03       -0.02     0.05            -0.02         0.01       0.03      0.01       0.01       0.07
                    (0.03)     (0.03)    (0.02)**        (0.02)        (0.02)     (0.01)*   (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.09)
 EMU                -0.13      -0.04     -0.10           0.00          -0.04      -0.04     0.16       -0.21      -0.17
                    (0.04)**   (0.03)    (0.03)**        (0.03)        (0.01)**   (0.02)+   (0.02)**   (0.02)**   (0.12)
 GDP per capita     0.15       0.15      0.00            0.13          0.02       0.03      -0.02      -0.01      0.08
                    (0.11)     (0.13)    (0.10)          (0.11)        (0.05)     (0.09)    (0.01)+    (0.02)     (0.27)
 POP                0.64       0.59      0.06            0.36          0.22       0.09      -0.04      0.01       0.72
                    (0.27)*    (0.27)*   (0.17)          (0.24)        (0.08)**   (0.16)    (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.56)
 y2000              0.03       -0.01     0.04            0.01          -0.01      0.03      0.00       0.00       0.06
                    (0.02)     (0.03)    (0.02)+         (0.02)        (0.01)     (0.02)+   (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.06)
 y2004              0.08       0.02      0.06            0.02          0.00       0.05      0.02       0.00       0.18
                    (0.04)+    (0.05)    (0.04)          (0.04)        (0.02)     (0.03)    (0.01)*    (0.01)     (0.10)+
 Constant           -3.02      -3.04     0.01            -2.41         -0.62      -0.31     0.31       0.01       -3.30
                    (1.20)*    (1.48)*   (1.12)          (1.26)+       (0.49)     (1.03)    (0.16)+    (0.21)     (3.01)

 Obs.               306        306       306             306           306        306       306        306        300
 R2                 0.92       0.92      0.87            0.94          0.85       0.87      0.95       0.97       0.93




Standard errors clustered at the country level in parentheses. + signi…cant at 10%; *
signi…cant at 5%; ** signi…cant at 1% .




                                                        36
                                             1
           R2(FXAGG=a+bNFA)

           R2(FXAGG=a+bNFAzero)             0.9

           CORR(FXAGG,FXAGGzero)
                                            0.8


                                            0.7


                                            0.6


                                            0.5


                                            0.4


                                            0.3


                                            0.2


                                            0.1


                                             0
    -1.0      -0.8   -0.6     -0.4   -0.2         0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0



Figure 1: Decomposition F X AGG = N F A + F X AGG;0 . Cross-country distribution of
statistics.




                                              37
                                           1.0
           R2(NFA=a+bNFAnr)

           R2(NFA=a+bFXR)                  0.9

           CORR(NFAnr,FXR)
                                           0.8


                                           0.7


                                           0.6


                                           0.5


                                           0.4


                                           0.3


                                           0.2


                                           0.1


                                           0.0
    -1.0    -0.8    -0.6     -0.4   -0.2         0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8    1.0



Figure 2: Decomposition of N F A = N F AN R + F XR. Cross-country distribution of sta-
tistics.




                                             38
                                            1.0
           R2(FXAGGzero=a+bEQSH_L)

           R2(FXAGGzero=a+bDCSHARE)         0.9

           CORR(EQSH_L,DCSHARE)
                                            0.8


                                            0.7


                                            0.6


                                            0.5


                                            0.4


                                            0.3


                                            0.2


                                            0.1


                                            0.0
    -1.0     -0.8   -0.6    -0.4     -0.2         0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0



Figure 3: Decomposition F X AGG;0 = EQSHL + DCSHARE. Cross-country distribution
of statistics.




                                              39
                                         1.0
        R2(DCSHARE=a+bDCSH_L)

        R2(DCSHARE=a+bDCSH_Anr)          0.9

        CORR(DCSH_L,DCSH_Anr)
                                         0.8


                                         0.7


                                         0.6


                                         0.5


                                         0.4


                                         0.3


                                         0.2


                                         0.1


                                         0.0
    -1.0     -0.8   -0.6   -0.4   -0.2         0.0   0.2     0.4     0.6     0.8     1.0



Figure 4: Decomposition of DCSHARE = DEBT LDC              ADC
                                                            N R . Cross-country distribution
of statistics.




                                           40
                                                1
              R2(NETFX=a+bFXAGG)

              R2(NETFX=a+bIFI)                 0.9

              CORR(FXAGG, IFI)
                                               0.8


                                               0.7


                                               0.6


                                               0.5


                                               0.4


                                               0.3


                                               0.2


                                               0.1


                                                0
    -1.0       -0.8    -0.6      -0.4   -0.2         0.0   0.2   0.4     0.6     0.8     1.0



Figure 5: Decomposition of N ET F X = F X AGG               IF I. Cross-country distribution of
statistics.




                                                 41
         1      .5
 e( fxaggch | X )
0        -.5




                     -.015             -.01           -.005          0            .005           .01
                                              e( dcov_rgdpch_neer15yrwindow | X )
                      coef = 9.0669039, (robust) se = 4.5280835, t = 2




Figure 6: Scatter of Partial Relation between                            COV (GDP; N EER) and   F X AGG .




                                                                   42
