NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RISK SHIFTING AND MUTUAL FUND PERFORMANCE
Jennifer Huang
Clemens Sialm
Hanjiang Zhang
Working Paper 14903
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14903

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2009

We thank Keith Brown, Jie Cao, Joe Chen, Jonathan Cohn, Ken French, W. Van Harlow, Marcin Kacperczyk,
Sheridan Titman, Stefan Ruenzi, Pablo Ruiz-Verdu, Richard Stanton, and seminar participants at Georgia
State University and the University of Texas at Austin for helpful comments and discussions. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Jennifer Huang, Clemens Sialm, and Hanjiang Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Risk Shifting and Mutual Fund Performance
Jennifer Huang, Clemens Sialm, and Hanjiang Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 14903
April 2009
JEL No. G11,G12,G23
ABSTRACT
Mutual funds change their risk levels significantly over time. This paper investigates the performance
consequences of risk shifting, as well as the economic motivations and the mechanisms of risk shifting.
Using a holdings-based measure of risk shifting, we find that funds that increase risk perform worse
than funds that keep stable risk levels over time. In addition, funds that expect higher benefits from
risk shifting are more likely to increase risk and perform particularly poorly after increasing risk. Our
results are consistent with the notion that agency problems, rather than the ability to take advantage
of changing investment opportunities, are the likely motivation behind risk shifting behavior.

Jennifer Huang
University of Texas at Austin
McCombs School of Business
1 University Station; B6600
Austin, TX 78712
jennifer.huang@mccombs.utexas.edu
Clemens Sialm
University of Texas at Austin
McCombs School of Business
1 University Station; B6600
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
clemens.sialm@mccombs.utexas.edu

Hanjiang Zhang
University of Texas at Austin
McCombs School of Business
1 University Station; B6600
Austin, TX 78712
hanjiang.zhang@mccombs.utexas.edu

1

Introduction

Mutual funds change their total risk exposure substantially over time. Using the disclosed
holdings of a sample of 2,335 U.S. equity funds over the period between 1980 and 2006, we
document that 27.1% of equity mutual funds change their annualized volatility by more than
2.5% in a given quarter, and 9.6% of funds change their volatility by more than 5%. These
changes are significant given that their average long-term volatility level is only 17.9%. Our
paper studies whether funds that shift risk exhibit different subsequent performance compared
to funds with more consistent risk levels. We further investigate the economic motivations
behind risk shifting and the mechanisms through which risk shifters add or destroy value.
Mutual funds change their risk levels for two potential reasons, which have different performance consequences. First, the literature on delegated portfolio management has identified
a potential agency conflict between mutual fund companies and their investors. Whereas
fund investors would like their mutual funds to maximize risk-adjusted returns, mutual fund
companies would like to maximize their profits. Since their profits depend primarily on the
amount of assets under management, mutual funds might have incentives to follow investment
policies that generate money inflows even if these policies reduce the risk-adjusted returns to
their investors. For example, Brown, Harlow, and Starks (1996) and Chevalier and Ellison
(1997) suggest that mutual fund companies strategically change their risk levels to attract
additional fund inflows due to the convex flow-performance relation.1 If agency problems are
the main cause behind risk shifting, then we should not expect superior performance for risk
shifting funds. To the extent that opportunistic risk shifting causes trading costs, constrains
the investment opportunity sets, and distracts fund managers from their goal of investing in
the most promising securities, we should expect risk shifters to perform worse.
The second reason funds change their risk levels is that fund managers might actively adjust
the composition of their portfolios to capitalize on time-varying investment opportunities. If
1
Additional papers on the flow-performance relation include Ippolito (1992), Goetzmann and Peles (1997),
Sirri and Tufano (1998), Zheng (1999), DelGuercio and Tkac (2002), Lynch and Musto (2003), Nanda, Wang,
and Zheng (2004), Huang, Wei, and Yan (2007), and Ivkovich and Weisbenner (2009).

1

funds that actively shift risk have superior investment abilities, then they should perform
better than funds that have more stable risk exposures. If, on the other hand, funds with
inferior investment abilities are more prone to shift risk (because, for example, they erroneously
believe that they have timing ability or lack the confidence to maintain a stable trading
strategy), then funds that shift risk should perform worse.
To measure risk shifting of mutual funds, we propose a holdings-based measure that is
defined as the difference between a fund’s current holdings volatility and its past realized
volatility. The current holdings volatility is the standard deviation of the most recently disclosed fund holdings, and the past realized volatility is the standard deviation of the fund’s
actual return. A fund has a positive risk shifting measure if the most recently disclosed
holdings are riskier than the actual fund holdings.
We sort mutual funds into portfolios according to their most recent risk shifting measure
and compare their subsequent performance. We find that funds that increase risk the most
perform significantly worse (with an annualized abnormal return of -2.6% using the Carhart
model) than funds that maintain stable risk levels (with an abnormal return of -0.7%). These
results are robust using alternative performance measures. The poor performance of risk
shifters suggests that they are unlikely to possess superior ability. Instead, risk shifting behavior is either an indication of inferior ability or is motivated by agency problems in delegated
portfolio management.
To investigate the potential role of agency problems in risk shifting behavior, we ask
whether the propensity to shift risk and the performance consequences of risk shifting differ
across funds with different benefits of risk shifting. The expected profit of a mutual fund
increases with both the expense ratio and the assets under management. Thus, funds with
higher expense ratios have more to gain from shifting risk. In addition, the literature has
identified younger, smaller funds, and funds that belong to smaller fund families as having
a more sensitive flow-performance relation. Hence, these funds also enjoy larger expected
benefits of risk shifting. Based on these characteristics, we separate funds into subgroups and

2

find that funds with larger benefits of risk shifting are more likely to shift risk and perform
particularly poorly after shifting risk. For example, 14.7% of funds with above-median expense
ratios increase their volatility by more than 2.5% and experience a Carhart alpha of -2.9% per
year, whereas only 10.5% of funds with below-median expense ratios increase their volatility
by the same amount and experience a Carhart alpha of -1.2%. Similarly, younger, smaller
funds and funds that belong to smaller fund families are more likely to shift risk and experience
more severe performance consequences when they shift risk.
To understand the sources of the poor performance of risk shifters, we study the various
mechanisms through which funds can change risk: First, funds can shift risk by changing the
composition between equity holdings and cash holdings. Second, within their equity holdings,
funds can shift risk by changing their exposure to systematic risk (e.g., by switching between
low beta stocks and high beta stocks). Third, funds can shift risk by changing their exposure
to idiosyncratic risk (e.g., by concentrating the holdings on a few positions or industries).
We find evidence that all of these mechanisms are important in explaining the risk shifting
behavior of mutual funds. In contrast, the performance consequences are significant mainly for
funds increasing idiosyncratic risk exposure, whereas both the reduction in cash holdings and
the increase in systematic risk lead to only mild reductions in fund performance. Thus, the
poor performance of risk shifters is driven not by the unsuccessful attempts of fund managers
to time the aggregate market but by their desire to take on idiosyncratic risks. We also
sort funds into subgroups with different turnover to study the impact of transaction costs.
Surprisingly, the poor performance of risk shifters is concentrated in low turnover funds. To
the extent that turnover is a proxy for trading costs, our finding suggests that direct trading
costs are unlikely the main driver of risk shifters’ poor performance.
Several studies have identified a convex flow-performance relation, in which mutual fund investors tend to invest in funds with stellar performance and do not penalize poor performance
equivalently. This convex flow-performance relation motivates mutual funds to strategically
shift risk levels to attract additional fund flows. For example, Brown, Harlow, and Starks

3

(1996) suggest that mutual funds compete with each other in a tournament and might manipulate fund risk depending on their prior performance. In particular, they show that funds
with poor past performance tend to increase their risk levels. Chevalier and Ellison (1997)
analyze the convex flow-performance relation and find evidence that mutual funds that are
well ahead of their peers also have an incentive to increase risk to make lists of “top performers.” Koski and Pontiff (1999) confirm this risk shifting behavior and suggest that risk
levels of mutual funds might also change in response to unpredictable fund flows. Furthermore, as discussed by Goetzmann, Ingersoll, Spiegel, and Welch (2007), fund managers have
an incentive to change risk levels to manipulate their performance numbers. Recently, several
theoretical and empirical studies have improved our understanding of risk shifting behavior
of mutual funds.2 Our paper contributes to this literature by investigating the consequences
of risk shifting on fund performance, which have not previously been analyzed. Studying the
performance consequences of risk shifting gives us important insights into the motivations for
risk shifting.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 derives our holdingsbased measure of risk shifting. Section 3 explains the data sources and gives some basic
summary statistics. Section 4 describes the characteristics of risk shifters and the mechanisms
of shifting risk. Section 5 documents a negative relation between risk shifting and subsequent
fund performance. Sections 6 and 7 investigate the motivations behind risk shifting and the
sources of risk shifters’ poor performance. Section 8 uses a multivariate regression analysis to
control for additional fund characteristics and Section 9 concludes.
2

Additional papers on risk shifting include Starks (1987), Grinblatt and Titman (1989), Carpenter (2000),
Busse (2001), Elton, Gruber, and Blake (2003), Palomino and Prat (2003), Ross (2004), Elton, Gruber, Krasny,
and Ozelge (2006), Li and Tiwari (2006), Basak, Pavlova, and Shapiro (2007), Guasoni, Huberman, and Wang
(2007), Massa and Patgiri (2007), Kempf and Ruenzi (2008), Kempf, Ruenzi, and Thiele (2008), Hu, Kale,
Pagani, and Subramanian (2008), and Chen and Pennacchi (2009).

4

2

Risk Shifting Measure

Mutual funds can change the total risk of their portfolio by holding assets with different risk
properties or by changing the diversification level of their overall portfolio. To capture the
risk shifting behavior of mutual funds, we examine their portfolio holdings. We measure risk
shifting of a mutual fund f at time t by comparing the current holdings volatility based on
H
the fund’s most recently disclosed positions σf,t
with the past realized volatility based on the
R
fund’s realized returns σf,t
:
H
R
RSf,t = σf,t
− σf,t
.

(1)

The return of mutual fund f at time t is the scalar product of the portfolio weight wf ,t
and the returns of the assets Rt :
RFf,t = wf0 ,t Rt =

N
X

i
wf,t
Rti ,

(2)

i=1

where Rt = [Rt1 , . . . , RtN ]0 is the vector of the returns for all available assets and wf ,t =
1
N 0
[wf,t
, . . . , wf,t
] is the vector for the portfolio weights invested in these assets by fund f at time

t. The weights add up to one (wf0 ,t 1 =

PN

i=1

i
wf,t
= 1).

The variance of the returns of mutual fund f at time t depends on the weights invested in
the various assets and on the N × N variance-covariance matrix of the individual assets Σ.
The variance of a portfolio can be determined by either computing the variance of the portfolio
returns or by pre- and post-multiplying the variance-covariance matrix of the underlying stock
returns by the weight vector.
VAR(RFf,t ) = VAR(wf0 ,t Rt ) = wf0 ,t VAR(Rt )wf ,t = wf0 ,t Σt wf ,t .

(3)

To estimate the current holdings volatility of fund f at time t, we compute the square root
of VAR(RFf,t ) by estimating the sample standard deviation of the return of a hypothetical
portfolio that holds the most recently disclosed fund positions over the prior 36 months. This
method is equivalent to calculating the square root of wf0 ,t Σt wf ,t .
5

The past realized volatility of fund f at time t is estimated as the sample standard deviation of the actual fund returns over the prior 36 months. It captures the total risk of the
actual positions. The realized volatility is identical to the current holdings volatility if a fund
maintains constant portfolio weights over the prior 36 months.
The risk shifting measure RS is positive if the most recently disclosed holdings exhibit
a higher volatility than the actual fund holdings over the prior 36 months and is negative
otherwise. Thus, a positive risk shifting measure indicates that a mutual fund increases
the portfolio risk, which is achievable either by holding assets with higher risk levels or by
concentrating its portfolio more.
Most previous papers analyze risk shifting by comparing the standard deviations of the
returns of mutual funds over two non-overlapping time periods.3 Comparing risk levels of a
fund over two non-overlapping time periods may capture the exogenous changes in market
conditions rather than the intentional changes in portfolio risk, especially during periods of
dramatic market movements. By using identical time periods to estimate both the current
holdings volatility and the realized volatility for a fund, our measure of risk shifting is designed
to capture the changes in risk levels induced by changes in the portfolio composition and is
unaffected by changes in market conditions.
One potential concern of our risk shifting measure is that our measure might capture the
impact of interim trades, window dressing, or other unobserved actions, since the current
holdings volatility is based on disclosed holdings returns and the realized volatility is based
on realized fund returns. In Section 7, we introduce several alternative risk shifting measures,
one of which (the equity-based risk shifting measure) is based solely on disclosed holdings and
is defined as the difference between the volatility of current equity holdings and the volatility
of past equity holdings. The results are similar using these alternative measures.
3
See for example, Brown, Harlow, and Starks (1996), Koski and Pontiff (1999), Busse (2001), and Elton,
Gruber, and Blake (2003). On the other hand, Chevalier and Ellison (1997) and Kempf, Ruenzi, and Thiele
(2008) do use mutual fund holdings data to compute changes in risk levels.

6

3

Data and Summary Statistics

This section explains the data sources and describes the main characteristics of mutual funds
in our sample.

3.1

Sample Selection

For our empirical analysis, we merge the CRSP Survivorship Bias Free Mutual Fund Database
with the Thomson Financial CDA/Spectrum holdings database and the CRSP stock price
data using the MFLINKS file based on Wermers (2000) and available through the Wharton
Research Data Services. Our sample covers the time period between 1980 and 2006. The CRSP
mutual fund database includes information on fund returns, total assets under management,
different types of fees, investment objectives, and other fund characteristics. The Thomson
Financial database provides long positions in domestic common stock holdings of mutual
funds. The data are collected both from reports filed by mutual funds with the SEC and
from voluntary reports generated by the funds. During most of our sample period, funds
are required by law to disclose their holdings semi-annually. Nevertheless, about 78% of the
observations are from the most recent quarter and only 3% of the holdings are more than two
quarters old.
We focus our analysis on actively-managed domestic equity mutual funds for which the
holdings data are most complete and reliable. Therefore, we eliminate balanced, bond, money
market, international, and index funds.4 We also exclude funds which in the previous month
manage less than $5 million and funds that did not disclose their holdings in the previous 36
months. For funds with multiple share classes, we compute fund-level variables by aggregating
across the different share classes.5
4
First, we select funds with the following S&P objectives: AGG, GMC, GRI, GRO, ING, SCG, ENV, FIN,
GLD, HLT, NTR, RLE, SEC, TEC, UTI. If a fund does not have any of the above objectives, we select funds
with the following ICDI objectives: AG, GI, LG, IN, PM, SF or UT. If a fund has neither the S&P nor the
ICDI objective, then we go to the Wiesenberger Fund Type Code and pick funds with the following objectives:
G, G-I, IEQ, GCI, LTG, MCG, SCG, GPM, HLT, TCH, or UTL. If none of these objectives are available and
the fund has the CS or SPEC policy, then the fund will be included. Index funds are identified based on their
names.
5

Our sample focuses on actively-managed domestic equity mutual funds, for which the holdings data are

7

3.2

Summary Statistics

Table 1 reports summary statistics of the main fund attributes. Our sample includes 2,335
distinct funds and 184,519 fund-month observations with a valid risk shifting measure RS.
The number of funds ranges from 141 (April 1983) to 1,559 (October 2006). Since we need 36
months of prior fund return data to compute the risk shifting measure, we lose the first three
years of the return histories of all mutual funds. Thus, our final sample covers the period
between 1983 and 2006.
We report summary statistics on fund total net assets (T N A), age, expense ratio, turnover,
asset allocations, and net investor returns based on the CRSP mutual fund data. Based on
the CRSP data we compute the fund flow (F LOW ), which is defined as the growth rate of
the assets under management after adjusting for the appreciation of the mutual fund’s assets
(RFt ), assuming that all the cash flows are invested at the end of the period:
F LOWf,t =

T N Af,t − T N Af,t−1 (1 + RFf,t )
.
T N Af,t−1

(4)

Since estimated fund flows are very volatile, we winsorize both the top and the bottom parts
of the distribution at the 1% level.
The average investor return of mutual funds in our sample equals 0.83% per month. We
compute the gross holdings return based on the most recently disclosed quarter-end Thomson
equity holdings and the asset allocation weights from CRSP. The holdings database includes
only long positions in domestic common stocks and excludes other non-equity holdings. Since
we focus our analysis on equity mutual funds, these disclosed holdings compose the vast
majority of fund assets (91.28%), with the remaining assets invested in cash (6.26%) and
other non-equity holdings (2.46%) including bonds, preferred stocks, and other securities. We
proxy for these asset returns using published indices. For bonds and preferred stocks we use
the total return of the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index; for cash holdings and other
most complete and reliable. In unreported results we show that the results are slightly stronger if we include
all funds which are listed in the MFLINKS file that matches CRSP with Thomson. The results are not affected
substantially if we exclude sector funds or include index funds.

8

assets we use the Treasury bill rate. The gross holdings return has a mean of 0.91% per month
and a correlation of 95.5% with the net investor return across the mutual funds in our sample.
Important determinants of the risk level of a fund are the number of stocks and the
concentration of stocks in particular industries. The number of stocks is computed based
on the holdings information from Thomson Financial and the Industry Concentration Index
(ICI) is computed following Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2005) as the concentration of the
stock portfolio in ten broadly defined industries.6
Table 1 also summarizes holdings-based style characteristics for the mutual funds in our
sample. We group fund holdings according to their size, book-to-market, and momentum
characteristics as proposed by Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997) and Wermers
(2003). Each stock listed in CRSP is grouped into respective quintiles according to its market
value (using NYSE cutoff levels), its industry-adjusted book-to-market ratio, and its lagged
one-year return. Using the quintile information, we compute the value-weighted size, value,
and momentum scores for each mutual fund in each period. For example, a mutual fund that
invests one half of its value in stocks in the largest size quintile and the other half in stocks
in the second largest size quintile has a size score of 4.5. Mutual funds in our sample tend to
hold stocks in the largest size quintile and have a slight bias towards growth and momentum
stocks.
The last three rows of Table 1 report the current holdings volatility, the past realized
volatility, and the risk shifting measure, as defined in Section 2. To compute the current
holdings volatility, we exclude the holdings of stocks that do not have complete return histories
over the prior 36 months. Both the current holdings volatility and the realized volatility are
computed and updated at a quarterly frequency. The current holdings volatility and the
realized volatility have similar means (17.54% and 17.86% per year, respectively) and a high
P10
j
The Industry Concentration Index of fund f at time t is defined as ICIf,t = j=1 (wf,t
− wjf,t )2 , where
j
j
wf,t is the value weight of the stocks held by the mutual fund in the j-th industry and wf,t is the weight of the
CRSP total market portfolio corresponding to the j-th industry. Industry concentration is measured across
ten broadly defined industries as summarized in Table AI of Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2005).
6

9

correlation of 0.83. The risk shifting measure has a mean close to zero and an annualized
standard deviation of 4.58%, which is about one quarter of the average realized volatility.
Thus, mutual funds shift risk significantly.
To test whether the current holdings volatility is a good proxy for the future realized
volatility of a mutual fund, in unreported analysis we regress the future 12-month realized
volatility of a mutual fund on the current holdings volatility and the past realized volatility
over the prior 36 months. We find that the coefficient on the current holdings volatility is
larger and more statistically significant than the coefficient on the past realized volatility.
Thus, the current holdings volatility captures an important aspect of the future risk exposure.

4

Characterization of Risk Shifting

This section discusses the characteristics of risk shifters and clarifies the main mechanisms
through which mutual funds shift risk.

4.1

Characteristics of Risk Shifters

To identify the characteristics of risk shifters, we sort all mutual funds in each quarter into
five portfolios according to the most recent RS measure and compute average characteristics
of these funds. Funds in Portfolio 1 (5) decrease (increase) risk by more than 2.5% per year
and compose 14% (13%) of our sample, whereas funds in Portfolio 3 change risk by less than
1% and compose 41% of our sample.7
Table 2 summarizes the characteristics of mutual funds sorted according to the RS measure. Funds in Portfolio 1 decrease risk on average by 5.60% per year, which is approximately
26% of their realized volatility over the prior 36 months. On the other hand, funds in Portfolio 5 increase risk by 4.75% per year, which is also approximately 26% of their prior realized
volatility. Thus, funds exhibit significant changes in their overall risk levels over time.
The current holdings volatility and the realized volatility contribute asymmetrically to
7

The results in the paper are similar if the mutual funds are sorted into decile portfolios instead.

10

the RS measure across different RS portfolios. Funds in Portfolio 5 exhibit high current
holdings volatility, and their realized volatility is not very different from the mean realized
volatility. On the other hand, funds in Portfolio 1 have high realized volatility, and their
current holdings volatility is not substantially different from the mean holdings volatility.
Thus, funds in Portfolio 5 increase their total risk significantly from the average risk level and
funds in Portfolio 1 reduce their total risk from their elevated levels back to the average. This
asymmetric pattern suggests that increasing volatility is more of an active choice for funds
while decreasing volatility is driven more by the reversion back to the mean risk level.
Most fund characteristics exhibit a U or inverse-U pattern, which indicates that funds that
increase risk share similar characteristics to funds that decrease risk. Funds that shift risk
are smaller, younger, charge higher expense ratios, and have higher turnover than funds with
more consistent risk levels.

4.2

Mechanism of Risk Shifting

Mutual funds have several potential mechanisms through which they change the riskiness of
their portfolios. First, they can change the composition between equity holdings and cash
holdings. Second, within their equity holdings, funds can change their exposure to systematic
risks by switching between low beta stocks and high beta stocks. Third, funds can change
their idiosyncratic risk exposures by changing the number of stocks or the concentration in
particular industries and styles.
Table 3 summarizes the initial characteristics (Panel A) and the changes in the characteristics (Panel B) of mutual funds in the various RS portfolios. The initial levels are defined as
the average values of the various characteristics over the prior three years and the changes are
defined as the differences in characteristics between the most recent quarter and the average
over the prior three years.
Funds with more consistent risk exposures have lower market betas despite holding smaller
cash positions than funds which shift risk. Risk shifters have higher initial levels of idiosyn-

11

cratic volatility and hold more concentrated portfolios as reflected by the lower number of
stocks and the higher industry concentration index. Risk shifters also differ in their style exposure from funds with more consistent risk exposures as they focus their holdings on small,
growth, and momentum stocks.
Panel B indicates that the changes in the various characteristics are monotonic across the
RS portfolios and illustrate the multiple mechanisms through which mutual funds change risk.
For example, funds that increase risk tend to reduce their cash holdings, increase market risk
exposure, increase idiosyncratic risk exposure by reducing the number of stock positions or increasing their industry concentration levels, and increase their holdings of small capitalization,
growth, and momentum stocks.
Figure 1 depicts the persistence of the RS measure four quarters before and eight quarters
after the formation of the five RS portfolios. Risk shifting builds up gradually over the year
prior to the portfolio formation and dissipates to a large extend two years after the portfolio
formation. The short-term persistence in risk shifting occurs partly because the persistence in
trading strategies and partly because the past realized volatility is based on overlapping data.
Over longer horizons, however, it would be difficult for mutual funds to consistently increase
or decrease risk. We frequently observe that funds in one of the extreme portfolios switch to
the other extreme, while funds with stable risk levels tend to remain in the middle portfolios.

5

Performance Consequences of Risk Shifting

This section compares the performance of funds that shift risk with the performance of funds
with more stable risk properties. We use various performance measures to evaluate fund
performance.
At the end of each month we sort mutual funds into portfolios according to their most
recent RS measure. We compute the fund portfolio return as the equal-weighted average
return of all funds in the corresponding portfolio over the next month. Subsequently, we
compute the abnormal returns using the time-series of fund portfolio returns. We analyze the
12

future performance of funds after computing the risk shifting measure to avoid any potential
issues of reverse causality.
We report four different performance measures for the fund portfolios. To adjust for risk
and style effects, abnormal returns are computed using the one-factor CAPM, the Fama and
French (1993), the Carhart (1997), and the Ferson and Schadt (1996) models. The FamaFrench-Carhart model is specified as follows:
RFk,t − RT B,t = αk + βkM (RM,t − RT B,t ) + βkSM B (RS,t − RB,t )
+βkHM L (RH,t − RL,t ) + βkU M D (RU,t − RD,t ) + ²k,t .

(5)

The return of portfolio k during time period t is denoted by RFk,t . The index M corresponds to the market portfolio and the index T B to the risk-free Treasury bill rate. Portfolios
of small and large stocks are denoted by S and B; portfolios of stocks with high and low ratios
between their book values and their market values are denoted by H and L; and portfolios
of stocks with relatively high and low returns during the previous year are denoted by U and
D. The Fama-French-Carhart model nests the CAPM model (which includes only the market
factor) and the Fama-French model (which includes the size and the book-to-market factors
in addition to the market factor).
Following Wermers (2003), we use the Ferson and Schadt (1996) conditional model that
nests the Carhart model.
RFk,t − RT B,t = αk + βkM (RM,t − RT B,t ) + βkSM B (RS,t − RB,t ) + βkHM L (RH,t − RL,t )
+ βkU M D (RU,t − RD,t ) +

5
X
j

j
βk (RM,t − RT B,t ) × M ACROt−1
+ ²k,t ,

(6)

j=1
j
where M ACROt−1
denotes one of five demeaned lagged macro-economic variables including

the Treasury bill yield, the dividend yield of the S&P Composite Index, the Treasury yield
spread (long- minus short-term bonds), the quality spread in the corporate bond market (lowminus high-grade bonds), and an indicator variable for the month of January.8 In all four
8

The market, size, book-to-market, momentum factors and the risk-free rate are obtained from Ken French’s

13

models, the factor loadings βk denote the sensitivities of the returns of portfolio k to the
various factors and are estimated for each of the portfolios separately. The intercepts αk
capture the abnormal returns of the corresponding models and are reported in Table 4.9
Table 4 reports the performance of mutual fund portfolios sorted by their risk shifting.
We observe that funds that increase risk experience significantly worse subsequent abnormal
returns than funds with stable risk levels. Funds that reduce risk also experience relatively
poor performance, although not significantly different from funds with stable risk levels. For
example, funds that increase risk the most (in Portfolio 5) exhibit an abnormal return of
-22 basis points per month using the Carhart model; funds that decrease risk the most (in
Portfolio 1) exhibit a Carhart alpha of -7 basis points per month; and funds with the most
consistent risk levels (in Portfolio 3) have an abnormal return of -6 basis points per month. The
poor performance of funds that increase risk remains economically and statistically significant
using alternative factor models. Figure 2 illustrates these results graphically.
In unreported results, we find that the performance results become substantially stronger
if we subdivide Portfolio 5 into more extreme portfolios. For example, the abnormal return
of mutual funds that increase their risk levels by more than 5% (corresponding to 3.8% of the
mutual fund observations) amounts to -31 basis points per month using the Carhart model,
and ranges between -25 and -46 basis points per month using the other factor models.
The asymmetry between the performance of funds that increase and decrease risk is consistent with the finding in Table 2 that increasing risk is driven by the high current holdings
volatility and is more of an active choice by funds while decreasing risk is driven by high past
realized volatility and is more of a passive reversion back to the long-term mean. Increases
in risk levels can be achieved by shifting towards riskier securities and by concentrating the
website (http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/index.html). The dividend yield of the
S&P Composite Index is obtained from Shiller’s website (http://www.econ.yale.edu/ shiller/data.htm).
The Treasury and corporate bond yields are obtained from the Federal Reserve Board
(http://www.federalreserve.gov).
9

Using a five factor model including the Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) liquidity factor does not affect the
results qualitatively and quantitatively. In addition, our results are also consistent if we use the manipulationproof performance measure of Goetzmann, Ingersoll, Spiegel, and Welch (2007).

14

portfolio on fewer securities and fewer sectors as documented in Table 3. On the other hand,
decreases in risk levels can be achieved by holding a more balanced and better diversified
portfolio.
Table 5 summarizes the long-term impact of risk shifting. We form mutual fund portfolios
using longer-term lags and report the Carhart alphas of mutual fund portfolios formed based
on lagged RS measures. The first column repeats the performance results from Table 4,
which use the RS measure in the prior quarter to form portfolios. The remaining columns
form portfolios based on the lagged RS measures up to four quarters earlier. The poor
performance of Portfolio 5 remains statistically significant over the first four quarters after
the portfolio formation.
These performance results build on an extensive literature that investigates the investment
ability of mutual fund managers. Whereas the recent mutual fund literature finds that some
mutual fund managers have significant stock selection ability, our paper indicates that risk
shifting does not improve fund performance.10 Instead, consistent with the the timing literature, we do not find that mutual funds benefit significantly by taking advantage of time-varying
investment opportunities.11

6

Motivation for Risk Shifting

The poor performance of risk shifters suggests that risk shifting behavior is either an indication
of inferior ability or is motivated by agency problems in delegated portfolio management. To
investigate the potential role of agency problems in risk shifting behavior, we conduct two
10
See, for example, Grinblatt and Titman (1993), Brown and Goetzmann (1995), Ferson and Schadt (1996),
Carhart (1997), Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997), Wermers (2000), Baks, Metrick, and Wachter
(2001), Bollen and Busse (2001), Coval and Moskowitz (2001), Chen, Hong, Huang, and Kubik (2004), Cohen,
Coval, and Pastor (2005), Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2005), Gaspar, Massa, and Matos (2006), Kosowski,
Timmermann, Wermers, and White (2006), Kacperczyk and Seru (2007), Mamaysky, Spiegel, and Zhang
(2007), Cohen, Frazzini, and Malloy (2008), Cohen, Polk, and Silli (2008), Cremers and Petajisto (2008),
Da, Gao, and Jagannathan (2008), Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2008), Yuan (2008), Christoffersen and
Sarkissian (2009), and Brown, Harlow, and Zhang (2009).
11

See, for example, Treynor and Mazuy (1966), Henriksson and Merton (1981), Busse (1999), Jiang (2003),
Jiang, Yao, and Yu (2007), and Breon-Drish and Sagi (2008).

15

additional analyses in this section. First, we study the potential benefits of risk shifting by
comparing the return distribution of funds that shift risk with funds that follow more stable
risk levels. Second, we ask whether funds that benefit more from risk shifting are more likely
to shift risk and whether these funds experience worse performance when they shift risk.

6.1

Return Distribution of Risk Shifters

Mutual fund investors tend to invest in funds with stellar performance and do not penalize
poor performance equivalently, resulting in a convex flow-performance relation. The mutual
fund literature extensively documents this pattern and suggests that fund managers have an
incentive to shift risk levels to increase the probability of becoming a top-ranked mutual fund.
To verify whether risk shifters are more likely to have extreme future performance, we
report in Figure 3 the cumulative distribution functions of the performance ranking of mutual
funds in different risk shifting groups. At the end of each quarter, we first compute the
percentile ranks for all the funds in our sample. The percentile ranks are based on the
Carhart alphas over the subsequent 12-month period. In a second step, we sort mutual funds
into the same five portfolios as reported in Table 2. Finally, we compute the cumulative
distribution function of the performance ranks for each of the five portfolios. The figure
shows the cumulative distributions for three different groups of mutual funds. The curve RS1
corresponds to funds in Portfolio 1 that reduce risk the most, RS5 to funds in Portfolio 5 that
increase risk the most, and RS3 to funds in Portfolio 3 that maintain stable risk levels. The
intermediate groups RS2 and RS4 are not depicted separately, but fall between the middle
and extreme groups.
Funds that increase risk exhibit significantly higher volatility and are more likely to be
ranked in the extreme of the mutual fund distribution than funds with more stable risk
exposures. For example, 15.2% of mutual funds in the RS5 group and only 8.7% of mutual
funds in the RS3 group rank in the top decile. Furthermore, 1.8% of funds in the RS5
group and only 0.6% of funds in the RS3 group rank in the top percentile of all funds. Not

16

surprisingly, risk shifting also increases the probability of being ranked at the bottom of the
performance distribution. For example, around 17.7% of mutual funds in the RS5 group and
just 7.1% of mutual funds in the RS3 group rank in the bottom decile. The more striking
difference at the bottom decile than at the top decile is the source of the lower average
performance of the RS5 group. Yet, funds might prefer the return distribution of the RS5
group because it enables them to take advantage of the convex flow-performance relation.

6.2

Differential Benefits of Risk Shifting

We investigate whether the propensity to shift risk and the performance consequences of risk
shifting differ across funds with different incentives to shift risk. The incentives of risk shifting
are higher for funds that are better able to reap the benefits of extreme performance. Since the
expected profit for mutual funds increases with both the expense ratio and the assets under
management, we expect the benefits of risk shifting to be higher both for funds with higher
expense ratios and for funds with a more sensitive flow-performance relation. The mutual
fund literature has identified younger, smaller funds, and funds that belong to smaller fund
families as having a more sensitive flow-performance relation. Hence, we consider different
subgroups of funds based on these four characteristics: the expense ratio, fund age, fund size,
and the size of the fund family.
For each characteristic we divide mutual funds in each period into two groups depending
on whether the fund characteristic is above or below the median value. In a second step, we
further divide the two groups of funds into five portfolios according to their most recent risk
shifting measure. The first group of columns in Table 6 summarizes the frequency distribution
of funds across the two groups and the last group of columns reports the subsequent Carhart
alphas for the ten mutual fund portfolios.12
We find that funds with larger benefits of risk shifting are more likely to shift risk and
perform particularly poorly after shifting risk. For example, in Panel A of Table 6, of the
12
The frequencies are computed on a quarterly basis and the differences in the frequencies use Newey-West
standard errors with a lag length of four quarters. The Carhart alphas are computed as described in Section 5.

17

50% of mutual funds that charge above-median expense ratios, 7.36% belong to Portfolio 5
(that decrease risk the most), whereas only 5.27% of funds charging below-median expense
ratios belong to Portfolio 5. In addition, high-expense funds in Portfolio 5 exhibit a Carhart
alpha of -24 basis points per month, which is statistically significant at the 1% level, whereas
low-expense funds in Portfolio 5 have an insignificant alpha of -10 basis points per month.
The row “All” reports the average subsequent performance of high and low expense funds
across the five risk shifting groups. In contrast to the drastic performance difference between these two groups of funds in Portfolio 5, the average high-expense funds underperform
low-expense funds by only 3 basis points per month. This performance difference, which
is calculated after expenses, is lower than the difference in expense ratios between these two
groups (which amounts to 5 basis points per month). Thus, high-expense funds do not exhibit
inferior investor ability before deducting expenses. Yet, high-expense funds that increase their
risk levels experience very poor subsequent performance, consistent with the notion that these
funds opportunistically shift risk to take advantage of the convex flow-performance relation.
Our result is also consistent with Gil-Bazo and Ruiz-Verdu (2009), who find that high-expense
funds do not perform better than low-expense funds, even before expense. They interpret this
evidence as an agency problem in which high-expense funds target naive investors who are
not responsive to expenses.
Chevalier and Ellison (1997) find that young funds with less established track records have
larger incentives to shift risk since the flow sensitivity to performance is more pronounced for
young funds. They also find smaller funds have more sensitive fund flows. In addition, Huang,
Wei, and Yan (2007) find that funds in smaller fund families have higher flow-performance
sensitivity. Hence, these funds have more significant incentives to shift risk.
Panels B, C and D of Table 6 confirm that young, small funds, and funds affiliated with
relatively small families are more likely to shift risk and they experience particularly poor abnormal returns if they increase their risk levels. Since the average performance of funds sorted
by each of these characteristics is similar across the high and low groups, these characteristics

18

are not significantly related to investment ability. The fact that they are all related to the
potential benefits of risk shifting provides supportive evidence that agency problems, rather
than ability, are the likely cause of risk shifting behavior.

7

Sources for the Poor Performance of Risk Shifters

In this section, we study the sources for the poor performance of funds that increase their risk
level. Mutual funds can change the riskiness of their portfolios by changing the composition
between equity holdings and cash holdings, by changing their exposure to systematic risks
within their equity portfolios, and by changing their idiosyncratic risk exposures. We construct
alternative RS measures based on these various mechanisms of risk shifting and investigate
the performance consequences of risk shifting using each alternative measure. This analysis
sheds light on the sources of the poor performance of risk shifters. We also consider several
alternative explanations for the poor performance of risk shifters, for example, the additional
trading costs to implement risk shifting strategies or to accommodate fund flows, and the role
of past fund performance and volatility.

7.1

Cash and Equity Holdings

Table 7 reports the performance consequences of risk shifting based on six alternative RS
measures. The first column reports the Carhart alphas for fund portfolios formed according
to our base case RS measure which is computed using the complete holdings of the fund. The
results correspond to the results in Table 4 using the Carhart risk and style adjustments.
The second column focuses on the aggregate proportion invested in cash and other nonequity positions and ignores the riskiness of the equity positions. This cash-based measure of
risk shifting is defined as:
cash
cash
− wcash
= −(wf,t
RSf,t
f,t ),

(7)

cash
is the most recently disclosed proportion invested in cash and other non-equity
where wf,t

securities according to the CRSP mutual fund database and wcash
f,t is the average proportion
19

invested in non-equity securities over the prior 36 months. Other non-equity positions include
bonds, preferred stocks, and other securities, and are only 2.46% of fund assets. To be
consistent with the other RS measures in which a higher RS measure corresponds to a riskier
current position relative to the past, we multiply the difference by minus one. The portfolios
are formed using the RS cash measure in specific ranges to maintain a similar distribution
of funds in the five groups as in our base case. Portfolio 1 (5) includes funds that increase
(decrease) the proportion invested in cash by more than 7.5% and Portfolio 3 includes funds
that change their cash proportion by less than 2.5%.
The third column considers only the riskiness of the disclosed equity positions and ignores
non-equity positions. This equity-based risk shifting measure is defined as:
equity
H,equity
R,equity
RSf,t
= σf,t
− σf,t
,

(8)

H,equity
where σf,t
is the current holdings volatility estimated using the returns of the most recently
R,equity
disclosed equity positions and σf,t
is the realized holdings volatility estimated using the

returns of a hypothetical portfolio that maintains the historically disclosed equity positions,
updated whenever new holdings become available, over the prior 36 months. Portfolio 1
(5) includes funds that decrease (increase) their equity risk by more than 2% per year and
Portfolio 3 includes funds that change their equity risk by less than 1%.
The results from Table 7 indicate that funds that increase risk have poor subsequent
performance, whether they decrease the proportion invested in cash or increase the volatility of
their equity holdings. The impact of increasing the volatility of equity holdings is similar to the
base case result using all the holdings (with a performance difference of about 17 basis points
per month), while the performance consequence of reducing cash holdings is substantially
lower (at 6 basis points per month). Therefore, increasing the volatility of equity holdings is
more costly in terms of their subsequent performance. In addition, the weaker result using
cash holdings suggests that activities that mainly affect the fraction of cash holdings (for
example, fund flows and fund managers’s effort to time the aggregate market) have a smaller
impact on fund performance.
20

7.2

Systematic and Idiosyncratic Risk

Fund managers might shift risk in an effort to take advantage of time-varying investment
opportunities. They might change their exposure to systematic risk if they believe that they
have superior market timing abilities; or they might change the idiosyncratic risk of their
portfolio in order to utilize their (perceived) stock selection ability.
The last three columns of Table 7 compare the future abnormal performance of fund
portfolios sorted by systematic and idiosyncratic risk levels. The fourth column is based on
changes in systematic risk and is defined as:
β
H
R
RSf,t
= βf,t
− βf,t
,

(9)

H
R
where βf,t
is the CAPM beta of the most recently disclosed holdings and βf,t
is the CAPM

beta of the realized returns over the prior 36 months. Portfolio 1 (5) includes funds that
decrease (increase) their CAPM beta by more than 0.15 and Portfolio 3 includes funds that
change their betas by less than 0.05.
The final two risk shifting measures in Table 7 are based on the idiosyncratic volatilities
computed using the CAPM and the Carhart factor models. The idiosyncratic risk shifting
measures are defined as
idiosync
H,idiosync
R,idiosync
RSf,t
= σf,t
− σf,t
,

(10)

H,idiosync
where σf,t
is the idiosyncratic volatility of the most recently disclosed fund holdings
R,idiosync
return and σf,t
is the idiosyncratic volatility of the past realized fund return. The

idiosyncratic volatilities are computed as the standard deviations of the residuals from the
CAPM or the Carhart factor regressions over the prior 36 months. Portfolio 1 (5) includes
funds that decrease (increase) their idiosyncratic risk by more than 2% per year and Portfolio 3
includes funds that change their idiosyncratic risk by less than 1%.
We find a strong relation between risk shifting and fund performance for portfolios sorted
according to changes in idiosyncratic volatilities, but do not find a statistically significant
return pattern for portfolios sorted according to changes in systematic risk. For example,
21

the performance difference between funds that increase their idiosyncratic risk the most (in
Portfolio 5) and funds that maintain stable risk levels (in Portfolio 3) is between -18 and -21
basis points per month, both significant at the 5% level, depending on whether idiosyncratic
risk is measured relative to the market model or the four-factor Carhart model. On the
other hand, the performance difference between funds that increase their systematic risk the
most and funds that maintain stable systematic risk is -5 basis points per month and is not
statistically significant. Thus, the poor performance of funds that increase risk is driven by
the increase in their idiosyncratic risk levels and not by the increase in their systematic risk
exposure. Our results suggest that the main driver of the poor performance of risk shifters
is not their inability to time the aggregate market movements but their tendency to take on
idiosyncratic risk.13
Chevalier and Ellison (1997), Basak, Pavlova, and Shapiro (2007), and Chen and Pennacchi (2009) suggest that, if fund managers are evaluated on their performance relative to
a benchmark, they have an incentive to increase tracking error volatility. Our finding that
some fund managers significantly increase their idiosyncratic volatility is consistent with these
predictions.

7.3

Trading Costs

One potential source of the poor performance of funds that increase risk could be the significant
trading costs incurred by such funds. Since we analyze only the future performance of funds
after computing the risk shifting measure, our performance measures are not contaminated
by the direct trading costs to implement the current risk shifting strategy. However, since risk
shifting is persistent, these funds might also have higher trading costs in the future.
We use turnover as a proxy for trading costs since it captures the majority of trading costs
as described by Chalmers, Edelen, and Kadlec (1999). If trading costs are the main cause
13

Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006) report that stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility based on daily
returns tend to exhibit relatively poor abnormal returns in the subsequent month. To investigate whether this
effect can explain our results, we augment, in unreported results, the Fama-French-Carhart factor model by
an idiosyncratic volatility factor. Adjusting for the idiosyncratic volatility factor does not qualitatively change
our main result that funds that increase their risk the most experience the worst subsequent performance.

22

of the poor performance of risk shifters, then we should observe that the relation between
performance and risk shifting is particularly pronounced for high turnover funds. We sort funds
into subgroups with different turnover and risk shifting measures, following the procedure in
Section 6.2, and report the frequency distribution and the Carhart alphas in Panel A of
Table 8. Surprisingly, we find that increasing risk has worse performance consequences for
funds with low turnover than for funds with high turnover. For example, the performance
difference between Portfolios 5 and 3 is -25 basis points per month for funds with low turnover
and only -8 basis points for funds with high turnover. Thus, direct trading costs are unlikely
the main reason behind the poor performance of risk shifters.
Another proxy for trading costs is fund flows. Edelen (1999) documents that the extra
trading and the resulting price impact induced by fund flows can significantly reduce the
average performance of mutual funds. In addition, Coval and Stafford (2007), Chen, Hanson,
Hong, and Stein (2007), and Zhang (2008) show that distressed mutual funds experiencing
large money outflows are forced to liquidate their positions in “fire sales.” Such outflows
can increase the total risk level of mutual funds as they reduce their cash positions or as
they reduce their portfolio diversification by selling some of their positions. To examine the
impact of fund flows, we divide mutual funds into groups depending on whether their fund
flows in the prior year are below or above the median level. Panel B shows that there are no
significant differences in the propensities to shift risk for funds in these two groups, suggesting
that most funds are able to undo the effect of funds flows and reach their desired risk level.
In addition, although funds with below-median flows perform slightly worse than funds with
above-median flows when they increase risk, the performance difference is not significantly
different from zero.
Therefore, the poor performance of funds that increase risk is unlikely driven by the
additional transaction costs needed to implement the risk shifting strategy or to accommodate
fund flows.

23

7.4

Past Fund Performance and Volatility

The past fund performance and volatility level may reveal the ability and incentives of fund
managers. Mutual funds with worse prior performance are likely to have inferior ability and
might continue to perform poorly. The literature suggests that past winners and losers have
different incentives to take risk. In addition, funds with higher volatility levels have more
extreme performance and might be able to take advantage of the convex flow-performance
relation without shifting risk. It is therefore important to study the impact of past fund
performance and realized volatility.
Panel C of Table 8 sorts mutual funds by their prior year performance and the risk shifting
measure. We find that funds with relatively disappointing performance are relatively more
likely to shift risk down (in Portfolio 1), whereas funds with superior performance are more
likely to shift risk up (in Portfolio 5). To investigate the relation between prior performance
and risk shifting in more detail, we analyze in unreported results the economic determinants of
risk shifting using a multivariate regression analysis. We find that both funds with very poor
and with very high past performance increase risk above their prior realized risk levels. This
result is consistent with Hu, Kale, Pagani, and Subramanian (2008), who develop a unified
theory that generates a U-shape relation between risk choices and prior performance. They
find evidence that managers that significantly outperform or underperform the benchmark
exhibit higher subsequent risk levels. The asymmetry in the frequency distribution in Panel C
occurs because the incentive to shift risk is on average more pronounced for winner funds than
for loser funds.
The performance consequences of risk shifting are stronger for loser funds than for winner
funds. Within loser funds, we find that funds that increase risk the most underperform
funds that maintain stable risk levels by 16 basis points per month. On the other hand,
the corresponding performance difference for winner funds is only 7 basis points and is not
statistically significantly different from zero.
Panel D of Table 8 reports the results for funds sorted on past realized volatility and risk
24

shifting measures. While it is intuitive that funds with higher risk levels are much more likely
to shift risk down, it is rather surprising that they are also more likely to increase risk further.
Moreover, these high-risk funds that increase risk further suffer the worst future performance,
with a Carhart alpha that is -27 basis points lower than the high-risk funds that maintain
stable risk levels. In contrast, low-risk funds have similar performance across risk shifting
groups, with a performance difference of only -1 basis point between Portfolios 5 and 3. The
different impact of risk shifting for the high- and low-volatility groups is striking, especially
given their similar average performance.
In summary, mutual funds with worse prior performance are likely to have inferior ability.
These funds also perform particularly poorly when they increase risk. We also find that past
realized volatility is not directly related to future risk-adjusted performance but is critical for
the impact of risk shifting behavior. Low-risk funds do not suffer poor performance when
they increase risk while high-risk funds have significantly lower future performance when they
choose to increase risk further.

8

Multivariate Regression

This section uses a multivariate regression analysis to investigate the relation between risk
shifting and subsequent fund performance. This methodology allows us to control for additional fund characteristics. We run the following Fama-MacBeth specification:
R
P ERFf,t = β0 + β1 M AX(0, RSf,t−1 ) + β2 M IN (0, RSf,t−1 ) + β3 σf,t−1

(11)

+ β4 RFf,t−1 +β5 LOGAGEf,t−1 +β6 LOGT N Af,t−1 +β7 EXPf,t−1
+ β8 T Of,t−1 +β9 F LOWf,t−1 +²f,t .
The dependent variable in each cross-section is a performance measure of an individual
mutual fund P ERF in a particular month. To capture the non-monotonic impact of risk
shifting on performance, we split RS into two components depending on whether it is positive
or negative. The coefficient β1 captures the relation between risk shifting and returns when
25

RS is positive and β2 captures the relation between risk shifting and returns when RS is
negative. The additional control variables are the realized volatility over the prior 36 months
σ R , the prior-year return of a fund RFf,t−1 , the age of the fund defined as the logarithm of
(1 + AGE), the logarithm of the assets under management LOGT N A, the expense ratio of
the fund EXP , the turnover ratio T O, and the fund flow over the prior year F LOW . All
control variables are lagged by at least one month. In a first step, we run in each month
a cross-sectional regression. In a second step, we compute the means of the cross-sectional
coefficients over the whole time period between 1983 and 2006.
One commonly used methodology to adjust for risk and style in the mutual fund literature
is to first estimate the factor loadings for each fund over a rolling window using prior data
and then compute abnormal returns in the subsequent period as the difference between the
actual fund return and the expected fund return based on the estimated factor loadings. This
methodology is not appropriate in our context since we focus on the risk shifting behavior of
funds over time. The factor loadings estimated over prior windows might not be accurate for
funds that shift risk levels significantly.14 Instead, the risk adjustments for our performance
measures are based on the most recent portfolio holdings.
We use four different performance measures: (1) the raw fund return; (2) the Carhart
abnormal return; (3) the characteristics-adjusted return; and (4) the return gap. The Carhart
alpha of a fund is defined in a similar way to the bottom-up alphas of Elton, Gruber, and
Blake (2007) as the fund return minus the expected factor return:
h

Carhart
M
SM B
αk,t
= (RFk,t − RT B,t ) − βk(H),t−1
(RM,t − RT B,t ) + βk(H),t−1
(RS,t − RB,t )

i

HM L
UMD
+βk(H),t−1
(RH,t − RL,t ) + βk(H),t−1
(RU,t − RD,t ) .

(12)

The expected factor return is computed as the product of the betas of the most recent
holdings of the fund and the returns of the four Carhart factors. The betas of the most
14
Despite this concern, the results are not substantially different if we use fund-specific abnormal returns as
dependent variables. This is consistent with the prior portfolio results which indicate that the performance
results are not very sensitive to alternative factor adjustments.

26

recent holdings are obtained by regressing the hypothetical return of the most recent portfolio
holdings (including non-equity positions) over the last 36 months on the Carhart factors.
The characteristics-adjusted return is defined as the difference between the fund return
and the benchmark return of securities with similar risk and style characteristics:
CharacAdj
αk,t

= RFk,t −

ÃN
X

!
i
[BRi(t−1),t ]
wf,t

,

(13)

i=1

The weight invested in position i at the beginning of month t in the mutual fund f is
i
denoted by wf,t
and the benchmark return to which position i was allocated during month

t − k is denoted by BRi(t−k),t . For equity positions, we follow Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman,
and Wermers (1997) and define the return on a benchmark portfolio as the value-weighed
return of stocks that fall in the identical size, value, and momentum quintiles as the equity
holdings of a fund. For non-equity positions we set the benchmark returns equal to the returns
corresponding to the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index (for bonds and preferred stocks)
and to the Treasury bill rate (for cash and other securities).
Finally, the return gap is computed following Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2008) as the
residual that captures the impact of unobserved actions on fund returns:
RGf,t = RFf,t − RHf,t + EXPf,t ,

(14)

where the investor return is denoted by RF , the holdings return by RH, and the expense
ratio by EXP .
Table 9 reports the multivariate regression estimates. All specifications indicate a significantly negative relation between risk shifting and the various performance measures for
funds that increase risk and a generally insignificant relation for funds that decrease risk. The
performance consequences of increasing risk are similar in magnitude to the results reported
in Table 4. For example, the first column indicates that an increase in RS from 0 to 5% (corresponding roughly to the difference in risk shifting between portfolios 3 and 5 in Table 2),
reduces the raw fund return by 22 basis points per month. The impact of increasing risk by
27

five percentage points ranges between 8 basis points for the return gap and 30 basis points
for the four-factor adjusted fund return.
Including additional control variables does not have a significant impact on the risk shifting coefficients. The level of the realized volatility over the prior 36 months does not have a
significant explanatory power for fund performance, consistent with the evidence in Panel D
of Table 8. The positive coefficient on the lagged return indicates some performance persistence. The coefficient on the expense ratio is significantly different from zero in the first three
specifications which use an after-expense performance measure. On the other hand the expense ratio has no significant relation to the return gap, which is measured after adjusting for
fund expenses. Finally, funds with higher turnover tend to exhibit slightly higher performance
using all four performance measures.
The results in this section confirm the portfolio results reported in Table 4 that funds that
increase risk perform poorly in the future, even after adjusting for other fund characteristics
and after controlling for risk and style.

9

Conclusions

As more and more investors delegate their portfolio decisions to mutual fund managers, potential agency problems between fund managers and investors have become increasingly important. Our paper extends the literature on one particular agency problem – the incentive for
fund managers to shift the risk level of their portfolios to increase their personal compensation
– and investigates its consequences for fund investors.
Risk shifting per se does not necessarily hurt fund investors. As long as the act of risk
shifting is well-known and has no performance consequences, investors can form efficient portfolios by adjusting their allocation to the funds based on the expected ability and risk levels.
However, if investors are not fully aware of the risk shifting behavior or if the changing risk
level hampers their ability to assess fund performance, then individual portfolios are less likely
to be efficient.
28

We find that even if investors are fully aware of the risk shifting behavior, they are better
off avoiding funds that are prone to switch risk over time. The reason is that funds that shift
risk perform worse than funds that keep stable risk levels over time. In addition, funds with
larger incentives to shift risk are more likely to increase risk and perform particularly poorly
after increasing risk. These results are consistent with risk shifting being a consequence of opportunistic behavior of fund managers and inconsistent with risk shifting being a consequence
of skilled fund managers taking advantage of time-varying investment opportunities.

29

References
Ang, A., R. Hodrick, Y. Xing, and X. Zhang (2006). The cross-section of volatility and
expected returns. Journal of Finance 61, 259–299.
Baks, K. P., A. Metrick, and J. Wachter (2001). Should investors avoid all actively managed
mutual funds? A study in Bayesian performance evaluation. Journal of Finance 56, 45–
86.
Basak, S., A. Pavlova, and A. Shapiro (2007). Optimal asset allocation and risk shifting in
money management. Review of Financial Studies 20 (5), 1583–1621.
Bollen, N. P. B. and J. A. Busse (2001). On the timing ability of mutual fund managers.
Journal of Finance 56, 1075–1094.
Breon-Drish, B. and J. S. Sagi (2008). Do fund managers make informed asset allocation
decisions. University of California at Berkeley and Vanderbilt University.
Brown, K. C., W. V. Harlow, and L. T. Starks (1996). Of tournaments and temptations: An
analysis of managerial incentives in the mutual fund industry. Journal of Finance 51 (1),
85–110.
Brown, K. C., W. V. Harlow, and H. Zhang (2009). Staying the course: The role of investment style consistency in the performance of mutual funds. University of Texas at
Austin and Fidelity Investments.
Brown, S. J. and W. N. Goetzmann (1995). Performance persistence. Journal of Finance 50,
853–873.
Busse, J. A. (1999). Volatility timing in mutual funds: Evidence from daily returns. Review
of Financial Studies 12 (5), 1009–1041.
Busse, J. A. (2001). Another look at mutual fund tournaments. Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 36 (1), 53–73.
Carhart, M. M. (1997). On persistence in mutual fund performance. Journal of Finance 52 (2), 57–82.
Carpenter, J. N. (2000). Does option compensation increase managerial risk appetite. Journal of Finance 55, 2311–2331.
Chalmers, J. M., R. M. Edelen, and G. B. Kadlec (1999). An analysis of mutual fund trading
costs. University of Oregon, University of Pennsylvania, and Virginia Tech.
Chen, H.-L. and G. G. Pennacchi (2009). Does prior performance affect a mutual fund’s
choice of risk? Theory and further empirical evidence. Forthcoming: Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis.
Chen, J., S. Hanson, H. Hong, and J. C. Stein (2007). Do hedge funds profit from mutualfund distress? USC, Harvard University, and Princeton University.
Chen, J., H. Hong, M. Huang, and J. Kubik (2004). Does fund size erode performance? Liquidity, organizational diseconomies and active money management. American Economic
Review 94, 1276–1302.
Chevalier, J. and G. Ellison (1997). Risk taking by mutual funds as a response to incentives.
Journal of Political Economy 105 (6), 1167–1200.
Christoffersen, S. and S. Sarkissian (2009). City size and fund performance. Forthcoming:
Journal of Financial Economics.

30

Cohen, L., A. Frazzini, and C. Malloy (2008). The small world of investing: Board connections and mutual fund returns. Journal of Political Economy 116, 951–979.
Cohen, R., J. D. Coval, and L. Pastor (2005). Judging fund managers by the company that
they keep. Journal of Finance 60, 1057–1096.
Cohen, R., C. Polk, and B. Silli (2008). Best ideas. Harvard University, London School of
Economics, and Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
Coval, J. and E. Stafford (2007). Asset fire sales (and purchases) in equity markets. Journal
of Financial Economics 86, 479–512.
Coval, J. D. and T. J. Moskowitz (2001). The geography of investment: Informed trading
and asset prices. Journal of Political Economy 109, 811–841.
Cremers, M. and A. Petajisto (2008). How active is your fund manager? A new measure
that predicts performance. Forthcoming: Review of Financial Studies.
Da, Z., P. Gao, and R. Jagannathan (2008). Informed trading, liquidity provision, and stock
selection by mutual funds. University of Notre Dame and Northwestern University.
Daniel, K., M. Grinblatt, S. Titman, and R. Wermers (1997). Measuring mutual fund
performance with characteristic-based benchmarks. Journal of Finance 52 (3), 1035–
1058.
DelGuercio, D. and P. A. Tkac (2002). The determinants of the flow of funds of managed
portfolios: Mutual funds versus pension funds. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 37, 523–557.
Edelen, R. M. (1999). Investor flows and the assessed performance of open-end fund managers. Journal of Financial Economics 53, 439–466.
Elton, E. J., M. J. Gruber, and C. R. Blake (2003). Incentive fees and mutual funds. Journal
of Finance 58 (2), 779–804.
Elton, E. J., M. J. Gruber, and C. R. Blake (2007). Monthly holding data and the selection
of superior mutual funds. New York University and Fordham University.
Elton, E. J., M. J. Gruber, Y. Krasny, and S. Ozelge (2006). The effect of the frequency
of holding data on conclusions about mutual fund management behavior. New York
University.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1993). Common risk factors in the return on bonds and
stocks. Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–53.
Ferson, W. and R. Schadt (1996). Measuring fund strategy and performance in changing
economic conditions. Journal of Finance 51, 425–462.
Gaspar, J.-M., M. Massa, and P. Matos (2006). Favoritism in mutual fund families? Evidence on strategic cross-fund subsidization. Journal of Finance 61, 73–104.
Gil-Bazo, J. and P. Ruiz-Verdu (2009). Yet another puzzle? The relation between price and
performance in the mutual fund industry. Forthcoming: Journal of Finance.
Goetzmann, W., J. Ingersoll, M. Spiegel, and I. Welch (2007). Portfolio performance manipulation and manipulation-proof performance measures. Review of Financial Studies 20,
1503–1546.
Goetzmann, W. N. and N. Peles (1997). Cognitive dissonance and mutual fund investors.
Journal of Financial Research 20 (2), 145–158.
Grinblatt, M. and S. Titman (1989). Adverse risk incentives and the design of performancebased contracts. Management Science 35, 807–822.
31

Grinblatt, M. and S. Titman (1993). Performance measurement without benchmarks: An
examination of mutual fund returns. Journal of Business 66, 47–68.
Guasoni, P., G. Huberman, and Z. Wang (2007). Performance maximization of actively
managed funds. Boston University, Columbia University, and the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York.
Henriksson, R. D. and R. C. Merton (1981). On market timing and investment performance.
II. Statistical procedures for evaluating forecasting skills. Journal of Business 54, 513–
533.
Hu, P., J. R. Kale, M. Pagani, and A. Subramanian (2008). Fund flows, performance,
managerial career concerns, and risk-taking. Georgia State University and San Jose
State University.
Huang, J., K. D. Wei, and H. Yan (2007). Participation costs and the sensitivity of fund
flows to past performance. Journal of Finance 62 (3), 1273–1311.
Ippolito, R. A. (1992). Consumer reaction to measures of poor quality: Evidence from the
mutual fund industry. Journal of Law and Economics 35 (1), 45–70.
Ivkovich, Z. and S. Weisbenner (2009). Individual investor mutual fund flows. Forthcoming:
Journal of Financial Economics.
Jiang, G., T. Yao, and T. Yu (2007). Do mutual funds time the market? Evidence from
portfolio holdings. Journal of Financial Economics 86, 724–758.
Jiang, W. (2003). A nonparametric test of market timing. Journal of Empirical Finance 10,
399–425.
Kacperczyk, M. and A. Seru (2007). Fund manager use of public information: New evidence
on managerial skills. Journal of Finance 62, 485–528.
Kacperczyk, M., C. Sialm, and L. Zheng (2005). On the industry concentration of actively
managed equity mutual funds. Journal of Finance 60 (4), 1983–2012.
Kacperczyk, M., C. Sialm, and L. Zheng (2008). Unobserved actions of equity mutual funds.
Review of Financial Studies 21 (6), 2379–2416.
Kempf, A. and S. Ruenzi (2008). Tournaments in mutual fund families. Review of Financial
Studies 21 (2), 1013–1036.
Kempf, A., S. Ruenzi, and T. Thiele (2008). Employment risk, compensation incentives and
managerial risk taking: Evidence from the mutual fund industry. Forthcoming: Journal
of Financial Economics.
Koski, J. L. and J. Pontiff (1999). How are derivatives used? Evidence from the mutual
fund industry. Journal of Finance 54 (2), 791–816.
Kosowski, R., A. Timmermann, R. Wermers, and H. White (2006). Can mutual fund ‘stars’
really pick stocks? New evidence from a bootstrap analysis. Journal of Finance 61,
2551–2595.
Li, W. and A. Tiwari (2006). On the consequences of mutual fund tournaments. University
of Iowa.
Lynch, A. W. and D. K. Musto (2003). How investors interpret past fund returns. Journal
of Finance 58, 2033–2058.
Mamaysky, H., M. I. Spiegel, and H. Zhang (2007). Improved forecasting of mutual fund
alphas and betas. Review of Finance 11 (3), 359–400.

32

Massa, M. and R. Patgiri (2007). Incentives and mutual fund performance: Higher performance or just higher risk taking? Forthcoming: Review of Financial Studies.
Nanda, V., Z. J. Wang, and L. Zheng (2004). Family values and the star phenomenon:
Strategies of mutual fund families. Review of Financial Studies 17 (3), 667–698.
Palomino, F. and A. Prat (2003). Risk taking and optimal contracts for money managers.
RAND Journal of Economics 34, 113–137.
Pastor, L. and R. F. Stambaugh (2003). Liquidity risk and expected stock returns. Journal
of Political Economy 111 (3), 642–685.
Ross, S. A. (2004). Compensation, incentives, and the duality of risk aversion and riskiness.
Journal of Finance 59, 207–225.
Sirri, E. R. and P. Tufano (1998). Costly search and mutual fund flows. Journal of Finance 53 (5), 1589–1622.
Starks, L. T. (1987). Performance incentive fees: An agency theoretic approach. Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 22 (1), 17–32.
Treynor, J. L. and K. Mazuy (1966). Can mutual funds outguess the market? Harvard
Business Review 44, 131–136.
Wermers, R. (2000). Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition into stockpicking talent, style, transactions costs, and expenses. Journal of Finance 55 (4), 1655–
1703.
Wermers, R. (2003). Is money really ‘smart’ ? New evidence on the relation between mutual
fund flows, manager behavior, and performance persistence. University of Maryland.
Yuan, K. (2008). Eliciting heterogeneous investor beliefs from portfolio holdings and performance evaluation. London School of Economics.
Zhang, H. (2008). Asset fire sales, liquidity provision and mutual fund performance. University of Texas at Austin.
Zheng, L. (1999). Is money smart? A study of mutual fund investors’ fund selection ability.
Journal of Finance 54, 901–933.

33

Table 1: Summary Statistics

This table summarizes the characteristics of the mutual funds in our sample over the period between
1980 and 2006.
Variable

Mean

Std.Dev.

Median

Total Net Assets (TNA) (in Millions)
Age (in Years)
Expense Ratio (in %)
Turnover Ratio (in %)
Common Stock Proportion (in %)
Cash Proportion (in %)
Bond Proportion (in %)
Preferred Stock Proportion (in %)
Other Securities Proportion (in %)
Flow (in % per Month)
Investor Return (in % per Month)
Holdings Return (in % per Month)
Number of Stock Positions
Industry Concentration Index
Size Score
Value Score
Momentum Score
Current Holdings Volatility (in % per Year)
Past Realized Volatility (in % per Year)
Risk Shifting (in % per Year)

1,382.54
17.54
1.28
90.65
91.28
6.26
1.58
0.39
0.49
0.43
0.83
0.91
89.23
0.12
4.20
2.80
3.10
17.54
17.86
-0.33

4,739.35
15.29
0.46
112.98
12.04
9.04
6.49
2.57
3.81
5.04
5.34
5.21
130.77
0.20
0.85
0.46
0.59
7.62
7.93
4.58

277.84
12.00
1.24
66.00
95.00
3.78
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.36
1.07
1.10
62.00
0.05
4.53
2.79
3.07
16.41
16.42
0.01

Total number of funds
Total number of observations

2,335
184,519

1
2
3
4
5

RS
Portfolio

(-∞,-2.5]
(-2.5,-1]
(-1,1)
[1,2.5)
[2.5,∞)

RS
Range
14.20
15.39
41.09
16.37
12.95

Prop. of
Obs. (%)
−5.60
−1.63
0.02
1.63
4.75

RS
Mean
15.84
15.61
15.85
17.83
22.84

Current
Holdings
Volatility
21.45
17.24
15.83
16.19
18.08

Past
Realized
Volatility
703.19
959.89
1, 231.34
1, 010.16
769.64

Net
Assets

18.13
19.77
22.05
19.85
17.66

Age

1.31
1.20
1.13
1.19
1.34

Expense
Ratio

117.73
87.23
69.73
76.53
99.58

Turnover

This table summarizes the average characteristics of portfolios of mutual funds sorted according to the most recent risk shifting measure.

Table 2: Fund Characteristics by Risk Shifting

Table 3: Mechanisms of Risk Shifting.

This table summarizes the initial levels (Panel A) and the changes (Panel B) in the fund characteristics that determine the total risk of a fund. The initial levels correspond to the average characteristics
over the prior 36 months and the changes correspond to the difference between the most recent characteristics and the average characteristics over the prior 36 months according to the most recent risk
shifting measure. Portfolios 1 to 5 are defined in Table 2 with cutoff RS measures of {±1%, ±2.5%}.
Panel A: Initial Fund Characteristics
RS
Portfolio
1
2
3
4
5

Cash
Holdings

Market
Beta

Idiosyn.
Volatility

Size
Score

Value
Score

Momen.
Score

Number
of Stocks

Industry
Concen.

0.12
0.10
0.08
0.09
0.10

1.11
1.00
0.93
0.94
0.96

3.42
2.29
2.00
2.18
2.84

3.89
4.06
4.21
4.02
3.82

2.72
2.80
2.89
2.87
2.81

3.34
3.20
3.10
3.14
3.23

72.50
80.26
89.45
81.31
62.18

0.17
0.13
0.11
0.12
0.17

Size
Score

Value
Score

Momen.
Score

Number
of Stocks

Industry
Concen.

Panel B: Changes in Fund Characteristics
RS
Portfolio

Cash
Holdings

Market
Beta

1
2
3
4
5

0.05
0.01
−0.01
−0.03
−0.05

−0.25
−0.10
−0.01
0.08
0.22

Idiosyn.
Volatility
−1.02
−0.17
0.05
0.26
0.82

0.10
0.06
0.03
0.02
−0.05

0.06
0.00
−0.02
−0.01
−0.03

−0.11
−0.03
−0.01
0.01
0.04

3.20
3.98
3.58
1.50
−1.59

−0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01

Table 4: Performance Consequences of Risk Shifting

This table reports the abnormal monthly returns of portfolios of mutual funds sorted according to the
most recent risk shifting measure. The table summarizes the intercepts from factor regressions based
on the CAPM, Fama-French, Carhart, and Ferson-Schadt models. All returns are expressed in %
per month. Portfolios 1 to 5 are defined in Table 2 with cutoff RS measures of {±1%, ±2.5%}. The
significance levels are abbreviated with asterisks: One, two, and three asterisks denote significance
at the 10, 5, and 1% level, respectively.
RS
Portfolio
1
2
3
4
5
(1)-(3)
(5)-(3)

CAPM

FamaFrench

Carhart

FersonSchadt

−0.12
(0.09)
−0.02
(0.05)
0.01
(0.05)
−0.03
(0.06)
−0.22∗∗
(0.11)

−0.10
(0.08)
−0.05
(0.05)
−0.07
(0.05)
−0.08
(0.06)
−0.14∗
(0.08)

−0.07
(0.08)
−0.04
(0.05)
−0.06
(0.05)
−0.09
(0.06)
−0.22∗∗∗
(0.08)

−0.09
(0.08)
−0.08
(0.05)
−0.09∗∗
(0.05)
−0.13∗∗
(0.06)
−0.21∗∗∗
(0.08)

−0.14
(0.09)
−0.23∗∗
(0.10)

−0.03
(0.07)
−0.07
(0.07)

−0.01
(0.08)
−0.16∗∗
(0.07)

0.00
(0.07)
−0.12∗
(0.07)

Table 5: Longer-Term Performance Consequences of Risk Shifting

This table reports Carhart-adjusted monthly returns of portfolios of mutual funds sorted according
to the prior risk shifting measure. The performance of the fund portfolios is computed based on
the risk shifting measures of funds over the prior four quarters. All returns are expressed in % per
month. Portfolios 1 to 5 are defined in Table 2 with cutoff RS measures of {±1%, ±2.5%}. The
significance levels are abbreviated with asterisks: One, two, and three asterisks denote significance
at the 10, 5, and 1% level, respectively.
RS
Portfolio
1
2
3
4
5
(1)-(3)
(5)-(3)

1

Number of Lags in Quarters
2
3

4

−0.07
(0.08)
−0.04
(0.05)
−0.06
(0.05)
−0.09
(0.06)
−0.22∗∗∗
(0.08)

−0.02
(0.08)
−0.05
(0.06)
−0.06
(0.05)
−0.08
(0.06)
−0.21∗∗∗
(0.08)

−0.03
(0.08)
−0.04
(0.05)
−0.07
(0.05)
−0.03
(0.05)
−0.22∗∗∗
(0.08)

−0.08
(0.08)
−0.01
(0.05)
−0.06
(0.04)
−0.07
(0.05)
−0.18∗∗
(0.08)

−0.01
(0.08)
−0.16∗∗
(0.07)

0.04
(0.08)
−0.16∗∗
(0.07)

0.04
(0.07)
−0.15∗∗
(0.07)

−0.02
(0.07)
−0.11
(0.07)

Table 6: Performance of Funds with Different Risk Shifting Incentives

This table reports the frequency distribution and the future Carhart alphas of portfolios of mutual
funds sorted according to risk shifting and fund characteristics that are related to risk shifting
incentives (expense ratio, age, size, and fund family size). Mutual funds are first sorted into two
equal-sized groups according to whether the characteristic is above or below its median value. In a
second step, funds are further divided into five groups according to their risk shifting level. The table
reports the average proportion of funds that fall into one of the ten groups and the Carhart alphas
of the ten portfolios and the differences in the future Carhart alphas between selected portfolios.
All returns are expressed in % per month. Portfolios 1 to 5 are defined in Table 2 with cutoff RS
measures of {±1%, ±2.5%}. The significance levels are abbreviated with asterisks: One, two, and
three asterisks denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1% level, respectively.
Panel A: Funds Sorted by Expense Ratio
RS
Portfolio

Low Exp.

Frequency
High Exp.

1

5.92

8.28

2

7.29

8.07

3

22.71

18.63

4

8.64

7.82

5

5.27

7.36

L−H
−2.36∗∗∗
(0.24)
−0.78∗
(0.42)
4.09∗∗∗
(0.57)
0.82∗
(0.42)
−2.09∗∗∗
(0.36)

All
(1)-(3)
(5)-(3)

Future Carhart Alphas
Low Exp. High Exp.
L−H
−0.10
(0.10)
−0.03
(0.06)
−0.07
(0.05)
−0.05
(0.06)
−0.10
(0.07)

−0.07
(0.10)
−0.06
(0.06)
−0.05
(0.05)
−0.12∗
(0.07)
−0.24∗∗∗
(0.08)

−0.03
(0.12)
0.03
(0.04)
−0.02
(0.02)
0.07
(0.04)
0.14∗∗
(0.06)

−0.07∗
(0.04)
−0.03
(0.10)
−0.02
(0.06)

−0.10∗∗
(0.04)
−0.02
(0.10)
−0.19∗∗∗
(0.07)

0.03∗
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.12)
0.17∗∗
(0.07)

Panel B: Funds Sorted by Fund Age
RS
Portfolio

Young

Frequency
Old

1

7.59

6.62

2

7.82

7.54

3

19.06

22.28

4

8.49

7.97

5

6.95

5.68

All
(1)-(3)
(5)-(3)

Y−O
0.97∗∗∗
(0.27)
0.27
(0.26)
−3.23∗∗∗
(0.54)
0.53
(0.47)
1.26∗∗∗
(0.39)

Future Carhart Alphas
Young
Old
Y−O
−0.09
(0.08)
−0.08
(0.06)
−0.06
(0.05)
−0.08
(0.06)
−0.21∗∗∗
(0.07)

−0.07
(0.11)
−0.04
(0.06)
−0.07
(0.05)
−0.10∗
(0.06)
−0.13∗
(0.07)

−0.01
(0.10)
−0.04
(0.04)
0.00
(0.03)
0.02
(0.04)
−0.08
(0.06)

−0.09∗∗
(0.04)
−0.03
(0.08)
−0.15∗∗
(0.07)

−0.08∗∗
(0.04)
−0.01
(0.11)
−0.06
(0.06)

−0.01
(0.02)
−0.02
(0.10)
−0.09
(0.07)

Panel C: Funds Sorted by Fund Size
RS
Portfolio

Small

Frequency
Large

1

7.81

6.40

2

8.07

7.30

3

19.49

21.85

4

7.87

8.58

5

6.70

5.93

S−L
1.41∗∗∗
(0.37)
0.77∗∗
(0.34)
−2.36∗∗∗
(0.36)
−0.71∗
(0.36)
0.78∗∗∗
(0.29)

All
(1)-(3)
(5)-(3)

Future Carhart Alphas
Small
Large
S−L
−0.11
(0.10)
−0.03
(0.06)
−0.03
(0.05)
−0.10
(0.06)
−0.25∗∗∗
(0.08)

0.01
(0.14)
−0.09
(0.06)
−0.09∗
(0.05)
−0.09
(0.06)
−0.08
(0.08)

−0.11
(0.16)
0.05
(0.05)
0.05∗
(0.03)
−0.01
(0.05)
−0.17∗∗
(0.08)

−0.08∗∗
(0.04)
−0.07
(0.10)
−0.21∗∗∗
(0.07)

−0.08∗∗
(0.04)
0.09
(0.14)
0.00
(0.08)

0.00
(0.02)
−0.17
(0.16)
−0.22∗∗
(0.09)

Panel D: Funds Sorted by Family Size
RS
Portfolio

Small

1

7.33

6.84

2

7.70

7.67

3

20.07

21.24

4

8.13

8.36

5

6.68

5.98

All
(1)-(3)
(5)-(3)

Frequency
Large

S−L
0.49
(0.30)
0.04
(0.42)
−1.16∗∗∗
(0.40)
−0.23
(0.34)
0.71∗∗
(0.32)

Future Carhart Alphas
Small
Large
S−L
−0.11
(0.09)
−0.10∗
(0.05)
−0.05
(0.05)
−0.10∗
(0.06)
−0.26∗∗∗
(0.08)

−0.03
(0.10)
−0.00
(0.06)
−0.07
(0.05)
−0.09
(0.06)
−0.07
(0.08)

−0.08
(0.09)
−0.09∗∗
(0.04)
0.02
(0.03)
−0.01
(0.04)
−0.19∗∗
(0.08)

−0.09∗∗
(0.04)
−0.06
(0.09)
−0.21∗∗∗
(0.07)

−0.07∗
(0.04)
0.03
(0.10)
−0.01
(0.07)

−0.02
(0.02)
−0.10
(0.10)
−0.20∗∗
(0.08)

Table 7: Performance Consequences Using Alternative Risk Shifting Measures

This table reports the abnormal monthly returns of portfolios of mutual funds sorted according
to the most recent risk shifting measure. We compute six different measures of risk shifting: the
standard deviation of the fund returns using all holdings; the proportion of the portfolio invested
in cash and other non-equity securities; the standard deviation of the returns using only equity
positions; the systematic risk, defined as the CAPM beta; and the idiosyncratic risk, defined as
the standard deviation of the residuals from the CAPM and Carhart regressions, respectively. All
returns are expressed in % per month. Portfolios 1 to 5 are defined similarly to Table 2 with
different cutoffs for each RS measure: {±1%, ±2.5%} for all holdings; {±2.5%, ±7.5%} for cash
proportions; {±1%, ±2%} for equity holdings; {±.05, ±0.15} for CAPM beta; and {±1%, ±2%} for
both idiosyncratic risk measures. The significance levels are abbreviated with asterisks: One, two,
and three asterisks denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1% level, respectively.
RS
Portfolio

1
2
3
4
5
(1)-(3)
(5)-(3)

All
Holdings

Proportion
of Equity

Equity
Holdings

−0.07
(0.08)
−0.04
(0.05)
−0.06
(0.05)
−0.09
(0.06)
−0.22∗∗∗
(0.08)

−0.05
(0.05)
−0.04
(0.04)
−0.07
(0.04)
−0.09∗∗
(0.05)
−0.13∗∗
(0.05)

−0.07
(0.08)
−0.08
(0.06)
−0.05
(0.05)
−0.10∗
(0.06)
−0.22∗∗∗
(0.07)

−0.01
(0.08)
−0.16∗∗
(0.07)

0.01
(0.04)
−0.06∗
(0.03)

−0.02
(0.07)
−0.17∗∗∗
(0.06)

CAPM
Beta

Idiosync.
Volatility
(CAPM)

Idiosync.
Volatility
(Carhart)

−0.10
(0.07)
−0.04
(0.05)
−0.06
(0.05)
−0.06
(0.05)
−0.12∗
(0.07)

−0.04
(0.08)
−0.04
(0.06)
−0.07
(0.05)
−0.09
(0.06)
−0.25∗∗∗
(0.09)

0.04
(0.10)
0.01
(0.05)
−0.05
(0.05)
−0.12∗
(0.07)
−0.26∗∗∗
(0.09)

−0.03
(0.07)
−0.05
(0.07)

0.03
(0.08)
−0.18∗∗
(0.08)

0.09
(0.10)
−0.21∗∗
(0.09)

Table 8: Performance of Funds by Risk Shifting and Other Fund Characteristics

This table reports the frequency distribution and the Carhart alphas of portfolios of mutual funds
sorted according to risk shifting and other fund characteristics that are related to trading costs and
prior fund performance (turnover, prior year flow, prior year return, and realized volatility over
prior 3 years). Mutual funds are first sorted into two equal-sized groups according to whether the
characteristic is above or below its median value. In a second step, funds are further divided into five
groups according to their risk shifting level. The table reports the average proportion of funds that
fall into one of the ten groups and the Carhart alphas of the ten portfolios and the differences in the
Carhart alphas between selected portfolios. All returns are expressed in % per month. Portfolios 1
to 5 are defined in Table 2 with cutoff RS measures of {±1%, ±2.5%}. The significance levels are
abbreviated with asterisks: One, two, and three asterisks denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1%
level, respectively.
Panel A: Funds Sorted by Turnover (TO)
RS
Portfolio

Low TO

Frequency
High TO

1

5.21

8.99

2

7.02

8.34

3

24.10

17.22

4

8.71

7.75

5

4.95

7.70

L−H
−3.79∗∗∗
(0.77)
−1.32∗∗
(0.63)
6.88∗∗∗
(0.43)
0.97∗
(0.52)
−2.74∗∗∗
(0.56)

All
(1)-(3)
(5)-(3)

Future Carhart Alphas
Low TO
High TO
L−H
−0.12
(0.13)
−0.04
(0.06)
−0.06
(0.05)
−0.06
(0.06)
−0.31∗∗∗
(0.10)

−0.09
(0.08)
−0.07
(0.06)
−0.07
(0.05)
−0.13∗∗
(0.06)
−0.15∗
(0.08)

−0.03
(0.13)
0.04
(0.05)
0.01
(0.03)
0.08∗
(0.04)
−0.16
(0.10)

−0.07∗
(0.04)
−0.06
(0.13)
−0.25∗∗
(0.10)

−0.10∗∗
(0.04)
−0.02
(0.07)
−0.08
(0.07)

0.03
(0.03)
−0.04
(0.13)
−0.17∗
(0.10)

Panel B: Funds Sorted by Prior Year Flows
RS
Portfolio
1

Low Flow
7.04

Frequency
High Flow
7.16

2

7.37

8.00

3

20.40

20.94

4

8.58

7.88

5

6.55

6.08

All
(1)-(3)
(5)-(3)

L−H
−0.11
(0.66)
−0.63∗
(0.37)
−0.54
(0.72)
0.71∗
(0.37)
0.48
(0.49)

Future Carhart Alphas
Low Flow High Flow
L−H
−0.14∗
−0.01
−0.14
(0.07)
(0.11)
(0.12)
−0.07
−0.07
0.00
(0.06)
(0.06)
(0.07)
−0.06
−0.06
−0.00
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.04)
−0.08
−0.10∗
0.01
(0.07)
(0.06)
(0.05)
−0.18∗∗
−0.13∗
−0.05
(0.08)
(0.08)
(0.09)
−0.09∗
(0.05)
−0.08
(0.06)
−0.12∗
(0.07)

−0.08∗
(0.04)
0.05
(0.11)
−0.07
(0.07)

−0.01
(0.04)
−0.13
(0.12)
−0.05
(0.08)

Panel C: Funds Sorted by Prior Year Fund Performance
RS
Portfolio

Low Ret.

Frequency
High Ret.

1

8.54

5.67

2

7.89

7.47

3

19.87

21.47

4

8.06

8.40

5

5.58

7.06

L−H
2.88∗∗∗
(1.02)
0.43
(0.36)
−1.60
(0.99)
−0.34
(0.50)
−1.48∗
(0.76)

All
(1)-(3)
(5)-(3)

Future Carhart Alphas
Low Ret. High Ret.
L−H
−0.06
(0.10)
−0.07
(0.07)
−0.07
(0.06)
−0.13∗
(0.07)
−0.23∗∗
(0.10)

−0.01
(0.11)
0.01
(0.05)
−0.04
(0.05)
−0.05
(0.06)
−0.11
(0.08)

−0.05
(0.15)
−0.08
(0.09)
−0.03
(0.07)
−0.09
(0.07)
−0.12
(0.12)

−0.13∗∗
(0.06)
0.01
(0.09)
−0.16∗∗
(0.08)

−0.04
(0.04)
0.03
(0.11)
−0.07
(0.06)

−0.08
(0.08)
−0.02
(0.13)
−0.09
(0.09)

Panel D: Funds Sorted by Realized Volatility over the Prior Three Years
RS
Portfolio

Low Vol.

Frequency
High Vol.

1

3.27

10.94

2

6.51

8.85

3

25.19

16.15

4

9.33

7.13

5

5.64

7.00

All
(1)-(3)
(5)-(3)

L−H
−7.67∗∗∗
(1.61)
−2.34∗∗∗
(0.86)
9.05∗∗∗
(0.92)
2.20∗∗∗
(0.54)
−1.36∗∗
(0.68)

Future Carhart Alphas
Low Vol. High Vol.
L−H
−0.07
(0.05)
−0.05
(0.05)
−0.07∗
(0.04)
−0.04
(0.05)
−0.09
(0.06)

−0.10
(0.10)
−0.01
(0.06)
−0.00
(0.06)
−0.14∗
(0.07)
−0.27∗∗∗
(0.10)

−0.07∗∗
(0.04)
0.00
(0.05)
−0.01
(0.05)

−0.09∗
(0.05)
−0.09
(0.10)
−0.27∗∗∗
(0.08)

0.03
(0.11)
−0.04
(0.06)
−0.07
(0.05)
0.09
(0.06)
0.18∗
(0.11)
0.02
(0.05)
0.10
(0.11)
0.26∗∗∗
(0.09)

Intercept

Flow

Turnover

Expense Ratio

Size

Age

Lagged Return

Realized Volatility

MIN(0,RS)

MAX(0,RS)

1.0372∗∗∗
(0.2426)

−0.0435∗∗
(0.0188)
0.0149
(0.0177)

−0.0348∗∗∗
(0.0101)
−0.0076
(0.0160)
−0.0020
(0.0136)
0.2489∗∗∗
(0.0637)
−0.0095
(0.0172)
−0.0111
(0.0087)
−0.0768∗∗
(0.0312)
0.0007∗∗∗
(0.0002)
−0.0115∗∗
(0.0056)
0.9193∗∗∗
(0.1879)

Raw
Fund Return

0.0047
(0.0401)

−0.0595∗∗∗
(0.0148)
−0.0094
(0.0158)

−0.0517∗∗∗
(0.0110)
−0.0207
(0.0140)
−0.0066
(0.0085)
0.0860∗
(0.0507)
−0.0273∗
(0.0158)
−0.0063
(0.0076)
−0.0671∗∗∗
(0.0253)
0.0004∗
(0.0002)
−0.0066
(0.0048)
0.1857
(0.1396)

Four-Factor Adjusted
Fund Return

−0.0100
(0.0278)

−0.0366∗∗∗
(0.0116)
−0.0060
(0.0146)

−0.0316∗∗∗
(0.0075)
−0.0213∗
(0.0123)
−0.0077
(0.0083)
0.1604∗∗∗
(0.0475)
−0.0106
(0.0126)
−0.0108
(0.0076)
−0.0646∗∗
(0.0253)
0.0005∗∗∗
(0.0002)
−0.0046
(0.0043)
0.0596
(0.1372)

Characteristics-Adjusted
Fund Return

0.0381∗∗
(0.0154)

−0.0168∗∗
(0.0085)
−0.0116
(0.0093)

−0.0178∗∗
(0.0082)
−0.0106
(0.0100)
−0.0008
(0.0024)
0.0407∗∗∗
(0.0121)
−0.0107∗
(0.0060)
−0.0062
(0.0050)
−0.0016
(0.0154)
0.0002∗∗
(0.0001)
−0.0023
(0.0022)
0.0733
(0.0534)

Return Gap

To investigate the relation between risk shifting and subsequent fund performance we run a multivariate Fama-MacBeth regression.
The dependent variable in each cross-section is a performance measure in a particular month. The additional control variables are the
realized volatility over the prior 36 months, the prior-year return of a fund, the age of the fund defined as the logarithm of (1 +AGE), the
logarithm of the assets under management, the expense ratio of the fund, the turnover ratio, and the growth rate in new money over the
prior year. To adjust for risk and style, we use four different performance measures: (1) the raw fund return; (2) the Carhart abnormal
return; (3) the characteristics-adjusted return; and (4) the return gap. The Carhart alpha of a fund is defined as the fund return minus
the expected factor return using the betas estimated from the current fund holdings over the last 36 months. The characteristics-adjusted
return is defined as the difference between the fund return and the benchmark return of securities with similar size, book-to-market,
and momentum characteristics as proposed by Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997). Finally, the return gap is computed
following Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2008) as the difference between the fund return and the holdings return after adjusting for fund
expenses. The significance levels are abbreviated with asterisks: One, two, and three asterisks denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1%
level, respectively.

Table 9: Multi-Variate Performance Regression

6

RS5

4

2

RS4

RS

RS3

0
-4

-2

0
-2

2

4

6

8

RS2

-4
RS1

-6
Quarters Around Formation Period

Figure 1: Persistence of Risk Shifting.

The figure depicts the average risk shifting level for the five risk shifting portfolios four
quarters before and eight quarters after the portfolio formation.

0.05
CAPM

0.00
-6

-4

-2

2

4

6

-0.05

Carhart

Performance

0

FersonSchadt

-0.10

FamaFrench

-0.15

-0.20

-0.25
Risk Shifting

Figure 2: Future Performance of Portfolios by Risk Shifting Measure.

This figure depicts the abnormal monthly returns of portfolios of mutual funds sorted according to the most recent risk shifting measure. The figure summarizes the intercepts from
factor regressions based on the CAPM, Fama-French, Carhart, and Ferson-Schadt models.
All returns are expressed in % per month.

100
90

Cumulative Distribution

80
70
60
50
40
30
RS5

20

RS1
RS3

10
0
0

10

20

30
40
50
60
70
80
Performance Rank Using Carhart Alphas

Figure 3: Cumulative Distribution Function.

90

100

We report the cumulative distribution functions of the fund rankings for mutual funds in
different risk shifting groups. We sort mutual funds into the five portfolios according to their
most recent risk shifting measure. At the end of every quarter we compute the cumulative
distribution function of the percentile ranking of funds based on the Carhart alphas over the
subsequent 12-month period for each of the five portfolios. Finally, we depict the average
levels of the quarterly cumulative distribution functions. The figure shows the cumulative
distributions for three different groups of mutual funds. The curve RS1 corresponds to funds
in portfolio (1) that reduce their risk by more than 2.5%, RS5 to funds that increase their
risk by more than 2.5%, and RS3 for funds that change their risk by less than 1%. All returns
are expressed in % per month.

