NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MOTIVATING POLITICIANS:
THE IMPACTS OF MONETARY INCENTIVES ON QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE
Claudio Ferraz
Frederico Finan
Working Paper 14906
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14906

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2009

We thank Daron Acemoglu, Simon Board, Ken Chay, Ernesto dal Bó, Miguel Foguel, Jinyong Hahn,
Ted Miguel, Ben Olken, Duncan Thomas, and seminar participants at Boston University, Brown University,
Duke University, EESP-FGV, EPGE-FGV, Ibmec-Rio, IPEA-Rio, LACEA-PEG, MIT, NBER Summer
Institute, 2008 NASM of Econometric Society, Pacific Development Conference, PUC-Rio, Stanford
GSB, UC-Riverside, UC-Berkeley, UCSan Diego, University of Southern California, USP, and Yale
University for helpful comments and suggestions. We are grateful to Diana Bello, Marcio Nery, Julia
Ramos, and Livia Schneider for excellent research assistance, and to Telma Venturelli for providing
the legislative census data. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Claudio Ferraz and Frederico Finan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Motivating Politicians: The Impacts of Monetary Incentives on Quality and Performance
Claudio Ferraz and Frederico Finan
NBER Working Paper No. 14906
April 2009
JEL No. D72,D78,J33
ABSTRACT
Recent studies have emphasized the importance of the quality of politicians for good government and
consequently economic performance. But if the quality of leadership matters, then understanding what
motivates individuals to become politicians and perform competently in office becomes a central question.
In this paper, we examine whether higher wages attract better quality politicians and improve political
performance using exogenous variation in the salaries of local legislators across Brazil’s municipal
governments. The analysis exploits discontinuities in wages across municipalities induced by a constitutional
amendment defining caps on the salary of local legislatures according to municipal population. Our
main findings show that higher wages increases political competition and improves the quality of legislators,
as measured by education, type of previous profession, and political experience in office. In addition
to this positive selection, we find that wages also affect politicians’ performance, which is consistent
with a behavioral response to a higher value of holding office.

Claudio Ferraz
Department of Economics
PUC-Rio
Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 22453-900
Brazil
cferraz@econ.puc-rio.br
Frederico Finan
Department of Economics
UCLA
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
ffinan@econ.ucla.edu

1

Introduction

Governments that secure property rights, regulate entry less, and curb corruption are thought to
create the right incentives for economies to prosper.1 But while the virtues of good government
for economic development and growth are widely acknowledged, what determines the quality of
government is much less clear. One predominant view in the literature argues that political institutions that restrict rent-seeking and promote electoral accountability shape the necessary incentives
for good policy-making. However, political institutions can only partially explain the variation in
the quality of government both across countries and over time.2 A complementary view is that
the quality of policy-making depends on the honesty and competence of the political class (Besley
(2006)). Recent empirical evidence suggests that leaders play an important role in enacting the
right policies and affecting economic performance (Besley, Persson, and Sturm 2007; Jones and
Olken 2005). But if the characteristics of policy-makers matter, then it is important to understand
what attracts high quality politicians into office and what provides them with the incentives to
perform according to voters preferences.
Politicians have a variety of motivations for holding public office. Some derive personal satisfaction from being in power or experience an intrinsic benefit based on a sense of civic duty;
others desire to implement their preferred policies because of ideology or to satisfy special interest
groups.3 For many, however, monetary rewards are the principal motivation. A growing theoretical
literature has shown that increases in monetary incentives affect both the types of politicians that
run for office as well as their performance. Yet, in contrast to the standard efficiency wage model,
which justifies higher levels of compensation as a way to align incentives and encourage positive
1

See De Long and Schleifer (2003); Knack and Keefer (1995); North (1981).
In their account of the success story of Botswana, Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2003) conjecture that good
institutions played an important role in Botswana’s performance. Nevertheless, they also attribute a key role to “a
number of important and farsighted decisions by the post-independence political leaders, in particular Seretse Khama
and Quett Masire”.
3
Alesina (1988), Calvert (1985), and Witman (1977) provide examples of models where politicians are motivated
by the desire to influence policy. The question of whether intrinsic motivations affect political behavior has received
a lot of recent attention. For instance Besley and Ghatak (2005) develop a model where incentives depend on the
extent to which agents agree with the cause. Callander (2007) use a game-theoretical model of electoral competition
to distinguish between office-motivated politicians versus policy-motivated politicians. Dal Bó, Dal Bó, and Di Tella
(2006) provide a model where legal institutions and violence affect incentives of individuals to enter public office.
Besley (2006) and Persson and Tabellini (2000) provide excellent discussions of these various models of political
motivations.
2

1

selection into firms, the benefits of increasing monetary rewards are not as clear in a political setting where monitoring and accountability may be weak. For instance, using a citizen-candidate
model, Caselli and Morelli (2004) show that the competence of the elected body is increasing in the
political rewards from office. An opposite prediction emerges from the model of Matozzi and Merlo
(2008) where an increase in the salary a politician receives while in office decreases the average
quality of individuals who become politicians. Thus, the question is ultimately an empirical one.
In this paper, we use exogenous variation in the salaries of local politicians across Brazil’s
municipal governments to study the effects of wages on political selection and performance. In
particular, we examine whether salaries affect who enters politics, the characteristics of elected
politicians, and their legislative performance. We overcome two existing obstacles to identify these
effects. First, previous studies have had to limit their analysis to elected politicians, which is a
selected group with unobserved skills (e.g. ability, valence) that may not only affect their probability
of winning but also their performance while in office.4 We gather data on all candidates that ran for
legislative office, and thus we are able to estimate the effects of wages on the number of candidates
and their characteristics. Second, and more importantly, wages are not set randomly, but often
by the politicians themselves, which introduces several identification concerns. Politicians that
perform better may be able to demand higher wages (Di Tella and Fisman 2004). We address
this identification issue by exploiting a quasi-experimental source of variation in local legislators’
salaries. A 2000 constitutional amendment introduced a cap on the maximum salary that could be
paid to local legislators. This cap, which varies according to the municipality’s population, induces
discontinuities in wages across municipalities. We use these discontinuities to estimate the causal
effects of salaries on political selection and performance using a two-stage least squares estimator
motivated by the fuzzy regression-discontinuity design (Campbell 1969; Van Der Klaauw 2002).
Our findings indicate that increases in the salary of legislators not only attract more individuals
to run for political office, but also attracts more educated ones. A one standard deviation increase
in wages increases political competition by 0.7 candidates per seat and the share of candidates with
a high school degree by 7.4 percent. We also find that higher salaries attract more candidates from
4
Existing studies do not have information on political candidates, only on those elected for office. See for example
Besley (2004) and Diermeier, Keane, and Merlo (2005).

2

white-collar professions (i.e. more businessmen and lawyers compared to farmers and policemen).
Moreover, these effects are not limited to the pool of candidates. In municipalities that offer higher
salaries, politicians have higher reelection rates, particularly those that are more educated. Thus,
legislative bodies that pay higher wages have more educated and experienced legislators.
In addition to these effects on political selection, we also find that salaries affect politicians’
performance. Legislators can influence local policy-making by submitting bills (formal requests
for project that are then passed into laws) and petitions (requests for targeted public works). We
find that higher wages increase both the number of bills submitted by the legislators and those
approved. But, our findings show mixed evidence with respect to public goods provision. While
higher salaries increase the number of health clinics and schools, and improve school infrastructure,
we find no effects on households’ access to water and sanitation.
While these effects on legislative performance are consistent with a political agency model
where changes in the value of holding office affect political behavior, it is difficult to separate it
from a selection effect. We do however provide suggestive evidence that the increase in legislative
productivity is not entirely driven by the positive selection of politicians. Instead, our results
suggest that legislators do put forth effort in policy-making due to an increase in the future value
of holding office.
In this paper, we present the first empirical evidence that exploits exogenous variation in politicians’ wage to identify its effects on political selection and performance. Existing studies have
simulated the effects of politician wages using structural models. Diermeier, Keane, and Merlo
(2005) estimate a dynamic model of career decisions of U.S. congressmen to quantify the returns
to a career in congress. They show that a 20 percent increase in the wages of House members increases the likelihood of running for re-election from 91.2 percent to 94.2 percent. Using the same
framework, Keane and Merlo (2007) examines the effects of a 20 percent reduction in salaries. This
policy simulation leads to not only a 14 percent reduction in the average duration of congressional
careers, but also induces skilled politicians to exit disproportionately more. These findings are consistent with our results that higher wages decrease turnover and increase the education level of the
legislature. Our paper complements these empirical studies in several ways. It examines the effects

3

of wages, not only political selection, but also on candidate entry. With data only on members
of Congress, these previous studies cannot evaluate the effects of wages on the composition of the
pool of candidates. Moreover, our study also focuses on legislative productivity and the provision
of public goods.
Our results lend further empirical support for the citizen-candidate models of Besley and Coate
(1997) and Osborne and Slivinski (1996), which highlight the importance of politicians’ identity
for policy choices.5 Our results are thus consistent with Besley, Pande, and Rao (2005), who use
data from Indian villages and show that education increases the chances of selection to public
office and reduces politicians’ opportunism. Our paper is also related to a large body of work in
political agency models that focus on the role of electoral accountability in disciplining incumbent
politicians.6 Our findings suggest that increases in wages are likely to make incumbent politicians
more accountable because it makes the value of holding office in the future higher. Politicians
respond by increasing their legislative effort in order to boost their chances of re-election.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a theoretical framework that will
help the interpretation of our empirical findings. Section 3 provides the institutional background
and describes the data used for the analysis. Section 4 presents the empirical strategy, followed by
the results shown in section 5 and the conclusions in section 6.

2

Theoretical Framework

In this section, we summarize the existing theoretical literature that builds on the citizen-candidate
model to analyze the effects of monetary incentives on the average quality of politicians. Moreover,
because the citizen-candidate model focuses only on political entry, we summarize the use of political agency model to analyze how wages might affect the behavior of incumbent politicians. To
complement this discussion, we present, in Appendix A, a simple model that generates predictions
on how changes in politicians’ salaries affect both selection and behavior.
5

See Chattopadhyay and Dufflo (2004), Lee, Moretti, and Butler (2004), and Munshi and Rosenzweig (2008) for
empirical evidence in support of these models.
6
See Barro (1970) and Ferejohn (1986) for original work focusing exclusively on hidden actions. More recently,
Besley (2006) and Smart and Sturm (2006) build models with both unobserved types and actions. Empirical evidence
is provided by Besley and Case (1995) and Ferraz and Finan (2007).

4

2.1

Wages, Political Behavior and Selection

The basic theoretical framework used to study the decision to enter politics is the citizen-candidate
model [Besley and Coate (1997); Osborne and Slivinski (1996)]. In this class of models, citizens’
decide whether or not to run for public office in an environment where running for office is costly and
candidates cannot fully commit to policy implementation. Without full commitment, candidate
heterogeneity in preferences ultimately determines the policy that is then implemented. Caselli
and Morelli (2004) adopt this framework to investigate how wages affect the quality of candidates
that run for office. They present a model with high and low ability individuals, where high ability
individuals have better policymaking skills and are also more productive in the private sector.
Voters, however, do not observe the quality of the candidates, but do receive a signal from each
candidate. In equilibrium, voters will only select high-signal candidates. Thus, as the monetary
returns from office decrease, high quality individuals are less likely to run and the proportion of low
quality-high signal candidates increases.7 In a related paper, Messner and Polborn (2004) also using
a citizen-candidate framework provide a different comparative static result. The expected quality
of candidates may decrease as the benefits of holding office increase. With higher wages, more
individuals enter politics thus increasing the incentive for more-competent candidates to free-ride
on the other candidates and thus not run for office.
A different result is obtained by Matozzi and Merlo (2008) using a dynamic equilibrium overlapping generations model. In their model, an increase in the salary of politicians induces two
effects: an entry effect, which affects the average quality of persons that become politicians, and
a retention effect given by the turnover in the political sector. An increase in the return to the
political profession makes it more attractive compared to private sector activities. Hence lower
quality individuals enter the political sector lowering the average quality of entering politicians. In
addition, it also increases the future earnings relative to the market wage making it more desirable
for politicians to stay in office for a second-term instead of moving to the private sector.
While these papers provide interesting insights into the effects of wages on political selection,
they do not provide any predictions on how wages will affect the behavior of politicians once in office.
7

The term quality is used in most of these models as the ability to provide public goods at low costs. Caselli and
Morelli (2004) emphasize that quality is mostly determined by two factors: competence and honesty.

5

Political agency models provide a useful framework to understand these additional effects. Besley
(2004) examines the effects of wages on the selection and behavior of politicians using a political
agency model where voters are unable to observe either the politician’s type or his actions.8 In
the model, there are two-types of politicians: congruent and dissonant politicians. Congruent
politicians always act in accordance with voters’ objectives, whereas dissonant politicians receive
additional rents from taking an action that is different from voter’s preferred action. But, as
Besley (2004) shows, given the possibility of re-election, as the value of holding office increases,
dissonant politicians are much more likely to refrain from rent-seeking and behave according to
voters’ preferences. Hence, this model predicts that an increase in the remuneration increases
average politician’s performance (as dissonant politician take voters’ preferred action) and, thus
also decreases turnover of incumbent politicians.

3

Institutional Background and Data

3.1

Local Governments and the Câmara de Vereadores

Brazil is one of the most decentralized countries in the world. Local governments receive large
sums of resources to provide a significant share of public services.9 The decision on how to spend
these resources is made by an elected mayor in conjunction with the local legislature – the Câmara
de Vereadores.10 These câmaras consist of a council of legislators elected from an open list, proportional representation system every four years. Its size varies from 9-55 members depending on
the municipality’s population. According to Brazil’s constitution, the legislature is responsible for
enacting laws and monitoring the executive for its use of public resources. Specifically, legislators
are in charge of proposing bills consisting of programs and budgetary projects that would become
laws, creating commissions designed to discuss local problems, and encouraging public hearings to
8

See Banks and Sundaram (1993) for an early agency model with both adverse selection and moral hazard.
Differently from local governments in other countries, Brazil’s municipalities are responsible for providing education, health care, transportation, and local infrastructure. The 5,560 Brazilian municipalities receive on average
$35 billion per year from the federal government, which represents approximately 15 percent of federal government’s
revenue.
10
Brazil’s Câmaras de Vereadores, date back to the 1800s. They were established by the Portuguese crown in the
major Vilas and were in charge of all local decision-making including administrative, police, and judiciary acts. See
Leal (1975) for details on its historical evolution.
9

6

learn about the needs of the community.
Legislators can influence local spending and the quality of public policy in three ways. First,
legislators must approve the municipal budget. The legislature receives a detailed budget proposal
from the mayor with spending items on all programs and public work projects. The legislature (or
a specific finance commission) analyzes the budget proposal and then returns it to the mayor with
or without line-items vetoes.11 While mayors are not obligated to spend on all of the approved
items, the budget, as approved by legislators, limits the amount that can be spent on each item.12
Local legislators influence local policy-making mainly by submitting bills (projetos de lei) and
petitions (indicações). Bills consist of formal projects that are submitted for consideration to the
legislature in order to become municipal laws. They can be submitted by individual legislators,
a legislative committee, or the mayor himself. While most bills submitted by mayors focus on
obtaining funds for extra spending and the hiring of public employees, bills formulated by legislators
focus on the adoption of new programs or the creation of local councils to monitor the executive
for its implementation of social programs. Some examples will help to illustrate the use of these
bills. In the municipality of Brumado, in Bahia, the legislator Gilberto Dias Lima, elected in
2004, proposed two bills that directly affect the quality of education and health provided. The
first project established direct elections for municipal school directors and a second project obliges
municipal health clinics to test newborns for hearing difficulties. Bills are also used to establish new
social programs. Rosinere França Abbud, a legislator from Juiz de Fora, Minas Gerais, presented
a bill aimed at creating an emergency unemployment program. In Santa Cruz do Capibaribe,
Pernambuco, legislator Rui José Medeiros Silva proposed a bill to create a municipal council of
economic and social development.
Petitions, on the other hand, consist of explicit requests made by legislators to the mayor, for
geographically-targeted public works and services. Most petitions consist of infrastructure projects
such as road building, construction of health clinics and schools. But it is also common to see
11
See Pereira and Mueller (2002) for an analysis of the budget process and the executive-legislative relations in
Brazil.
12
Differently from the federal congress, however, amendments play a small role in the bargaining process between
the local executive and legislative (Melo 2005). See Ames (1995) for a detailed description on the use of Emendas
Parlamentares in Brazil.

7

legislators request such items as additional doctors in local clinics or teachers and computers for
schools. For instance, in the municipality of São Manuel, São Paulo, a legislator sent a petition to
the mayor to build a primary school in the neighborhood of Conquista e Bela Vista. In Itabela,
Bahia, the legislator Genilda Farias requested resources to train primary school teachers, while
another legislator, Agnaldo Santos, proposed the hiring of doctors to attend the growing number of
patients in the Itabela health center. In the municipality of Taquari, Rio Grande do Sul, petition
no.140/06, from legislator Celso Göethel, asked for the acquisition of computers for the municipal
school “Sóror Joana Angélica”, located in Passo do Juncal. In addition to submitting bills and
public work requests, local legislators are also in charge of monitoring the executive for its use of
public resources. The quality of legislators (competence and honesty) is likely to affect whether
they overlook corruption, irregular public hires, and irregularities in the public administration.13
Differently from mayors who face a two term limit, legislators can get reelected indefinitely.
Hence, politicians that desire a career in local politics have strong incentives to perform according
to voters expectations. Moreover, for some politicians, the local legislature is just a first step
towards a higher level political position. A large number of mayors, governors and congressmen
started their careers as local legislators. For all these reasons, increases in legislators salaries are
likely to induce vereadores to put more effort into signaling high productivity to voters in order to
get reelected or build a future career.
We measure this effort by examining the number of bills submitted and approved by legislators
and the variation in public services using data for the number of schools, health clinics, doctors, and
water and sanitation connections. In order to illustrate how legislators inform voters about the bills
and petitions (indicações) they have submitted, we present in Appendix C three examples extracted
from the personal web sites of legislators. Each example includes the name of the legislator, the
municipality they got elected for, and the internet address of the web site that provides information
on their accomplishments.
In the first example, legislator Ana Selma, from Cabo de Santo Agostinho, Pernambuco, describes her visit to the city of Garapu, where she informed its citizens about her petitions to benefit
13

See Lopez (2004) for a detailed case study of the executive-legislative relation at the municipal level.

8

the region. She requested the construction of a primary school, a health clinic for the Health
Family Program and the intensification of police escorts to control crime. In the second example,
legislator Romério, from Resende in the state of Rio de Janeiro, highlights his petitions for educational improvements. His website claims the acquisition of magazines and newspapers for school
libraries, and the construction of computer and science labs in the local schools. The third example
illustrated by José Damaso, from Palmas, informs his constituents about his requests for the construction of new classrooms in the municipal school of Tiago Barbosa, as well as the construction
of a local police station in the community of Taquari.14

3.2

Constitutional Rules and the Salary of Legislators

The salary of federal deputies, as determined by Brazil’s constitution, serves as the basis for the
wages of all other legislators. State legislators are free to set their own salary subject to a maximum
of 75 percent of what federal deputies earn and until 2000 local legislators were subject to a
maximum salary of 75 percent of state deputies’ earnings. In February of 2000, a constitutional
amendment was established to further limit the maximum salary of local legislators. It defined caps
on the salary of legislators and the share of revenues that could be spent on the local legislature as
a function of municipal population. Because wages can only be set by legislators for the subsequent
administration, these new caps did not have an immediate effect on salaries during the 2001-2004
legislature.15 Even though wages are set in the previous legislature , as it will become clear in
the empirical strategy section, this does not affect our research design. Our identification strategy,
which is an intention-to-treat design, exploits cross-sectional variation and the discontinuous jumps
created by the amendment. This does not suggest, however, that the law did not affect selection
into the 2000 election or politicians’ performance during the 2001-2004 term. It is possible that
among municipalities that were able to offer a higher future wage, incumbent politicians increased
effort in order to get re-elected. We test for this in Section 5.
Table 1 summarizes the main features of this law. There are 5 population thresholds defining the
14
These three examples are just a sample of many web pages and blogs used to disseminate the information about
the actions being taken by legislators. In effect, several legislators list the bills and petitions submitted on their web
pages or blogs as a way to signal productivity to voters.
15
Except for a small subset of municipalities that had to reduce wages to comply with the law.

9

maximum salary of legislators. In smaller municipalities, up to 10,000 inhabitants, local legislators
can get as much as 20 percent of the state deputy salary. This share increases to 30 percent in
municipalities with a population between 10,000 and 50,000 residents. For larger municipalities,
those above 500,000 inhabitants, the maximum value is set at 75 percent of state deputy salaries.
Column 3 displays the maximum allowed wages estimated for 2004/2005, given that federal deputies
had a salary of R$12,847.2 and state deputies had a salary capped at R$9,635.4.16 For municipalities
with less than 10,000 inhabitants, the maximum salary of a legislature can receive is R$1,927
per month versus R$7,227 per month for legislators residing in municipalities with a population
above 500,000 inhabitants. The constitutional amendment also capped the amount of legislative
spending as a percent of total revenues, but these percentages only vary for the municipalities with
a population above 100,000, which represents only 3 percent of the sample (see column 4).
Given that salaries are determined by these population cutoffs, there are two potential concerns
that might affect our analysis. First, municipal governments may have influenced the law through
some bargaining process with the federal government or may have altered their population count.
This is extremely unlikely in the case of Brazil, where municipal governments (even larger ones) have
limited control over the constitutional amendments that are legislated. Also, we can indirectly test
for this when comparing the characteristics of municipalities near the threshold points. A second
concern relates to the existence of other policies that are determined by population cutoffs. As
we discuss in detail in the robustness section, these population cutoffs do not determine any other
policies and our results are robust to accounting for policies that are affected by other population
thresholds.

3.3

Data and Descriptive Statistics

The main data source used in this study comes from a new Census of Brazil’s Municipal Legislatures.
It was collected in 2005 by the Interlegis, a sub-secretary of the Brazilian Senate, for approximately
5,000 municipalities. Roughly, 260 surveyors collected data on physical facilities (e.g. building
ownership, existence of telephone lines, and access to the internet); institutional characteristics
16

There is almost no variation in the salaries of state deputies across Brazil. Most of the variation comes from the
perks from office.

10

(e.g. administrative structure, existence of legislative commissions, wage paid to legislators); and
personal characteristics of legislators (e.g. education, gender, age, term in office). A novel feature
of this census is the availability of municipal level data on the legislators’ wages, and measures of
legislative output (number of bills submitted and approved).17
To study the effects of wages on political entry and selection, we construct a complementary
dataset with the characteristics of legislative candidates that ran in the 2000 and 2004 elections.
Using the electronic files available from the Tribunal Superior Eleitoral (TSE), we calculate for
each municipality, the number of candidates, the proportion of female candidates, their age, their
years of schooling, occupation, campaign spending, and their political parties.
For the purpose of the analysis, it is important to account for any differences in municipal
characteristics and to test whether these characteristics are discontinuous at the wage cutoffs. As
such, we gathered information from several additional sources.18 The Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatı́stica(IBGE)) 2000 population census
provides us with socio-economic characteristics such as the percentage of urban population, Gini
coefficient, income per capita and a measure of infrastructure availability (percentage of households
with electricity). In addition, we use the IBGE inter-census population estimates to obtain data
on the 2003 and 2004 municipal populations. To control for different institutional features of the
municipality, we use the 2002 and 2005 Perfil dos Municı́pios Brasileiros: Gestão Pública. This
survey characterizes various aspects of the public administration, such as budgetary and planning
procedures, the number of public employees. It also provides us with structural features such as
the existence of local radio and the presence of a judge and public prosecutors. Public finance data
was obtained from the National Treasury (Secretaria do Tesouro) through the FINBRA dataset.
It contains municipal spending by categories and revenues by sources (i.e. local taxes, intergovernmental transfers). The differences in legislators’ wages across municipalities might, in part, reflect
differences in living costs across regions. In order to control for this we also gathered data on
average municipal wages from the RAIS, which includes information on all workers in the public
17

We also have data on total compensation (wages plus perks from office such as gas for their cars and mobile
phones) but there is considerable measurement error associated with these figures. We use wages in the analysis that
follows but our results are similar if instead we use total compensation.
18
See the data appendix B for a detailed description of data sources.

11

sector and formal private sector.
Descriptive statistics for the main variables used in the analysis are shown in Table 2. The
average size of the legislature is about 9 legislators (which is equal to the minimum size) and the
average wage for a legislator is R$1641, which is approximately 2.6 times the average wage for
workers. In a large number of municipalities, the legislature is in session for only part of the week,
on average 10 hours. During 2005, there were approximately 0.86 bills submitted per legislator
and 0.69 got approved. The legislatures are mainly composed of male legislators (approximately 87
percent) and legislators that are either in their first or second mandate (72 percent). Approximately
one third are less than 40 years old and the average years of schooling of legislators is 9.7 (median
is 10.6), which is equivalent to a high school drop-out. Elected legislators seem to be slightly
more educated than the average candidate (9.08 years of schooling) and a smaller proportion of
woman get elected (women are, on average, 20 percent of candidates). There are, on average, 6.1
candidates per seat, but this number drops to 3.6 for the first quartile of municipalities. As for
municipalities in Brazil, they are, on average, small (23,000 inhabitants), largely urban (61% of
urban population), highly unequal (average Gini coefficient of 0.56), and approximately a quarter
of the population is illiterate.

4

Empirical Strategy

Our analysis estimates the effects of wages on politician selection and performance. To identify these
effects, we exploit exogenous variation in local legislators’ salaries induced by federally-mandated
salary caps. We begin this section by discussing the identification concerns associated with using
OLS estimation. We then present the econometric models we use to estimate these wage effects
and the assumptions needed for a causal interpretation of the parameters of interest.
Consider the following cross-sectional relationship between wages and politicians’ characteristics
or performance:
yi = β0 + β1 log(wi ) + x0i δ + εi
log(wi ) = α + x0i θ + νi
12

(1)

where yi is the average characteristic or performance indicator of politicians in municipality i (e.g.
average years of schooling or the average number of projects approved by the legislative council),
wi is the wage that members of the local legislature receive, xi is a vector of observed municipal
characteristics, and εi and νi are unobserved determinants of politician performance (or selection)
and wages, respectively. Under the assumption that E[εi νi ] = 0, the least squares estimator of β1
will be a consistent estimate of the causal effect of wages on politician performance (or selection).
Unfortunately, there are several potential omitted factors in equation 1 that covary with both
wages and politician performance. Municipalities that offer higher wages presumably attract more
able politicians who are also more educated and more productive in submitting bills to the legislature. Moreover, the correlation between wages and politician performance might capture the
fact that high performance politicians might be able to set themselves a higher wage (Di Tella and
Fisman (2004)).
To overcome these identification concerns, we exploit the exogenous variation in legislators’
wages induced by salary caps. As we discussed in Section 3, the federal government stipulated
five ceilings for the wage of local politicians depending on population thresholds. In municipalities
with population above the cutoffs, legislators receive, on average, higher salaries compared to those
legislators in municipalities below the cutoffs, as we show in the next section.
Our empirical approach uses these discontinuities in the wages to identify the effects on politician selection and performance. Intuitively, if legislators’ salaries are smoothly related to other
characteristics at the population cutoffs, then we can estimate the effects of wages by comparing
outcomes of legislators in municipalities with population levels just below and above these cutoffs.
In our setting, because salaries are not entirely explained by the population cutoffs, we use a fuzzy
regression discontinuity design where indicators for population cutoffs serve as excluded instruments in a Two-Stage Least Squares (TSLS) setting (Van Der Klaauw 2002).19 Formally, consider
19

The population cutoffs act as a cap on the maximum value that can be paid to legislators. The amount that
is effectively paid, however, depends on the resources available to the municipal government, on political bargaining
between the mayor ad legislators, and on the social pressure exerted by the population. Thus, a large number of
smaller municipalities pay salaries below the cap.

13

the following model:
yi = β0 + β1 E[log(w)i |Pi , xi ] + f (Pi ) + x0i δ + εi
5
X
E[log(w)i |Pi , xi ] = α0 +
αk 1{Pi > P̄k } + g(Pi ) + x0i θ

(2)

k=1

where Pi is the population of municipality i, 1{·} is an indicator function that equals one if the
municipality’s population is above the k th cutoff P̄k (i.e. 10,000 inhabitants), and the functions
f (·) and g(·) are flexible functions of population.
In the context of equation (2), consistent estimation of β1 using the TSLS approach relies
on wages being discontinuous at the cutoffs (which is testable) and f (·) and g(·) being locally
continuous at the population cutoffs (Hahn, Todd, and Van der Klaauw 2001). If the functions f (·)
and g(·) are specified correctly, they will capture all other potential effects of population on wages
and legislators outcomes far away from the cutoffs. Then, the use cutoffs indicators as excluded
instruments will provide a consistent estimate of β1 .
In our preferred specification, we use the five population cut-offs and estimate f (·) and g(·) as
piecewise linear splines (i.e. separate regressions on both sides of each discontinuity). We also show
that our results are robust to alternative estimation strategies. First, we relax the spline functional
form assumption and allow for a flexible polynomial on population.20 Second, we restrict the sample
to only those municipalities close to the cut-offs. Finally, we use the actual value of the salary cap
as an instrument for the salary paid to legislators. This identification strategy is related to the
trend-break models used by Angrist and Lavy (1999) and Burgess and Pande (2005).
20

Alternatively, the fuzzy-regression discontinuity estimator could be implemented using a non-parametric approach. A local linear regression could be used to estimate the outcome and treatment regressions. Due to the small
number of municipalities to the right of the first cut-off, we preferred to estimate a parametric specification. See Lee,
Moretti, and Butler (2004), Ferreira and Gyourko (2007), Urquiola and Verhoogen (2008) for other studies that adopt
a similar strategy to ours and Imbens and Lemieux (2008) for an overview of different alternatives for estimating the
Regression Discontinuity.

14

5

Empirical Results

In this section, we begin by documenting the OLS estimates of the effects of legislator’s salaries on
the measures of political selection. Next, we propose an alternative identification strategy based
on discontinuities in the wages. Using these TSLS estimates, we show that salaries affect both the
type of politicians that run for and get elected into office, as well as their behavior. These results
are robust to various specifications and are consistent with the models of Caselli and Morelli (2004)
and Besley (2004).

5.1

The Effects of Wages on Political Selection

OLS Estimates
Table 3 presents the relationship between legislators’ wages and characteristics of both the candidates of the 2004 elections as well as those that were elected. The first row reports the estimated
slope coefficient on log wages from a series of OLS regressions where the dependent variables are
specified in each column. Each specification adjusts for various characteristics of the legislature
(e.g. the number of assistants per legislator and the number of hours for which the legislature
functions per week) as well as characteristics of the municipality, such as: population, income per
capita and urbanization. The regressions also control for average wages in the municipality to
capture any potential differences across municipalities in politicians’ opportunity costs.
In column 1, we report a strong positive association between the wages legislators receive and
the number candidates per seat (a measure of political competition). The point estimate on log
wages suggests that a one standard deviation increase in wages (approximately 50 percent) is
associated with a 1.35 more candidates per seat. Higher wages may not only induce more political
competition, but also attract a different composition of candidates. Increases in the salary of
legislators are associated with more educated candidates (column 2) and a higher share of female
candidates (column 4). We do not, however, find any evidence that higher wages attract a higher
share of candidates who were employed in a white-color profession (column 3). One potential
implication of higher salaries is that candidates should be willing to pay more to gain political

15

power. In column 5, we test this by examining whether there is more campaign spending per
candidate among municipalities that offer higher wages. We find a 30 percent increase in campaign
spending when wages increase by 50 percent.
In columns 6-9, we present the OLS estimates of the relationship between wages and the characteristics of those that were elected into office in 2004. In municipalities that offer higher wages,
the legislature is on average more educated (column 6) and has a higher share of white-collar professionals (column 7). Despite a positive effect on the share of female candidates, higher wages
are negatively correlated with the share of female legislators.21 As with the result found for all
candidates, higher wages attracts more campaign spending among elected politicians: a 50 percent
increase in wages increase campaign spending by 32.5 percent.
Overall, the results presented in Table 3 suggest that higher remuneration is associated with
increased competition and potentially higher quality legislators (more educated and white-collar
professionals). One should, however, be cautious to interpret these results as causal. There are
several omitted factors that could confound these results, and next we address these identification
concerns.

Population Thresholds and Politicians’ Salaries
As we discussed in Section 3, the federal government stipulated a ceiling for the wage of local
politicians that depends on various population thresholds. The innovation of our empirical approach
is to use this exogenous variation in wage determination to identify the effects of wages on politician
selection and performance. The effects of the federal mandate on politicians’ wages can be seen in
the 3 panels presented in Figure 1, which plots politician wages in 2005 against the municipality’s
population in 2003.22 Each panel presents unadjusted population-cell means of wages (depicted by
the small circles) along with the fitted values of a locally weighted regression calculated within each
population segment (as denoted by the vertical lines).23 The data exhibit a sharp discontinuity
21

In Brazil, there is a quota for female candidates, but not for female legislators.
We use the 2003 population because the wages in 2005, the first year of the legislature, had to be set by the
previous legislature in power between 2001 and 2004. Since wage changes are usually done during the last year of
the legislature and population estimates are only available in the end of the year, legislators choosing wages in 2004
were likely to be regulated based on the 2003 population.
23
The average wage is computed for a 200 person bin.
22

16

at each of the population cut-offs and a discernable step-function at each segment. For instance,
municipalities between 50,000 and 100,000 inhabitants (i.e. the third segment) display a cluster
of wages set at around R$ 4,000 per month (approximately $2,200). In the fourth segment, the
wages appear to cluster at just below R$5,000. The figure also highlights the fact that several
municipalities do not set their politician wages to the maximum allowance.
The general patterns presented in the figure are also borne out in the adjusted regression results.
In Table 4, column 1 presents the first-stage regression of log wages on indicators for whether
population is above the first five cutoffs along with a piecewise linear spline for population. The
coefficients on the cutoff indicators estimate the average increase in log wages at each threshold
point. For instance, the indicator for the first cutoff suggests that wages in municipalities just
above the population threshold pay politicians 21 percent more than municipalities immediately
below the cutoffs. The other cutoffs display a similar pattern to the one presented in Figure 1,
except for the second cutoff where the discontinuity is close to zero and not statistically significant.
The results remain very similar when we control for municipal characteristics in column 2.
When we only allow for differential slopes in the first two cut-offs, where most of the data are
concentrated, the regression does not lose any explanatory power and the cutoff indicators have
more predictive power.24 Overall, the regressions fit the data well. The cut-off indicators and the
population function explain almost 70 percent of the variation in wages generating a joint F-statistic
of 29.10 on the excluded instruments.

Smoothness condition and other potential confounds
The general concern with any regression discontinuity design is the possibility that other determinants of the variable of interest are also discontinuous at the various cutoff points. Although we
cannot directly test this assumption for unobserved characteristics, we can examine whether the
observable characteristic have discontinuous breaks. Figure 2 present a series of municipal characteristics plotted again population. Each figure depicts population cell means of the municipal
characteristic for the first three population thresholds (which represents 96 percent of the observa24

For all of our subsequent results, we use the second specification presented in Table 4 as the first stage. Using
the third specification provides similar results that given the higher F-statistic are more precise.

17

tions) along with the fitted values of a locally weighted regression calculated with each segment.25
Consider, for example, log income per capita, which is a strong predictor of the types of candidates
that run for office. As Figure 2 depicts, income per capita is smooth across each of the three
cutoff points. We also graph the following pre-determined characteristics: average private sector
wage, total expenditure in 2000, effective number of political parties in 1996 election, assistants
per legislators and hours in session. In general, the figures show only small differences at each
threshold points. Table 5 formally tests whether the population cutoffs are significant for a larger
set of municipal and mayor characteristics. It reports a series of regressions where we fit the dependent variable listed in each column to equation (2). Overall, the table confirms that there are
no significant differences at cutoff points for various characteristics of the municipality. The only
exception, among 20 characteristics, is income inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient.
The results presented in Table 5 address another potential concern. If the legislatures that
offered higher wages also provided other non-wage job attributes or perks that directly affect the
utility of politicians, then we might be overestimating the effects of wages on performance and
selection. But as columns 13 and 14 demonstrate (and as Figure 2 depicts), there are no discontinuities in the two principal non-pecuniary features of the legislature: number assistants and number
hours the legislature is open.26 Alternatively, and perhaps a more reasonable situation would be for
legislatures just below the population cap to provide perks to compensate for the lower salary (e.g.
cell phones, fuel for cars). If this was the case, then the effects of wages would be underestimated.
As another specification test of our design, Figure 3 plots the density of population. If there
were any discontinuities in the density at the cutoff points, one might be concerned that municipalities were manipulating their population statistic in order to offer a higher wage (McCrary 2008).
However, as Figure 3 depicts, the density appears continuous at the various cutoff points. Moreover, the population statistics are collected by the Brazilian Statistical Office (IBGE), which is an
independent government body.
25
We excluded the 4th and 5th cutoffs for presentational purposes. To include these additional observations does
not affect the results.
26
Each regression that has been presented has controlled for these features of the legislature.

18

Two-Stage Least Squares Estimates of Political Selection
In Table 6, we investigate whether municipalities that offer higher wages attract more individuals
into politics. For each dependent variable, we estimate specifications based on equation (2), where
f (Pi ) and g(Pi ) are assumed to be piecewise linear splines in population. The excluded instruments
are the indicator variables for the five cutoff points, and the joint test of their significance is reported
for each sample. In our base specification (odd-numbered columns) we control for the number of
assistants per legislator and number of hours that the legislature functions per week; whereas, in our
full specification we adjust for all of the controls presented in Table 3 (even-numbered columns).27
Column 1 presents the TSLS results for the effect of wages on the number of candidates per
seat that ran for election in 2004. The estimated coefficient on log wages is 1.424 (robust standard
error = 0.597) which is approximately half the size of the OLS estimate (see Table 3), and suggests
that a 50 percent increase in wages increase political competition by 0.72 candidates per seat. In
column 2, we report our full specification and find that the point estimate is similar when additional
controls are added.
Given the increase in political competition, a natural question to ask is whether this reflects
the entry of more political parties. We find that a 50 percent increase in wages increases the
number of political parties that participate in the elections by 0.95 per seat (columns 3 and 4).
This result is perhaps not surprising given Brazil’s open-list proportional representation system
which encourages fragmentation of parties (Myerson 1993).28 In column 5-8, we demonstrate that
candidates increase campaign spending in response to higher wages and increased competition.
Among elected candidates, a 50 percent increase in wages increases campaign spending by 18.65
percent.
In addition to these effects on political participation, Table 7 shows that wages affect the
candidate pool and the type of elected legislators. Panel A reports the TSLS estimates for the effects
on candidate characteristics, whereas Panel B reports the effects for elected legislators. Consistent
27

Although our base specification controls for the number of assistants per legislator and the number of hours,
removing these controls does not affect our two-stage least squares estimate in the slightest. This is not too surprising
given that the instrument is orthogonal to these characteristics as demonstrated in the figures.
28
Legislators in Brazil are elected based on the d’Hondt method. As a result, members of smaller political parties
are often elected despite having fewer vote totals than losing candidates of larger political parties. See Ames (1995)
for details.

19

with the OLS estimates, we find that a 50 percent increase in wages, increases candidates’ average
years of schooling by 0.31 years (see column 1). Although this effect appears relatively small, the
average years of schooling for Brazil’s adult population in 2005 was 6.5. Moreover, when we focus
only on the share of candidates with at least a high school degree, a similar increase in wages
increases the share by 7.4 percent (column 3). Different from the OLS estimates, higher wages
not only attract individuals with more education but also more females and those from whitecollar professions. For instance, in column 5, the effects of wages on the proportion of white-collar
candidates is 0.062 (standard error=0.028), which represents a 16 percent increase from the average.
Another natural question is whether municipalities that offered higher wages attracted politicians
from other municipalities. Although not reported, we do not find any evidence that this case (point
estimate = 0.031, standard error of 0 .071).
Although wages induce a positive selection on the pool of candidates, this does not necessarily
imply a change in the composition of elected politicians. The results do indicate that wages affect
the characteristics of the legislative body. The estimates reported in columns 1-2 suggest that a 50
percent increase in wages increase the average education of the legislature by 0.47 years of schooling
and the share of legislators with at least a high school degree by 10 percent. Columns 5-6 and 7-8
report the effects of wages on the share of legislators from a white-collar occupation and share
female legislators, respectively. The effects are large and significant for share of legislators from a
white-collar occupation, while measured with less precision for the share of female legislators.
According political agency models, we expect a lower turnover of legislators among municipalities that can offer higher salaries (Besley 2004). In Table 8 we examine how higher salaries affect
both reelection rates and the tenure of legislators. Columns 1 and 2 report the estimated slope
coefficient from a TSLS regression where the dependent variable is the proportion of legislators
that were re-elected in the 2004 elections. Using the full specification (column 2), the estimated
effect is 0.063 (standard error = 0.037). In columns 3-6, we show that the increase in re-election
rates is predominately among more educated legislators (columns 5 and 6). A 50 percent increase
in wages increased re-election rates on legislators with at least a high school education by about 30
percent. Consistent with these results, columns 7-14 provide further evidence that legislatures are

20

more experienced among municipalities that offer higher wages. For instance, the estimated effect
of log wages on average number of terms is 0.41 (see column 8) and highly significant (robust standard error = 0.151). When we consider the entire distribution, we find that higher wages increase
the share of legislator with 4-7 terms (approximately 0.09 percentage points, robust standard error=0.03), while decreasing the share of legislators with only 1 term of experience (0.038 percentage
points, robust standard error = 0.053). These results support the theoretical prediction that higher
wages decrease turnover rates of politicians and echo the empirical findings of Diermeier, Keane,
and Merlo (2005).
In sum, exploiting discontinuities in the wages that local legislators receive, the findings indicate
that higher salaries attract a better pool of candidates and elected legislators (more educated and
a higher share of white-collar professionals).29 Given this positive selection, a natural question to
ask is whether or not wages also affect politicians’ behavior and performance. As we discussed in
the theoretical framework, there are many reasons why legislative performance might be affected.
First, as the monetary benefits from holding office increase, elected officials will exert more effort in
order to signal productivity to voters and get re-elected. Second, as we change the composition and
type of legislators that are elected, we would expect performance and effort to change. Next, we
investigate whether higher salaries affect legislative performance using indicators of bills submitted
and approved, and measures of the provision of local public goods.

5.2

The Effects of Wages on Politician Performance

Although there are several potential indicators of politician performance, it is not easy to obtain
an objective measure for local legislatures. We use the data available in the legislative census to
measure performance as the number of bills submitted and the number of bills approved by the
legislators in 2005. Although these measures do not account for the quality of the bills and projects
submitted, we would expect the number of bills to be a function of legislators’ effort.30
Table 9 presents estimates for the effects of wages on the various measures of legislative perfor29
These characteristics may not necessarily lead to more competence in office. We do, however, believe that they
are positively correlated with public sector performance.
30
See for example Clinton and Lapinski (2006) for a discussion on measuring legislative accomplishment.

21

mance. The TSLS results are displayed in panel A while the OLS results are shown in panel B for
comparison. For each dependent variable, we estimate equation (2) with municipal controls and a
piecewise linear spline in population (not shown in results). The excluded instruments are again
the indicator variables for the five cutoff points.
Column 1 of Panel A reports the estimated slope coefficient from a TSLS regression where
the dependent variable is the log of the number of bills submitted per legislator.31 In the first
specification, which adjusts for the population of the municipality, the number of assistants per
legislator, and the number of hours the legislature is in session, we find a strong positive association
suggesting that a 50 percent increase in wages increases the number of bills submitted by 25 percent.
The estimated effect is approximately 0.07 percentage points lower than the OLS estimate. In
column 2, we report our full specification and find that the point estimate is virtually unchanged
with additional controls. Even though the number of bills submitted does capture a measure of
politician’s effort, perhaps more important for society is whether these bills get approved. In
columns 3 and 4, we re-estimate the specifications reported in the first two columns but use the
log number of approved bills per legislator. We also find a significant and positive relationship
between wages and the number bills approved, with an elasticity of 0.51 (robust standard error =
0.264). Moreover, when we divide the number of bills approved by the bills submitted and compute
a share of bills approved, we find that higher wages also increase this share (see columns 5 and
6). For instance, a 50 percent increase in wages increases the share of bills approved by about 15
percentage points. This point estimate lies in contrast to the OLS estimates which suggest that
share actually decreases.
In addition to bills, we use another measure of the organization of the legislative process –
the functioning of the committee system. Several scholars argue that in legislatures, the existence
of committees reduce the possibility of opportunistic behavior by legislators (e.g. Weingast and
Marshall 1988 suggest that committees improve ex-post enforceability). Even though most municipalities only have one or two committees, their existence induces gains from specialization and
improvements in the quality of decision-making. In columns 7 and 8, we report the estimated
31
Before taking the log, we add a one to the total number of bills submitted to avoid losing the municipalities that
had zero bill in 2005. To do so, does not affect our results in the slightest.

22

effects of wages on an indicator for whether the legislature has a functioning legislative commission. We find that legislatures with higher wages have a higher probability of having a functioning
commission, but the effect is small (a 50 percent increase in wages increase the chances of having
a commission by 0.10 percentage points).
In sum, the estimates presented in Table 9 suggest that wages have an important effect on
legislative productivity. Local legislatures that pay their elected officials higher wages have more
bills submitted and approved and are more likely to have functioning commissions. But whether
these legislative acts map into population welfare gains is not entirely obvious, especially given
that we are unable to distinguish the type of bills in our data. In the next section, we explore one
potential effect of legislative quality given by the provision of public services.

5.3

The Effects of Wages on Public Goods

As described in the Section 3, legislators affect policy both through formal bills as well as informal
requests (petitions). These informal requests are a common way for legislators to provide patronage
to their constituents and consist of various types of public works (as depicted in Appendix C).
Unfortunately without data on the number and type petitions, we cannot test whether wages affect
the number of petitions that legislators submit. Instead, we examine the relationship between
salaries and the provision of public goods and services that are most frequently cited in these
petitions – schools, local clinics and sanitation infrastructure.32
Table 10 presents the relationship between wages and the provision of various public goods.
For each dependent variable, we estimate equation (2) controlling for our full set of covariates.
Columns 1-4 present the effects of wages on various educational inputs, columns 5-7 present the
effects on health inputs, and columns 8 and 9 present the effects on household access to water and
sanitation. Each of these public inputs is found in the petitions presented in Appendix C.
Column 1 reports the effects of log wages on the number of primary and secondary schools per
32

If bills and petitions are viewed as substitutes then it is quite possible that higher wages may have even lowered
the number petitions. Using data for 148 legislators on the number of petitions and bills that were submitted in 20052007 by legislator for a sample of 14 municipalities, we estimate a positive correlation coefficient of 0.151 (bootstrap
standard error=0.083). Unfortunately this is not based on a random sample of municipalities. We could only gather
this information for a subset of the municipalities that posted this information on the legislatures’ websites.

23

school-aged child in 2006. A 50 percent increase in wages increases the number of schools by 0.64
schools per 1000 children. Moreover, for municipalities that offer higher wages, there is an increase
in the school infrastructure as measured by the share of schools with a science lab (column 2) and
a computer lab (column 3).33 In columns 5-7, we also find that higher wages affect the provision of
health services. For instance, a 50 percent increase in wages increases the number of health clinics
by 0.12 per 1000 inhabitants (column 5). There is also an effect on the number of doctors per
capita (point estimate = 0.639; robust standard error=0.279), and the average number of doctor
visits (point estimate 0.521; robust standard error= 0.241). Differently from education and health
inputs, we do not find robust evidence that increases in salary lead to differential changes in the
provision of water and sanitation for households (columns 8-11).

5.4

Discussion

Behavior versus Selection of Politicians
Thus far the findings that politicians’ performances change with higher salaries are consistent with
the standard political agency models where higher salaries increase the value of holding office in
the future and induce more effort. There are however, at least two other explanations for our
results. One possible interpretation is that the results are driven exclusively by selection: higher
wages attract higher quality politicians and this induces better performance. This is the intuition
behind the Caselli and Morelli (2004) model and the original efficiency wages models (e.g. Weiss
(1980)).34 Another potential interpretation of our findings is that higher wages increases worker
morale or dedication, as discussed by Akerlof (1982).
Although our research design does not allow us to separately identify whether higher wages increase performance through effort (rather than selection), we can test whether wages still affect our
measures of performance after accounting for the changes in the composition of the legislative body.
Assuming that the observed characteristics of the politicians are correlated with their unobserved
characteristics, then this approach attributes to the observed characteristics of the legislature all
33

The results are similar if we use the change in the stock of public of goods from 2004-2006 as a measure of new
public goods.
34
Higher quality politicians may also induce positive social interactions that leads to more productivity.

24

the effects of the unobserved variables. Thus, if politician productivity is largely due to changes
in the pool of local legislators, then we would expect that accounting for these differences should
attenuate the wage effects.35
Table 11 shows that some characteristics of the legislative body have significant power in predicting legislative performance. More educated and male-dominated legislative bodies are associated
with higher performance.36 We do however find that adjusting for the observable differences has
only a minimal effect on the wage coefficient; in most cases, attenuating the effects only slightly.
Thus, if the politicians’ unobserved abilities are correlated with their measured characteristics,
selection cannot entirely explain our results.

Specification Tests
Given the differences in income inequality across the third population threshold and some of the
other slight differences in the observable characteristics that we observed in Table 5, we re-estimate
all the models presented in Tables 3-10 including a flexible-functional form for each of our control
variables (a fourth-order polynomial). The results are presented in column 1 of Table 12, where
each coefficient is the TSLS estimate of the dependent variables listed in each row on log wages.
As column 1 reports, the estimates are not only similar, but in some cases measured with more
precision.
In Table 12, columns 2-5, we test whether our results are sensitive to the functional form assumption of a linear spline. We present TSLS estimates of a model where instead of allowing for
different slopes in each side of the discontinuities, we control for a fourth degree polynomial in
population and again use the cutoffs as the excluded instruments (columns 2-4).37 This model,
unlike the linear spline where the identification is limited to the cutoff points, imposes additional
structure by assuming a constant treatment effect.38 As seen in Column 2, virtually all of the
35

An obvious concern with this test is that we can only capture observable differences in politician characteristics,
and controlling for these difference may not be sufficient to partial out all the effects of the unobserved variables. For
instance, higher wages may have encouraged more able politicians and if ability is not captured in the observable
differences, we are not fully accounting for the selection effect.
36
The negative coefficient on the share of female legislators while difficult to interpret is not unprecedented. Jeydel
and Taylor (2003) provides a discussion of these issues.
P
37
In model 2, f (P ) = g(P ) = 4i=1 P i .
38
See Card, Mas, and Rothstein (2008) and Lee (2008) for applications of such models.

25

results are qualitatively similar. In general the point estimates are slightly larger and more precisely estimated. In columns 3-4, we re-estimate this model using only observations close to the
discontinuities (i.e. the set of observations that are 5 and 10 percent above and below the cutoff
points). The point estimates are consistent with the previous results, although as expected with
fewer observations, they lose precision.
In column 5, we present estimates of an alternative TSLS model, which is based on the approach
used in Angrist and Lavy (1999) and Burgess and Pande (2005). Instead of using the cutoffs, we
estimate the model using the maximum wage that a municipality could offer as the excluded
instrument. As expected, the results are similar to those presented in column 2 and again highlight
the robustness of the results.

Tests of potential confounds
An important contribution of our paper is the use of discontinuities in the wages that local legislators’ receive to identify the effects of wages on political selection and performance. One potential
threat to our research design comes from the possibility that other forms of federal spending or
policies are discontinuous at the same cutoffs. Although we demonstrated in Table 5 that there
is no evidence that other characteristics of the municipality change discontinuously at these cutoff
points, both the size of the legislature and the amount of block grant a municipality receives vary
according to other population cut-offs.
To account for these potential confounds, columns 6 and 7 present estimates of our model,
where we control for a 4th degree polynomial in the amount of the block grant and the size of the
legislature. In both columns, our results remain highly robust. As an alternative test, we estimate
the extent to which the block grant affects our measures of political selection and performance,
restricting the estimation sample to a set of municipalities where the maximum wage does not vary
(i.e. for municipalities between 10,000 and 50,000 inhabitants). As reported in the appendix Table
A1, the block grant does not have any effect on our dependent variables. Finally, our approach of
using only those municipalities just around the cut-offs points isolates our results from the effects
from these other discontinuities (see columns 3-4, Table 12).

26

6

Conclusions

Despite the general consensus that good governance matters for economic development, there is
much less agreement on which aspects of governance are important or how it can be improved. The
existing political economy literature has mostly focused on how incentives shape the quality of government. But recent studies have introduced an important role for political selection. Institutions
and policies are shaped by those holding power, so improvements in governance may require good
leaders (Besley 2006).
In this paper, we estimate the effects of monetary rewards on political selection and legislative
performance. While there has been a growing theoretical literature that examines how monetary
rewards to politicians affect political selection (Caselli and Morelli (2004), Matozzi and Merlo
(2008)), data limitations and identification concerns have limited the empirical tests of these models.
Moreover, little is known about how monetary rewards affect politicians’ performance (Besley 2006).
The empirical analysis exploits discontinuities in the wages of local politicians across Brazil’s
municipal governments that are based on population thresholds. We find that higher wages increases
political competition and improves the quality of legislators, as measured by education, type of
previous profession, and political experience in office. In addition to this positive selection, we
find that wages also affect politicians’ performance, which is consistent with a behavioral response
to a higher value of holding office. We are unable, however, to identify whether this increase in
performance is due to the positive selection or the incentive effects of higher wage. Future research
should focus on the complementarity of improvements in selection and the adoption of appropriate
incentives for elected politicians to improve public service provision.
More importantly, whether these effects ultimately translate into improvements in voters’ welfare remains an open question. While we find an increase in a number of visible public goods (e.g.
number of schools, computer labs, health clinics, and doctors) in municipalities that offer higher
salaries, there is no improvement on others (e.g. water and sanitation). Without a more comprehensive data on public goods and services and other dimensions of political quality (e.g. honesty
and competence), it is difficult to fully assess the welfare effects of increasing politicians’ salaries.
In sum, this paper provides evidence that improving financial incentives can improve the quality
27

of government, at least in a local context, consistent with Caselli and Morelli (2004) and Besley
(2004). This can occur even in an environment where agents are intrinsically motivated (Benabou
and Tirole (2003); Besley and Ghatak (2005); Prendergast (2008)) or care about other aspects of
the position they hold.

28

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2003. “An African Success Story:
Botswana.” In In Search of Prosperity: Analytical Narrative on Economic Growth, edited by
Dani Rodrik. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Akerlof, George A. 1982. “Labor Contracts as Partial Gift Exchange.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, November, 543–69.
Alesina, Alberto. 1988. “Credibility and Policy Convergence in a Two-Party System with Rational
Voters.” American Economic Review 78 (4): 796–805.
Alesina, Alberto, and Guido Tabellini. 2007. “Bureaucrats or Politicans? Part I: A Single Policy
Task.” American Economic Review, vol. 97.
Ames, Barry. 1995. “Electoral Strategy under Open-List Proportional Representation.” American
Journal of Political Science 39 (2): 406–433 (May).
Angrist, Joshua D., and Victor Lavy. 1999. “Using Maimonides Rule to Estimate the Effect of
Class Size on Scholastic Achievement.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114:533–575.
Banks, Jeffrey, and R. Sundaram. 1993. “Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard in a Repeated
Elections Model.” In Political Economy: Institutions, Information, Competition, and Representation, edited by et al W. Barnett. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Barro, Robert. 1970. “The Control of Politicians: An Economic Model.” Public Choice 14:19–42.
Benabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2003. “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation.” Review of Economic Studies 70 (3): 489520.
Besley, Tim, Torsten Persson, and Daniel Sturm. 2007. “Political Competition, Policy and Growth:
Theory and Evidence from the United States.” NBER Working Paper No. 11484.
Besley, Timothy. 2004. “Paying Politicians: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of the European
Economic Association 2:193–215.
. 2006. Principled Agents? The Political Economy of Good Government. Oxford, UK: The
Lindahl Lectures, Oxford University Press.
Besley, Timothy, and Anne Case. 1995. “Does Electoral Accountability Affect Economic Policy
Choices? Evidence from Gubernatorial Term Limits.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
110 (3): 769–798 (August).
Besley, Timothy, and Stephen Coate. 1997. “An Economic Model of Representative Democracy.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112:85–114.
Besley, Timothy, and Maitreesh Ghatak. 2005. “Competition and Incentives with Motivated
Agents.” American Economic Review 95 (3): 616–636.
29

Besley, Timothy, Rohini Pande, and Vijayendra Rao. 2005. “Political Selection and the Quality
of Government: Evidence from South India.” Mimeo, Yale University.
Burgess, Robin, and Rohini Pande. 2005. “Can Rural Banks Reduce Poverty? Evidence from the
Indian Social Banking Experiment.” American Economic Review 95 (3): 780–795 (June).
Callander, Steven. 2007. “Political Motivations.” Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Calvert, R. L. 1985. “Robustness of the Multi-dimensional Voting Model: Candidate Motivations,
Uncertainty and Convergence.” American Journal of Political Science, vol. 29.
Campbell, D.T. 1969. “Reforms as Experiments.” American Psychologist 24:409–429.
Card, David, Alexandre Mas, and Jesse Rothstein. 2008. “Tipping and the Dynamics of Segregation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (1): 177218.
Caselli, Francesco, and Massimo Morelli. 2004. “Bad Politicians.” Journal of Public Economics
88:759–782.
Chattopadhyay, Raghabendra, and Esther Dufflo. 2004. “Women as Policy Makers: Evidence
from a India-Wide Randomized Policy Experiment.” Econometrica 72 (5): 1409–1443.
Clinton, Joshua D., and John S. Lapinski. 2006. “Measuring Legislative Accomplishment, 18771994.” American Journal of Political Science 50 (1): 232–249.
Dal Bó, Ernesto, Pedro Dal Bó, and Rafael Di Tella. 2006. “Plata o Plomo?: Bribe and Punishment in a Theory of Political Influence.” American Political Science Review 100 (1): 41–53
(February).
De Long, J. B., and A. Schleifer. 2003. “Princes or Merchants? City Growth before the Industrial
Revolution.” Journal of Law and Economics, pp. 153–177.
Di Tella, Rafael, and Ray Fisman. 2004. “Are Politicians Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?” The
Journal of Law and Economics 47:477–513.
Diermeier, Daniel, Michael Keane, and Antonio Merlo. 2005. “A Political Economy Model of
Congressional Careers.” American Economic Review 95:347–373.
Ferejohn, J. 1986. “Incumbent Performance and Electoral Control.” Public Choice 50:5–25.
Ferraz, Claudio, and Frederico Finan. 2007. “Electoral Accountability and Corruption in Local
Governments: Evidence from Audit Reports.” IZA Discussion Paper no.2843.
Ferreira, Fernando, and Joe Gyourko. 2007. “Do Political Parties Matter? Evidence from U.S.
Cities.” forthcoming in Quarterly Journal of Economics, October.
Hahn, J., P. Todd, and W. Van der Klaauw. 2001. “Identification and Estimation of Treatment
Effects with a Regression Discontinuity Design.” Econometrica 69:201–209.
Imbens, Guido W., and Thomas Lemieux. 2008. “Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide to
Practice.” Journal of Econometrics 142 (2): 611–850.
30

Jeydel, Alana, and Andrew J. Taylor. 2003. “Are Women Legislators Less Effective? Evidence
from the U.S. House in the 103rd-105th Congress.” Political Research Quarterly 56 (1): 19–27.
Jones, Ben, and Ben Olken. 2005. “Do Leaders Matter? National Leadership and Growth since
World War II.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (3): 835–864 (August).
Keane, Michael P., and Antonio Merlo. 2007. “Money, Political Ambition, and the Career Decisions
of Politicians.” PIER Working Paper 07-016.
Knack, Stephen, and Philip Keefer. 1995. “Institutions and Economic Performance: CrossCountry Tests Using Alternative Institutional Measures.” Economics and Politics 7 (3): 207–
227.
Leal, Victor Nunes. 1975. Coronelismo, Enxada e Voto. São Paulo: Alfa-Ômega.
Lee, David. 2008. “Randomized Experiments from Non-random Selection in U.S. House Elections.”
Journal of Econometrics 142 (2): 675–697.
Lee, D.S., E. Moretti, and M. Butler. 2004. “Do Voters Aect or Elect Policies? Evidence from
the U.S. House.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119:807–859.
Lopez, Felix G. 2004. “A Polı́tica Cotidiana dos Vereadores e as Relações entre Executivo e
Legislativo am Âmbito Municipal: o Caso do Municı́pio de Araruama.” Revista de Sociologia
Polı́tica 22:153–177.
Matozzi, Andrea, and Antonio Merlo. 2008. “Political Careers or Career Politicians?” Journal of
Public Economics 92 (April): 597–608.
McCrary, Justin. 2008. “Testing for Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression
Discontinuity Design.” Journal of Econometrics 142, no. 2 (February).
Melo, Marcus. 2005. “Instituições Orçamentárias Municipais e o Processo Legislativo em Recife1988-2000.” In Desenho Institucional e Participação Polı́tica, edited by Catia Lubambo, Denilson B. Coêlho, and Marcus A. Melo. Petrópolis: Editora Vozes.
Messner, Matthias, and Mattias Polborn. 2004. “Paying Politicians.” Journal of Public Economics
88:2423–2445.
Munshi, Kaivan, and Mark Rosenzweig. 2008. “The Efficacy of Parochial Politics: Caste, Commitment, and Competence in Indian Local Governments.” Mimeo, May.
Myerson, Roger. 1993. “Effectiveness of Electoral Systems for Reducing Government Corruption:
A Game Theoretical Analysis.” Games and Economic Behavior 5:118–132.
North, Douglas. 1981. Structure and Change in Economic History. New York: Norton.
Osborne, Martin J., and Al Slivinski. 1996. “A Model of Political Competition with CitizenCandidates.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 88:2423–2445.

31

Pereira, Carlos, and Bernardo Mueller. 2002. “Comportamento Estrategico em Presidencialismo
de Coalizao.” Dados 45 (2): 265–301.
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. 2000. Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy.
Cambridge, Massachussets: MIT Press.
Prendergast, Canice. 2008. “Intrinsic Motivation and Incentives.” American Economic Review
98 (2): 201–205.
Smart, Michael, and Daniel M. Sturm. 2006. “Term Limits and Electoral Accountability.” CEPR
Discussion Paper 4272, July.
Urquiola, Miguel, and Eric Verhoogen. 2008. “Class Size and Sorting in Market Equilibrium:
Theory and Evidence.” Forthcoming, American Economic Review, June.
Van Der Klaauw, W. 2002. “Estimating the Effect of Financial Aid Offers on College Enrollment:
A Regression Discontinuity Approach.” International Economic Review 43:1249–1287.
Weingast, Barry R., and William J. Marshall. 1988. “The Industrial Organization of Congress; or,
Why Legislatures, Like Firms, Are Not Organized as Markets.” Journal of Political Economy
96 (1): 132–163.
Weiss, Andrew. 1980. “Job Queues and Layoffs in the Labor Markets with Flexible Wages.”
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 88.
Witman, Donald A. 1977. “Candidates with Policy Preferences: A Dynamic Model.” Journal of
Economic Theory 14 (1): 180–89.

32

Appendix A: Simple Model of Political Selection and Accountability
Consider an infinite horizon economy comprised of a finite number of citizens who are heterogenous
in their ability θ. An individual’s ability is private information, but the distribution of ability across
the population, F (θ̄, σθ ), is common knowledge. Each individual has preferences over their income y
and a policy outcome g, according to a well-behaved quasi-linear utility function U (y, g) = y+H(g).
The policy outcome g is set by the elected official as:
g = θ + e,
where e is the effort level put forth by the elected official. Effort is costly in terms of disutility
and measured according to the following cost function: ψ(e, θ), which is increasing in effort but
decreasing in ability.
Each individual can run for public office, and if elected will experience the following per-period
utility while in office:
U p (e, θ) = wp + H(g(e, θ)) − ψ(e, θ)
where wp is the politician’s wage. Individuals who were not elected for public office work in the
private sector and earn a wage of wm (θ) which is increasing in θ, i.e. wm (θi ) > wm (θj ) for θi > θj .
Thus their ex-ante utility in the private sector is:
U m (θ) = wm (θ) +

Z
H(g(e(θ), θ))dF (θ)
A

where A is set of individuals who run for office. Assuming that there is a probability π of getting
elected as a non-incumbent, in any given period an individual with ability θ will enter politics if:


Z
π wp − wm (θ) + H(g(e(θ), θ)) − ψ(e(θ), θ) −
H(g(e(θ), θ))dF (θ) ≥ 0.

(3)

A

Note that because an individual’s opportunity cost of entering politics increases with ability, if an
individual of type θ̂ is willing to participate then every individual of ability θ ≤ θ̂ is also willing to
enter politics.
The timing of events is as follows. In every period an incumbent runs for office knowing both
his type and the effort provided in producing public goods. In addition, a set of citizens decides to
become candidates before observing the level of public goods g. The level of public goods becomes
publicly known and an election is held where all individuals cast their votes. Candidates vote for
themselves, whereas non-candidate vote according to a voting rule r. As in Alesina and Tabellini
(2007), and Ferejohn (1986), we assume that citizens vote retrospectively and will re-elect the
incumbent if their utility exceeds a threshold Ḡ. To set this threshold, voters understand that the
33

alternative to re-electing the incumbent is to randomly select another politician from the pool of
candidates, and require that he exert an effort level that makes the individual indifferent between
seeking re-election or exiting politics. Thus, the voting rule will be as follows:

1
r=
0

if g ≥ g(ê, θ)
otherwise

where ê is equilibrium level of effort that will leave an individual of average ability indifferent
between seeking re-election or entering the private sector.
To examine the level of effort that incumbents exert while in office, let ē denote the amount of
effort an incumbent of type θ must exert in order to provide Ḡ. Let e∗ denote the optimal level of
effort an incumbent would exert in a single period without re-election concerns. Thus given this
reelection rule, an incumbent will exert enough effort to be re-elected if:
wp + H(g(ē, θ)) − ψ(ē, θ)
δ
≥ wp + H(g(e∗ , θ)) − ψ(e∗ , θ) +
Um
1−δ
1−δ

(4)

where δ is the discount rate.39 Equation 4 can be rearranged in order to express a net utility as a
function of ability, i.e. Ũ (θ):
Ũ (θ) = [δwp + (H(g(ē, θ)) − H(g(e∗ , θ))) − (ψ(ē, θ) − ψ(e∗ , θ))]
− δ [U m + H(g(e∗ , θ)) − ψ(e∗ , θ)] ≥ 0
Figure A1 illustrates the solution to the model graphically.40 It compares the value of holding
office to the value of remaining in the private sector, assuming that the politician exerts at least
the minimum level of effort required to produce Ḡ. Given that Ũ (θ) is concave in θ, we can separate
individuals into four regions, as depicted in Figure A1.41
1. For individuals with θ ≤ A1, the effort required to get re-elected is too costly and Ũ (θ) < 0
(see Panel A). These individuals, if elected, will simply exert effort level e∗ and enter the
private sector in the next period (see panel B).
2. For individuals with θ ∈ (A1, A2], the benefits of office are greater than those in the private
sector, i.e. Ũ (θ) > 0. These politicians will exert just enough effort to set public goods equal
to Ḡ and get re-elected. As depicted in Panel B, effort will decline with ability up to A2.
3. For individuals with θ ∈ (A2, A3], the benefits of additional public goods will exceed the
39

This model assumes that once a politician leaves office, he can no longer return to politics.
The figure shows the equilibrium outcomes under the following functional form assumptions. Politician’s utility:
U p = wp + ln(θ + e) − 21 ( θe )2 . Utility in the private sector:U m = α + βθ + ln(θ∗ + e∗ ); Public Goods: g = θ + e
41
Ũ (θ) is concave because of the concavity of H.
40

34

costs and thus will provide a level of public goods above Ḡ, (i.e. will exert effort above the
minimum need for re-election).
4. For individuals with θ > A3, politics is too costly to enter.
The Effects of Wages on Political Selection and Performance
As the model illustrates, the wages politicians receive play an important role in attracting candidates and influencing politician’s behavior while in office. In Figure A2, we show the effects of
an increase in wages on the equilibrium outcomes of this simple model. Panel A depicts how an
increase in salaries affect the decision to enter politics (Equation 3). An increase in politicians’
wages has two effects. First, the benefits of holding office increases, thus attracting more able
candidates. Second, as the quality of candidates improves, the expected level of public goods that
R
∂
will be provided also increases (i.e ∂w
H(g(ē(θ), θ))dF (θ) > 0), thus decreasing the incentives
p A
for running for office. Panel A illustrates these two opposing effects. As wages increase from wp to
wp0 , the marginal individual who enters politics goes from A3 to A30 , thus increasing average ability
in pool of candidates.
In panel B, we show the effects of wages on the set of elected officials that will remain in office.
As shown in Panel A, an increase in wages increases the ability of the politician that is willing to stay
in office from A3 to A30 . But as the quality of candidates improves, voters impose a higher standard
to re-elect the incumbent politician, i.e. a higher Ḡ. Consequently, a lower ability incumbent, who
under the previous wage regime was willing to stay in office, now finds it too costly to exert the
effort to get re-elected. Thus higher wages create a positive selection by inducing higher types to
get re-elected and lower types to exit.
In panel C, we illustrate how higher wages affect effort. Individuals with ability θ ∈ [A1, A10 ]
are unwilling to provide Ḡ and thus decrease effort and exit politics. For individuals that have the
incentive to remain in politics, an increase in wages will increase their efforts, except for sufficiently
high quality politicians where effort will remain unaffected.
In sum, this simple model of political agency predicts that higher wages will increase the quality
of both those that enter politics, as well as, those that hold office. Higher wages will, however, have
an ambiguous effect on performance. Given the results of our model and those the literature, the
question of whether wages affect political selection and performance is an empirical one, which is
the paper’s main contribution.

35

Appendix B: Data Sources
The data used in the paper comes from a variety of sources. The data is at the level of the
municipality, the lowest government unit below a state in Brazil. The main data source is the
legislative census collected during 2005 by the Interlegis, a branch of Brazil’s senate. Although
Brazil’s had 5,564 municipalities recorded as of 2005 by Brazil’s Statistical Office (IBGE), the
legislative census only recorded information from 5,414 municipalities. Next, we describe the source
of each variable used in the analysis.
Legislature characteristics: Characteristics of the legislature come from the 2005 legislative
census. Next to the answers to the questions on the wages there was a question to whether the
person answering the question was sure about the wages. We restricted our analysis to answers
where the informant was sure about the wage and removed some remaining outliers that represented
less than 1 percent of the sample. The variables used in the analysis are as follows: Legislator’s
salary – monthly salary paid to local legislators, expressed in Reais; Number of legislators – the
size of the legislature in 2005; Weekly hours – the number of hours per week the legislature is open;
Assistants per legislator – the average number of assistants each legislator has; Bills submitted per
legislator – the number of bills submitted in 2005 divided by the size of the legislature; Bills approved
per legislator – the number of bills approved divided by the size of the legislature; Functioning
Commission – an indicator variable for whether the legislature has a commission that functions;
% female legislator – the number of female legislators divided by the size of the legislature; %
legislators age < 40 – share of the legislature that is less than 40 years old;% legislators age 40 − 49
– share of the legislature that is between 40 − 49 years old;% legislators age > 49 – share of the
legislature that is older than 40 years old;% legislators in 1-2 mandate – share of the legislature
with 1-2 terms of experience; % legislators in 3-7 mandate – share of the legislature with 3-7 terms
of experience; Years of schooling – the average years of schooling of legislators.
Politician’s Characteristics: the Tribunal Superior Eleitoral (TSE) provides basic demographic information on each candidate that ran in the 2004 municipal elections. These data is
available at www.tse.gov.br. We use this information to create the following municipal level indicators: Number of candidates per seat – the number of candidates that ran for local legislator
divided by the size of the legislature; Age – the average age of the candidates that ran for office in
2004; % female – the share of candidates that were female; Years of Schooling – the average years
of schooling for the candidates.
Municipal demographic characteristics: Demographic characteristics of the municipality
come from 2000 population census, available at IBGE (www.ibge.gov.br). The estimate for the 2003
population was obtained from the IBGE inter-census population estimates. The variables used in
the analysis are: % Urban population – the number of inhabitants that live in urban areas divided
by the population; Gini coefficient – income inequality based on household income in 2000; Literacy
Rate – share of the population that is literate; % households with electricity – share of households
36

with access to electricity; Household income per capita – Total household income divided by the
number of persons residing in the household.
Municipal institutional and public management characteristics: the 2002 and 2005
surveys of the Perfil dos Municı́pios Brasileiros: Gestão Pública provide information on various
aspects of the public administration, such as budgetary and planning procedures, the number of
public employees. It also provides us with structural features such as the existence of local radio
and the presence of a judge and public prosecutors.
Municipal public finance information: the National Treasury (Secretaria do Tesouro)
provides information of spending and revenues through the FINBRA dataset. It contains municipal
spending by categories and revenues by sources (i.e. local taxes, intergovernmental transfers). See
www.tesouro.com.br
Private sector wages: the RAIS provides information of public and private sector wages for
all (formal) firms in Brazil. We use this data to construct a measure of the average wage of private
sector employees in municipalities.
School data: information on the number of primary schools (Ensino fundamental), their
characteristics (whether they have a science or computer lab), and their teacher’s characteristics is
available from Edudata (www.edudata.gov.br), based on yearly school census undertaken by INEP.
Health data: information on the number of clinics managed by the municipal government
and the number of doctors was taken from the Cadastro Nacional de Estabelecimentos de Saúde
(CNES). The information is only available at www.datasus.gov.br for 2006. Data on the average
number of medical visits for 2004 and 2006, was obtained from the Indicadores do Pacto de Atenção
Básica 2006 and are available at www.datasus.gov.br.
Water and Sanitation data: information on sanitation and water network extension and
connections was obtained by the Sistema Nacional de Informações sobre Saneamento (SNIS). The
information is available at www.snis.gov.br. The information is collected using a survey of sanitation
service providers in a representative sample of municipalities.

37

Appendix C: Examples from Legislators’ Webpages
Vereadora Ana Selma, Câmara Municipal de Cabo de Santo Agostinho, PE
http://anaselma.blogspot.com/
Vereadora Ana Selma visita Cidade Garapu
Na sexta-feira passada, 22, Ana Selma e equipe estiveram, mais uma vez, em visita ao Loteamento
Cidade Garapu. Na oportunidade, foram distribuı́dos panfletos, cujo teor tem o objetivo de prestar
contas aos moradores da localidade sobre as iniciativas da Vereadora nos últimos três anos. Presença
constante no Loteamento Cidade Garapu, a Vereadora Ana Selma tem se colocado ao lado dos
moradores na luta por melhorias para o Bairro, realizando visitas aos moradores; Gabinete na Rua
e reuniões com lideranças e representantes de entidades.
Veja algumas das iniciativas da Vereadora na Câmara para Garapu:
• Indicação solicitando a construção de uma Escola de Ensino Fundamental e Educação
Infantil;
• Indicação solicitando providências para instalação de um Posto do Programa Saúde da
Famı́lia - PSF;
• Indicação solicitando a intensificação de rondas policiais no Loteamento Cidade Garapu
e adjacências;
• Indicação solicitando a instalação de abrigos para a espera do transporte coletivo;

Vereador Romério, Câmara Municipal de Resende, RJ
http://www.vereadorromerio.blogspot.com/
Luta por melhor qualidade na educação
Ao longo do seu mandato, Romério, conseguiu a aprovação de diversas indicações que trariam mais
qualidade à Educação Pública no Municı́pio, dentre elas temos:
• A aquisição de jornais e revistas para as bibliotecas das escolas;
• Implantação do ensino de informática desde a 5 série até o 3 ano do ensino médio;
• Construção de laboratórios de ciências e informática nas escolas, entre outras.

38

Infelizmente, nada foi feito pelo Poder Executivo, neste sentido, mas Romério garante continuar
lutando para diminuir a distância entre o ensino público e o particular.

Vereador José Damaso, Câmara Municipal de Palmas, TO
http://damasovereador.blogspot.com

Este é o blog do vereador Damaso. Aqui você vai encontrar as notı́cias sobre seu mandato e suas
ações em benefı́cio da população palmense.
A exemplo do que ocorreu em 2005, nessa legislatura na Câmara Municipal de Palmas, o vereador
Damaso (PDT) já apresentou diversos requerimentos que levam benefı́cios para a região Sul de
Palmas:
• O vereador também apresentou requerimento que solicita a construção de salas para alunos
com necessidades especiais na área disponı́vel da Escola Municipal Tiago Barbosa.
• Em outra propositura, o parlamentar solicitou a implantação de um posto da Polı́cia
Comunitária no setor Taquari.
• Em requerimento apresentado nesta quarta-feira, na Câmara Municipal de Palmas, o vereador
Damaso (PDT) solicitou a abertura de um ambulatório médico em Taquaralto.

39

2000
1800
Wages
1400
1600
1200
1000

7500

10000
Population

12500

15000

0

1000

Wages
2000
3000

4000

5000

5000

30000

50000

70000
90000
Population

110000

130000

150000

0

2000

Wages
4000

6000

8000

10000

100000

300000

500000
Population

700000

900000

FIGURE 1: LEGISLATORS’ SALARIES BY POPULATION
Notes: Figure shows legislators’ salaries by population. Each figure presents the mean wage for a bin size of 200
inhabitants (hollow-circles) along with a locally weighted regression calculated within each population segment with a
bandwidth of 0.5. The vertical lines denote the various cutoff points.

6

8.5
8

6.5

7.5

4

6

7

5.5

6.5

2

5

0

6

4.5
4
0

20000

40000
60000
Population

80000

0

100000

20000

40000
60000
Population

80000

0

100000

80000

100000

0

20000

40000
60000
Population

80000

Total Expenditure 2000

100000

40
0

2

14

15

10

4

16

20

6

17

30

8

18

40000
60000
Population

Assistants per legislators

Private Sector Wages (logs)

Income per capita (log)

20000

0

20000

40000
60000
Population

80000

100000

Effective Number of Political Parties in 1996
Elections

0

20000

40000
60000
Population

80000

100000

Hours in session

FIGURE 2: MUNICIPAL CHARACTERISTICS BY POPULATION
Notes: The figure shows municipal characteristics by population. Each figure presents the mean of the municipal characteristic for a bin size of 200 inhabitants
(hollow-circles) along with a locally weighted regression calculated within each population segment with a bandwidth of 0.5. The vertical lines denote the various cutoff
points.

1000
800
Frequency
400
600
200
0
0

50000

100000

150000

Population

FIGURE 3: DISTRIBUTION OF 2003 POPULATION
Notes: Figure shows the distribution of the population of each municipality in our sample for the first three cutoff points (denoted by vertical lines).

A2
Ability
Public sector

A3

2

1.5

15

4

Expected Utility
20

6
Eff t

Public Goods
2
2.5

8

25

10

3

25
Expected Utility
15
20
10
5

A1

A1
Private sector

Panel A: Incentive Compatibility Constraint

A2
Ability
Public Goods

A3

A3
Ability
Effort

Panel B: Public Good Provision and Effort

Public sector

Private sector

Panel C: : Participation Constraint

FIGURE A1: OUTCOMES OF THE MODEL
Notes: Figure shows the equilibrium outcomes of the model under the following functional form assumptions. Politician’s utility:

ln

;

ln
; Public Goods:
. In Panels A and C, the y-axis is the utility that an individual will receive in each
Utility in the private sector:
sector. For the public sector, the utility is computed assuming that the individual will exert enough effort to get re-elected. For the private sector, utility is computed
for the expected amount of public goods that a randomly selected challenger will provide.

10

25

8

20

25

5

4

Effort
6

Expected Utility
10
15

Expected Utility
20

A3'

Original Wage Regime

2

0

15

A3
Ability

A1

A1'

A3

A3'

A1

A1'

A3

Ability
New Wage Regime

Panel A: Effects of Wages on Entry

Original Wage Regime

A3'

Ability
New Wage Regime

Panel B: Effects of Wages on Selection

Original Wage Regime

New Wage Regime

Panel C: Effects of Wages on Performance

FIGURE A2: THE EFFECTS OF A WAGE INCREASE ON POLITICAL SELECTION AND PERFORMANCE
Notes: Figure shows the equilibrium outcomes of the model under the following functional form assumptions. Politician’s utility:

ln

;

ln
; Public Goods:
. In Panels A and C, the y-axis is the utility that an individual will receive in each
Utility in the private sector:
sector. For the public sector, the utility is computed assuming that the individual will exert enough effort to get re-elected. For the private sector, utility is computed
for the expected amount of public goods that a randomly selected challenger will provide.

Table 1. Constitutional Amendment No. 25, 2000

Population bracket

0 to 10,000
10,001 to 50,000
50,001 to 100,000
100,001 to 300,000
300,001 to 500,000
500,000 plus

Cap on salary
Value of
Average legislative spending as a
Cap on legislative
Cap on salary as a
maximum
spending as a proportion spending as a proportion proportion of
percentage of state
allowed salary
legislative
of revenues
of revenues
legislators salary
in 2004
spending
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
75%

1927.1
2890.6
3854.2
4817.7
5781.2
7226.6

8%
8%
8%
7%
6%
5%

3.6%
3.0%
2.8%
2.6%
2.7%
2.6%

75%
75%
75%
75%
75%
75%

Notes: The population brackets and the caps on the salaries are defined by the Constitutional Amendment No. 25, 2000. The
approximate salaries in 2004 are calculated based on the salary of Federal Deputies of R$ 12,847.2. The maximum legislative
spending is defined as a proportion of revenues, defined as the sum of tax revenues and intergovernmental transfers in the
previous year.

Table 2. Descriptive Statistics

Mean

S.D.

0.10

0.25

Quantiles
0.50

0.75

0.90

Legislature characteristics:
Number legislators
Legislator wages
Weekly hours
Assistants per legislator
Bills submitted per legislator
Bills approved per legislator
Functioning commissions (1/0)

9.21
1641.56
10.49
0.49
0.86
0.69
0.84

1.21
975.04
7.33
0.71
1.95
1.31
0.36

9.00
750.00
4.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

9.00
930.00
8.00
0.11
0.11
0.11
1.00

9.00
1320.00
8.00
0.33
0.33
0.33
1.00

9.00
2100.00
12.00
0.56
0.89
0.78
1.00

9.00
2862.00
20.00
1.00
2.00
1.60
1.00

Legislators Characteristics:
Average campaign spending ($)
% female legislators
Years of schooling
% legislators without high school
% legislators with high school
% legislator from white collar
% legislators with 1 mandate
% legislators in 2-3 mandate
% legislators in 4-7 mandate

10858.89 16930.59
0.13
0.12
9.78
2.09
0.44
0.22
0.55
0.22
0.27
0.20
0.47
0.21
0.38
0.19
0.10
0.13

2000
0.00
7.06
0.11
0.22
0.00
0.22
0.11
0.00

3000
0.00
8.28
0.27
0.33
0.11
0.33
0.22
0.00

5000
0.11
9.83
0.44
0.56
0.22
0.44
0.36
0.05

10000
0.22
11.25
0.56
0.67
0.44
0.67
0.56
0.11

20000
0.27
12.50
0.78
0.89
0.56
0.78
0.67
0.22

Variable

Candidates Characteristics:
Number of candidates per seat
Number of parties per seat
Campaign spending
Years of schooling
% candidates without high school
% candidates with high school
% candidates from white collar
% candidates female

6.10
1.08
9644
9.04
0.51
0.48
0.19
0.20

3.68
0.45
14573
1.55
0.16
0.16
0.11
0.07

2.56
0.56
2000
6.98
0.30
0.26
0.06
0.11

3.44
0.78
3000
7.97
0.39
0.36
0.12
0.16

5.00
1.00
5000
9.09
0.51
0.48
0.19
0.21

7.67
1.33
10000
10.17
0.63
0.60
0.26
0.25

11.30
1.73
20000
11.02
0.72
0.69
0.33
0.29

Municipal Characteristics:
Average municipal wages
Population in 2003 (10000s)
% Urban population
Gini coefficient
Literacy rate
% households with electricity
Household income per capita
Revenues per capita

648.08
0.23
0.60
0.56
0.78
0.87
4.96
998.70

197.45
0.64
0.23
0.06
0.13
0.17
0.57
516.05

446.52
0.03
0.27
0.49
0.60
0.60
4.18
548.08

518.12
0.05
0.41
0.52
0.68
0.80
4.45
656.69

616.65
0.10
0.60
0.56
0.82
0.94
5.05
855.34

737.87
0.20
0.79
0.60
0.88
0.99
5.44
1174.91

870.11
0.42
0.91
0.63
0.92
1.00
5.67
1627.45

School and health characteristics:
Health center
Doctors per 1000 persons
Average number of doctor visits
Number of schools per school-aged children in 2006 (x1000)
Share of schools with a science laboratory in 2006
Share of schools with a computer lab in 2006
Sanitation network extension per capita (x100)
Water network extension per capita (x100)
Sanitation connections per capita (x100)
Water connections per capita (x100)

0.68
1.72
1.60
4.04
0.03
0.41
0.06
0.30
4.36
18.81

0.47
1.23
1.00
3.48
0.13
0.40
0.13
0.22
8.97
8.84

0.00
0.48
0.48
0.86
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.09
0.00
8.09

0.00
0.84
0.92
1.50
0.00
0.03
0.00
0.15
0.00
12.69

1.00
1.42
1.46
3.00
0.00
0.23
0.00
0.27
0.00
18.66

1.00
2.30
2.09
5.62
0.00
0.89
0.04
0.39
2.32
24.64

1.00
3.33
2.84
8.67
0.06
1.00
0.27
0.53
21.00
29.56

Notes: This table reports the mean political and socio-economic characteristics of the all the municipalities in our sample. Column 1 reports the
mean of each variable and column 1 reports the standard deviation. The characteristics of the legislature are based on 2005 Brazilian Legislative
Census (Censo do Legislativo). The candidate characteristics were constructed using data from Brazil’s electoral commission (Tribunal Superior
Eleitoral: http://www.tse.gov.br/index.html). The socio-economic characteristics were constructed using data from Brazil’s statistical bureau
(Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatistica: http://www.ibge.gov.br). For more information on the variables see the data appendix.

Table 3. The Effects of Politicians’ Wages on Candidate Entry - OLS
Candidate characteristics
Dependent variables:

Log wages

Number
Candidates
per Seat

Log
Candidate
Years of
Schooling

Share of
skilled
occupation
candidates

(1)

(2)

(4)

2.707

0.718

[0.123]*** [0.043]***
Population (1/100000)

1.107

0.184

0.002
[0.003]
0.009

[0.260]*** [0.033]*** [0.002]***
Log income per capita

-0.686

0.329

0.028

[0.167]*** [0.084]*** [0.007]***
% urban population

4.156

1.510

0.046

(3)

(5)

0.013

0.594

[0.002]*** [0.029]***
-0.001

0.220

[0.001]

[0.032]***

% households with energy

Log (wages municipality)
Hours functioning legislature
Assistants per legislator

(6)

(8)

0.812

0.032

[0.060]*** [0.006]***
0.245

0.028

[0.048]*** [0.005]***

Log
Share of
Legislators
female
campaign
legislators
spending
(7)

(9)

-0.009

0.650

[0.004]**

[0.031]***

0.000

0.226

[0.002]

[0.034]***

-0.007

0.307

0.445

0.019

-0.010

0.330

[0.050]***

[0.117]***

[0.012]

[0.008]

[0.053]***

2.267

0.112

0.026

0.076

-0.136
[0.062]**

[0.138]*** [0.014]*** [0.009]***

-0.106
[0.064]*

-0.871

1.400

0.029

0.021

0.007

1.842

0.011

0.053

0.214

[0.722]

[0.353]***

[0.029]

[0.018]

[0.218]

[0.493]***

[0.054]

[0.034]

[0.232]

-1.183

1.233

[0.286]*** [0.166]***
% literate

Log
Share of
Legislators
skilled
Years of
occupation
Schooling legislators

[0.004]*

[0.196]*** [0.099]*** [0.008]*** [0.005]***
Gini

Legislators' characteristics

Log
Share of
Candidates
female
campaign
candidates
spending

0.027

-0.005

0.008

0.946

-0.003

0.002

0.069

[0.014]*

[0.009]

[0.094]

[0.226]***

[0.025]

[0.016]

[0.100]

5.746

0.773

-0.105

-0.008

-1.558

0.475

-0.058

-0.071

-1.784

[0.644]***

[0.350]**

[0.030]***

[0.018]

[0.202]***

[0.488]

[0.053]

[0.033]**

[0.216]***

1.312

-0.028

0.027

0.007

0.271

0.205

0.044

-0.008

0.285

[0.192]***

[0.088]

[0.009]***

[0.005]

[0.058]***

[0.126]

[0.015]***

[0.008]

[0.062]***

0.004

0.005

0.000

0.000

0.004

0.008

0.001

0.000

0.003

[0.006]

[0.002]**

[0.000]

[0.000]

[0.002]**

[0.003]**

[0.000]**

[0.000]

[0.002]

0.447

0.163

0.006

0.005

0.092

0.194

0.023

[0.094]*** [0.032]*** [0.002]*** [0.001]*** [0.019]***

[0.059]*** [0.004]***

0.003

0.094

[0.003]

[0.020]***

Mean of dependent variable

6.103

9.037

0.193

0.205

8.739

9.780

0.273

0.128

8.808

Observations

4889

4887

4890

4889

4824

4888

4890

4892

4818

R-squared

0.54

0.38

0.06

0.10

0.27

0.33

0.10

0.02

0.28

Notes: This table reports the OLS estimates for the effects of wages on the characteristics of those that ran and were elected for legislature in the 2004 elections. * indicates statistical significance at the
10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets.

Table 4. First-Stage Results

(1)
0.208
[0.019]***
-0.052
[0.037]
0.115
[0.063]*
0.024
[0.079]
0.142
[0.214]
4.932
[0.275]***
-3.056
[0.286]***
-1.567
[0.151]***
-0.219
[0.133]*
-0.006
[0.133]
-0.076
[0.127]

Log wages
(2)
0.213
[0.019]***
-0.025
[0.036]
0.129
[0.061]**
0.048
[0.084]
0.102
[0.227]
4.407
[0.276]***
-2.667
[0.287]***
-1.486
[0.145]***
-0.188
[0.128]
0.013
[0.143]
-0.071
[0.138]

No
4892
0.67
29.10
[0.00]

Yes
4892
0.68
29.72
[0.00]

Dependent variable
1{x >10,000}
1{x >50,000}
1{x >100,000}
1{x >300,000}
1{x >500,000}
x
(x -10,000)*1{x >10,000}
(x -50,000)*1{x >50,000}
(x -100,000)*1{x >100,000}
(x -300,000)*1{x >300,000}
(x -500,000)*1{x >500,000}
Municipal characteristics
Observations
R-squared
F-test
(P-values)

(3)
0.213
[0.019]***
0.02
[0.029]
0.23
[0.033]***
0.143
[0.057]**
0.142
[0.086]*
4.407
[0.276]***
-2.67
[0.287]***
-1.717
[0.081]***

Yes
4892
0.68
39.00
[0.00]

Notes: This table reports the OLS estimate of the effects of the population cutoff on log wages. The running variable x refers to
the population in 2003. All regressions control for the number of hours the legislature functions per week and assistants per
legislator from the 2005 Brazilian Legislative Census (Censo do Legislativo). Municipal Characteristics include Log household
income per capita, % urban population, Gini coefficient, % households with energy, % literate population and Log average wages
in municipality. All regressions control for log(average wage in private and public sector in municipality). * indicates statistical
significance at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. The
reported F-test refers to the cut-off indicators.

Table 5. Robustness Test – Smoothness
%
households
Log
with
income
Gini
% urban
per capita Coefficient population electricity

%
Hours
population Number of
legislative
Mayor in
secondary assistants per functions per
second term Male mayor education
week
legislator

Dependent variable

Log
private
Sector
Wages
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

1{x >10,000}

0.011

0.02

-0.004

-0.016

0.004

-0.69

0.004

-0.088

-0.271

0.027

-0.017

[0.034]

[0.033]

[0.003]

[0.013]

[0.010]

[1.735]

[0.007]

[0.257]

[0.568]

[0.026]

[0.016]

-0.078

0.014

-0.018

-0.022

0.002

2.713

0.005

-0.528

1.863

0.045

0.006

[0.033]**

[0.076]

[0.007]**

[0.026]

[0.020]

[3.585]

[0.016]

[0.435]

[1.322]

[0.059]

[0.037]

1{x >50,000}
1{x >100,000}
1{x >300,000}
1{x >500,000}
x

Age of
mayor

-0.004

-0.001

-0.008

0.01

-0.023

1.083

-0.01

1.416

3.988

-0.092

-0.002

[0.101]

[0.011]

[0.029]

[0.020]

[4.312]

[0.018]

[0.664]**

[1.919]**

[0.098]

[0.043]

-0.018

0.059

-0.022

-0.005

-0.004

7.759

0.024

-0.21

2.072

-0.212

0.066

[0.093]

[0.182]

[0.019]

[0.023]

[0.010]

[3.676]**

[0.016]

[1.947]

[3.828]

[0.161]

[0.061]

-0.095

-0.174

0.033

0.045

0.003

0.291

-0.008

-2.47

3.203

-0.565

0.186

[0.263]

[0.448]

[0.038]

[0.035]

[0.006]

[5.882]

[0.032]

[3.061]

[9.329]

[0.471]

[0.190]

1.898

-2.895

0.478

0.712

-0.708

-178.844

-0.832

-1.558

3.618

-0.414

[0.683]** [0.494]*** [0.052]***
(x -50,000)*1{x >50,000}

Literacy
rate

Years of
schooling
mayor

[0.056]

[0.679]*** [0.474]*** [0.050]*** [0.202]*** [0.151]***
(x -10,000)*1{x >10,000}

%
households
with water

0.115

0.068

[0.136]

[0.286]

(x -100,000)*1{x >100,000} -0.403

-0.714

[0.122]*** [0.258]***
(x -300,000)*1{x >300,000} 0.057
0.097
[0.150]

[0.291]

-0.083

-0.189

0.819

[0.208]

[0.155]***

-0.234

[0.028]*** [0.091]**
0.021
[0.026]

-0.254

[25.983]*** [0.104]***
194.57

0.918

[26.861]*** [0.108]***

16.838

17.494

-1.356

0.274

[4.087]***

[8.862]**

[0.410]***

[0.239]

-10.474

-14.26

1.386

-0.35

[4.184]**

[9.165]

[0.423]***

[0.249]

0.099

15.169

0.122

-7.041

-7.321

0.158

0.229

[0.071]

[13.316]

[0.057]**

[1.771]***

[5.272]

[0.238]

[0.129]*

-0.191

[0.077]*** [0.061]***

-29.145

-0.197

0.467

2.151

-0.193

-0.17

[11.741]**

[0.049]***

[1.602]

[4.909]

[0.226]

[0.115]

0.01

-0.045

-0.02

-5.553

-0.016

1.484

1.724

0.371

-0.077

[0.023]

[0.027]

[0.011]*

[3.945]

[0.020]

[2.311]

[5.234]

[0.273]

[0.107]

(12)

(13)

-0.016
[0.430]
[0.022]
-0.362
0.094
[1.271]
[0.193]
1.082
0.023
[1.740]
[0.394]
-0.448
-0.28
[4.201]
[0.873]
-5.675
-1.969
[9.689]
[1.950]
-11.922
1.865
[6.027]** [0.282]***
32.675
-0.462
[6.412]***
[0.316]
-0.646
-0.519
[4.674]
[0.778]
-17.891
-0.558
[4.326]***
[0.858]
4.991
0.03
[6.554]
[1.262]
-6.481
-0.378
[6.433]
[1.201]
0.21

(14)

-0.626
[0.379]*
-1.353
[1.150]
-1.754
[2.327]
4.713
[6.705]
6.034
[12.773]
17.788
[5.320]***
-7.685
[5.618]
-0.757
[5.281]
-6.598
[5.328]
-3.721
[8.715]
0.061
[8.542]

(x -500,000)*1{x >500,000} -0.103

-0.161

-0.009

0.009

0.001

3.474

0.005

-1.226

-0.035

-0.367

0.094

[0.144]

[0.285]

[0.021]

[0.022]

[0.004]

[3.006]

[0.017]

[2.263]

[5.108]

[0.263]

[0.099]

Observations

4894

4894

4894

4894

4894

4894

4894

4464

4894

4894

4894

4894

4894

4894

R-squared

0.03

0.08

0.07

0.16

0.03

0.05

0.07

0.06

0.01

0.01

0

0.28

0.2

0.08

F-test

1.28

0.24

2.00

0.98

0.46

1.25

0.88

1.86

1.06

0.93

0.69

0.6

0.29

0.88

0.26

0.94

0.08

0.42

0.81

0.28

0.49

0.11

0.38

0.46

0.63

0.70

0.92

0.49

(P-values)

Notes: The dependent variable is specified in each column. The running variable x refers to the population in 2003. * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the
1% level. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. The reported F-test refers to the cut-off indicators.

Table 6: The Effects of Wages on Number Candidates and Parties

Dependent variable:

Number of
Candidates per Seat

Log wages

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
1.424
1.327
0.183
0.177
[0.597]** [0.547]** [0.089]** [0.086]**

F-test
(exc. instruments)
Municipal characteristics
Observations

29.52

29.45

Number of parties
per seat

29.86

29.79

Log Campaign
spending per
candidate

Log Campaign
spending per elected
legislator

(5)
(6)
0.477
0.389
[0.203]** [0.201]*

(7)
(8)
0.46
0.368
[0.210]** [0.208]*

28.82

28.95

28.6

28.73

No
4818

Yes
4818

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

4889

4889

4890

4890

4824

4824

Notes: The table reports the TSLS estimates for the effects of wages on the number of candidates and parties that participated in the 2004 elections. All regressions control for the number
of hours the legislature functions per week and assistants per legislator. Municipal Characteristics include Log household income per capita, % urban population, Gini coefficient,
% households with energy, % literate population, log average wage in private and public sector in municipality, and a linear spline in population. * indicates statistical significance
at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. The instruments used are the indicators for the cutoffs at 1{x>10,000},
1{x>50,000}, 1{x>100,000}, 1{x>300,000} and 1{x>500,000}. The reported F-test refers to these excluded instruments.

Table 7. The Effects of Politicians’ Wages on Candidate Selection

Dependent variable:

Log Years of schooling

Share with at least a
high school education
(4)

Share skilled
occupations

(1)

(2)

(3)

(5)

0.584
[0.352]*

0.602
[0.318]*

0.062
[0.037]*

29.12

29.76

29.12

0.885
[0.478]*

0.876
[0.444]**

0.107
[0.053]**

F-test
(exc. instruments)

29.12

29.76

29.12

29.76

30.03

Municipal characteristics
Observations

No
4887

Yes
4887

No
4889

Yes
4889

No
4890

(6)

Share of female
(7)

(8)

0.026
[0.017]

0.028
[0.017]*

29.12

29.76

0.039
[0.031]

0.043
[0.031]

29.93

29.12

29.76

Yes
4890

No
4889

Yes
4889

Panel A. Candidate characteristics
Log wages

F-test
(exc. instruments)

0.068
0.062
0.062
[0.035]* [0.028]** [0.027]**
29.76

30.03

29.93

Panel B. Legislators' characteristics
Log wages

0.11
0.084
0.079
[0.051]** [0.049]* [0.048]

Notes: The table reports the TSLS estimates for the effects of wages on the characteristics of those that ran and were elected as legislators in the 2004 elections. All regressions control for
the number of hours the legislature functions per week and assistants per legislator. Municipal Characteristics include Log household income per capita, % urban population, Gini
coefficient, % households with energy, % literate population, log average wage in private and public sector in municipality, and a linear spline in population. * indicates statistical
significance at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. The instruments used are the indicators for the cutoffs at
1{x>10,000}, 1{x>50,000}, 1{x>100,000}, 1{x>300,000} and 1{x>500,000}. The reported F-test refers to these excluded instruments.

Table 8. The Effects of Politicians’ Wages on Re-election and Tenure

Dependent variable:

Panel A: IV estimates
Log Wages
F-test
(excl. instruments)
Panel B: OLS estimates
Log Wages
R-squared

Reelection rate

Reelection rate less
educated

Reelection rate more
educated

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.060
[0.038]

0.063
[0.037]*

0.036
[0.060]

0.038
[0.058]

0.126
[0.078]

0.132
[0.077]*

29.31

29.47

25.81

27.17

25.8

26.53

Average Number of
Terms
(7)

(8)

0.382
0.41
[0.155]** [0.151]***
29.68

29.62

Share of
Share of legislators in
Share of legislators in
legislators in 2nd1st term
4th-7th terms
3rd terms
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
-0.037
[0.053]

-0.038
[0.053]

0.009 0.010
0.082
0.087
[0.049] [0.049] [0.031]*** [0.031]***

29.68

29.62

29.68

29.62

29.68

29.62

0.053
0.048
0.04
0.038
0.071
0.068
0.136
0.132
-0.055
-0.052
0.017 0.016
0.031
0.031
[0.007]*** [0.007]*** [0.011]*** [0.011]*** [0.014]*** [0.014]*** [0.028]*** [0.030]*** [0.010]*** [0.010]*** [0.009]* [0.009]* [0.006]*** [0.006]***
0.05

0.12

0.03

0.05

0.02

0.05

0.03

0.06

0.03

0.06

0.01

0.01

0.04

0.07

Municipal characteristics No
Observations
4890

Yes
4890

No
3884

Yes
3884

No
3733

Yes
3733

No
4892

Yes
4892

No
4892

Yes
4892

No
4892

Yes
4892

No
4892

Yes
4892

Notes: The table reports the TSLS and OLS estimates for the effects of wages on re-election rates for 2004 elections. The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is the proportion
of legislators that were re-elected in 2004. The dependent variable in columns 3-4 is the proportion of legislators with less than a high school degree that were re-elected in 2004.
The dependent variable in columns 5-6 is the proportion of legislators with at least a high school degree that were re-elected in 2004. All regressions control for the number of
hours the legislature functions per week and assistants per legislator. Municipal Characteristics include Log household income per capita, % urban population, Gini coefficient, %
households with energy, % literate population, log average wage in private and public sector in municipality, and a linear spline in population. * indicates statistical significance at
the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. The instruments used are the indicators for the cutoffs at 1{x>10,000},
1{x>50,000}, 1{x>100,000}, 1{x>300,000} and 1{x>500,000}. The reported F-test refers to these excluded instruments.

Table 9. The Effects of Wages on Legislative Productivity

Dependent variable:

Log Number of Bill Submitted

Log number of Bill Approved

Share of Bills Approved

Functioning Commission

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.466
[0.254]*

0.436
[0.251]*

0.495
[0.263]*

0.506
[0.264]*

0.275
[0.096]***

0.297
[0.099]***

0.208
[0.097]**

0.206
[0.098]**

27.18

26.63

25.29

24.51

20.62

19.91

29.83

29.72

0.531
[0.044]***

0.502
[0.041]***

0.438
[0.035]***

0.411
[0.035]***

-0.022
[0.011]**

-0.023
[0.011]**

0.101
[0.011]***

0.09
[0.012]***

R-squared

0.18

0.24

0.15

0.18

0.03

0.05

0.02

0.03

Municipal characteristics
Observations

No
4471

Yes
4471

No
4216

Yes
4216

No
3392

Yes
3392

No
4894

Yes
4894

Panel A: IV estimates
Log Wages

F-test
(exc. instruments)
Panel B: OLS estimates
Log Wages

Notes: The table reports the OLS and TSLS estimates for the effects of wages on legislative productivity. The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is the log of one plus the
number of bills submitted. The dependent variable in columns 3-4 is the log of one plus the number of bills approved. All regressions control for the number of hours the
legislature functions per week and assistants per legislator. Municipal Characteristics include Log household income per capita, % urban population, Gini coefficient, %
households with energy, % literate population, log average wage in private and public sector in municipality, and a linear spline in population. * indicates statistical significance at
the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. The instruments used are the indicators for the cutoffs at 1{x>10,000},
1{x>50,000}, 1{x>100,000}, 1{x>300,000} and 1{x>500,000}. The reported F-test refers to these excluded instruments.

Table 10. The Effects of Wages on Public Good Provision
Education

Dependent variable:

Panel A: IV estimates
Log Wages

F-test
(exc. instruments)
Panel B: OLS estimates
Log Wages

Health

Number of
Share of
schools per Share of
schools with
schools with
school
a computer
aged child a science lab
lab
(x1000)
(1)
(2)
(3)

Health
Clinic

Sanitation and Water

Number of
Average
doctors per
number of
capita
doctor visits
(x1000)

Water
Sanitation
Water
Sanitation
connections connections
network
network
extension per extension per per capita per capita
(x100)
(x100)
capita (x100) capita (x100)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

1.27
[0.688]*

0.068
[0.029]**

0.175
[0.073]**

0.242
[0.129]*

0.639
[0.279]**

0.521
[0.241]**

0.073
[0.036]**

0.028
[0.052]

3.201
[2.353]

0.457
[1.741]

26.21

26.21

26.21

27.31

28.59

30.23

21.54

26.49

22.05

26.68

-0.088
[0.035]**

-0.033
[0.005]

-0.063
[0.006]

-2.371
[0.328]

-2.028
[0.221]

-0.292
-0.015
[0.093]*** [0.005]***

-0.064
[0.011]***

0.104
0.142
[0.016]*** [0.033]***

R-squared

0.48

0.07

0.54

0.04

0.31

0.16

0.27

0.27

0.31

0.50

Municipal characteristics
Observations

Yes
4736

Yes
4736

Yes
4736

Yes
4012

Yes
4857

Yes
4825

Yes
3479

Yes
3928

Yes
3483

Yes
3935

Notes: The table reports the OLS and TSLS estimates for the effects of wages on the provision of certain public goods. The dependent variables refer to 2006 levels. In column 5,
the dependent variable is an indicator for whether or not a health clinic exists. All regressions control for the number of hours the legislature functions per week and assistants per
legislator. Municipal Characteristics include Log household income per capita, % urban population, Gini coefficient, % households with energy, % literate population, log average
wage in private and public sector in municipality, and a linear spline in population. * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level.
Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. The instruments used are the indicators for the cutoffs at 1{x>10,000}, 1{x>50,000}, 1{x>100,000}, 1{x>300,000} and
1{x>500,000}. The reported F-test refers to these excluded instruments.

Table 11. The Effects of Wages and Legislative Characteristics on Legislative Productivity
Functionin
Log number Log number Share of
g
Bills
of Bill
of Bill
Commissio
Submitted Approved Approved
n
Dependent variable:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Log Wages
0.384
0.476
0.312
0.224
[0.255]
[0.270]* [0.100]*** [0.100]**
Share of legislator with 3 or more terms
0.136
0.082
-0.034
-0.111
[0.096]
[0.099]
[0.030] [0.032]***
Share of female legislators
-0.352
-0.32
-0.011
0.002
[0.119]*** [0.132]**
[0.048]
[0.044]
Share of legislator with at least high school
0.323
0.228
-0.05
-0.006
[0.074]*** [0.076]*** [0.028]*
[0.028]
Share of legislators with a white collar profession 0.006
0.022
-0.012
-0.013
[0.075]
[0.075]
[0.028]
[0.029]
Average age of legislators
0
-0.002
0
0
[0.001]
[0.002]
[0.000]
[0.000]
Municipal characteristics
Observations

Yes
4467

Yes
4212

Yes
3387

Yes
4890

Share of
Number of
schools with
schools
a science lab
(5)
1.173
[0.698]*
0.379
[0.288]
0.189
[0.345]
-0.162
[0.207]
0.681
[0.209]***
0.01
[0.004]***

(6)
0.064
[0.029]**
0.013
[0.010]
0.006
[0.015]
0.02
[0.010]**
0.001
[0.009]
0
[0.000]

Yes
4801

Yes
4539

Share of
Number of
schools
Health doctors per
with a
capita
Clinic
computer
(x1000)
(7)
(9)
(10)
0.164
0.259
0.559
[0.074]** [0.133]* [0.282]**
0.022
-0.111
0.249
[0.024]
[0.046]** [0.097]**
0.022
-0.037
-0.29
[0.034]
[0.062] [0.123]**
0.079
-0.026
0.369
[0.022]*** [0.040] [0.081]***
-0.034
-0.001
0.109
[0.021]
[0.041]
[0.079]
0
0
0.004
[0.000]
[0.001] [0.001]***
Yes
4539

Yes
4010

Yes
4855

Average
number of
doctor
visits
(11)
0.496
[0.245]**
0.142
[0.080]*
-0.204
[0.114]*
0.106
[0.072]
0.085
[0.070]
0.001
[0.001]
Yes
4890

Notes: The table reports the TSLS estimates for the effects of wages on legislative productivity controlling for the characteristics of the legislators. All regressions control for the
number of hours the legislature functions per week and assistants per legislator. Municipal Characteristics include Log household income per capita, % urban population, Gini
coefficient, % households with energy, % literate population, log average wage in private and public sector in municipality, and a linear spline in population. * indicates statistical
significance at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. The instruments used are the indicators for the cutoffs at
1{x>10,000}, 1{x>50,000}, 1{x>100,000}, 1{x>300,000} and 1{x>500,000}. The reported F-test refers to these excluded instruments.

Table 12. Robustness Test – Functional form assumption
Flexible polynomial on population (quartic)

Linear Spline

Linear Spline

Full Sample

5 percent
sample

10 percent
sample

Salary Cap as
Instrument

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Flexible control
for federal
block grant
(6)

1.539
[0.528]***

3.767
[0.223]***

2.425
[0.664]***

1.331
[0.528]**

0.206
[0.083]**

0.584
[0.030]***

0.479
[0.037]***

0.357
[0.104]***

0.143
[0.084]*

Campaign Spending

0.481
[0.196]**

0.609
[0.065]***

4.282
[0.962]***
(719)
0.596
[0.111]***
(719)
0.95
[0.226]***

3.535
[0.272]***

Number of Political Parties per Seat

4.971
[1.132]***
(499)
0.559
[0.131]***
(499)
0.815
[0.271]***

0.483
[0.082]***

0.427
[0.231]*

0.323
[0.199]

Average Years of Schooling

0.684
[0.303]**

1.353
[0.096]***

At least a high school education

0.07
[0.033]**

0.137
[0.010]***

White collar

0.056
[0.026]**

-0.01
[0.008]

0.031
[0.016]*

0.02
[0.005]***

0.452
[0.203]**

Average education

Share with at least high school

Flexible control for
municipal
characteristics
(1)
Panel A: Candidates
Number of Candidates per Seat

Control for
council size
(7)

(491)

(710)

1.123
[0.399]***
(499)
0.126
[0.045]***
(499)
0.005
[0.032]
(499)
0.022
[0.019]
(499)

1.417
[0.336]***
(719)
0.145
[0.037]***
(719)
0.009
[0.027]
(719)
0.01
[0.016]
(719)

1.2
[0.119]***

0.842
[0.362]**

0.54
[0.308]*

0.122
[0.013]***

0.091
[0.040]**

0.06
[0.034]*

-0.004
[0.010]

0.035
[0.031]

0.057
[0.027]**

0.018
[0.006]***

0.024
[0.020]

0.027
[0.017]

0.655
[0.068]***

0.774
[0.265]***

0.93
[0.235]***

0.527
[0.085]***

0.439
[0.240]*

0.33
[0.207]

(488)

(707)

0.907
[0.427]**

1.673
[0.134]***

1.227
[0.518]**

0.835
[0.434]*

0.173
[0.015]***

0.15
[0.019]***

0.158
[0.060]***

0.099
[0.050]**

White collar

0.072
[0.047]

0.033
[0.015]**

0.012
[0.018]

0.071
[0.056]

0.07
[0.048]

Share of female legislators

0.037
[0.030]

0.014
[0.010]

2.078
[0.485]***
(719)
0.21
[0.057]***
(719)
0.062
[0.056]
(719)
0.055
[0.035]
(719)

1.416
[0.166]***

0.11
[0.050]**

1.673
[0.573]***
(499)
0.168
[0.068]**
(499)
0.061
[0.067]
(499)
0.048
[0.043]
(499)

0.01
[0.012]

0.018
[0.036]

0.039
[0.031]

Share of female candidates

Panel B:: Legislators
Campaign Spending

Table 12. Robustness Test – Functional form assumption (continued…)
Flexible polynomial on population (quartic)

Linear Spline
Flexible control for
municipal
characteristics
(1)

Linear Spline

Full Sample

5 percent
sample

10 percent
sample

Salary Cap as
Instrument

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Flexible control
for federal
block grant
(6)

0.463
[0.244]*

0.567
[0.102]***

0.621
[0.300]**

0.373
[0.249]

0.655
[0.084]***

0.615
[0.104]***

0.671
[0.326]**

0.454
[0.262]*

0.291
[0.096]***

0.059
[0.029]**

0.111
[0.040]***

0.303
[0.120]**

0.305
[0.098]***

0.194
[0.095]**

0.175
[0.029]***

0.784
[0.486]
(676)
1.147
[0.304]***
(642)
0.106
[0.096]
(552)
0.13
[0.101]
(719)

0.47
[0.117]***

0.523
[0.257]**

0.553
[0.586]
(467)
1.181
[0.360]***
(442)
0.136
[0.110]
(380)
0.101
[0.123]
(499)

0.164
[0.035]***

0.231
[0.112]**

0.18
[0.097]*

1.337
[0.653]**

0.38
[0.732]

0.48
[0.754]

1.489
[0.679]**

0.062
[0.027]**

0.021
[0.026]

0.031
[0.028]

0.038
[0.029]

0.063
[0.028]**

Share of schools with a computer lab

0.163
[0.068]**

0.144
[0.085]*

0.178
[0.088]**

0.077
[0.078]

0.18
[0.071]**

0.198
[0.128]

0.184
[0.037]***

0.194
[0.047]***

0.291
[0.167]*

0.218
[0.130]*

Number of doctors per capita (x1000)

0.668
[0.270]**

0.275
[0.090]***

0.345
[0.101]***

0.361
[0.310]

0.663
[0.275]**

Average number of doctor visits

0.501
[0.232]**

0.019
[0.259]

1.446
[2.096]
(643)
0.012
[0.066]
(643)
0.275
[0.242]
(643)
0.28
[0.123]**
(659)
0.425
[0.399]
(713)
-0.696
[0.740]
(650)

0.638
[0.774]

Share of schools with a science lab

3.744
[2.766]
(427)
-0.007
[0.080]
(427)
0.352
[0.306]
(427)
0.402
[0.145]***
(464)
0.619
[0.460]
(493)
-0.798
[0.942]
(430)

0.133
[0.273]

0.034
[0.288]

0.527
[0.239]**

Panel C: legislative productivity
Log number of bills submitted

Log number of bills approved

Share of bills approved

Functioning commission

Panel D: Public goods provision
Number of schools per school-aged child (x1000)

Health clinic

Control for
council size
(7)

Notes: All regressions control for the number of hours the legislature functions per week and assistants per legislator and the full set of municipal characteristics. Column 1
controls for a linear-spline in population and a 4th order polynomial in all of the municipal characteristics. Columns 2-5 controls for 4th order polynomial in population. * indicates
statistical significance at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. The instruments used are the indicators for the
cutoffs at 1{x>10,000}, 1{x>50,000}, 1{x>100,000}, 1{x>300,000} and 1{x>500,000}. The reported F-test refers to these excluded instruments.

Table A1. The Effects of Block Grants on Political Selection and Performance

1{x >13584}
1{x >16980}
1{x >23772}
1{x >30564}
1{x >44148}

Controls
F-test (excluded instruments
P-value
Observations
R-squared

Number
Number of
Change Change in
Log
Change in
of
Change in
Log
Average
Total
health
share of
in
number
Average Average
doctors the average
share of
number of
Number of Years of
clinics per
schools
of Bill number
Number Educatio
number of
per
schools with a
Bill
Candidates Schoolin
capita
with a
of
Approve
n
of Terms
capita doctor visits
computer lab
Submitted
g
per Seat
(x1000)
schools science lab
d
(x1000)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
0.38
-0.003
-0.008
-0.33
-0.043
0
-0.594
0.001
0.015
0.025
0.11
-0.095
[0.336]
[0.158] [0.076] [0.405] [0.136] [0.140] [0.564]
[0.005]
[0.020]
[0.023]
[0.127]
[0.111]
-0.436
0.054
-0.038
0.195
0.064
0.059
-0.707
0.003
0.012
-0.014
0.133
-0.05
[0.366]
[0.162] [0.081] [0.454] [0.145] [0.143] [0.673]
[0.006]
[0.020]
[0.022]
[0.119]
[0.107]
-0.151
0.159
-0.054
0.872
-0.187
-0.023 -0.996
0.005
0.006
-0.002
-0.038
0.177
[0.390]
[0.158] [0.106] [0.549] [0.147] [0.146] [0.974]
[0.008]
[0.022]
[0.020]
[0.126]
[0.115]
0.367
0.179
-0.119
1.266
-0.199
-0.222
0.637
-0.001
-0.024
-0.026
-0.168
-0.043
[0.542]
[0.190] [0.168] [0.658]* [0.175] [0.168] [1.302]
[0.009]
[0.022]
[0.025]
[0.169]
[0.152]
0.069
0.269
-0.089
1.732
0.113
0.131
2.319
0.003
-0.007
0.001
0.03
-0.06
[0.600]
[0.211] [0.261] [0.748]** [0.202] [0.202] [1.604]
[0.007]
[0.022]
[0.028]
[0.196]
[0.142]
Y
0.91
0.47
1999
0.34

Y
0.57
0.72
1999
0.32

Y
0.18
0.97
2001
0.06

Y
1.86
0.10
2001
0.06

Y
0.72
0.61
1832
0.16

Y
0.7
0.62
1721
0.12

Y
0.96
0.44
1831
0.03

Y
0.17
0.97
1984
0

Y
0.45
0.82
1984
0.05

Y
0.74
0.60
1841
0.07

Y
0.57
0.72
1999
0.37

Y
0.79
0.56
1993
0.01

Notes: This table present OLS estimates for the effects of the block grant cutoffs on various characteristics of political selection and performance, for municipalities with a
population of 10,000-50,000, where wages are held constant. All regressions control for the number of hours the legislature functions per week and assistants per legislator.
Municipal Characteristics include Log household income per capita, % urban population, Gini coefficient, % households with energy, % literate population and Log average wages
in municipality. All regressions control for log(average wage in private and public sector in municipality). * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level
and *** at the 1% level. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. The instruments used are the indicators for the cutoffs at 1{x>10,000}, 1{x>50,000}, 1{x>100,000},
1{x>300,000} and 1{x>500,000}. The reported F-test refers to cutoffs.

