NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMMIGRATION AND PRODUCT DIVERSITY
Francesca Mazzolari
David Neumark
Working Paper 14900
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14900

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2009

Both authors are research fellows at IZA. Neumark is also a research associate of the NBER and a
Bren Fellow at the Public Policy Institute of California. We are grateful to the University of California
Labor and Employment Research Fund and the United Nations for research support, to Daria Burnes
for outstanding research assistance, to Giuseppe Ragusa for help with programming, and to Albrecht
Glitz, Saul Lach, Ken Small, Klaus Zimmermann, three anonymous referees, and seminar participants
at UCI and the University of Milan, for helpful comments. Any views are our own, and not those of
the University of California, Confindustria, the United Nations, the Public Policy Institute of California,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper circulated earlier with the title “Beyond
Wages: The Effects of Immigration on the Scale and Composition of Output.”
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Francesca Mazzolari and David Neumark. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Immigration and Product Diversity
Francesca Mazzolari and David Neumark
NBER Working Paper No. 14900
April 2009, Revised January 2011
JEL No. J18,J2,J61
ABSTRACT
We study the effects of immigration on the diversity of consumption choices. Data from California
in the 1990s indicate that immigration is associated with fewer stand-alone retail stores, and a greater
number of large and in particular big-box retailers – evidence that likely contradicts a diversity-enhancing
effect of immigration. In contrast, focusing on the restaurant sector for which we can better identify
the types of products consumed by customers, we find that immigration is associated with increased
ethnic diversity of restaurants. This latter effect appears to come in part from the comparative advantage
of immigrants in the production of ethnic goods.
Francesca Mazzolari
Department of Economics
UCI
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
fmazzola@uci.edu
David Neumark
Department of Economics
UCI
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu

I. Introduction
The share of foreign-born workers in the U.S. labor force increased from 6.5% in 1980 to
13.3% in 2007. Contemporaneous with the remarkable surge in immigration, a controversial
debate has arisen on the economic consequences of immigration – in large part focused on
whether immigrants compete with natives for jobs and hence reduce wages for U.S. workers.
Economic theory can be readily used to justify concerns over the effects of immigrant inflows on
outcomes for natives who compete for similar jobs with immigrants (see, e.g., Borjas, 2009;
Davis and Weinstein, 2002), and an extensive empirical literature assesses these effects.
A much less studied question is the effect of immigration on the variety of consumption
choices in the destination country. Because immigrants are consumers with potentially different
demand characteristics, and also may have a comparative advantage in the production of ethnic
goods, their arrival may change the composition of products available to consumers. The sign of
the effect of immigration on product diversity, which can result from both output demand and
labor supply shifts, is ambiguous. To the extent that immigrants have higher price elasticities of
demand and/or less attachment to brands, they may increase demand for low-cost, standardized
goods such as those often thought to be offered by big-box retailers, potentially reducing
diversity in consumption choices. On the other hand, because of the differentiated variety of
products that immigrants consume and produce, an inflow of foreign-born individuals may
increase the diversity of consumption choices available to natives in non-tradable services, such
as retail trade and restaurants. Our research attempts to quantify some of these
“composition/variety” effects – which have been often mentioned in the immigration literature
but hardly ever modeled or measured.
To investigate the effects of immigration on product diversity, we focus on small areas

1

that experienced different immigration inflows. The immigrant inflows would only be expected
to have effects on local markets for goods and services that are locally-produced and non-traded,
and hence our focus is on these non-tradable sectors, in particular the retail trade and the
restaurant sector.1 We use data from the National Establishment Time Series (NETS) database
matched with Census of Population data. The NETS covers essentially all establishments, and
provides detailed information on both geographical location and industry. We use NETS data for
the entire state of California, mapping each business establishment in the NETS to its Census
tract, and merging the NETS data with Census of Population data on changes in the total and
foreign-born population residing in each tract. California is an immigrant-rich area; in 2000, the
state was home to one-third of all foreign-born individuals living in the United States. Our
empirical evidence is based on the relationships between immigrant inflows into local areas and
a number of dimensions of change in the employment and composition of businesses in these
local areas. Strictly speaking, then, we do not measure output, but infer the effects of
immigration on the composition of output from changes in the composition of employment and
businesses.
2. Prior research on the effects of immigration on product variety
In contrast to the extensive literature on immigration and natives’ labor outcomes, there is
far less work that investigates how immigration changes product diversity. There is, in fact,
relatively little work that even tries to measure product demand shifts associated with
immigration (Borjas, 2009, footnote 8) or effects of immigration on prices, which might be
viewed as prerequisites for immigration to have much effect on product diversity. As such, we
1

The proportion of goods and services consumed by immigrants might be too small to affect the product
demand curve for nationally-traded goods (“traded”); and goods that are traded nationally may also be
traded internationally, so immigration does not necessarily change the demand or supply of these goods.
Regardless, our identification strategy focuses on local markets, and it is not clear how one would identify
the effects on national markets.

2

start by briefly reviewing the available evidence on product demand shifts and price effects.
Using store-level price data, Lach (2007) finds a large and significant reduction in prices
following the unexpected arrival of a large number of immigrants from the former Soviet Union
in Israel during 1990. The short-run nature of the empirical analysis – restricted to changes in
prices in 1990 – limits the extent to which the negative immigration effect can be explained by
declines in retail costs stemming from an outward labor supply shift, and in fact the immigrationinduced labor supply shocks were arguably small in light of the low labor force participation of
the recently-arrived immigrants. If interpreted as demand-side effects, Lach’s results are
consistent with new consumers having higher price elasticities and lower search costs than the
native population. In addition, evidence for prices for different product categories is consistent
with product demand shifts induced by immigration, as prices increased more for products
representing a relatively larger share of expenditures for immigrants.
Bodvarsson et al. (2008) analyze the effects of the inflow of Cuban immigrants into
Miami after the Mariel Boatlift of 1980. They find a positive and significant impact of immigrant
inflows on retail sales per capita, and interpret their findings as evidence of positive consumer
demand effects. Finally, Bodvarsson and Van den Berg’s (2006) study of Hispanic immigration
to Dawson County, Nebraska – a uniquely-segmented economy where immigrants work
exclusively in an export sector (the meatpacking industry) but, as usual, consume locally – also
suggests that immigration can substantially boost local consumer demand.
Evidence consistent with the existence of immigration-induced product demand shifts is
also available for the United Kingdom, where Frattini (2009) finds that immigrant inflows
between 1995 and 2006 increased the price of low-value and everyday grocery goods – a result
interpreted as stemming from demand side effects, and which parallels some of our later findings

3

for the retail sector.
Saiz (2007) and Cortes (2008) also study the effects of immigration on prices, but with a
different focus. Saiz studies immigrants’ demand for housing and subsequent changes in housing
rents, while Cortes studies how immigration changes the price of domestically-produced
products through declines in labor costs.
As this brief review indicates, empirical research on how immigration affects host
countries has recently moved away from its almost exclusive focus on labor markets to include
effects on product demand and prices. Changes in prices are important because – aside from
reflecting product demand shifts – they affect real income and its distribution, in ways that
depend on natives’ consumption patterns. However, what is still largely ignored in most
empirical research are the potential benefits from immigration in terms of increasing the variety
of consumption choices in the destination country.
One of the commonly-cited benefits of immigration is that the diversity of the population
is enhanced. Although diversity is often touted as a benefit in and of itself, economic models can
help explain why diversity might increase welfare. Lazear (2000), for example, builds a model in
which the gains from diversity are greatest when groups have information sets that (i) are
disjoint, (ii) are relevant to one another, and (iii) can be learned by the other group at low cost.
He then empirically evaluates the argument in favor of immigration-induced diversity using the
1990 Census, and concludes that current immigration policy fails to promote diversity, while
balanced immigration, promoted through the sale of immigration slots, would enrich the
diversity of the U.S. population. In other analyses of the economic effects of ethnic diversity
(Ottaviano and Peri, 2006 and 2008; Sparber, 2008; Amuedo-Dorantes and de la Rica, 2008; Peri
and Sparber, 2009), the gains from diversity arise from productivity effects (e.g., because of the

4

existence of complementarities between workers of different types).
In this paper, we define and study a different kind of diversity that may be induced by
immigration – namely, we ask whether immigrant inflows increase the variety of products
available for consumption. This diversity effect can arise for two reasons. First, immigrants
consume and hence increase demand for “ethnic” goods. And second, they may have a
comparative advantage in producing ethnic goods, hence increasing the supply of these goods.2
(A similar effect can stem from any kind of frictions or preferences that lead immigrants to
increase labor supply in industries producing ethnic goods.) The increased diversity of goods in
the product market generated by immigration may then lead to welfare improvements for natives
that have relatively stronger preferences for ethnic goods.3
In economics, there is a well-established trade literature modeling and estimating the
welfare gains from increased varieties of traded goods. Broda and Weinstein (2006), building on
the seminal work of Krugman (1979) and on the methodology developed by Feenstra (1994),
model international trade within a framework of differentiated goods and estimate the
contribution of imports of new varieties to national welfare in the United States. Using
disaggregated U.S. import data, they find that U.S. consumers have low elasticities of
substitution across similar goods produced in different countries, and calculate the gain from the
2

See Chiswick (2009) for a formal treatment of the relevance of ethnicity for economic analysis through
these two channels (that is, that ethnic groups differ in their consumption patterns as well as in their
supply of resources).
3
Waldfogel (2008) presents evidence consistent with the idea that an individual consumer’s welfare can
be affected by the agglomeration of individuals with particular tastes in the same market. He studies the
relationship between the distribution of consumer types and the distribution of restaurants, and concludes
that “agglomeration of demographically similar persons brings forth private products … preferred by the
agglomerating group” (p. 580). Although this research does not pertain to immigration per se, it makes
the point that the entry of immigrants with similar tastes to a subgroup of natives may increase the
provision of products preferred by those natives and hence increase their welfare, and more generally that
the distribution of tastes in the market can affect the types of products offered. In the immigration
literature, see Hatton and Leigh (2009) for a review of the interaction between ethnic groups and the host
society, and the process by which the non-immigrant community accepts, accommodates, and adapts to
inflows from particular immigrant groups.

5

threefold increase in import varieties between 1972 and 2001 to be 2.6% of GDP.
More closely related to what we do is the study by Ottaviano and Peri (2007), which
adapts the concept of “consumption variety” effects to the study of the economic benefits of
immigration. They develop a general equilibrium model for a small open economy where
individuals are differentiated in terms of origin – home-born and foreign-born – and consume
two goods – a homogenous tradable good and a differentiated local non-tradable good.
Individuals of different origin are assumed to be able to produce different varieties of the nontradable good. In this setting, the non-tradable good can be thought of as a composite basket of
local services whose supply particularly benefits from “ethno-cultural” diversity, such as
restaurants, retail trade, and entertainment. We build on the approach and attempt to directly
study the relationship between immigrant inflows and the composition of products available to
consumers, focusing on the retail sector and the restaurant sector.4
3. Empirical approach
We use establishment-level data for California to study the relationships between changes
in the composition of employment and businesses in a Census tract or other local area and
immigrant inflows into the same and surrounding tracts. Before plunging directly into the
analysis of the effects of immigration on variety, we present some preliminary analysis of the
effects of immigration on employment in locally-produced, non-traded industries, to establish
that immigration into a local area affects such industries – a prerequisite for immigration to have
effects on the variety of local output.
When immigrants flow into an area, they increase the demand for locally-produced, non-

In the model of Ottaviano and Peri (2007), it is instead assumed that immigration increases the ethnic
diversity of some local services. When calibrating the model to conditions in the United States, the
authors specify restaurants and entertainment as the two sectors where immigration may induce ethnic
diversity.

4

6

traded goods (Altonji and Card, 1991). In addition, the outward labor supply shift associated
with immigration contributes to higher total employment in any industry in which labor supply
increases, with the magnitude depending on how much the increase in labor supply lowers
prices, how strongly native labor supply to the industry responds to potential wage declines, and
the price elasticity of demand for products from which labor demand is ultimately derived
(Borjas, 2009). Of course, immigrant inflows may themselves be a response to outward demand
shifts in industries that employ immigrants, so we have to be cautious about causal inferences.
These considerations have a few implications. First, to the extent that we want to detect
demand effects of immigration, we should focus on non-tradables. Second, although the labor
supply effect of immigration can increase employment in any industry, it is only for nontradables that we can reliably attribute a change in local variety to local immigration, so, again,
we are more interested in this sector. And third, the effects might be different in industries that
are intensive in the use of immigrants. In particular, to the extent that the supply effects of
immigration are important, we ought to see more of an effect of immigration on employment in
non-tradable industries that are immigrant-intensive.
In addition to these considerations, given our focus on product variety we are most
interested in industries in which we can infer something about variety based on employment
patterns. We focus on the retail sector – which is non-traded and non-immigrant intensive – and
restaurants – which are also non-traded, but are immigrant intensive. Much of our analysis in
fact focuses on the restaurant industry, for which the link between establishments and
consumption variety is most transparent; in particular, we study the ethnic variety of restaurants
and how it is affected by immigration.
We look at the effects of immigration on product diversity along a number of dimensions.

7

First, for retail stores, we examine how immigrant inflows are associated with changes in the
numbers of chain versus stand-alone establishments, as well as establishments of different sizes.
The idea behind this analysis is that a larger number of small and especially stand-alone
establishments – in contrast to large and/or chain stores – may be associated with increased
diversity of consumption choices. Immigrant inflows might lead to a proliferation of small or
stand-alone establishments to cater to the specific tastes of immigrants that might not be met by
the larger, chain stores. On the other hand, if immigrants have greater price elasticities of
demand (consistent with Lach, 2007), or if they tend to consume the products in which the large
chain stores specialize, their arrival could shift the composition of businesses in the opposite
direction.
We then take this analysis in a narrower direction that more definitively identifies the
effects of immigration on the diversity of consumption choices. Specifically, we examine
whether immigrant inflows and increases in ethnic diversity in the local population are
associated with a higher share of ethnic restaurants and greater diversity of the ethnicity of
restaurants in the local market. Our analysis is based on detailed ethnic classifications of
restaurants, and characterizations of variety based on Herfindahl-Hirschman indexes. Although
the focus on restaurants is narrow, the advantage of looking at this sector is that we know what
types of goods a restaurant’s consumers are purchasing. In contrast, even if we suggested above
that growth of large chain stores at the expense of small retailers implies less diversity in
consumption, chain stores, in principle, could offer a variety of ethnic goods – although casual
observation suggests that their offerings are in fact quite homogenous.
Finally, we are generally not concerned with separating the effects of labor supply and
labor demand shifts that immigration induces. Demand shifts can increase product diversity by

8

changing the agglomeration of tastes in a market, and supply shifts may play a role in increasing
the diversity of consumption choices under the likely assumption that immigrants have a
comparative advantage at producing “ethnic” goods, or because of price effects of increased
labor supply to particular industries. However, some of our analysis attempts to assess whether
the increased variety of ethnic restaurants that we find likely stems more from the demand or
from the supply side.
4. Data
Employment and business establishment composition
Our dependent variables are constructed using data from the National Establishment
Time Series (NETS) database. The NETS is a longitudinal file created by Walls & Associates
using Dun and Bradstreet (D&B) data, which covers all business establishments in the United
States between 1989 and 2004. The unit of observation in the NETS is a business establishment,
which is a business or industrial unit at a single physical location that produces or distributes
goods or provides services. Using the headquarters’ DUNS number, we can tell whether an
establishment is a stand-alone firm or a branch of a multi-establishment firm. The data in the
NETS do not come from a single survey. Rather, D&B collects the underlying data through a
massive data collection effort covering many sources, including over 100 million telephone calls
to businesses each year, as well as obtaining information from legal and court filings,
newspapers and electronic news services, public utilities, all U.S. secretaries of state,
government registries and licensing data, payment and collections information, company filings
and news reports, and the U.S. Postal Service.5

5

The NETS data construction effort – including both the cross-sectional files and the longitudinal linking
that tracks establishments over time – is a massive and complicated one. Details are provided in Neumark
et al. (2007). For more information about the NETS and comparisons to other data sources, see
http://www.youreconomy.org/nets/NETSDatabaseDescription.pdf (viewed December 17, 2008).

9

The NETS database does not contain detailed information about establishments, but it
does include the business name, a unique D&B establishment identifier (the DUNS number), the
establishment location, detailed SIC industrial codes in each year (and a cross-walk to NAICS
codes), the identifier of the firm’s headquarters (also a DUNS number), and employment (as well
as sales, which we do not use because it is usually imputed) in each year.
The NETS has unique advantages for the purposes of this study. First, after geocoding
business establishments’ addresses, we can map employment at the detailed geographic level; in
our case, we do this at the level of the Census tract.6 Second, the NETS is designed to capture the
universe rather than a sample of establishments, and hence covers essentially all firms and
establishments. Third, unlike other sources of data on individual business establishments
available through the Census Bureau or the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the NETS data are not
confidential. We are therefore able to identify specific businesses both in our own work with the
data, and in the reporting of results. Both of these uses of specific business names are important
in the ensuing analysis; we use company names to identify certain big-box retailers, and to refine
the ethnic classification of restaurants. On the other hand, a limitation of the NETS is that it
includes no information on the composition of employment with respect to skill, immigrant
status, or any other dimension.
We use an extract of the NETS data that covers all business establishments that were ever

Although the data extend back to 1989, the data prior to 1992 are less reliable because only beginning in
1992 was D&B able to purchase Yellow Page information on business units. We therefore use data
beginning in 1992.
6
The establishment locations were mapped to Census tracts with GIS software using the Census 2000
TIGER/Line files as our data source (downloaded from www.esri.com/data). The NETS contains the
street address of each business establishment, but GIS mapping requires that these addresses be
“geocoded” to latitude-longitude coordinates. We used a geocoded version of the NETS data that was
constructed for another research project (Neumark and Kolko, 2010).

10

located in California between 1992 and 2002.7 Given that the Census of Population data that we
use to measure immigrant inflows (discussed next) span a 10-year window ending in 2000, using
2002 as the ending year for our analysis makes sense. Moreover, evidence that the NETS
sometimes detects business births with a lag (Neumark et al., 2007) implies that using a 10-year
window that is shifted forward by a couple of years relative to the Census should provide more
accurate measurement of changes in employment and the number and types of businesses
associated with immigrant inflows. Census-tract level summary statistics of the variables used in
the analysis are reported in Appendix Table A1.
Total and foreign-born population
Data on total and foreign-born population by Census tract are from the 1990 and 2000
Censuses of Population. One question is how to define the size of the market in which to
measure the immigrant inflows that may influence the diversity of consumption choices or
reflect the availability of choices to consumers. We can identify immigrant inflows at the Census
tract level. Two extreme choices would be to consider the data at the Census tract level, or
instead to aggregate up to the metropolitan statistical area (MSA).8 However, neither Census

7

We only had access to the geocoded NETS data for California for this research. The results might not
generalize to other states, especially those in which immigrant inflows are much smaller relative to the
population.
8
Census tracts are designed to be relatively homogenous with respect to population characteristics,
economic status, and living conditions. The spatial size of Census tracts varies widely depending on
population density. In California there are 7,049 Census tracts, with an average population of 4,200 in
1990 and 4,800 in 2000. MSA’s include counties that center on an urban core and are characterized by a
high degree of social and economic integration (as measured by commuting to work) with the core. There
are 25 MSA’s in California, ranging from highly densely-populated metro-areas such as Los AngelesLong Beach (including 2,054 tracts) to more sparsely populated areas such as Merced (including 47
tracts). The analyses reported in this paper exclude the 242 tracts located outside any MSA, which are
located along the sparsely populated northern and eastern borders of the State.
Because Census geography changes over time, we must normalize 1990 and 2000 Census tract
geographic definitions. Our primary data source is the Neighborhood Change Database (NCDB), which
provides total and foreign-born population counts from each Census year for each year-2000 Census tract,
mapping the earlier data onto the current boundaries. In the analyses of the restaurant sector we also need
figures on foreign-born population from different countries, which are not available in the NCDB. In this

11

tracts nor MSA’s seem to provide the right level of aggregation to identify the potential pool of
customers or establishments located in a given tract: the former tend to be too small and also
vary widely in size; the latter may be too large. And both are based on arbitrary boundaries that
are likely to be crossed on a daily basis by residents, especially for Census tracts in denselypopulated areas and along borders shared by MSA’s.
To circumvent these problems, we define the pool of potential customers for an
establishment located in tract c in year t as the weighted sum of the population in tracts k (k = 1,
…, Kc) located in area a(c) – an area that encompasses but is larger than c, and is not arbitrarily
restricted to MSA boundaries:
Popa(c)t = ka(c){wck  Popkt},

(1)

where the weights wck are functions of the distance between the center of tract c and the center of
tract k, which we denote dc,k.9
Assuming that the likelihood that consumers shop in tract c decreases with the distance
between c and the tract where they live, we could arbitrarily specify wck as some decreasing
function of dc,k. Instead, we define weights based on the distances consumers travel. In particular,
using data from the 2001 National Household Travel Survey (NHTS), we calculate summary
statistics on the number of miles that Californians travel to go shopping. Figure 1 shows
smoothed distributions of shopping trips by miles traveled, separately for residents in the MSA’s
of Los Angeles, Orange County and Riverside (Panel A), and for residents in the remainder of

case, we use data from the Census Summary Files (SF4), and employ Census Bureau reports of tract level
allocation factors to map 1990 tract variables to 2000 geography. We would like to thank Justin Marion
and Nathaniel Baum-Snow for sharing their computer code to implement this procedure.
9
In practice, the center of a tract is defined by its geometric center, or “centroid.” Spherical coordinates
of Census 2000 tract centroids were downloaded from the U.S. Census Bureau
(http://www.census.gov/geo/www/gazetteer/places2k.html) and converted to planar coordinates using
ArcGIS software.

12

the urbanized areas of California (Panel B).10 We group trips shorter than 5 miles into 1-milelength bins, trips between 5 and 30 miles into 5-mile-length bins, and trips between 30 and 50
miles into one residual bin. We let δ index these 11 distance bins, and denote by p the
proportions of shopping trips in each bin. These proportions are graphed in Figure 1 (piecewise
line). For each tract c, we then calculate the number of tracts that are -miles away from c (Tc),
and set the weights in equation (1) equal to:

 p

wck   Tc
 0

if d c ,k  

(2)

if d c ,k  50

where the values of p vary depending on whether tract c is in the Los Angeles, Orange CountyRiverside area, or elsewhere in the state.11
[Insert Figure 1 here]

When characterizing consumption choices available to consumers, we apply the same
weights to counts of establishments by type. Finally, since we have argued that the
composition/variety effects of immigration may arise not only from immigrants’ consumption
choices, but also from their labor supply, in some of our analyses of these latter effects we also
define weights that map the distribution of miles traveled by Californians to commute to work. In
practice, these weights are constructed as in (2), where the p’s represent the proportions of work

10

We do not disaggregate further because the sample is small.
The idea behind dividing by Tcδ is the following. Suppose that tract c is distance d from tract k, and the
travel data imply that the proportion p of the trips of those residing in tract k cover distance d. Residents
of tract k can travel in multiple directions, and we would not expect all those traveling distance d to travel
to tract c. Instead, we count the number of tracts that are distance d from tract c, which we denote T, and
assume that 1/T of those who travel distance d will travel to tract c. In principle one could try to refine this
by taking account of roads and other travel infrastructure. Furthermore, this is a simplification, because
one would really want to do this calculation separately for each tract k within distance d of tract c,
calculating the share of those from each tract k around tract c that would travel to tract c. The simplified
calculation we use, however, will still capture the variation in potential inflow from a surrounding tract
depending on whether tracts in the area are geographically small or geographically large.

11

13

trips of different length (piecewise lines in Figure 2). A comparison of Figures 1 and 2 reveals
that individuals tend to travel longer distances to go to work than to go shopping.
[Insert Figure 2 here]
5. Econometric analysis

Preliminary evidence on effects of immigration on local industries
We begin with a brief preliminary analysis relating the growth in employment in
establishments in industry groupings (indexed by i) located in a given Census tract to inflows of
immigrant residents into the same and surrounding tracts. Following the literature on the effects
of immigration (e.g., Card, 2001; Card and DiNardo, 2000; Ortega and Ottaviano, 2009), we
denote by ΔIt/Popt-1 the immigration rate, namely the change in the foreign-born population from
(t - 1) to t relative to the total population in (t - 1) and estimate regression models of the form:
ΔEict/Eict-1 = i + iN(ΔNa(c)t /Popa(c)t-1) + iI (ΔIa(c)t /Popa(c)t-1) + uict,

(3)

where Eict is the employment in establishments located in Census tract c in year t. The equation
also controls for the change in the native population ΔN, which is treated symmetrically to the
immigration rate and scaled as well relative to the initial total population. All population
measures are defined in area a(c) around Census tract c using the weighting described in the
previous subsection. Because the model is estimated in differences, it eliminates time-invariant
Census tract characteristics that may be correlated with both employment and population.
In equation (3), comparisons of the estimates of iN and iI tell us how inflows of
immigrants into a local area affect employment in industry i, compared to inflows of natives. As
discussed earlier, we expect the inflow of immigrants (or natives) into an area to have more
impact on product and hence labor demand in non-tradable industries. Moreover, to the extent
that immigrants tend to work in particular (non-tradable) industries, those industries ought to

14

experience larger employment increases stemming from the labor supply increase and hence the
lowering of prices for that industry’s output; therefore, we report results for non-tradable
industries divided into those that are less and more immigrant-intensive. Finally, because our
analysis of the effects of immigration on product diversity focuses on the retail sector and on
restaurants, we also present preliminary evidence based on equation (3) for the retail sector and
the accommodation and food services sector (which includes restaurants).
For the first classification, we would ideally categorize industries on the basis of
estimates of the fraction of output that is non-traded. Since these estimates are not easily
obtained, we have to rely on a standard, but somewhat arbitrary, classification of industries.
Services have traditionally been classified as non-tradable industries. More broadly, this is
arguably an appropriate definition for retail trade, construction, educational services, health care,
social assistance, food services, repair and maintenance, personal and laundry services, and
private household services – and in what follows we will refer to this set of industries as nontradable. Industries including transportation, warehousing, accommodation services, and public
administration, as well as information, and finance, insurance, and professional services, may
more often serve a larger population than local residents (Jensen and Kletzer, 2010), while
agriculture, mining, manufacturing, utilities, and wholesale trade are more clearly classified as
strictly traded sectors.
With regard to immigrant-intensiveness, we use information on the existing differences in
the likelihood of employment of foreign-born individuals across industries.12 As shown in Table
1, in 2000, foreign-born individuals made up around 31% of the total labor force in California.
Of course, we cannot classify industries strictly on the basis of the immigrant-intensiveness of their
labor input, in part because there is a continuum of characteristics, and in part because these
characteristics are not immutable. For example, an industry that is non-intensive in immigrant labor can
still absorb immigrant labor, and the composition of the labor input in different industries can change with
immigration.
12

15

However, foreign-born shares in the labor force of (NAICS) 2-digit industries were as high as
65% in agriculture and as low as 12% in mining – both industries that we classify as strictly
tradable. Most of the other strictly tradable industries – that is, the manufacturing sub-industries
and wholesale trade – have higher-than-average intensity in the use of immigrant labor. On the
contrary, among non-tradable industries, some are more immigrant-intensive and others are less
so. Note in particular that retail is below average in immigrant-intensiveness, although still fairly
intensive in the use of immigrants, while accommodation and food services is among the most
immigrant-intensive industries. We might, then, expect the supply of immigrants to this sector –
and restaurants in particular – to play more of a role in the effects of immigration.13
[Insert Table 1 here]

Table 2 reports the estimates of equation (3) for different industry groups. Given the
uneven distribution of employment by industry and tract, regressions are weighted by the number
of employees in tract c and industry i in 1992. Standard errors are clustered at the MSA level to
correct for heteroscedasticity and arbitrary correlation across tracts located in the same MSA.14
[Insert Table 2 here]

As shown in column 1, Panel A, a 1% increase in native population is associated on
average with a statistically significant 1.4% increase in employment when looking at all
industries, whereas a similar increase in the immigrant population is associated with a smaller
(but still significant) employment increase of 0.95%; the difference between the effects of native
versus immigrant population inflows is marginally significant (p = 0.11). When we restrict
attention to non-tradable industries, in column (2), we see – as expected – larger effects of both
13

Immigrant-intensiveness in the restaurant sector (43.4%) is virtually the same as in the broader
accommodation and food services sector (43.5%).
14
The estimation results presented in the paper are robust to running unweighted regressions and to
clustering the standard errors at a higher level (across the 17 Consolidated Metropolitan Areas in
California).

16

types of population inflows. Again, the effect of immigrants is smaller than the effect of natives,
although the difference is not significant. Nonetheless, the lower point estimates for immigrant
inflows may reflect the fact that immigrants are on average lower earners, and remit some of
their income to their home countries.15
Columns (3) and (4) break up non-tradable industries into non-immigrant-intensive and
immigrant-intensive. Contrary to what we might expect if immigrants tend to push out labor
supply in immigrant-intensive industries (and this may not be what happens because of, for
example, natives’ employment responses), the estimated effect of immigration on employment in
the immigrant-intensive industries is smaller (0.69 versus 1.12), and is imprecisely estimated.
To focus more sharply on the sectors on which we concentrate in our main analysis of
immigration and product diversity, columns (5) and (6) report results for the retail and the
accommodation and food services industries. The results for retail are similar to those for nontraded industries overall and even more so to non-traded, non-immigrant-intensive industries
(column (3)). In particular, the effect of immigrant inflows is substantially weaker than that of
native inflows. In contrast, for accommodation and food services, the effects of both native and
immigrant inflows are large, and the effect of immigrants is almost as large as (and not
significantly different from) the effect of native inflows.
This preliminary analysis leads to a couple of conclusions, as well as setting the stage for
some of the analyses we report next. First, immigrant inflows are associated with increased
employment in both retail and accommodation and food services. This provides some prima
facie evidence for studying the effects of immigration on the composition of output in these
industries. Second, the effect is much greater in the latter industry, which is at least consistent
15

Immigrants are also younger. In 2000 Census data for California, the share of prime-age individuals
(25-44 years old) was 49% among the adult foreign-born population, but only 37% among natives. On the
contrary, the shares over 65 were, respectively, 10% and 17%.

17

with labor supply mattering more in the accommodation and food services industry. This is
consistent with other evidence we report below on how immigrants affect product diversity in the
restaurant sector. At the same time, we do not find similar evidence of a larger relative (or
absolute) effect of immigration on non-traded, immigrant-intensive industries generally, perhaps
because, in this case, immigrants move into industries that have not been as immigrant-intensive
in the past. The pattern could be different in the restaurant sector because of a comparative
advantage of immigrants in the production of ethnic food corresponding to their country of
origin. Below, we present evidence consistent with this as well.
Econometric analysis of the composition/diversity effects of immigration
We now turn to evidence on the effects of immigration on the variety of consumption
choices available to natives. We estimate models that relate measures of the composition of
businesses (such as the share of establishments of a certain type K, e.g., defined by size) to
measures of the composition of the population by nativity and ethnicity (such as the share of
immigrants over the total population). Our interest in this analysis is in how immigration affects
the consumption options of residents of a particular Census tract. Because these residents may
travel to surrounding tracts when they shop or go out to eat, and because the consumption
choices in these surrounding tracts (as well as their own tract) are likely, in general, to be shaped
in part by the role of immigrants as consumers, in this analysis both the dependent and
independent variables are defined as aggregates of tracts that correspond to the shopping area
centered on a given tract of residence c, using the weights defined in equation (2). We therefore
estimate equations of the form:

logEstabtypeK_sharea(c)t = η + log(I/Pop)a(c)t + logPopa(c)t + ξ a(c)t.

(4)

The dependent variable is the change in the log of the share of establishments that are of

18

type K. The coefficient  captures the potential effect of the immigrant share of the population on
the composition of businesses. Since size per se arguably leads to more diversity,16 the equation
also controls for changes in the population. Because the equation is estimated in first-differences,
the estimates are not influenced by aggregate time-series relationships between structural
changes in the economy – such as the advent of big-box retailing – and immigration.
When we turn to the narrower analysis of restaurants, the consumption choices available
to natives may also be shaped by the role of immigrants as workers, because immigrants may
have a comparative advantage in the production of ethnic goods. In this analysis, therefore, we
also estimate equations where the immigrant share of the population is defined in area a(c)
centered on c, but defined using weights that map the distribution of commuting-to-work trips,
rather than the distribution of shopping trips.
Retail stores
We focus first on the retail sector. Table 3 looks at changes in the share or number of
stores by size of the business, using three size categories: stores with 1 to 9, 10 to 99, and 100 or
more employees. As shown in Panel A, columns (1) through (3), growth in the share of the
foreign-born population is associated with a decline in the share of very small retail
establishments and increases in the shares of both medium-sized and large stores (although the
latter effect is not statistically significant). As shown in Panel B, this compositional change stems
from a drop in the number of small stores. The estimates imply that a 10% increase in the share
of the foreign-born population is associated with a 4% drop in the number of small
establishments.
[Insert Table 3 here]
16

For example, in Krugman (1979), growth in the labor force (which may stem from immigration, as well
as from other changes) increases varieties available in the market solely because of economies of scale in
production.

19

As suggested earlier, a decreasing share or number of small retail establishments may be
associated with less diverse consumption choices. This argument is more likely to hold for
products such as food, clothes, or other consumption goods such as decorations and gifts, but is
likely less relevant for items such as auto parts, hardware, or electronics – because the latter are
more likely to be uniform across stores of different sizes, and at any rate unlikely to display
variation in the “ethnicity” of goods. We therefore next restrict the analysis to the subset of the
retail sector in which it is more likely that more small stores implies greater diversity (possibly
along ethnic lines); we define this subset to include grocery, clothing and general merchandise
stores, as well as a series of miscellaneous stores that specialize in items such as art supplies,
posters, coins, decorations, or collectibles. As shown in columns (4) through (6), in this case,
also, growth in the share of the foreign-born population is associated with a drop in both the
number and share of very small retail stores, and growth in the share of larger stores.
In the next two tables we look at the same question, but characterizing the composition of
retail stores differently. In Table 4 we study the differential growth in small businesses,
identified on the basis of the number of establishments in California with the same DUNS
headquarter number. First, we identify stand-alone stores as those with no other establishments
in California with the same DUNS headquarter number. We find that an increasing share of
immigrants in the population is associated with both smaller shares of and fewer stand-alone
stores (columns (1) and (4)). We find similar results when extending the analysis to a more
broadly-defined group of small businesses – including not only stand-alone stores but also small
chains, which are identified as stores for which no more than 9 other stores share the same
DUNS headquarter number (columns (2) and (5)). As it turns out, though, these findings are
driven by the stand-alone stores; when we run the analysis separately for small chains, but

20

excluding the stand-alone stores (columns (3) and (6)), we find that an increasing share of
immigrants in the population is associated with a larger share of stores in small chains (and no
effect on the number of such stores). Thus, the sharpest result is that an increasing immigrant
share is associated with declines in stand-alone retail stores.
[Insert Table 4 here]

In Table 5, we look instead at large chains. Specifically, we exploit the nonconfidentiality of the NETS data to examine effects of immigrant inflows on particularly large
and well-known big-box retailers. Columns (1) and (2) use a narrow list, including Wal-Mart,
Kmart, Costco, Target, Lowe’s, and Sears, while in columns (3) and (4) the list is expanded to
also include Best Buy, Home Depot, Staples, Office Depot, Circuit City, and Fry’s. The first list
captures general big-box retailers, and the second includes more-specialized ones. In 1992, there
was on average one big-box retailer from the short list for every 13 Census tracts, and one bigbox retailer from the long list for every 9 tracts. For the two definitions, the average change in
the number of big-box stores between 1992 and 2002 is one more store for every 23 tracts (short
list) or 9 tracts (long list). Most of the establishments that belong to these chains are reported to
belong to the retail sector, but there are some cases in which the sector of activity is wholesale
trade (on average, fewer than 10%). In columns (1) and (3) we consider all establishments
belonging to each chain, and in columns (2) and (4) we restrict attention to the retail stores only,
as in the preceding analyses in this section.
[Insert Table 5 here]

For these different definitions, we regress the change in the number of big-box retail
establishments on the change in the share of the foreign-born population and the change in the

21

log total population.17 The estimates indicate that increases in the immigrant share are associated
with more big-box retail establishments. In particular, the estimates in columns (2) and (4) imply
that a 10-percentage point increase in the foreign-born population (which is the standard
deviation of the foreign-born share across tracts) is associated with one more big-box store from
the short list for every 59 tracts, and one more big-box store from the long list for every 40 tracts.
As shown in Panel B, increases in the share foreign-born are also associated with increases in the
number of big-box retailers as a fraction of all retail establishments, although the estimate is
significant only for the longer list of big-box chains.
A potential issue in interpreting the estimates of the coefficients on the change in the
foreign-born share of the population in this last analysis is the endogenous location of
immigrants. Despite using first differences, we cannot rule out bias from time-varying local
factors associated with both changes in the number or type of retail establishments and
immigrant inflows. Big-box retailers may locate in areas where land values are increasing more
slowly than in other areas, a factor that may also be associated with larger immigrant inflows.
We cannot directly test this hypothesis, but we did find that between 1990 and 2000 the foreignborn population share did not grow faster in areas with a larger concentration of big-box retailers
in 1992, providing some evidence against this particular non-causal interpretation of our
estimates.18 Moreover, recent evidence (Saiz, 2003 and 2007; Ottaviano and Peri, 2007) suggests
that immigrant inflows increase rather than decreasing rents. This combined evidence appears to
rule out the possibility that immigrants either flowed into areas of declining land values (which

17

Note that in this case, because of the large number of tracts with no big-box outlets, the dependent
variable is the change in levels rather than the change in logs.
18
We study the association (across tracts and aggregates of tracts) between the 1990-2000 changes in the
share of the foreign-born population and the share of big-box retailers (in the total number of stores) in
1992. The association is negative across tracts, and positive, but not statistically significant, across
aggregates of tracts based on the weights we use in the regression analysis.

22

therefore would have already had more big-box retailers), or caused land values to decline,
which could have led to a greater concentration of such retailers.
If we assume that diversified products are more likely to be provided by a large number
of stand-alone retail stores, and less likely to be provided by chain stores and especially big-box
retailers, then the findings reported in this section suggest that, rather than increasing diversity,
immigrants may have the opposite effect. This could be due to lower income levels, greater
thrift, or greater price sensitivity that favors Wal-Marts over smaller outlets.19 However, an
important caveat is that we have no information on the types of goods that consumers can buy at
different stores. For example, one might associate a big-box retail store with more uniformity of
consumption choices than an equal volume of goods sold by numerous small stand-alone stores.
But that may not always be true. It is possible that we need, for example, a Mexican, Indian, and
Ethiopian grocery store in a local labor market in order to be able to buy tortillas, na’an, and
injera, in addition to the white and whole wheat bread at the local Safeway or IGA. But it is also
possible that large big-box retailers have the capacity to supply a greater variety of types of
bread, including many ethnic choices. Moreover, many stand-alones are not necessarily
purveyors of ethnic goods. For example, casual observation suggests that many of the bodegas in
Manhattan carry similar inventories of food items. Because of this inherent limitation in being
able to draw conclusions based simply on the number, size, and composition of retail outlets, in
the next section we turn to the analysis of the restaurant sector, for which we can much more
readily associate the type and variety of establishments with the nature of the consumption
choices they offer.

19

We are interested in the effects of immigrant inflows without conditioning on their income, as the
relevant question is the effect of the immigrant inflows actually experienced by the areas we study, not
what would have happened if there were inflows of immigrants with incomes the same as natives.

23

Ethnic restaurants
The industrial classification of establishments in the NETS is extraordinarily rich: the
dataset includes an 8-digit SIC code that in the case of eating places separately identifies
restaurants of 15 different ethnicities. The full list of ethnic categories as well as other types of
eating places is provided in Table 6. On the other hand, a shortcoming of the NETS data is that
around 40% of establishments in the restaurant sector are generally classified as “eating places,”
without identification of a specific category. The availability of the company name, however,
allows us to substantially refine the classification. For example, we can easily identify
establishments that belong to well-known chains such as MacDonald’s or Taco Bell (examples
of fast-food places), Cold Stone or Baskin Robbins (examples of ice cream places), and Denny’s
or Sizzler (examples of family restaurants). More important, we can also use the company name
to identify ethnic restaurants that may have been misreported as generic eating places. We do so
by searching for words included in the business name that point to a specific ethnicity (e.g.,
“Chinese” or “Mandarin,” “Japanese” or “Tokyo,” “Italy” or “Milan”), or for words from the
foreign language of reference (e.g. “wok,” “samurai,” or “trattoria”). Our re-classification
reduced by nearly half the share of unclassified places, and substantially increased the share of
restaurants of foreign ethnicities. We also separately identify three more categories of foreign
ethnic restaurants: other Asian, other Hispanic, and other foreign ethnic restaurants.
[Insert Table 6 here]

Paralleling the analysis of the previous section, we are interested in exploring whether the
presence of a large (and diverse) foreign-born population increases the choices of restaurants
available to natives. First, we study the relationship between changes in the foreign-born share of
the population and changes in the share of foreign ethnic restaurants, as in:

24

logEthnic_sharea(c)t = η + log(I/Pop)a(c)t + log Popa(c)t + ζ a(c)t.

(5)

Columns (1) and (2) of Table 7 present estimates of equation (5) for three different levels
of aggregation: in Panel A we add up the number of restaurants and all population figures in
tracts using the shopping weights defined in equation (2). In Panel B, we use shopping weights to
define the growth of restaurants and of the total population, while we define the growth in the
immigrant share of the population on areas centered on c but defined using commuting-to-work
weights, to more accurately capture changes in the immigrant share of the local workforce.
Finally, in Panel C we aggregate all variables across the 25 MSA’s in California, which may also
better capture the labor market than using shopping weights. Regardless of the level of
aggregation, we find that an increase in the foreign-born share of the population is associated
with sizable increases in the share of ethnic restaurants.20
[Insert Table 7 here]

The effects are larger when defining the immigrant share in an area that more closely
represents the size of the labor market (Panels B and C), suggesting that labor supply shifts may
play an important role in the growth of ethnic restaurants. For example, in column (1), when we
define the dependent variable as the ratio of foreign ethnic restaurants to all eating places (except
caterers), we find that a 1% increase in the foreign-born share in the shopping area centered on c
is associated with a 0.18% increase in the share of ethnic restaurants in the same area, while a
1% increase in the foreign-born share in the commuting-to-work area centered on c is associated
20

Given that ethnic restaurants are predominantly stand-alone, we would likely similarly find that
immigration is associated with increases in the share of stand-alone restaurants. However, because there
may be many non-ethnic stand-alone restaurants that do not add to product diversity (think of another
diner), evidence on how immigration affects the share of stand-alone restaurants is less informative about
how immigration affects product diversity than is evidence on how immigration affects the ethnic
composition of restaurants. (This is a reflection of the same problem we discussed earlier, with regard to
the limitations of drawing conclusions about how immigration affects product diversity from evidence on
how immigration affects the size distribution, chain versus stand-alone, and big-box composition of the
retail sector.)

25

with a 0.44% increase in the share of ethnic restaurants in the reach of consumers residing in
tract c. The results are robust to an alternative definition of the share of ethnic restaurants – the
ratio of foreign ethnic restaurants to all eating places excluding not only caterers but also fastfood and ice-cream places (column (2)).
If these positive associations are really an effect of immigration, then the ethnicity of the
restaurants that “result” from immigration ought to be associated with the ethnicity of the
immigrants. To test this prediction, we estimate the relationship between the growth in the share
of Hispanic restaurants and the growth in both the share of Hispanic and non-Hispanic foreignborn in the population.21 We focus on Hispanic immigration because it was by far the largest
immigrant inflow into California in our sample period. As shown in columns (3) and (4), we find
that the within-ethnicity relationships are positive and significant, regardless of the level of
aggregation, while the cross-ethnicity relationships are generally not significant, either
economically or statistically (and are opposite-signed). In this analysis, though, it is only for the
commuting weights (Panel B) that the positive relationship is stronger.
Finally, we ask whether increasing variety of ethnic groups is associated with increasing
variety of ethnic restaurants. While studying the correlates of the share of foreign-born in the
population has the advantage of analyzing the effects of immigration using a similar approach to
the small number of previous studies, it is not informative about “diversity” per se. Likewise, the
share of ethnic non-American restaurants is not necessarily an appropriate measure of variety of
choices available to those who decide to eat out. To measure diversity, we construct HerfindahlHirschman indexes (HHI) of concentration for the ten ethnic nativity groups (indexed by j) that
are separately identified at the Census tract level (U.S. born individuals, and individuals born in
Europe, Mexico, the Caribbean, Central America, South America, Canada, Asia, Africa, and
21

Hispanic restaurants are those of Mexican, Spanish, or other Hispanic ethnicity.

26

Oceania), and for the eighteen types of ethnic restaurants (indexed by m) coded in the NETS or
by us (listed in Table 6):

HHI apop
(c)

2
2

 # restaurants

10 
Pop j, a (c) 
18 

m ,a ( c )
eat
   10
 .
 and HHI a( c )  m 1  18
j1

 Pop j, a (c) 
#
restaurant
s
m
,
a
(
c
)

 m 1


 j1

(6)

Table 8 reports the relationship between changes in the two indexes defined above, and
shows evidence of a positive association between the ethnic diversity of the population and the
ethnic diversity of restaurants, regardless of the level of aggregation.22 However, the positive
association between population and restaurant diversity is only statistically significant, and is
much stronger, when the diversity of the population (HHIpop) is evaluated for areas that capture
the extent of the relevant labor market (columns (2) and (3), using commuting-to-work weights
and aggregation across MSA’s, respectively), compared to defining the index to capture the
diversity of the more limited pool of consumers (column (1)). This suggests that the more varied
the composition of the population across nativity groups becomes – in terms of the workforce –
the more varied is the composition of restaurants across ethnic lines, suggesting that the potential
channel through which immigration delivers “consumption variety” is more likely to stem from a
comparative advantage of immigrants in the production of ethnic food than from immigrants’
consumption demands for ethnic food in restaurants (although we have little doubt that both
channels are important.) This is consistent with the evidence that the restaurant labor force is
strongly immigrant-intensive, as shown in Table 1, as well as the apparently greater effect of
immigrant inflows in the restaurant sector than in retail, as shown in Table 2, which we
interpreted as likely reflecting larger labor supply increases in the restaurant sector.
[Insert Table 8 here]
22

The indexes are both inversely related to variety, so this conclusion follows from the positive regression
coefficients.

27

Notice that in our equations we control for changes in the population. So, even if size per
se creates diversity (Krugman, 1979), we are explicitly testing for the increased variety that may
arise from diversity in the population, which can clearly be enhanced by immigration; the
coefficient on the Herfindahl-Hirschman index measures the relationship between diversity in
the population and diversity in the types of restaurants once changes in the size of the population
are held constant.
Of course, the mere presence of ethnically-diverse restaurants does not mean that natives
are better off. Although we do not attempt to estimate the actual welfare gains from diversity, a
prerequisite for such gains would have to be that natives consume from the ethnic establishments
that get created, rather than that these ethnic restaurants simply serve new immigrants from the
corresponding ethnic group. Casual observation suggests that the clientele of ethnic restaurants is
by no means limited to co-ethnics. And in fact a limited amount of research documents this. Liu
and Jang (2009) collected data on customers of Chinese restaurants in a Midwestern U.S. city,
and found that 60.2% were Caucasian, while 32.0% were Asian. Josiam and Monteiro (2004)
surveyed patrons of Indian restaurants in Minneapolis/St. Paul. Among their respondents, 75%
were classified as white American, and only 12% as South Asian.23
For given elasticities of substitution of demand across different types of restaurant meals,
another reason why natives would benefit from increased variety is through reduced prices. The

23

It would be ideal to know more about actual spending patterns of consumers. In his study of
immigration to Israel, Lach (2007) infers something about spending patterns by looking at the association
of immigrants from the former Soviet Union with prices for pork and vodka (given that their consumption
demands for these products differ substantially from the rest of the population). But these are
idiosyncratic cases. For the United States, the Consumer Expenditure Survey does not identify
respondents who are immigrants, although it does identify Hispanic respondents. However, the survey
does not identify spending at ethnic versus other restaurants, or spending on other goods that are strongly
tied to ethnicity.

28

lack of detailed data on prices at the local level prevents us from pursuing an approach along the
lines of Broda and Weinstein’s (2006) estimation of the gains from trade.
6. Conclusions

Most of the debate on the economic consequences of immigration focuses on whether
immigrants take jobs away from natives and reduce wages for U.S. workers. In this paper, we
direct attention instead to the effects of immigration on the composition of output, stemming
from the fact that immigrants are consumers with potentially different demand characteristics,
and also may have a comparative advantage in the production of ethnic goods.
We look at these composition effects in a number of ways. First, we estimate the
relationship between immigrant inflows and the size distribution of business establishments. This
analysis indicates that immigration is associated with fewer stand-alone retail stores, and a
greater number of chains and in particular big-box retailers. This evidence would appear to
contradict a diversity-enhancing effect of immigration, although we cannot draw firm
conclusions because we do not have information on the types of goods that consumers buy at
different stores.
Consequently, we focus more of our attention on the relationship between immigration
and the ethnic diversity of restaurants, for which we can much more readily identify the types of
products consumed by customers. The evidence indicates quite clearly that immigration is
associated with increased ethnic diversity of restaurants, and labor supply shifts appear to play an
important role in the growth of ethnic restaurants.
Our findings support the existence of some economic benefits of immigration that have
rarely been documented in the literature. Although a statement about welfare would require a
more structural approach, the diversity effects of immigration in the restaurant sector expand

29

natives’ consumption choices and, as such, are potentially welfare-enhancing. We find that these
effects likely stem in part from comparative advantage of immigrants in the production of ethnic
food from their country of origin. On the other hand, with respect to the composition of the retail
sector, one might plausibly view our evidence as suggesting that immigrant inflows increase the
homogeneity rather than the diversity of consumption choices. This latter result may reflect the
fact that immigrants do not have any particular comparative advantage in retail work, and, for
that sector, their effect may act more through the demand side. Perhaps because of generally low
incomes of immigrants, as well as sensitivity to prices, the demand effects of immigrants on the
retail sector may do less to increase consumption diversity. Of course low-income natives may
gain more from growth of larger, big-box retailers that lower prices, even at the cost of
standardization, than from increases in diversity of consumption choices, so that once we
account for heterogeneity of the native population, the mapping from diversity to welfare is not
necessarily straightforward.
[Insert Appendix Table A1 here]

30

References

Amuedo-Dorantes C, de la Rica S (2008) Complements or Substitutes? Immigrant and Native
Task Specialization in Spain. CREAM Discussion Paper No. 16/08.
Altonji J, Card D (1991) The Effects of Immigration on the Labor Market Outcomes of LessSkilled Natives. In: Abowd J, Freeman RB (eds) Immigration, Trade and the Labor
Market. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 201-234.
Bodvarsson O, Van den Berg H (2006) Does Immigration Affect Labor Demand? Model and
Test. Research in Labour Economics 24:135-166.
Bodvarsson, O, Van den Berg H, Lewer J (2008) Measuring Immigration’s Effects on Labor
Demand: A Reexamination of the Mariel Boatlift. Labour Economics 15(4):560-574.
Borjas G (2009) The Analytics of the Wage Effect of Immigration. NBER Working Paper No.
14796.
Broda C, Weinstein D (2006) Globalization and the Gains from Variety. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 121(2):541-585.
Card, D, DiNardo J (2000) Do Immigrant Inflows Lead to Native Outflows? American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings 90(2):360-367.
Card D (2001) Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of
Higher Immigration. Journal of Labor Economics 19(1):22-64.
Chiswick CU (2009) The Economic Determinants of Ethnic Assimilation. Journal of Population
Economics 22:859-880.
Cortes P (2008) The Effect of Low-Skilled Immigration on US Prices: Evidence from CPI Data.
Journal of Political Economy 116(3):381-422.
Davis DR, Weinstein DE (2002) Technological Superiority and the Losses from Migration.
NBER Working Paper No. 8971.
Feenstra R (1994) New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices. American
Economic Review 84(1):157-177.
Frattini T (2009) Immigration and Prices in the UK. Unpublished manuscript.
Hatton TJ, Leigh A (2009) Immigrants Assimilate as Communities, Not Just as Individuals.
Journal of Population Economics (forthcoming).
Jensen JB, Kletzer L (2010) Measuring Tradable Services and the Task Content of Offshorable
Services Jobs. In: Abraham K, Spletzer J, Harper M (eds) Labor in the New Economy.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago. 309-335.
Josiam BM, Monteiro PA (2004) Tandoori Tastes: Perceptions of Indian Restaurants in America.
International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management 16(1):18-26.
Krugman P (1979) Increasing Returns, Monopolistic Competition, and International Trade.
Journal of International Economics 9(4):469-479.
Lach S (2007) Immigration and Prices. Journal of Political Economy 115(4):548-587.
In: Lazear E (2000) Diversity and Immigration. Borjas G, ed., Issues in the Economics of
Immigration. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 117-142.
Liu Y, Jang S (2009) Perceptions of Chinese Restaurants in the U.S.: What Affects Customer
Satisfaction and Behavioral Intentions? International Journal of Hospitality Management
28(3):338-48.
Neumark D, Kolko J (2010) Do Enterprise Zones Create Jobs? Evidence from California’s
Enterprise Zone Program. Journal of Urban Economics 68(1):1-19.
Neumark D, Zhang J, Wall B (2007) Employment Dynamics and Business Relocation: New
Evidence from the National Establishment Time Series. Research in Labor Economics

26:39-83.
Ortega F, Peri G (2009) The Causes and Effects of International Labor Mobility: Evidence from OECD
Countries 1980-2005. NBER Working Paper No. 14833.
Ottaviano G, Peri G (2006) The Economic Value of Cultural Diversity: Evidence from US
Cities. Journal of Economic Geography 6(1):9-44.
Ottaviano G, Peri G (2007) The Effects of Immigration on U.S. Wages and Rents: A General
Equilibrium Approach. CEPR Discussion paper No. 6551.
Ottaviano G, Peri G (2008) Immigration and National Wages: Clarifying the Theory and the
Empirics. NBER Working Paper No. 14188.
Peri G, Sparber C (2009) Task Specialization, Immigration, and Wages. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 1(3):135-169.
Saiz A (2007) Immigration and Housing Rents. Journal of Urban Economics 61(2):345-371.
Saiz A (2003) Room in the Kitchen for the Melting Pot: Immigration and Rental Prices. Review
of Economics and Statistics 85(3):502-521.
Sparber C (2008) A Theory of Racial Diversity, Segregation, and Productivity. Journal of
Development Economics 87(2):210-226.
Waldfogel J (2008) The Median Voter and the Median Consumer: Local Private Goods and
Population Composition. Journal of Urban Economics 63(2):567-582.

Table 1. Immigrant shares in the California labor force, by industry (2000)a
Immigrant
% of labor force
share (%)
Total Foreign-born
30.53
Overall average
Industry
Above average
Agriculture, forestry, fishing, & hunting
TR
65.16
1.97
4.04
Manufacturing: food & textile
TR
61.75
2.27
4.63
Accommodation and food services
NT
43.53
6.06
8.61
Manufacturing: metal, electrical, & electronic
TR
43.08
8.49
12.07
Admin., support, waste mgmt. services
NT
40.05
4.12
5.44
Repair, personal, household services
NT
39.54
5.04
6.56
Manufacturing: paper & chemical
TR
38.03
2.42
3.03
Wholesale trade
TR
36.75
4.02
4.88
Construction
NT
31.41
6.24
6.37
Below average
Mail & warehousing
28.98
1.28
1.23
Transportation
28.43
2.68
2.5
Retail trade: miscellaneous
NT
28.27
7.12
6.63
Health care and social assistance
NT
28.10
9.88
9.11
Retail trade: hobby & general
NT
24.86
3.89
3.17
Real estate, rental, & leasing
23.24
2.13
1.63
Finance and insurance
22.93
4.63
3.48
Professional, scientific, & technical serv.
22.59
7.25
5.39
Management of companies/enterprises
19.12
0.04
0.02
Information
19.11
3.90
2.48
Arts, entertainment, & recreation
18.73
2.06
1.25
Educational services
NT
17.24
8.41
4.74
Utilities
TR
14.70
0.77
0.38
Public administration
13.41
5.16
2.28
Mining
TR
12.23
0.16
0.06
a

TR: traded industries; NT: non-traded industries. NAICS 2-digit industries ranked by the share of
foreign-born in the labor force, from the most immigrant-intensive sector to the least. Source: 2000
Census.

Table 2. Percentage growth in employment across Census tracts and immigrant and native population
growth in surrounding areasa
Non-traded,
Non-traded,
All
Nonnon-immigrant immigrant
Accommodation
industries
traded
intensive
intensive
Retail
and food
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Percentage growth in
1.385***
1.893**
2.654***
1.824*** 2.997***
5.281***
native population
(0.132)
(0.210)
(0.310)
(0.510)
(0.581)
(0.917)

Percentage growth in
immigrant population

0.945***
(0.232)

1.321***
(0.432)

1.119**
(0.451)

0.690
(1.417)

1.078**
(0.437)

4.250**
(1.968)

Constant

0.036
(0.027)

0.085*
(0.050)

0.250***
(0.039)

0.287
(0.207)

0.257***
(0.078)

0.421**
(0.158)

Observations
F-test (H0:  N =  I)
Probability >F

6,793
2.711
0.113

6,789
1.455
0.240

6,776
6.528
0.017

6,782
0.836
0.370

6,753
9.982
0.004

5,960
0.245
0.625

a

Dependent variable: 1992-2002 percentage change in the number of employees in establishments located in a Census
tract in the industry or industries indicated. Immigrant and native population figures are defined as the weighted sum of
the population in surrounding tracts in the 1990 and 2000 Censuses, with weights reflecting the distribution of shopping
trips from the National Household Travel Survey, 2001. The number of observations varies across columns because
Census tracts with no observations in an industry in 1992 are dropped. The universe is 6,793 populated Census tracts
located within one of the 25 MSA’s in California. Estimates are weighted by the tract-industry employment level in 1992.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the MSA level. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; ***
significant at 1% level. Sources: NETS; Neighborhood Change Database, 1990 and 2000 Censuses.

Table 3. Growth of establishments of different sizes and growth in the foreign-born share
across Census tractsa
Retail stores
Food, Clothing, General
All
Merchandise, Miscellaneous
Number of
1-9
10-99
100+
1-9
10-99
100+
employees
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Dependent variable:  log share of stores
-0.041**
0.255*
0.390
-0.048**
0.357**
0.280
 log foreign share
(0.017)
(0.136)
(0.258)
(0.018)
(0.156)
(0.280)
-0.030*
0.273**
0.280
-0.019
0.244
0.409*
 log population
(0.015)
(0.127)
(0.214)
(0.014)
(0.152)
(0.213)
Panel B: Dependent variable:  log number of stores
-0.374**
-0.078*
0.056
-0.386*
0.019
-0.059
 log foreign share
(0.141)
(0.041)
(0.194)
(0.209)
(0.108)
(0.193)
0.703*** 1.006*** 1.013***
0.804*** 1.067*** 1.232***
 log population
(0.151)
(0.121)
(0.176)
(0.140)
(0.138)
(0.214)
a

Dependent variable: Change in the log of the share (Panel A) or the log of the number (Panel B) of retail
establishments with 1 to 9 employees, 10 to 99 employees, or 100 or more employees. Sample in columns
(1)-(3) is restricted to establishments with NAICS two-digit codes 44 and 45 (retail trade). Sample in
columns (4)-(6) is restricted to establishments with NAICS 3-digit codes: 445 (grocery stores); 448
(clothing stores) except luggage and leather goods stores; 452 (department and other general merchandise
stores); and 453 (miscellaneous stores) except pet supplies stores and manufactured home dealers. Both
dependent variables and population figures are defined for aggregates of tracts, with weights reflecting
the distribution of shopping trips from the National Household Travel Survey, 2001. Observations: 6,807
tracts within MSA’s. Estimates are weighted by the weighted number of retail establishments across
aggregates of tracts in 1992. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the MSA level. * significant
at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level. Sources: NETS; Neighborhood
Change Database, 1990 and 2000 Censuses.

Table 4. Growth of stand-alone or small-chain establishments and growth in the foreign-born share
across Census tractsa
Retail sector
Food, Clothing, General Merchandise,
All
Miscellaneous
Number of stores with
One
1-10
2-10
One
1-10
2-10
same headquarter
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Dependent variable:  log share of stand-alone or small-chain stores
-0.092*** -0.066***
0.296**
-0.089***
-0.066***
0.335**
 log foreign share
(0.022)
(0.014)
(0.124)
(0.030)
(0.021)
(0.158)
-0.059**
-0.051***
0.204
-0.039
-0.042***
0.073
 log population
(0.024)
(0.015)
(0.144)
(0.026)
(0.014)
(0.239)
Panel B: Dependent variable:  log number of stand-alone or small chain stores
-0.425*** -0.399***
-0.037
-0.427*
-0.403*
-0.003
 log foreign share
(0.144)
(0.137)
(0.122)
(0.222)
(0.212)
(0.128)
0.674*** 0.682*** 0.937***
0.784***
0.780***
0.895***
 log population
(0.158)
(0.149)
(0.115)
(0.148)
(0.138)
(0.210)
a

Dependent variable: Change in the log of the number of establishments with unique headquarter DUNS number in
California (columns (1) and (4)), or whose headquarter DUNS number is shared by no more than 9 other
establishments in California, either including stand-alone stores (columns (2) and (5)) or excluding them (columns (3)
and (6)). Both dependent variables and population figures are defined for aggregates of tracts, with weights reflecting
the distribution of shopping trips from the National Household Travel Survey, 2001. Observations: 6,807 tracts within
MSA’s. Estimates are weighted by the weighted number of retail establishments across aggregates of tracts in 1992.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the MSA level. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level;
*** significant at 1% level. Sources: NETS; Neighborhood Change Database, 1990 and 2000 Censuses.

Table 5. Changes in the number of big-box retailers and changes in the foreign-born share
across bundles of Census tractsa
Big-box retailers
Short list
Long list
Reported sector of
Wholesale and
Retail trade
Wholesale and
Retail trade
activity
retail trade
only
retail trade
only
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: Dependent variable:  number of big-box retailer establishments
0.129**
0.168**
0.222
0.247*
 foreign share
(0.062)
(0.069)
(0.150)
(0.135)
0.093***
0.085***
0.131***
0.126***
 log population
(0.017)
(0.018)
(0.028)
(0.027)
Panel B: Dependent variable:  share of big-box retail/total retail establishments
0.008
0.019*
 foreign share
(0.006)
(0.009)
0.008***
0.010***
 log population
(0.002)
(0.002)
a

Dependent variable: Change in the number of big-box retailers: Wal-Mart, Kmart, Costco, Target,
Lowe’s, and Sears (columns (1) and (2)); these as well as Best Buy, Home Depot, Staples, Office Depot,
Circuit City, and Fry’s (columns (3) and (4)). Both dependent variables and population figures are defined
for aggregates of tracts, with weights reflecting the distribution of shopping trips from the National
Household Travel Survey, 2001. Observations: 6,807 tracts within MSA’s. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are clustered at the MSA level. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; ***
significant at 1% level. Sources: NETS; Neighborhood Change Database, 1990 and 2000 Censuses.

Table 6. Distribution of eating places in California by 8-digit SIC categories, 1992
and 2002a
SIC 8-digit industry

Reported %
1992
2002

Eating places
Ethnic food restaurants
American
Cajun
Chinese
French
German
Greek
Indian/Pakistan
Italian
Japanese
Korean
Lebanese
Mexican
Spanish
Thai
Vietnamese
Other Asian
Other Hispanic
Other non-American
Ice cream and soft drink stands
Concessionaire
Frozen yogurt stand
Ice cream stands
Snow cone stand
Soda fountain
Soft drink stand
Fast-food restaurants and stands
Box lunch stand
Carry-out only (except pizza)
Chili stand
Coffee shop
Delicatessen
Drive-in restaurant
Fast-food, chain
Fast-food, independent
Food bars
Grills
Hamburger stand
Hot dog stand
Sandwiches shop
Snack bar
Snack shop
Lunchrooms and cafeterias
Automat
Cafeteria
Luncheonette
Lunchroom
Restaurant, lunch counter

42.26
0.83
2.61
0.06
4.50
0.61
0.15
0.16
0.24
2.79
1.43
0.13
0.02
4.42
0.07
0.37
0.13

39.37
1.06
1.91
0.07
4.17
0.44
0.11
0.15
0.38
2.53
1.75
0.16
0.02
5.10
0.06
0.57
0.21

0.16
0.31
0.82
1.69
0.03
0.06
0.04
1.92
0.05
0.94
0.02
1.66
1.43
0.65
3.96
1.55
0.03
0.49
0.53
0.35
2.30
0.26
0.13
0.03
0.01
0.42
0.07
0.01
0.04

Family restaurants
Family: chain
Family: independent

0.56
0.97
1.69

Recoded %
1992
2002

0.32
0.24
0.32
1.37
0.05
0.06
0.04
1.31
0.04
0.83
0.02
3.12
1.08
0.44
7.75
1.33
0.03
0.89
0.54
0.31
2.24
0.22
0.10
0.35
0.01
0.30
0.05
0
0.05

24.3
0.37
2.25
0.03
6.39
1.48
0.28
0.30
0.48
4.21
1.97
0.19
0.02
8.24
0.04
0.96
0.32
0.30
0.04
0.08
0.36
0.28
0.8
1.73
0.03
0.05
0.03
2.21
0.04
0.66
0.01
2.34
1.34
0.58
11.54
1.20
0.03
0.46
0.47
0.32
1.81
0.23
0.11
1.97
0.01
0.36
0.07
0.01
0.04

20.16
0.49
1.65
0.04
5.80
1.34
0.21
0.26
0.65
3.52
2.40
0.25
0.02
8.45
0.05
1.20
0.45
0.35
0.06
0.07
0.35
0.21
0.31
1.36
0.04
0.05
0.03
1.60
0.03
0.54
0.01
3.63
0.98
0.39
18.81
0.98
0.02
0.58
0.39
0.29
1.58
0.18
0.09
2.18
0
0.23
0.05
0
0.04

0.77
1.09
1.12

0.44
1.19
1.42

0.55
1.13
0.94

SIC 8-digit industry
Pizza restaurants
Pizzeria, chain
Pizzeria, independent
Seafood restaurants
Oyster bar
Seafood shack
Steak and barbecue restaurants
Barbecue restaurant
Steak restaurant
Other
Buffet
Café
Caterers
Chicken restaurant
Commissary restaurant
Contract food services
Diner
Dinner theater
Health food restaurant

Reported %
1992
2002
3.68
4.3
1.41
1
1.40
0.76
1.13
0.89
0.01
0
0.04
0.11
0.04
0.05
0.56
0.61
0.78
0.61

Recoded %
1992
2002
4.23
4.01
1.34
1.84
1.29
0.68
1.16
0.96
0.01
0
0.03
0.08
0.17
0.13
0.52
0.56
0.53
0.4

0.12
2.27
3.69
0.42
0.02
0.18
0.17
0.03
0.09

0.10
2.07
3.57
0.21
0.01
0.10
0.16
0.03
0.09

0.24
2.29
3.79
0.43
0.02
0.18
0.17
0.04
0.08

0.12
2.02
3.60
0.23
0.02
0.11
0.14
0.04
0.07

Total
100
100
100
100
Number of establishments
41,000
47,608
41,000
47,608
a
The sample is restricted to business establishments with SIC 4-digit industry 5812. The table reports the
distribution of SIC 8-digit industries. Percentages shown for bold-faced entries are for restaurants that are
not more finely classified. The recoding of establishments is based on the company name, as described in
the text. For example, we can easily identify well-known chains (of fast-food, ice-cream places, and
family restaurants). Ethnic restaurants of foreign ethnicity are identified based on the presence of foreign
words in the company name. Source: NETS.

Table 7. Changes in the share of foreign ethnic restaurants and changes in the share of foreign-born
population across bundles of Census tractsa
Dependent variable:
Foreign ethnic restaurants
Hispanic ethnic restaurants
over all eating places
over all eating places
Excluding caterers,
Excluding caterers,
Excluding
fast food, iceExcluding fast food, ice-cream
caterers
cream places
caterers
places
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: Aggregation of all variables using weights from distribution of shopping trips
0.180**
0.229***
 log foreign share
(0.066)
(0.069)
0.364***
0.359***
 log foreign Hispanic share
(0.048)
(0.055)
-0.130
-0.114
 log foreign non-Hispanic share
(0.092)
(0.089)
-0.058
0.111
0.201
0.400**
 log population
(0.097)
(0.101)
(0.176)
(0.187)
Panel B: As in Panel A except foreign share defined using commuting weights
0.440***
0.407***
 log foreign share
(0.108)
(0.116)
0.458***
 log foreign Hispanic share
(0.079)
-0.105
 log foreign non-Hispanic share
(0.159)
-0.087
0.116
0.217
 log population
(0.088)
(0.094)
(0.200)
Panel C: Aggregation of variables across MSA’s
0.632*** 0.584***
 log foreign share
(0.089)
(0.086)
 log foreign Hispanic share

 log foreign non-Hispanic share
 log population
a

-0.857***
(0.233)

-0.645***
(0.203)

0.361***
(0.093)
-0.050
(0.145)
-0.378
(0.344)

0.384***
(0.088)
-0.093
(0.157)
0.447**
(0.213)

0.274**
(0.102)
-0.012
(0.146)
-0.068
(0.374)

Dependent variable: Share of foreign ethnic or Hispanic restaurants. All variables are aggregated across Census
tracts, with weights reflecting the distribution of shopping trips from the 2001 National Household Travel Survey
(Panels A and B, except foreign share in Panel B defined using commuting-to-work weights), or across MSA’s
(Panel C). Observations: 6,807 tracts within MSA’s (Panels A and B) and 25 MSA’s (Panel C). Estimates are
weighted by the 1992 number of restaurants, based on the same aggregation of tracts. Standard errors (in
parentheses) in Panels A and B are clustered at the MSA level. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level;
*** significant at 1% level. Sources: NETS; Neighborhood Change Database and Summary Files (SF4), 1990 and
2000 Censuses.

Table 8. Changes in the Herfindahl-Hirschman index of concentration for ethnic
restaurants and changes in the index of concentration for nativity groupsa
Aggregation
Census tract, weighted sum of
restaurants and populations
Across MSA’s
HH nativity index defined using
Shopping
Working
weights
weights
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.042
0.161**
0.316***
 HH index for nativity groups
(0.075)
(0.060)
(0.080)
0.031
0.035*
0.193***
 log population
(0.021)
(0.019)
(0.045)
a

Dependent variable: Changes in the Herfindahl-Hirschman index of concentration for ethnic
restaurants, defined over 18 categories of ethnic restaurants (American, Cajun, Chinese, French,
German, Greek, Indian/Pakistan, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Lebanese, Mexican, Spanish, Thai,
Vietnamese, other Asian, other Hispanic, and other foreign). The independent variable capturing
diversity is the change in the Herfindahl-Hirschman index of concentration for nativity groups, defined
over 10 categories (US-born; born in Europe, Mexico, Caribbean countries, Central America, South
America, Canada, Asia, Africa, or Oceania). All variables are aggregated across Census tracts, with
weights reflecting that map the distribution of shopping trips from the 2001 National Household Travel
Survey (columns (1) and (2), except the HH index for nativity groups in column (2) is defined using
commuting-to-work weights) or across MSA’s (column (3)). Observations: 6,807 Census tracts within
MSA’s (columns (1) and (2)) and 25 MSA’s (column (3)). Estimates are weighted by the 1992 number
of restaurants, based on the same aggregation of tracts. Standard errors (in parentheses) adjusted for
heteroscedasticity and (in columns (1) and (2)) clustering across MSA’s. * significant at 10% level; **
significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level. Sources: NETS; Neighborhood Change Database
and Summary Files (SF4), 1990 and 2000 Censuses.

Figure 1: Distribution of shopping trips by miles in California, 2001a
A. Los Angeles, Long Beach, Orange County and Riverside

B. Rest of California

a

The figures plot smoothed distributions of shopping trips by distance traveled (miles). The distance is
between the person’s residence and the shopping destination. The piecewise lines plot the average
frequencies in 1-, 5- or 20-mile distance bins. Sample: Panel A is based on 1,328 trips made for shopping
purposes (general retail, food purchase, and personal services) by residents in Los Angeles, Long Beach,
Orange County and Riverside; Panel B is based on 1,628 shopping trips made by residents of urbanized
areas in the rest of California. Source: 2001 National Household Travel Survey.

Figure 2: Distribution of commuting-to-work trips by miles in California, 2001a
A. Los Angeles, Long Beach, Orange County and Riverside

B. Rest of California

a

The figures plot smoothed distributions of trips to work by distance traveled (miles). The distance is
between the person’s residence and the place of work. The piecewise lines plot the average frequencies in
1-, 5- or 20-mile distance bins. Sample: Panel A is based on 598 trips made to go to work by residents in
Los Angeles, Long Beach, Orange County and Riverside; Panel B is based on 695 trips made to go to
work by residents of urbanized areas in the rest of California. Source: 2001 National Household Travel
Survey.

Appendix Table A1. Summary statistics across Census tractsa
Census of Population data
Total population
Foreign population
Native population
Foreign-born share
Hispanic foreign-born share
NETS data
Employment
Number of establishments
Retail stores
Employment
Total number of establishments
Food, clothing, general merchandise, miscellaneous
1-9 employees
10-99 employees
100 or more employees
Stand-alone (unique DUNS #)
Small chains (at most 9 stores with = headquarter)
Big-box retailers (short list)b
Including wholesale trade sector
Big-box retailers (long list)b
Including wholesale trade sector
Restaurants
Number of establishments
Total
Excluding caterers
Excluding caterers, fast-food, ice-cream places
Foreign ethnic restaurants
Hispanic ethnic restaurants
a

1990-2000
growth
0.12 (0.7)
0.36 (0.50)
0.06 (0.37)
0.23 (0.36)
0.40 (0.72)
1992-2002
1992
growth
2,105.6 (4,748.8) 0.20 (0.49)
188.2 (245.3)
0.35 (0.30)
1990
4,321 (1,853)
936 (824)
3,295 (1,610)
0.21 (0.15)
0.11 (0.14)

226.9 (390.7)
31.6 (34.6)
14.6 (20.7)
28.2 (29.9)
3.48 (5.13)
1.12 (0.57)
27.8 (28.7)
2.4 (4.0)
0.07 (0.28)
0.08 (0.31)
0.09 (0.36)
0.11 (0.40)

0.05 (0.77)
0.11 (0.49)
0.20 (0.58)
0.10 (0.50)
0.11 (0.53)
0.03 (0.23)
0.07 (0.49)
0.08 (0.52)
0.04 (0.34)c
0.04 (0.34)c
0.11 (0.53)c
0.11 (0.53)c

6.02 (8.33)
5.81 (8.13)
4.20 (6.11)
1.52 (2.53)
0.50 (0.97)

0.14 (0.54)
0.14 (0.54)
0.07 (0.55)
0.10 (0.55)
0.08 (0.50)

The table reports mean values (and standard deviations in parentheses). Figures are calculated for
the 6,807 Census tracts located in one of the 25 MSA’s in California. Growth rates are calculated as
changes in the log of the variable. Sources: NETS; Neighborhood Change Database and Summary
files (SF4), 1990 and 2000 Censuses.
b
See notes to Table 5 for lists of big-box retailers.
c
This is the absolute change, not the growth rate.

