                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              WAGE RISK AND EMPLOYMENT RISK OVER THE LIFE CYCLE

                                              Hamish Low
                                             Costas Meghir
                                             Luigi Pistaferri

                                         Working Paper 14901
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14901


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2009




We are grateful to the editor, two anonymous referees, Joe Altonji, Gadi Barlevy, Marco Bassetto,
Audra Bowlus, David Card, Thomas Crossley, James Heckman, Bruce Meyer, Dale Mortensen, Giuseppe
Moscarini, Chris Pissarides, Victor Rios-Rull, Chris Taber, Robert Townsend, Gianluca Violante,
Randy Wright, conference participants at the NBER Summer Institute, Society of Economic Dynamics,
Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics, the 2006 Cowles Macro-Labor Conference, the “Macroeconomics
of Imperfect Risk Sharing” conference in Santa Barbara, as well as participants in numerous seminars
and workshops. Pistaferri acknowledges funding from NSF through grant 0453119. Costas Meghir
thanks the ESRC for funding under the Professorial Fellowship RES-051-27-0204. We thank the ESRC
Centre for Microeconomic Analysis of Public Policy at the Institute for Fiscal Studies. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Hamish Low, Costas Meghir, and Luigi Pistaferri. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Wage Risk and Employment Risk over the Life Cycle
Hamish Low, Costas Meghir, and Luigi Pistaferri
NBER Working Paper No. 14901
April 2009
JEL No. D91,E21,H31,J64

                                             ABSTRACT

We specify a structural life-cycle model of consumption, labour supply and job mobility in an economy
with search frictions that allows us to distinguish between different sources of risk and to estimate
their effects. The sources of risk are shocks to productivity, job destruction, the process of job arrival
when employed and unemployed and match level heterogeneity. In contrast to simpler models that
attribute all income fluctuations to shocks, our framework disentangles variability due to shocks from
variability due to the responses to these shocks. Estimates of productivity risk, once we control for
employment risk and for individual labour supply choices, are substantially lower than estimates that
attribute all wage variation to productivity risk. Increases in productivity risk impose a considerable
welfare loss on individuals and induce substantial precautionary saving. Increases in employment risk
have large effects on output and, primarily through this channel, affect welfare. The welfare value
of government p rogram s such as food stamps which partially insure productivity risk is greater than
the value of unemployment insurance which provides (partial) insurance against employment risk
and no insurance against persistent shocks.


Hamish Low                                          Luigi Pistaferri
Faculty of Economics                                Department of Economics
University of Cambridge                             579 Serra Mall
Cambridge CB3 9DD ENGLAND                           Stanford University
hwl23@econ.cam.ac.uk                                Stanford, CA 94305-6072
                                                    and NBER
Costas Meghir                                       pista@stanford.edu
Department of Economics
University College London
Gower Street
London WC1E 6BT ENGLAND
c.meghir@ucl.ac.uk
1       Introduction

      There is an extensive literature analyzing individuals’ precautionary response to income risk

under incomplete markets. The theoretical literature has clarified the circumstances under which

precautionary behavior arises. Empirical analysis has concentrated on assessing the levels of income

risk and the persistence of shocks;1 on showing that insurance markets are indeed incomplete;2

and on measuring the eﬀects of uninsurable idiosyncratic risk on life-cycle consumption profiles

and wealth accumulation.3 In most studies idiosyncratic risk is identified as the variance of an

appropriately defined residual in a panel data model of income but the underlying sources of risk

are not distinguished and exogenous shocks are not disentangled from the eﬀects of actions (such as

changes in labour supply and job mobility) taken in response to such shocks. While we have learned

a lot by this first generation of models, to obtain a better understanding of individual responses to

risk and to carry out policy analysis, it is necessary to go deeper and to understand the sources of risk

and to recognize that many of the observed fluctuations are the result of endogenous choices. Indeed

the key first steps for assessing the eﬀects on allocations and welfare of various social insurance

policies that are designed to help deal with risk are to understand and to quantify the underlying

sources of the uncertainty that individuals face.

     In order to disentangle shocks from the responses to the shocks, we specify a structural life-cycle

model of consumption, labour supply and job mobility. We then specify the underlying sources

of shocks that are the key drivers of observed fluctuations in earnings. These include shocks to

individual productivity that persist across diﬀerent jobs and across time; firm level shocks that

lead to job destruction; the stochastic process of job oﬀers when employed and unemployed; and

variation in the quality of the match oﬀered. Our model captures how these basic underlying shocks

transmit into observed behavior, welfare and earnings fluctuations. Without the labour supply and

job mobility choices, we would obtain a misleading picture on the extent to which individuals can

self-insure and the extent to which observed earnings fluctuations reflect risk.4

     Within our framework, we can distinguish between employment risk and productivity risk. Pro-
    1 Forexample, see MaCurdy (1982), Abowd and Card (1989), Meghir and Pistaferri (2004) and Guvenen (2007).
    2 SeeCochrane (1991) and Attanasio and Davies (1996).
   3 See amongst others Zeldes (1989), Deaton (1991), Carroll (1992), Carroll and Samwick (1997), Banks, Blundell

and Brugiavini (2001), Gourinchas and Parker (2002), and Attanasio, Banks, Meghir and Weber (1999).
   4 Krussell et al. (2008) highlight the importance of modelling labour market frictions alongside labour supply

choices in understanding the aggregate implications of incomplete markets.



                                                       1
ductivity risk is individual-specific uncertainty which exists independently of the employer’s char-

acteristics. Employment risk captures the uncertainty about having a job and also about the firm

type. This includes the possibility of firm closure or job destruction, the diﬃculty of finding a new

job match while unemployed, and the extent of unobserved heterogeneity across firms. In a fully

competitive labor market with no worker-firm match heterogeneity and no search costs, the dis-

tinction between employment and productivity risk would be meaningless because unemployment

would arise only due to low productivity resulting in the individual’s market wage being below the

reservation wage. Unemployment itself would not be a source of risk.5

    Shocks diﬀer in their available insurance opportunities. For example, layoﬀs are usually partially

insured by the unemployment insurance system, while individual productivity shocks, other than

major observable health shocks, are rarely insured in any formal way because of moral hazard and

limited enforcement and commitment reasons. It is precisely this lack of formal insurance that

prompts prudent individuals to engage in precautionary behavior. Furthermore, the individual’s

response to earnings risk will depend partly on the availability of outside insurance - private or

public. With few exceptions (Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes, 1995), the literature on precautionary

savings has assumed that only self-insurance is available. In this paper, we propose a model in which

people can self-insure, but may also be eligible for government provided insurance mirroring three

popular programs in the US: Unemployment Insurance (UI), Disability Insurance (DI), and Food

Stamps. These systems provide partial insurance only.

    The parameters of our model are obtained partly from estimating the characteristics of the wage

process with endogenous employment and mobility choices, and partly from calibrating our life cycle

model to fit observed employment profiles and unemployment durations. We use longitudinal wage

and job mobility data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) and employment

and unemployment duration data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID).

    The empirical results we report relate to the nature of the income process and the basic im-

plications of the model. First, we show that our preferred stochastic process for income (the sum

of a random walk, an i.i.d. component, and a firm-worker match fixed eﬀect) provides a good fit
    5 Some recent papers have analyzed the joint precautionary saving-labour supply decision. Low (2005), Pijoan-Mas

(2006), and Domeij and Floden (2006) analyze the joint saving and labour supply decision, but in a context without
exogenous job destruction, search frictions or job mobility. French (2004) analyzes labour supply and savings behavior,
but focuses on older workers. Heathcote et al. (2007) consider a joint saving-labor supply decision, again without
frictions, and focusing on the degree of partial insurance.


                                                          2
of the key facts in the data. Second, we find that if mobility is ignored the estimated variance of

the permanent innovation to wages doubles, leading to an impression of much greater risk in the

earnings process. This is because much of the wage fluctuations are due to individuals moving to

jobs with better match specific eﬀects; ignoring this biases measured uncertainty upwards.

   Turning to counterfactual experiments, we assess the eﬀects of diﬀerent types of risk by vary-

ing some key parameters one at a time (including the variance of productivity risk, and the job

destruction rate) and reporting the change in labour supply, output and savings. We also compute

the willingness to pay to avoid the various changes in risks. Changes in these sources of risk af-

fect the level of individual output, as well as the variance. This is because changes in risk change

labour market participation. Some of these changes are exogenous: greater job destruction directly

reduces employment; others are endogenous: greater variability in productivity leads to wage oﬀers

being more likely to fall below an individual’s reservation wage. When productivity risk increases

therefore, individuals are worse-oﬀ because of the increased risk but also because output declines.

However, individuals are willing to pay substantially more than the output loss to compensate for the

increased risk. When job destruction increases, output also declines and unemployment increases,

as we would expect. The environment becomes riskier as highly valued jobs can be lost at a faster

rate, but the welfare eﬀects of this risk are mitigated by the utility value of leisure (which in our

model is a substitute for consumption). Overall, although welfare falls as job destruction increases,

the willingness to pay to return to the original lower rate of job destruction is less than the loss in

output.

   To compare the two risks we consider first changing the variance of productivity shocks and

second changing the rate of job destruction so as to achieve a decline of 5% in the variance of income

growth. We compute the willingness to pay for each of these two changes. Individuals value more

the decline in productivity risk than the decline in the rate of job destruction, both of which achieve

the same decline in the variance of income growth. The underlying reason is that, in contrast to

permanent productivity shocks to wages, job destruction leads to a transitory shock in income.

   Finally, we measure the value that people assign to an increase in the various government provided

insurance programs in our model, and compare this to the value of a revenue equivalent cut in

proportional taxes. The welfare value of programs such as food stamps, which partially insure



                                                  3
productivity risk, is greater than the value of unemployment insurance which provides (partial)

insurance against employment risk and no insurance against persistent shocks. This relatively low

value of unemployment insurance is in line with the results of Hansen and Imrohoroglu (1992).6

    The layout of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents the model and discusses the distinction

between employment and productivity risk. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 describes the

estimation strategy and results for estimating the wage process. Section 5 presents the calibration

process for the remaining parameters. Section 6 discusses possible alternatives to our wage process.

Section 7 presents our calculations of the behavioral eﬀects and the welfare costs of uncertainty and

the welfare benefit of government insurance programs. Section 8 concludes.


2     Model
2.1     Overview

We specify a model where individuals choose consumption and make work decisions so as to maximize

an intertemporal utility function, in an environment with search frictions. We view the key sources of

shocks underlying earnings fluctuations as being shocks to individual productivity, firm level shocks

leading to job destruction, the process of job oﬀers when unemployed and when employed, and the

quality of the match oﬀered. Thus individuals face multiple sources of uncertainty: in each period

employed individuals may be laid oﬀ or may receive oﬀers of alternative employment; unemployed

workers may or may not be oﬀered a job; all individuals face uninsurable shocks to their productivity.

    The economy oﬀers partial social insurance in the form of a number of programs. These are

Food Stamps, Unemployment Insurance, Disability Insurance and Social Security (pensions). When

simulating the model, changes to these programs are funded by proportional taxation; thus indi-

viduals are linked through the government budget constraint. The model has numerous sources of

dynamics. These include asset accumulation, the fact that job oﬀer probabilities are state dependent

and that current actions aﬀect future eligibility to the various programs. We consider two types of

individuals separately: the lower educated individuals, which include all those with a high school
    6 Lentz (2003) also analyzes the value of unemployment insurance, allowing for the interaction between search

frictions and saving. Costain (1999) proposes an equilibrium search model with precautionary savings that attempts
to measure the welfare eﬀects of unemployment insurance. Rendon (2006) examines the relationship between wealth
accumulation and job search dynamics in a model where the motivation for accumulating wealth is to finance voluntary
quits in order to search for a better job. However, all these papers, along with Hansen and Imrohoroglu (1992), ignore
the risk to individuals’ own productivity which is independent of any particular match.




                                                          4
diploma or less, and the higher educated individuals with at least some college.

    In this section we start by describing the stochastic process of wages. Then we describe the

process of job arrival and job destruction. With the sources of shocks specified we then describe

the individual optimization problem and the distinction between employment and productivity risk.

The empirical analysis follows in the next sections.

2.2     Structure of Wages and Shocks

We begin the model specification by outlining the process for wages. We assume that wages wit in

the data are governed by the process:

                                    ln wit = dt + x0it ψ + uit + eit + aij(t0 )                                 (1)

where wit is the real hourly wage, dt represents the log price of human capital at time t, xit a vector

of regressors including age, uit the permanent component of wages, and eit the transitory error

component. All parameters of the wage process are education specific.

    In principle, the term eit might be thought to represent a mix between a transitory shock and

measurement error. In the usual decomposition of shocks into transitory and permanent components,

researchers work with annual earnings data where transitory shocks may well be important because

of unemployment spells. In our framework, this source of transitory shocks is modelled explicitly

through the employment and job mobility. We show below that the model generates a stochastic

process for earnings similar to that estimated using earnings from say the PSID. Thus, we assume

that all estimated transitory shocks to wages represent measurement error.7

    The term aij(t0 ) denotes a firm-worker match specific component where j (t0 ) indexes the firm

that the worker joined in period t0 ≤ t.8 It is drawn from a normal distribution with mean zero and

variance σ2a . We model the match eﬀect as constant over the life of the worker-employer relationship.

If the worker switches to a diﬀerent employer between t and t+1, however, there will be some resulting

wage growth which we can term a mobility premium denoted as ξ it+1 = aij(t+1) − aij(t0 ) . The

match eﬀect is assumed normally distributed and successive draws of aij(t) are assumed independent;
   7 Further, in the empirical section we find that the variance of e
                                                                       it is low, and indeed lower than the variance
of measurement error obtained on annual earnings by validation studies on the SIPP data we use (see Abowd and
Stinson, 2005).
   8 We should formally have a j subscript on wages but since it does not add clarity we have dropped it. Note also

that in the absence of firm data one cannot distinguish between a pure firm eﬀect and a pure match eﬀect. In the
latter case, one can imagine αij(t0 ) as being the part of the matching rent that accrues to the worker. We take the
bargaining process that produces this sharing outcome as given.


                                                         5
however, because of the endogenous mobility decisions successive realizations of the match eﬀect will

be correlated. Since oﬀers can be rejected when received, only a censored distribution of ξ it+1 is

observed. The match eﬀect aij(.) is complementary to individual productivity.9 Both the match

eﬀect and the idiosyncratic shock have education-specific distributions. The information structure is

such that workers and firms are completely informed about uit and aij(.) when they meet (jobs are

“search goods”). The importance of match eﬀects in explaining wages has been stressed by Topel

and Ward (1992) and Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis (1999). Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002) show

in an equilibrium setting how firm and individual heterogeneity translate into a match eﬀect.

    Finally, we assume that there are constant returns to scale in labor implying that the firm is

willing to hire anyone who can produce non-negative rents. However, we assume the firm does

not respond to outside oﬀers. If firms did respond, this would imply that the match specific eﬀect

would increase each period with some probability and would manifest itself as a return to job

tenure. However, returns to tenure are thought to be small, once one controls for endogeneity of

job mobility.10 This provides some evidence that outside oﬀers are not an important source of wage

growth on the job. While dealing with the eﬀect of outside oﬀers may be interesting, we leave this

for future research.

    We assume that the permanent component of wages follows a random walk process:

                                                  uit = uit−1 + ζ it                                                 (2)

    The random shock to the permanent process, ζ it is normally distributed with mean zero and

variance σ2ζ and is independent over time. We assume this shock reflects uncertainty.11 We assume

that the permanent shock, ζ it , occurs each quarter with probability 0.25. Thus, on average, the

permanent component of wages changes once per year.

    Given a particular level of unobserved productivity, the worker will be willing to work for some

firms but not for others, depending on the value of the match. We assume that the measurement
   9 Ideally we would like to allow also for shocks to the match eﬀect. These will act as within firm aggregate shocks.

Restricting match eﬀects to be constant is forced upon us by the lack of matched firm and individual data. In
section 6, we consider the alternative assumption of modelling individual productivity as a fixed eﬀect and the match
component as a random walk.
  10 Altonji and Williams (2005) assess this literature and conclude that their preferred estimate for the US is a return

to tenure of 1.1% a year.
  11 An issue is how much of the period to period variability of wages reflects uncertainty. A large component of this

variability is measurement error, which we control for. Beyond that, primarily for lack of adequate data, we abstract
from the important issues that have to do with consumers having superior information vis-á-vis the econometrician.
For discussions and empirical analysis see Blundell and Preston (1998), Manski (2004) Pistaferri (2001, 2003) and
Cunha, Heckman and Navarro (2004).


                                                           6
error eit is normally distributed with variance σ2e and independent over time. As far as the policy

implications of the model are concerned, we are interested in estimating σ2a and σ2ζ . We describe

later how these are estimated.

    The specification we present, while consistent with much of the evidence and in line with a

number of papers,12 is not uncontroversial. Two alternatives might be a model with a stationary

AR(1) process with a fixed eﬀect in wage growth13 or a model where the match specific eﬀect evolves

stochastically over time. We discuss these alternatives in Section 6 and justify our choice.

2.3     Job destruction and job arrival rates

In each period workers receive an alternative job oﬀer with probability λe . Those who are currently

unemployed receive an oﬀer with probability λn . Individuals become unemployed either because

they choose to quit following particular wage realizations or because of exogenous job destruction,

which happens each period with probability δ. The friction parameters (as well as the variance

parameters discussed earlier) are all assumed to be specific to an education group.

    The composition of those becoming unemployed is not random in our model, despite the fact that

the job destruction rate acts as a random shock independently of individual skill levels. First, people

with bad productivity shocks will quit their jobs and the extent to which this happens depends on

the variance of the wage innovations. Second, the job destruction rates can diﬀer by education group.

Thus there is selection into the unemployment pool both in terms of observable and unobservable

skill characteristics, and this selection means those becoming unemployed are less productive on

average than the employed.

    We assume there is no exogenous depreciation of skills following job loss. Instead, the loss of the

particular match on entering unemployment may lead to wages on re-entry being lower because the

new firm will on average have a lower match value. This is the case because individuals in work will

have improved over the average oﬀer through job mobility, before a job in which they are employed

is destroyed.14 Thus firm heterogeneity implies that exogenous job destruction will lead to wage
  12 See MaCurdy (1982), Topel (1991), Abowd and Card (1989), Moﬃtt and Gottschalk (2001), and Meghir and

Pistaferri (2004) .
  13 This is sometimes referred to as the "random growth model".
  14 Indeed, as stated by Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan (1993), “workers possessing skills that were especially suited

to their old positions are likely to be less productive, at least initially, in their subsequent jobs. Such a fit between
workers’ skills and the requirements of their old jobs could have resulted from on-the-job investment in firm-specific
human capital or from costly search resulting in particularly good match with their old firms”.




                                                           7
losses and appear as “scarring", which we document in the empirical analysis below.

    We assume that job destruction and job oﬀer arrival rates are constant over time and so we ignore

business cycle eﬀects. We focus instead on the implications of idiosyncratic risk for behavior and

for welfare. By contrast, Lucas (1987) and others focus on the welfare benefit of smoothing out the

aggregate business cycle risk, and Storesletten et al. (2001) focus on smoothing out the variation in

idiosyncratic risk. In our comparative static analysis, however, we show the eﬀects of diﬀerent values

of job destruction and job oﬀer arrival rates across a range consistent with the variation observed

over the business cycle.

2.4       Individual Optimization

We consider an individual with a period utility function


                                                  Ut = U (cit , Pit )


where P is a discrete {0, 1} employment variable and c is consumption. The individual is assumed

to maximize lifetime expected utility,
                                                        L
                                                        X
                                        max Vit = Et          β s−t U (cis , Pis )
                                         c,P
                                                        s=t

where β is the discount factor and Et the expectations operator conditional on information available

in period t (a period being a quarter of a year). Individuals live for L periods, may work from age

22 to 62, and face an exogenous mandatory spell of retirement of 10 years at the end of life. The

date of death is known with certainty.

    The labour supply choice in our model is a discrete choice. However, since one period is one

quarter, this discrete choice can generate substantial variation in annual hours of work.15 The

worker’s problem is to decide whether to work or not if an oﬀer is available and, if the opportunity

arises, whether to switch firms. When unemployed he has to decide whether to accept a job that may

have been oﬀered or wait longer. If eligible, the unemployed person will have the option to apply

for disability insurance. Whether employed or not, the individual has to decide how much to save

and consume. Accumulated savings can be used to finance spells out of work and early retirement.
  15 Inthe data, the variation in annual hours is predominantly due to changes in employment status during the year.
By using a quarter as the decision time we are able to generate substantial variation over the year. Hours elasticities
for workers are found to be very small in most empirical microeconomic studies for men; see MaCurdy et al. (1990),
Pencavel (2002) and Meghir and Phillips (2008) as examples.



                                                          8
   We use a utility function of the form


                                                      (c · exp {ηP })1−γ
                                         U (c, P )=
                                                             1−γ

We consider cases where γ > 1 and η < 0, implying that individuals are reasonably risk averse,

working reduces utility and that consumption and employment are Frisch complements (i.e. the

marginal utility of consumption is higher when working). We use this specification because it is

consistent with findings showing that consumption and leisure are not additively separable.16

   The intertemporal budget constraint during the working life has the form



         £                                            UI
                                                         ¡     DI
                                                                  ¢        DI                     T
                                                                                                           ¤
Ait+1 = R Ait + (wit h (1 − τ w ) − Fit ) Pit + (Bit Eit  1 − Eit   + Dit Eit ) (1 − Pit ) + Tit Eit − cit

                                                                                                              (3)

where A are beginning of period assets, R is the interest factor, w the hourly wage rate, h a fixed

number of hours (corresponding to 500 hours per quarter), τ w a proportional tax rate that is used

to finance social insurance programs, F the fixed cost of work, Bit unemployment benefits, Tit the

monetary value of food stamps received, Dit the amount of disability insurance payments obtained,
     UI    DI        T
and Eit , Eit , and Eit are recipiency {0, 1} indicators for unemployment insurance, disability

insurance, and the means-tested transfer program, respectively. Note also that there are costs of

applying for disability insurance which we discuss below.

   We assume that individuals are unable to borrow either against the social insurance programs

or against future earnings:

                                                      Ait ≥ 0

In practice, this constraint has bite because it precludes borrowing against unemployment insurance,

against disability insurance, against social security and against the means-tested program.

   At retirement, people collect social security benefits which are paid according to a formula

similar to the one we observe in reality (see below). These benefits, along with assets that people

have voluntarily accumulated over their working years, are used to finance consumption during

retirement.
  16 Heckman (1974) on the importance of such non-separability and Blundell, Browning and Meghir (1992), Attanasio

and Weber (1995) on empirical results.




                                                         9
    Unemployment Insurance We assume that unemployment benefits are paid only for the

quarter immediately following job destruction. We define eligibility for unemployment insurance
 UI
Eit to mirror current legislation: benefits are paid only to people who have worked in the previous

period, and only to those who had their job destroyed (job quitters are therefore ineligible for UI

payments, and we assume this can be perfectly monitored).17 We assume Bit = b × wit−1 h, subject

to a cap, and we set the replacement ratio b = 75%. The replacement ratio is set at this high value

because the payment that is made is intended to be of a magnitude similar to the maximum available

to someone becoming unemployed. The cap is set according to the median state (Meyer, 2002).

    In the US, unemployment benefit provides insurance against job loss and insurance against not

finding a new job. However, under current legislation benefits are only provided up to 26 weeks

(corresponding to two periods of our model) and so insurance against not finding a new job is

limited. Our assumption is that there is no insurance against the possibility of not receiving a

job oﬀer after job loss. This simplifying assumption means that, unemployment benefit is like a

lump-sum payment to those who exogenously lose their job. This implies that UI introduces two

types of distortions on labor supply. The first is due to the tax on wages that finances the program.

The other is the eﬀect of UI payments on asset accumulation decision, which in turns aﬀects job

acceptance.


    Universal Means-Tested Program In modelling the universal means-tested program, our

intention was to mirror partially the actual food stamps program but with three simplifying dif-

ferences. First, the means-testing is only on income rather than on income and assets;18 second,

the program provides a cash benefit rather than a benefit in kind;19 and third, we assume there

is 100% take-up. These assumptions mean that in our model there is no direct disincentive for

poor individuals to hold assets (as in Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes, 1995); there is still however the
  17 We have simplified considerably the actual eligibility rules observed in the US. A majority of states have eligibility

rules which are tougher than the rule we impose, both in terms of the number of quarters necessary to be eligible for any
UI and in terms of the number of quarters of work necessary to be eligible for the maximum duration (Meyer, 2002).
However, making eligibility more stringent in our model is numerically diﬃcult because the history of employment
would become a state variable. Our assumption on eligibility shows UI in its most generous light.
  18 The diﬃculty with allowing for an asset test in our model is that there is only one sort of asset which individuals

use for retirement saving as well as for short-term smoothing. In reality, the asset test applies only to liquid wealth
and thus excludes pension wealth (as well as real estate wealth and other durables). Finally, note that in 1996 a work
test was also introduced for Food stamps. This is outside our sample period.
  19 We assume that the means-tested transfer is paid in cash rather than in the form of coupons (as with Food Stamps).

While this is in contrast with the reality, it would be of little practical importance if stamps were inframarginal or if
there were “traﬃcking”. Moﬃtt (1989) finds evidence for both phenomena.



                                                            10
disincentive to accumulate caused by the programs, as the public insurance will lead to a lower need

for precautionary savings.

   For the purposes of the program gross income is defined as

                        gross             ¡     UI
                                                   ¡     DI
                                                            ¢        DI
                                                                        ¢
                       yit    = wit hPit + Bit Eit  1 − Eit   + Dit Eit   (1 − Pit )                           (4)


giving net income of y = (1 − τ w ) y gross − d, where d is the standard deduction that people are

entitled to when computing net income for the purpose of determining food stamp allowances. The

value of the program is then given by
                                             ½
                                                 T − 0.3 × yit   if yit ≤ y
                                     Tit =                                                                     (5)
                                                 0               otherwise

where T is the maximum payment and where y should be interpreted as a poverty line. In the actual

food stamp program, only people with net earnings below the poverty line are eligible for benefits
                     T
(which we denote by Eit = 1). The maximum value of the payment, T , is set assuming a household

with two adults and two children, although in our model there is only one earner.


   Disability Benefits and Social Security                   Workers may find themselves in circumstances

that would lead them to apply for disability insurance, the final element of the budget constraint.

First, we allow only individuals who face a negative productivity shock to apply for disability. The

requirement of a negative shock to wages is meant to mimic a health shock, on the basis of which

an individual could claim to be eligible. Second, we require people to remain unemployed for at

least one quarter before being able to apply for disability insurance and then they must remain

unemployed in the quarter that the application is made. Again, this is meant to reflect the actual

rules of the system: there is a waiting period of 5 months between application and receipt of benefits,

and during this period the individual must be unemployed. Third, we assume that only workers

above the age of 50 are eligible to apply for disability benefits.20

   Conditional on applying, individuals have a fixed probability of obtaining the benefit, which

we obtain from actual data (50%, see Bound et al., 2004). If successful, the individual remains

eligible for the rest of their working life and disability insurance becomes an absorbing state. If

not successful, the individual has to remain unemployed another quarter before taking up a job.
  20 Interestingly, this was an actual requirement of the program at the time of inception (1956). In our model, it

reflects the fact that health shocks triggering disability are rare before this age.


                                                        11
Individuals can only re-apply in a subsequent unemployment spell. The combination of disability and

the means-tested program turns out to be very important in fitting the decline in employment with

age. Disability payments can provide a high replacement rate which is not aﬀected by the duration

of unemployment. However, the requirement that individuals spend two quarters unemployed before

the disability application is resolved would discourage a large proportion of applicants were it not

for the means-tested (food stamps) program which provides a floor to income during this application

process.

   The value of disability insurance is given by

                   
                   
                    0.9 × wi                                           if wi ≤ a1
                   
                     0.9 × a1 + 0.32 × (wi − a1 )                       if a1 < wi ≤ a2
             Dit =                                                                                (6)
                    0.9 × a1 + 0.32 × (a2 − a1 ) + 0.15 × (wi − a2 )
                                                                       if a2 < wi ≤ a3
                   
                     0.9 × a1 + 0.32 × (a2 − a1 ) + 0.15 (a3 − a2 )     if wi > a3
where wi is average earnings computed before the time of the application and a1 , a2 , and a3 are

thresholds we take from the legislation. We assume wi can be approximated by the value of the
                                                                                         DI
permanent wage at the time of the application. Whether an individual is eligible (i.e., Eit = 1)

depends on the decision to apply (DIit = 1) while being out of work, on having received a large

negative productivity shock and on the application being successful. We assume that the probability

of success is independent of age. Eligibility does not depend on whether an individual quits or the

job is destroyed.

   By contrast with our assumption of a 50% probability of success for DI is our assumption of

100% take-up for our universal means-tested program and for unemployment insurance. We assume

that this diﬀerence arises because of the diﬃculty of verifying disability compared to the income test

and the unemployment test.

   In retirement, all individuals receive social security calculated using the same formula used for

disability insurance.

2.5    Employment Risk and Wage Risk

We allow for diﬀerent types of shocks that constitute risk an individual is facing and we distinguish

earnings and employment fluctuations driven by endogenous decisions versus unexpected shocks.

The direct shocks to wages are interpreted as productivity risk. The job destruction process, the

rate at which job oﬀers are sampled in and out of work and the heterogeneity of firms constitute


                                                   12
employment risk.

    The distinction between employment and wage risk becomes relevant in the presence of search

frictions and is further reinforced by the probability of job destruction. Firm heterogeneity adds

another dimension to this risk: it means that some jobs may be available with a match value

that would lead to a wage worth taking for an unemployed individual, even following a very bad

productivity shock. Search frictions, however, make it hard to find such a job and create uncertainty

in both the length of unemployment and in prospective earnings. Moreover firm heterogeneity

generates an option value to waiting in the unemployment state if the job arrival rate when on the

job is lower than the job arrival rate when unemployed. The model allows us to identify the eﬀects

of changes in each of these risks from the behavioral reactions to their presence/change.

    The productivity shocks that we observe are assumed to be uninsurable uncertainty. These

productivity shocks may, for example, reflect health shocks or demographic shocks but we do not

specify their source in this model. We assume that there is no commitment from the side of the

firm (or the worker), so Harris-Holmstrom (1983) type contracts are not implementable. Further,

we assume there is no private insurance market against employment risk. This incomplete markets

set-up is consistent with results from Attanasio and Davis (1996) and others.21

2.6     Value Function and Model Solution

The solution of the model consists of policy functions for consumption, the decision to work, and

realizations of earnings, career paths, assets etc. There is no analytical expressions for these. Instead,

the model must be solved numerically, beginning with the terminal condition on assets, and iterating

backwards, solving at each age for the value functions conditional on work status. In this section we

discuss the key features of the solution. More details on the method are provided in Appendix A.
                                            ©                  ª
    When employed, the state variables are Ait , uit , aij(t0 ) , corresponding to current assets, indi-

vidual productivity and the match eﬀect. The match eﬀect is indexed by t0 , which is the date the
                                                                              n                o
job began.22 When unemployed and not on disability, the state variables are Ait , uit , DItElig ,
   21 It is possible that observed wages may have already been smoothed out relative to productivity by implicit

agreements within the firm. This means that productivity risk may be greater than observed wage movements within
a firm, which implies that the process for productivity shocks is not properly identified for the unemployed. In other
words, productivity shocks are a combination of actual shocks plus insurance, but this insurance is only present if the
individual is working. If the unemployed experience greater productivity risk than estimated, this will impact on the
reservation wage and on job search. For the time being we ignore this issue as far as permanent shocks are concerned.
   22 Ideally we should model the behavior of the firm. If the firm has a fixed number of positions, and if there are

firing costs, a firm with characteristic aij(.) may not make an oﬀer to any worker. High aij(.) firms may wish to wait


                                                          13
corresponding to current assets, individual productivity and an indicator of whether the individual

is eligible to apply for disability in that period. When unemployed and receiving disability, the state

variables are {Ait , Dit } where Dit is the amount of disability benefit received defined by equation

(6). Consumption is chosen to maximize each value function conditional on all other decisions.

Once consumption is substituted out of each value function the discrete labour supply and mobility

decisions can be made.

    The value function for an employed individual incorporates the fact that in the next period he

will have the choice of quitting into unemployment, moving to a new job if he gets an alternative

oﬀer or staying with the firm. However if the job is destroyed the individual will have to move to

unemployment. Thus the value function for an individual i who is working in period t is

                                                ¡                    ¢
                                             Vte Ait , uit , aij(t0 ) =                                         (7)
                                                                                                  
                   
                                               U (cit , Pit = 1) +                                
                                                                                                   
                   
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
                   
                                          h    ³                                ´i                
                                                                                                   
                   
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
                   
                                             n                       Elig
                                      βδEt Vt+1 Ait+1 , uit+1 , DIit+1 = 1                         
                                                                                                   
                   
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
                   
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
                   
                                            "    (           ³                               ´ )# 
                                                                                                   
                   
                                                         n                        Elig            
                                                                                                   
                                        e              Vt+1 Ait+1 , uit+1 , DIit+1 = 1 ,
          max          +β (1 − δ) (1 − λ ) Et max                 ¡                        ¢
               c   
                                                             e
                                                            Vt+1   Ait+1 , uit+1 , aij(t0 ) ,      
                                                                                                   
                   
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
                   
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
                   
                                                       ³                                ´     
                                                                                                   
                   
                                                  n                          Elig               
                                                                                                   
                   
                                                Vt+1 Ait+1 , uit+1 , DIit+1 = 1 ,               
                                                                                                   
                   
                                     e                      ¡                       ¢           
                                                                                                   
                   
                        +β (1 − δ) λ Et max         V   e
                                                                A    , u     , a        ,         
                                                                                                   
                   
                                               
                                                        t+1 ¡ it+1 it+1 ij(t0 ) ¢
                                                         e
                                                                                              
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
                                                      Vt+1 Ait+1 , uit+1 , aij(t+1)
    The expectation operator is conditional on information at time t. If there is no oﬀer available in

t + 1, the expectation operator is over the productivity shock only; if an oﬀer is an oﬀer in t + 1, the

expectation taken in t is also over the type of the firm making the oﬀer.

    Among the unemployed, we distinguish between those who have the option of applying for

disability and those who are ineligible to apply (either because the individual is under 50 or because

he has not had a negative productivity shock or because he has had an application turned down in

the current unemployment spell).

    For an individual who is eligible to apply for disability, the value function is given by


                                                   (                           (     A
                                                                                                         )
               ¡                       ¢                                           Vt+1   if Apply = 1
         Vtn    Ait , uit , DI Elig = 1 = max          u (cit , Pit = 0) + β                                    (8)
                                         c,Apply                                     NA
                                                                                   Vt+1   if Apply = 0
to locate high uit workers, in the same way that high uit workers may wish to wait for high aij(.) firms. At present
we ignore this issue.


                                                          14
where


                               "      (       ¡                             ¢ )#
                                          n
                          n             Vt+1   Ait+1 , uit+1 , DI Elig = 1 ,
                         λ Et max            e
                                                ¡                         ¢
            NA                             Vt+1  Ait+1 , uit+1 , aij(t+1)
          Vt+1    =                      £ n ¡                                ¢¤
                           + (1 − λn ) Et Vt+1   Ait+1 , uit+1 , DI Elig = 1

            A             DI
                                                            £ n ¡                            ¢¤
          Vt+1    = S × Vt+1 (Ait+1 , Dit+1 ) + (1 − S) × Et Vt+1 Ait+1 , uit+1 , DI Elig = 0


and S is the exogenous probability of a successful application. When deciding whether or not to

apply, the individual already knows if he has a job oﬀer in that period. If the disability application
                                                                DI
is successful, we can calculate the resulting value function, Vt+1 , analytically: the amount of the

disability insurance payment, Dit , depends on the permanent wage only and not on the particular

firm that the individual has most recently been working for. This amount is earned each year until

retirement.

    Based on a comparison of the value functions, in each period the individual decides whether or

not to work; and if working, whether or not to move to another job if the opportunity arises; and if

not working, whether or not to apply for disability benefit. The decision about whether or not to

move to another job if an outside oﬀer is received is, in practice, more straightforward than the other

decisions because we assume that there is no cost of switching firm. This means that the decision to

switch firm involves a simple comparison of the aij(.) and the individual will move if the new oﬀer

is from a higher aij(.) -firm than the current one.23

    Because of the discrete nature of labour supply, consumption may not be continuous in assets and

value functions may not be necessarily diﬀerentiable, which complicates the optimization problem.

See the Appendix for a discussion of these issues.


3     Data

We use the 1993 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) to estimate

our wage dynamics parameters because it records all job to job transitions and the resulting new

wage each time. However, the SIPP follows individuals only for 3 years and this means that it is
   23 If we were to allow for a cost of switching firm in the numerical solution, then the decision about whether or not

to switch would depend on a comparison of the value function at the existing firm and the value function at the new
firm. This diﬀerence will depend on the expected duration of the new job, the worker’s horizon and all elements of
the dynamic programming problem.



                                                          15
less useful for duration analysis. We use the 1988-1996 Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID)

to construct employment and unemployment duration profiles. In both data sets, we stratify the

sample by education, low (those with a high school diploma or less), and high (those with some

college or more).

3.1       The SIPP

The main objective of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), conducted by the

US Census Bureau, is to provide accurate and comprehensive information about the income and

welfare program participation of individuals and households in the United States. The SIPP oﬀers

detailed information on cash and non-cash income on a sub-annual basis. The survey also collects

data on taxes, assets, liabilities, and participation in government transfer programs.

   The SIPP is a nationally representative sample of individuals 15 years of age and older living

in households in the civilian non-institutionalized population. Those individuals, along with others

who subsequently come to live with them, are interviewed once every 4 months for a certain number

of times (from a minimum of 3 to a maximum of 13 times). Each year, a new panel starts, so

some overlapping is expected. The first sample, the 1984 Panel, began interviews in October 1983

and surveyed individuals 9 times. The second sample, the 1985 Panel, began in February 1985 and

surveyed individuals for 8 times. We use the 1993 panel, which has 9 interviews in total (or 36

months of data for those completing all interviews).24

   The Census Bureau randomly assigns people in each panel to four rotation groups. Each rotation

group is interviewed in a separate month. Four rotation groups thus constitutes one cycle, called

a wave, of interviewing for the entire panel. At each interview, respondents are asked to provide

information covering the 4 months since the previous interview. The 4-month span is the reference

period for the interview.

   Our sample selection is as follows. The raw data has 62,721 records, one for each member of

the survey households, corresponding to 1,767,748 month/person observations (note that, due to

attrition, not all individuals complete 9 interviews). We drop females, those aged below 22 or

above 61, those completing less than 9 interviews, the self-employed, those who are recalled by their

previous employer after a separation, those with missing information about the state of residence,
 24 The   raw data can be obtained at http://www.nber.org/data/sipp.html.



                                                       16
and those with outlier earnings.25 Our final sample includes 6,494 individuals corresponding to

233,784 month-person observations. We report some sample statistics in Table 7 in the appendix.

   Our measure of (firm-specific) hourly wage is obtained by dividing annual earnings earned at the

firm by annual hours worked at the firm.26 Individuals may have multiple hourly wage observations

within a year if they work for multiple firms (concurrently or not). We use only the main job (the

one that pays the highest proportion of annual earnings). In the SIPP, each firm an individual is

working for is assigned an ID.27 We set Mit = 1 if the employer the individual is working for at time

t is diﬀerent than the one he was working for at time t − 1. We allocate individuals to the low and

high education groups based on response to a question about the highest grade of school attended.

An important advantage of the SIPP over the PSID when it comes to estimating the wage process

allowing for job mobility is that the SIPP does not average pay over diﬀerent employers. Thus the

full eﬀect of a move from one employer to another is observed.

3.2     The PSID

The PSID data are drawn from the 1988-1996 family and individual-merged files.28 The PSID

started in 1968 collecting information on a sample of roughly 5,000 households. Of these, about

3,000 were representative of the US population as a whole (the core sample), and about 2,000 were

low-income families (the Census Bureau’s SEO sample). Thereafter, both the original families and

their split-oﬀs (children of the original family forming a family of their own) have been followed. In

the empirical analysis we use the heads of the core sample households after 1988 because detailed

data on monthly employment status and other variables of interest are available only after that year

and only for household heads.

   Our sample selection is as follows. As with the SIPP, we focus on working age males, aged 22-61.

We drop those with missing records on education and the monthly employment status question, and

the self-employed. Education level is computed using the PSID variable with the same name.

   The PSID asked individuals to report their employment status in each month of the previous
   25 An outlier is defined as one whose annualized earnings fall by more than 75% or grow by more than 250%. This

is not influenced by periods of unemployment.
   26 The average hourly wage data refer to 1993, 1994 and 1995. Due to the rotating nature of the 1993 SIPP panel,

there are some individuals who report wage data for 1, 2, or 3 months in 1992. We do not use these data because
they may not be informative about wages over the entire year.
   27 We use corrected firm IDs (see Stinson, 2003).
   28 The raw data are available at http://psidonline.isr.umich.edu/.




                                                        17
calendar year and their year of retirement (if any). We use these questions to construct a quarterly

employment indicator for each individual and the duration of unemployment spells. We classify

as not employed in a given month those who report to be unemployed/temporarily laid oﬀ, out

of the labor force, or both, in that month. We treat unemployment and out-of-labor force as the

same state; this tallies with the definition of unemployment that we use in the simulations (see

Flinn and Heckman, 1991, for a discussion of the diﬀerence between these two reported states).29

In principle, the durations are both left- and right-censored. Some spells begin before the time of

the first interview, while some spells are still in progress at the time of the last interview. To avoid

problems of left censoring we only use spells that begin in the sample and drop those with less than

three years of data. In calculating durations, we take our sample to be individuals who exit between

1988 and 1992. However, we use more recent years of PSID data (1993-1996) to calculate durations

for those whose spells are right-censored by the 1988-1992 window. This reduces the censoring from

13.09% of all spells to 5.29%.


4     Estimating the Wage Process

In estimating the wage process, we take the diﬀerence of the wage equation (1) between years.30
                                                                     ¡                 ¢
Taking the process for permanent shocks (2) and recalling that ξ it = aij(t) − aij(t0 ) , we obtain:



                                ∆ ln wit = ∆dt + ∆x0it ψ + ζ it + ∆eit + ξ it Mit

where the indicator Mit is one for those who changed employer and zero otherwise. Wage growth

is only observed for those who work in both periods. If one were to ignore selection issues, under

the assumptions discussed in section 2.2 the variance of the permanent shock to wages can be

estimated using the residual within firm wage growth git,w = ζ it + ∆eit based on the expression
       ¡ 2 ¢
σ2ζ = E git,w + 2E (git,w git−1,w ), where the subscript w denotes “within”. The measurement error

variance is recovered by σ2e = −E (git git−1 ) using data for the whole sample of workers. Finally, the

variance of the match eﬀect can then be estimated based on the variance of residual wage growth
  29 If the distinction in the data between out-of-labor force and unemployment reflects a diﬀerence in search intensity,

we could make a meaningful distinction in our model only if we introduced a search decision with a cost attached.
  30 To smooth the eﬀect of the well know seam bias in the SIPP, in our estimation procedure we focus on annual

wage growth rather than quarterly growth. In the appendix we discuss how the timing involved in our estimation
procedure is reconciled with the model.




                                                           18
                                                                                       ³ ³      ´              ´
                                                                                   1
between firms git,b = ζ it + ∆eit + aij(t) − aij(t0 ) using the expression σ2a =   2
                                                                                           2
                                                                                        E git,b   − σ 2ζ − 2σ2e ,

where the subscript b denotes “between”.

   However, selection issues are central in our model: wages are observed conditional on individuals

working; within-firm wage growth, which identifies the variance of permanent productivity shocks, is

only observed if the individual does not change job; between firm wage growth, which helps identify

heterogeneity across firms is observed only for job movers. Further, employment and mobility

decisions are all endogenous and if this is ignored we risk biasing the estimates of the variances to

wages and of firm heterogeneity.

   To address this problem our approach is as follows: First we model the selection process into and

out of work and between firms. We then construct sample selection terms and estimate wage growth

equations conditioning on these terms. We finally obtain the estimates of the variances of interest

by modelling the first and second moments of unexplained wage growth for various subgroups.

   Define the latent utility from working as Pit∗ = zit
                                                     0
                                                        ϕ + π it . The associated labor market employ-

ment index is Pit = 1 {Pit∗ > 0}, which is unity for workers. Workers separate from their current

employer voluntarily (quits) or involuntarily (layoﬀs). As argued by Borjas and Rosen (1980), job

turnover, regardless of who initiates it, represents the same underlying phenomenon, that of workers’

marginal product being higher elsewhere. Let Mit∗ = kit
                                                     0
                                                        θ + µit denote the latent utility from moving

in period t to an employer that is diﬀerent from the one in t − 1. We have that Mit = 1 {Mit∗ > 0}.
              ¡                 ¢0
We assume:      π it π it−1 µit     ∼ N (0, I) and serially independent. Selection into and out of

work and into new jobs is accounted for by the correlations between πit and ζ it (ρζπ ), πit and ξ it

(ρξπ ), π it and ξ it−1 (ρξπ−1 ), µit and ζ it (ρζµ ) and µit and ξ it (ρξµ ).

   Suppose now that we select only those who work at t and t − 1 (Pit = 1 and Pit−1 = 1). It is

easy to show that:




  E (∆ ln wit |Pit = 1, Pit−1 = 1) = E (∆ ln wit |Pit = 1, Pit−1 = 1, Mit = 1) Pr (Mit = 1)

                                           +E (∆ ln wit |Pit = 1, Pit−1 = 1, Mit = 0) (1 − Pr (Mit = 1))

                                       = ∆dt + ∆x0it ψ + Git                                                 (9)


where Git is a selection term induced by employment and inter-firm mobility (see Appendix B for


                                                       19
details).31 We estimate the components of this selection term in a first stage by running separate

probit regressions,32 and use these to then estimate the parameters of (9) consistently in a second

stage using only workers in both periods.

    We now need to estimate the variance of the permanent shocks, the variance of the firm level

heterogeneity and the variance of the measurement error. Estimation is based on the moments of

unexplained wage growth (observed only for workers in both periods):



                             git = ∆ (ln wit − dt − x0it ψ) = ζ it + ∆eit + ξ it Mit                             (10)

    We use the first and second moments of (10) for movers (Mit = 1) and for stayers (Mit = 0),

as well as the first-order autocovariance, always correcting for selection due to employment and

mobility. In addition to the two variances of interest we also estimate the relevant correlations

that drive selection. The estimation process takes into account that the wage growth we model is

annual, while the work decision is quarterly, in accordance with the model. The details of the entire

estimation process are given in Appendix B.

    Standard errors are computed using the block-bootstrap procedure suggested by Horowitz (2002).

In this way we account for serial correlation of arbitrary form, heteroskedasticity, as well as for the

fact that we use a multi-step estimation procedure, pre-estimated residuals and selection terms.

We should point out that this procedure is likely to be conservative, since it allows for more serial

correlation than that implied by the moment conditions we use.

4.1     Results
4.1.1    Employment and mobility

We start by estimating quarterly probits for employment using the SIPP data. Our regressors include

a quadratic in age, a dummy for whites, region dummies, a dummy for married, year dummies as

well as unearned household income and an index of generosity of the welfare system, which here we

proxy with the generosity of the state-level UI system.33 The latter two are excluded from the wage
  31 In estimation we do not use the restrictions on the parameters of interest imposed by (9). This only results in a

loss of eﬃciency, but it does not aﬀect consistency. We estimate the standard errors by the block bootstrap.
  32 The assumed orthogonality assumption between π
                                                        it and µit allows us to do this.
  33 Unearned household income is defined as total household income net of household earnings and means-tested cash

benefits. To obtain a measure of the generosity of the UI program in the state where the worker lives, we rank states
according to the maximum weekly UI benefit (which we take from current legislation). Our measure of generosity is
the rank variable, which varies over time and across states. We obtain similar results if we rank states pooling data
for all years. Ideally, one would like to use an index of generosity of the Food Stamps program, but this is a federal



                                                         20
equation and are the instruments that identify selection into work - the unearned income as a pure

income eﬀect and the generosity of the UI system as a fixed cost of work.34 The probit estimates

for each quarter are reported in Appendix C, Table 8. The main point is that unearned income has

a strong and significantly negative eﬀect on the probability of working. The generosity of the UI

system is also a significant factor discouraging work, but only for the lower education group and not

for the college graduates.

    We also estimate a mobility probit, which will allow us to control for the censoring of between

firm wage growth. The dependent variable is whether an individual who was working in period t is

in a diﬀerent job in period t+1. Thus for the purposes of this estimation, mobility may include those

moving jobs via unemployment. The mobility probit includes the same variables as the employment

equation, as well as industry dummies and an indicator as to whether the person was working for a

non-profit organization, in both cases for period t. Unearned income influences mobility positively

for both education groups; UI generosity influences mobility positively for the lower education group

but not the college graduates. The eﬀect of UI on mobility is theoretically ambiguous. On the

one hand, it increases the reservation wage leading to individuals quitting employment following

negative wage shocks and increasing mobility through this mechanism. On the other hand, when UI

is low, durations of unemployment will be shorter and wage increases will occur through job-to-job

mobility; the former eﬀect dominates. Our results also show that mobility declines with age for both

groups. This decline arises because of a selection eﬀect: older individuals have had the opportunity

to move to jobs with higher match components, and thus it becomes increasingly unlikely that an

outside oﬀer is suﬃciently good to trigger mobility. Job destruction is an important force disrupting

this age eﬀect. Table 9 in Appendix C presents the results.

4.1.2    Variance Estimates

Armed with these results, we move on to estimate the parameters of the wage process by the

method of moments, imposing constraints across equations. The results are reported in Table 1.
program and its time-series variability is negligible.
  34 We exploit variation over states and time that exists in the generosity of the UI system. For this exclusion

restriction to be valid the US labour market should be suﬃciently integrated and suﬃcient trade should be taking
place, so that variability in benefits in one state does not aﬀect wage in that state. For the unearned income exclusion
restriction to be valid requires that UI payments do not aﬀect wages through bargaining, as in Pissarides (2000), or
through compensating diﬀerentials, as in Topel (1984). Our model imposes the weaker condition that these instruments
can be excluded from wage growth.




                                                          21
The σ parameters refer to the standard deviations of the various stochastic components of wages.

The ρ parameters are the correlations between the various stochastic shocks and the shocks driving

selection. They are defined in Appendix B, which also reports the moments we fit and the corrections

for selection. We estimate the model for the whole sample to have a comparison with previous work

(column 1) and separately by the two education groups (columns 2 and 3).

   When we control for selection into employment and for job mobility, we find that in the whole

sample the standard deviation of the permanent shock, σ ζ , is about 0.10, the standard deviation

of the measurement error, σ e , 0.09, and the standard deviation of the match specific eﬀect, σ a ,

0.23. These parameters are all very precisely estimated. They imply that matching heterogeneity

is a very important component of wage dispersion; wages can fluctuate ±46% between firms for the

same individual.

   Columns (2) and (3) report the results of estimating the model separately for our two education

groups. There are some diﬀerences in the stochastic process of wages of the two education groups.

For example, the high educated face a higher variance of the permanent shock than the low educated.

   What happens if we ignore the fact that mobility is endogenous and attribute all wage fluctuations

to the permanent and transitory shocks (σζ and σe )? This, implicitly, has been the assumption

made in papers estimating the covariance structure of earnings (MaCurdy, 1982; Abowd and Card,

1989; Meghir and Pistaferri, 2004) and in the precautionary savings papers estimating risk via the

standard transitory/permanent shock decomposition (Carroll and Samwick, 2001; Gourinchas and

Parker, 2002). In column (4) we report the results of this experiment for the whole sample. The

estimated standard deviation of the permanent shock σ ζ increases by about 50%: a large proportion

of wage fluctuations usually attributed to unexpected shocks is in fact a result of endogenous mobility

choices. This is likely to be important for the welfare costs of risk because individuals change jobs

quite frequently and because they do not have to accept worse paying jobs than the one they have.

However match dispersion does itself introduce risk: first because individuals with good matches who

are displaced can expect to be hired at a lower rate (on average); and second, because individuals

face uncertainty about the quality of oﬀers they are likely to receive. On the other hand, match

dispersion also oﬀers the possibility of job improvements, which as we shall see is a dominant factor

in the eﬀect of such dispersion on welfare when the arrival rate is suﬃciently high.



                                                  22
                         Table 1: Wage variance estimates
                   Whole             Low               High              Neglect
                   sample            education         education         mobility
                                                                         (All)
                   (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)

                                Standard Deviations

σζ                 0.103             0.095             0.106             0.152
                   (0.012)           (0.022)           (0.017)           (0.009)
                    [0%]              [1%]              [0%]              [0%]
σe                 0.087             0.084             0.088             0.086
                   (0.011)           (0.035)           (0.016)           (0.005)
                    [0%]              [0%]              [0%]              [0%]
σa                 0.228             0.226             0.229
                   (0.011)           (0.019)           (0.015)
                    [0%]              [0%]              [0%]




                                     Correlations

ρζπ                0.153             0.214             −0.104            0.509
                   (0.244)           (0.254)           (0.293)           (0.171)
                    [40%]             [22%]             [74%]             [1%]
ρζµ                −0.847            −0.990            −0.871
                   (0.410)           (0.469)           (0.498)
                    [0%]              [0%]              [0%]
ρξπ                −0.036            0.164             0.149
                   (0.351)           (0.417)           (0.402)
                    [43%]             [91%]             [8%]
ρξπ−1              0.190             −0.071            0.190
                   (0.239)           (0.254)           (n.a.)
                    [4%]              [99%]            [n.a.]
ρξµ                0.324             0.353             0.333
                   (0.165)           (0.202)           (0.216)
                    [0%]              [2%]              [1%]


Note - σ ζ , σ e , and σa are the standard deviations of the permanent shock, measurement
error, and the match component. ρζπ (ρξπ ) is the correlation between the permanent
shock (mobility premium ξ = aj − aj−1 ) and unobserved heterogeneity in the employ-
ment equation. ρξπ−1 is the correlation between the mobility premium and unobserved
heterogeneity in the employment equation in the previous period. ρζµ (ρξµ ) is the corre-
lation between the permanent shock (mobility premium) and unobserved heterogeneity
in the mobility equation. Standard errors (in parenthesis) are computed using the block
bootstrap (400 replications). Bootstrap p-values in square brackets. We constrain all
the correlation coeﬃcients to lie between -1 and 1. In column 3 we set ρξπ−1 to the
whole sample estimate due to convergence problems.




                                           23
    The estimated correlations that drive selection are reported in the lower panel of Table 1 and

conform to the expected signs. The most significant is the negative correlation between the perma-

nent shock and mobility (ρζµ ). For the purposes of correcting for selection in estimation, mobility

is defined as any job change, including those taking place through unemployment. Since a good

productivity shock will encourage people to work, it will also result in less job changes than other-

wise - hence the negative and significant correlation. The next most important one, with an overall

p-value below 1% is the correlation between a good alternative oﬀer and mobility, which is positive

and quite large, as expected.


5     Calibrated Parameters

We now need to set the remaining parameters required to complete the model. We set the coeﬃcient

of relative risk aversion γ equal to 1.5, taken from Attanasio and Weber (1995), whose model of

consumption also allows for nonseparable labor supply. The real interest rate is set equal to the real

return on 3 month treasury bills, at an annual rate r = 0.015, and this is set equal to the discount

rate ( β1 − 1). The remaining parameters we obtain through calibration using the structural model

outlined in section 2.

    Given the estimated parameters of the wage process and those set above, we now set the remaining

parameters to fit the life-cycle employment profile and unemployment duration profile for men, by

education group. Our approach is to choose the parameters for each education group to minimize the

absolute distance between statistics calculated in the data and corresponding simulated statistics.

    The statistics we use are the average employment rate in four ten year age bands (22-31, 32-41,

42-51 and 52-61) and the mean duration of unemployment in eight five-year age bands. In Table

10 in the appendix we show the fit of the moments we have targeted. In Table 2, we present the

calibrated parameter values, with job destruction and arrival rates given at quarterly rates. In

Figures 1 and 2 we show the calibrated profiles.

    The job destruction rate is about 75% higher for the lower educated individuals than for the

higher educated ones. The contact rates are higher for the more educated and they are higher for

those out of work than when in work, possibly reflecting increased costs of search when working.

The value of η for high education individuals implies that work is equivalent to a 46% loss of



                                                   24
                             Table 2: Parameters Obtained through Calibration

                  Parameter                                    High Education      Low Education

                  Job destruction rate δ                           0.028                 0.049

                  Job arrival rate - Unemployed λn                  0.82                  0.76

                  Job arrival rate - Employed λe                    0.72                  0.67

                  Fixed cost of work F                             $1213                 $1088

                  Disutility of working η                           -0.62                -0.55

           Note - The values of δ , λn and λe are given as quarterly rates. The value of the fixed cost F for
           each education group is per quarter



consumption. For those of low education the equivalent consumption loss is 42%.35 These values

also imply consumption and leisure are substitutes, and thus it is consistent with the observed fall of

consumption upon retirement (or unemployment). Finally, the fixed costs of work for both education

groups are expressed in dollar values per quarter. For the low educated, this corresponds to about

$91 per week in 1992 prices, which is equivalent to 7 hours a week evaluated at the average wage of

those working. For the high educated, the cost is $101, equivalent to about 5 hours a week. French

(2004) estimates the fixed cost in terms of hours, rather than dollars, and his preferred estimate

corresponds to a fixed cost of about 5 hours a week for all workers.

    Figure 1 shows employment profiles for the high educated and low educated. Each figure compares

the profile in the data with the calibrated profile (labelled “employed”).36 For both education groups,

employment rates are constant or display a slow decline until the age of 45, followed by a sharp decline

to age 62. Part of this fall reflects early retirement, rather than temporary periods out of the labor

force. Since early retirement is an endogenous labor supply response, we treat this in the same way

as we treat unemployment. There is a level diﬀerence between the two groups: the high educated

work more than the low educated up to age 45 (employment rates around 96%, compared to 90%

for the low educated), and the subsequent decline is less marked. Our match of employment is fairly

good for both skill groups.
  35 The consumption equivalent is calculated as (1 − exp [η]) .
  36 The profiles from the data are calculated controlling for cohort eﬀects and assuming that time eﬀects average out
to zero and are orthogonal to the time trend. The estimated employment rate is equal to the actual rate at age 40.




                                                          25
   We also plot the employment rate that would be obtained if all oﬀers received (including those

oﬀers from an existing employer) were accepted. Since the oﬀer rate is constant over the life-cycle,

the downturn in employment with age is due to more oﬀers being rejected.

                                                                    Figure 1: Employment over the Life-Cycle

                                                           High Education                                                        Low Education
                                                                            Employed
                                                  1                         + Rejected offers               1
     Proportion Participating




                                              0.9                                               0.9
                                                                                                                                                            Employed
                                              0.8                                   Employed    0.8                                                         + Rejected offers
                                              0.7                                               0.7
                                              0.6                           Data                0.6                                                              Employed
                                              0.5                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                                                 Data

                                                      25   35      45       55       65                                    25     35        45        55         65
                                                                              Age                                                                          Age




                                                                   Figure 2: Mean Duration over the Life-Cycle

                                                                High Education                                                          Low Education

                                              8                                                                        8
                                                                                    Data                                                                          Data
                                                                                                 Duration (Quarters)
                        Duration (Quarters)




                                              6                                                                        6

                                              4                              Simulated
                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                 Simulated
                                              2                                                                        2


                                                      25   35       45        55           65                               25         35        45         55           65
                                                                                    Age                                                                          Age




   Figure 2 compares mean unemployment durations over the life-cycle in the simulations and in

the data for both education groups. Durations have a maximum length determined by the number of

quarters until age 62. In the data, durations are measured in months and are expressed as fractions

of a quarter. We are able to match very well the durations for the high education individuals. For

the low educated, we simulate a very similar profile to the one in the data but shifted somewhat to

earlier ages.

   In the model λn , λe , δ, F and η are independent of age and so the age eﬀects that we find in

all the simulated profiles can be explained only by endogenous saving and labor supply behavior

                                                                                                26
in response to the budget constraint and the welfare benefit structure: the match in the slope of

profiles over the life-cycle is not an artefact of age varying parameters and is a demonstration of the

strength of the model. Average unemployment durations increase over the lifecycle because of the

increase in assets held by the individual, and this counteracts the fact that older individuals have

higher wages and thus a greater incentive to work. In addition, as individuals get older the amount

of future uncertainty declines, thus reducing the precautionary motive for working (Low, 2005).

5.1    Implications of the model

We have calibrated the model using only employment rates and unemployment duration data, given

the pre-estimated wage process and given an intertemporal substitution parameter from the litera-

ture. However, the model has implications for a range of diﬀerent variables. In particular, we use the

model to predict the wage loss associated with a spell of unemployment, the extent of consumption

loss on unemployment, the arrival rate of accepted oﬀers, and the ratio of mean wealth over stages

of the life cycle to mean life-cycle income. Table 3 reports the model predictions and corresponding

statistics, obtained from various diﬀerent sources of data, for a number of statistics that are not

used in the calibration.


The Cost of Displacement There is empirical evidence that displaced workers experience earn-

ings losses following job loss. Some authors impute this to exogenous skill depreciation during periods

of unemployment (Rogerson and Schindler, 2001; Ljunqvist and Sargent, 2002). An alternative that

is consistent with our model is that wages on re-entry may be lower than before job loss because of

the loss of a particular good match on entering unemployment. We report in Table 3 the extent of

the wage fall on re-entry.

   For the high educated, wages on re-entry are, on average, 20% lower than before displacement.

For the low educated, the loss is 14%. These figures are similar to those found in the literature. In

particular, we compare these figures with those reported by Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan (1993)

for their non-mass layoﬀ sample (after controlling for time trends). They report that 1 quarter

after displacement, earnings of displaced workers are 19% less than before displacement. Finally,

one implication of our model is that the displacement costs are likely to be relatively short lived.

Indeed, we calculate that 1 year after returning to work, wages of the low educated are only 6.1%


                                                  27
                                        Table 3: Model Implications
                     Statistic                                     Data                               Model

                                                        High Educ       Low Educ           High Educ      Low Educ

Mean wage loss+
   ln wτ − ln wt                                                    -0.19                     -0.20            -0.14
   ln wτ +4 − ln wt                                                -0.076                    -0.091           -0.061

Mean consumption loss (Age 25-60)++
            ct+1 −ct yt+1 −yt
               ct   / yt                                            0.56                      0.45            0.61

Arrival rate of accepted job oﬀers (Age <40):
    On-the-job                                                                                0.034           0.038
    From unemployment                                                                          0.51            0.45

Fraction of job oﬀers accepted ( Age <40):
    On-the-job                                                                                0.047           0.057
    From unemployment                                                                          0.62            0.59

Mean wealth / Mean annual income∗
   Age 30-35                                                1.58            1.71              0.98            1.44
   Age 50-55                                                7.27            5.13              5.72            5.30

Decomposition of Earnings∗∗
         Std Dev of Permanent Component                     0.17            0.20              0.19            0.21
         Std Dev of Transitory Component                    0.12            0.15              0.11            0.16

+ The data numbers for wage loss are taken from Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan (1993). w is the wage at displace-
                                                                                            t
ment, wτ is the wage at reentry, wτ +4 is the wage one year later.
++ The data numbers for consumption loss are taken from Browning and Crossley (2001).
∗ The wealth data come from the 1994 PSID wealth supplement and include housing wealth and private pension

holdings. Mean annual income is defined as average annual household income for heads of household aged 22-62.
∗∗ Income growth is defined as growth in annual earnings. This is then decomposed into permanent and transitory

components by estimating the variance of the growth of earnings, and the autocovariance of growth. For the data,
we report results taken from the lower panel of Table III in Meghir and Pistaferri (2004). For our lower education
group we take a weighted average of the results in the two lower groups in that paper. For the data generated by
the simulations, we impose an MA(1) in the levels of the transitory shock, implying an MA(2) for the overall residual
earnings growth. This is consistent with the simulated autocovariance of earnings as well as the earnings data in the
PSID.




                                                       28
below their pre-displacement wages; for high educated individuals the figure is 9.1%. These figures

are very close to the ones we extrapolate from Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan (1993) over a similar

time horizon.


Consumption Fall at Unemployment Gruber (1997) and Browning and Crossley (2001) have

explored empirically the consumption loss associated with unemployment. Consumption will be

lower in unemployment if the job loss followed a permanent loss in productivity, which implies a life

cycle wealth eﬀect and a lower incentive to work. In addition if there are non-separabilities between

consumption and leisure, as in our model, and leisure is a substitute for consumption, individuals will

cutback on consumption as leisure increases. Finally if individuals are unable to smooth consumption

through borrowing against future income they will also have to cut back more than they otherwise

would. Our model contains these three eﬀects, with the source of the income loss being the loss of

the match as well as possibly the wealth eﬀect implied by a negative permanent shock; the non-

separability being built into the structure of the utility function; the liquidity constraint being the

restriction that assets have to be non-negative.

   In Table 3 we report average consumption loss by education group and compare it to Browning

and Crossley (2001).37 They use data from a Canadian sample which includes many two earner

households; moreover the Canadian welfare system implies diﬀerent replacement rates. To control for

these diﬀerences we compare the percentage consumption lost relative to the percentage income lost

following unemployment. Our figures are remarkably close to the Browning and Crossley number,

whose comparable figure is 56%.38 We calculate a 61% relative loss for the low educated and a 45%

for the high educated. The Browning-Crossley sample contains 70% low educated individuals. So

on this score the model fits the facts very well indeed.


Arrival rate of oﬀers Table 3 reports the arrival rate of accepted job oﬀers among workers and

among the unemployed. For workers, the arrival rate of accepted oﬀers is low because workers

only choose to move if they receive a better oﬀer than the wage at their existing firm. Among the

unemployed a much higher proportion of oﬀers are accepted: the table shows that, among the low
  37 Our numbers are not comparable to the Gruber calculation because he only uses food. One would need to inflate

his number by dividing it by the marginal budget share for food to get back to a total consumption figure.
  38 Their figures are a 14% consumption loss and a 25% loss in income,which imply the number we report (56%).




                                                       29
educated, 62% of oﬀers are accepted by the unemployed, whereas only 4.7% of oﬀers are accepted by

the employed. The fast movement out of unemployment is not surprising because the oﬀer arrival

rate when employed is not much lower than it is for the unemployed making the option value of

unemployment low.


Wealth Accumulation Table 3 reports, for individuals aged 30-35 and 50-55, the ratio of average

wealth holdings to average annual income. Our model captures fairly accurately the level of wealth

holdings of the low educated at both stages of life. For the high educated, the model under-predicts

slightly the wealth holdings, but the rate of wealth accumulation is similar.


Variability of Income As noted earlier, despite there being no explicit transitory shocks in the

wage process, the interaction of job destruction, the participation and mobility decisions and other

components of employment risk generate a permanent/transitory structure in the time series of

earnings from the model. These have very similar time series properties to the ones for the PSID

reported by Meghir and Pistaferri (2004).39 As in that paper, the growth of earnings is consistent

with a transitory/permanent shock decomposition, with the latter being MA(1) in levels (MA(2)

in growth). The estimates of the variances of each component are remarkably similar. Moreover,

the MA coeﬃcient for the transitory shock for the high education group is -0.65, which compares

to -0.51 reported in the paper. The low education MA parameters are however a bit further apart

with the one from the model being -0.53 and the one estimated from the PSID -0.26.


Wages and Wage Variability Figure 3 shows how wages and the cross-section variance of wages

evolve over the life-cycle for the two education groups. The top line reports the wage profile for

those who are working. Average wages increase with age in the model partly due to search leading

to changes in the match component, partly due to deterministic growth in productivity (as reflected

in the estimated age eﬀects) and partly due to the composition change caused by selection into

work. Early in life, much of wage growth is due to search leading to improved matches. This can be

seen by the increase in the diﬀerence between the path of actual wages and the path of wages net

of the match eﬀect. The diﬀerence between this latter line and the oﬀered wage profile shows the

contribution of selection, which only becomes a substantial factor after the age of 50.
 39 Lower   panel of table III page 9 in Meghir and Pistaferri (2004).


                                                          30
                                               Figure 3: Life-cycle Wage Profiles

                               High Education                                                 Low Education
     ln wt                                                               ln wt
                   Wage of workers




                                                                            3
        3




                                       Wage net of match effect




                                                                            2.6
                                                                                       Wage of workers
        2.6




                                      Offered wage net of match effect
                                                                                                         Wage net of match effect




                                                                            2.2
        2.2




                                                                                               Offered wage net of match effect
                                                   Selection effect
                                                                                                                    Selection effect




                                                                            1.8
        1.8




              20       30            40           50              60              20     30          40             50              60

                                                       Age                                                                Age




                                              Figure 4: Variance of Wages by Age

                                var (ln wt )
                                     0.4

                                                    Data           Simulations



                                     0.2




                                                                  Predicted age effect
                                          0
                                                        30               40            50           60
                                                                                              Age



   Figure 4 shows how the variance of wages increases over the life-cycle (pooled over both education

groups). The line labelled “data” reports the actual cross-sectional variance in the SIPP at each

age, while the line labelled “predicted age eﬀect” reports the predicted cross-sectional variance using

the unit root specification for wages assumed in our model.40 The line labelled “simulations" shows

how the cross-section variance of wages for workers in the simulations evolve over the life-cycle. The

flattening out in the cross-section variance that occurs at older ages in the data and also observed

in the simulations arises because of the sharp decline in participation among men over 50.
  40 The “estimated age eﬀect" is obtained controlling for cohort eﬀects and assuming that time eﬀects average out

to zero and are orthogonal to a time trend.




                                                                       31
6     Evidence on the Wage Process and Alternatives

Our choice of specification for the stochastic process of wages is based on a long and well established

literature. However this does not make it uncontroversial. In this section, we address three issues

regarding the specification: first, we consider whether controlling for mobility aﬀects estimates of the

persistence of shocks; second, we consider modelling the match component as evolving stochastically

over time; finally, we consider introducing heterogeneity in income growth rates, in the way that

Guvenen (2006) does.


Mobility and Persistence of Shocks One diﬃculty with relying on the existing literature to

support our specification of a unit root in wages is that the papers that provide supporting evidence

do not control for worker mobility. In particular, job mobility decisions might create the impression

of greater persistence in income: for example, if mobility is ignored, wage increases due to moving

firms will be seen as permanent shocks, whereas when we control for mobility, shocks are identified

from within firm wage movements which may be less persistent. Our specification imposes a unit root

on within firm wage movements, but the concern is that wages are not as persistent as they seemed

to be when mobility was ignored. To address this, we estimate the autocovariance properties of wage

growth residuals for workers who do not change jobs, controlling for selection. These autocovariances

still conform to the random walk process, rather than to one with less than unit root persistence.

In particular the autocovariances are statistically and economically insignificant after the first two

lags and there is no evidence of a gradually declining pattern which would have been observed if a

simple AR(1) process had generated the data.41 Thus allowing for mobility cannot account for the

earlier finding of a random walk.


Stochastic Match Component The analysis in this paper has been based on the assumption that

the match specific eﬀect is constant for the duration of the match and that the shocks to individual

productivity persist beyond the current job. In fact, since these shocks are permanent, they persist

forever. If we had matched employer-employee data, we could have allowed for a richer specification
  41 We construct an estimate of the wage growth residual in the PSID using the estimates from the SIPP discussed

in Section 4. Growth is measured annually. We use the 1987-1992 PSID because it allows us to look at longer
autocovariances. In the PSID whether one is a mover or stayer is identified correctly (up to measurement error). For
stayers, the autocovariances at lags 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 are, respectively 0.0854 (s.e. 0.0038), -0.0213 (0.0015), -0.0005
(0.0013), 0.0021 (0.0018), and -0.0029 (0.0030).



                                                          32
for the match component. Given our data restrictions, however, the alternative assumption that

we explore is that individual heterogeneity is captured by a fixed eﬀect, while the match eﬀect is

subject to permanent stochastic shocks.42

   This specification has a number of interesting implications. First, the shock to the match specific

eﬀect is in eﬀect transitory from an economic point of view: the individual can change jobs following

a bad realizations of the match eﬀect, thus wiping the slate clean from past shocks even if these are

permanent at the match level. This has important implications for the cross-sectional variance of

wages by age. In the data, this increases almost linearly with age. We find that our preferred model

matches the growth of the variance by age far better than the alternative model, which instead

predicts almost a flat profile due to the absence of very persistent economic shocks (see Figure 4).

   The second piece of evidence in support of our preferred model comes from the estimates of the

variance of initial wages required in the two specifications. Evidence from MaCurdy and Mroz (1995)

and others show that more recent cohorts face a higher variance on entering the labour market. In

our preferred specification the variance of initial wages is indeed higher for more recent cohorts,

while in the alternative specification it decreases with year of birth. The reason for the latter is

that the only way the alternative model can fit the increasing variance of wages by age that exists

in the data is to attribute the increase to cohort eﬀects, i.e., older cohorts have a higher variance on

entering the labour market.

   Third, we find that the alternative specification is incapable of capturing the downturn in em-

ployment from about age 45 onwards and the increased duration of unemployment spells for older

people that is present in the data. This contrasts with the success of our preferred specification.

The reason is that with the alternative wage specification anyone quitting due to a negative shock

to the match specific eﬀect can start again with a new job and “wash away” the past. By contrast,

when these negative shocks are individual specific and so persist across matches, an individual is

more likely to remain unemployed, particularly with the availability of government insurance.

   Thus overall, the alternative stochastic specification with the random walk in the match com-

ponent is not consistent with the data and does not allow the model to match key moments of the

data anywhere near as well as we do with our preferred model. This is not to say that a richer
 42 The   results reported in this section are available in the web appendix.




                                                           33
model that combined aspects of both stochastic specifications for wages could not do even better.

However, given the data limitations, we oﬀer a parsimonious model, that is capable of replicating

basic features of the data.


Heterogeneous Income Growth Model Guvenen (2008) argues that the increase in the cross-

sectional variance with age can also be achieved by allowing for heterogeneity in income growth rates

(as in Baker, 1997), alongside a lower degree of persistence of income shocks (an AR(1) parameter

of 0.82). This specification will produce an increase in the cross-section variance of income with age,

as in the data and in our preferred specification. If there were less persistence in income shocks but

without the income growth heterogeneity, then the variance would be concave in age and so both

components are needed to match the data.

    Distinguishing this specification from one with a permanent shock is not straightforward: in the

data, the autocovariance of earnings growth is zero for observations more than two or three periods

apart which is consistent with the permanent shock model and not quite in line with the model

allowing for an individual specific fixed eﬀect in growth (the "random growth model"), which would

imply nonzero autocovariances at all lags. Guvenen points out that with a high enough positive

autoregressive coeﬃcient the eﬀects of the random growth on the autocovariance structure can be

obscured and its presence can only be identified by considering the covariance of income growth many

years apart when the persistent shock has little eﬀect (12 lags or so, see Guvenen, 2008). However,

long panel data sets have too much attrition over such long time periods to provide a reliable test

of this view. A further diﬃculty with this specification, as pointed out by Guvenen (2007), is that

it would not match the growth in the variance of consumption because of the limited innovations to

income over the life-cycle. In order to match the growth in the variance of consumption when the

income process does not have a unit root, it is necessary to assume that individuals do not know

their own growth term and have to learn about it over time. This gives rise to innovations over

the life-cycle leading to an increasing variance of consumption; however, it is diﬃcult to distinguish

statistically between learning about a random growth model and a model with a permanent shock.43
  43 Farber and Gibbons (1996) assume that individual productivity is unknown to the firm, but it is learned over

time through observation of output, and so wages are updated in a Bayesian sense. They prove that this will result
in the wage residual being a martingale. Thus our unit root characterization can also be consistent with a less than
complete information case, but we have not considered the implications of the learning case as yet.




                                                        34
Further, Haider and Solon (2006) suggest that such heterogeneity in trends may be most important

early in the life-cycle, but that there is little evidence for its importance beyond age 30. Guvenen

and Smith (2008) use consumption and income data to try to separate out the two models. Further,

we do not preclude that introducing labour supply choices into a Guvenen framework might generate

interesting alternative implications. We have chosen what is a parsimonious specification that fits

the data well both in terms of income and in terms of consumption behavior.


7     The Implications of Risk

Our model and characterization of shocks has important implications for the impact of risk on

behavior and welfare. Understanding these is relevant particularly when designing and evaluating

policies such as unemployment insurance, food stamps or other transfers (e.g. tax credits), which

eﬀectively insure part of the risk individuals face. In this model, we have exogenous, uninsured

idiosyncratic shocks and so welfare would increase if insurance were provided in a non-distortionary

way. We also have behavioral responses to insurance built in both through changes in employment

and through changes in savings. This means we can quantify the risk sharing benefits of diﬀerent

sorts of insurance as well as identifying the behavioral eﬀects induced by the insurance programs.

    In this section, we show first the eﬀects of varying productivity risk, looking at the impact on

employment, output and asset accumulation, as well as welfare. We then show the eﬀects of varying

the various aspects of employment risk, including job destruction and firm heterogeneity.

    In the model the actions of individuals are linked to each other because we require the government

budget to balance over the life cycle of a cohort, which is assumed to have N members. Thus we

impose

 XN X T                                                                  N X T
         1 £¡      UI
                      ¡      DI
                                ¢         DI
                                             ¢                T
                                                                     ¤ X        1
           t
             Bit Eit   1 − Eit    + Dit E it   (1 − Pit ) + E it Tit  =            τ w wit hPit + Def icit
 i=1 t=1
         R                                                              i=1 t=1
                                                                                Rt
                                                                                                       (11)
                                                                                           UI    DI
where Bit is unemployment insurance, Dit is disability insurance and Tit are food stamps; Eit , Eit
     T
and Eit are 1/0 indicators of recipiency for each of the programs respectively and Pit = 1 denotes

employment. On the right hand side τ w wit hPit represents tax revenue from a working individual.

The deficit term represents unaccounted expenditures or revenues and will be kept constant across all

simulation experiments. Following a simulated policy change we select the tax rate τ w to satisfy this


                                                    35
government budget constraint; individuals take τ w as given.44 Budget balance is imposed within a

particular education group. We therefore abstract from the insurance between groups that Attanasio

and Davis (1996) found to be important. Allowing the budget to balance over all education groups

would confound the issue we are considering with distributional questions.

    To define the welfare cost of risk write the life time expected utility of an individual as

                                                              X (ckt exp {ηPkt })1−γ
                                        E0 Uk = E0              β
                                                              t
                                                                        1−γ

where the subscript k refers to the implied consumption and labour supply stream in the baseline

economy (k = 1) or an alternative economy with diﬀerent risk characteristics (k = 2) and E0 is the

expectation at the beginning of working life. Now define π as the proportion of consumption an

individual is willing to pay to be indiﬀerent between environment k = 2 and k = 1. This is implicitly

defined by
                                             X ((1 − π) c2t exp {ηP2t })1−γ
                           E0 U2 |π ≡ E0       β                            = E0 U1
                                             t
                                                          1−γ
                                 h                i 1−γ
                                                     1
                                       E0 U1
which implies that π = 1 −           E0 U2 |π=0           .

    Since there are no aggregate shocks in the economy and no business cycle fluctuations, we do not

consider the value of, for example, smoothing the eﬀect of the business cycle (as in Lucas, 1987) or

the value of removing variation in the extent of idiosyncratic risk over the life-cycle (as in Storesletten

et al., 2001). Such insurance removes heteroskedasticity but the average level of risk remains. Thus

we focus entirely on the cost to the individual of idiosyncratic risk, which would be insured in a first

best setting.

7.1     Wage Risk

We start by considering the impact of the permanent shock to wages. We have already shown that

allowing for job mobility substantially reduces the amount of risk that we attribute to unexpected

changes in productivity. Indeed this reduction is likely to be very important.

    In Figure 5 we report π, the willingness to pay to avoid changes in risk relative to the estimated

baseline. This willingness to pay arises because individuals are averse to the greater risk associated

with increases in σ ζ . Note that when we change the risk faced by the individual many aspects of
  44 We assume that unemployment insurance and disability insurance are financed by the tax on wages, even though

in reality the financing is partly imposed upon the firms. However, if the incidence of the tax falls on the workers, as
most empirical studies find, our assumption is inconsequential.


                                                                  36
behavior will change, including labour supply as well as unemployment and employment durations.

These will result in output changes, which we also show on the graph, labelled as ∆ ln y. The

willingness to pay parameter has factored in all these aspects. While changes in wage risk end up

implying relatively low changes in output (particularly for the higher educated), they imply large

welfare losses. Thus a 50% increase of σ ζ to 0.159 for the high educated individuals, implies a 3.7%

loss in output but a willingness to pay to avoid this increase of 19.2% of consumption (the numbers

are in Table 4). It is not straightforward to compare across education groups because the baseline is

diﬀerent. However, we note that if we increase the variance for the low educated to the same level

(0.159) welfare goes down by less (16.4%). This is partly due to the eﬀect of the welfare programs,

which are more important for this lower wage group. Output declines by more for the low educated,

as is visible from the graph, driven by the decrease in employment shown in Figure 6. However, the

overwhelming impression here is that wage risk is a major determinant of welfare, well beyond its

impact on output, making insurance for such risk potentially very valuable.


                         Figure 5: Welfare Costs and Output Eﬀects of Varying σς

                            High Education                                 Low Education
           0.2                                                   0.2
                   π                                                   π
           0.1                                                   0.1
                   ∆ ln y                                              ∆ ln y
           0.0
                                                       σζ        0.0
                                                                                0.05    0.1       0.15
                                                                                                           σζ
                        0.05         0.1       0.15
         − 0.1                                               − 0.1

         − 0.2                                               − 0.2




    More detail on the eﬀects of varying wage risk is provided in Table 4: productivity shocks

have substantial eﬀects on unemployment durations, on consumption growth and on rates of asset

accumulation particularly among the young.45 In particular, for the high educated group, as σ ζ

increases by 50%, the median rate of wealth accumulation for individuals aged 25-35 almost doubles.

This faster accumulation results in an earlier and faster rate of decumulation when old, alongside

lower employment rates and longer unemployment durations. Table 4 also reports the implications

for the standard deviation of annualized earnings growth. The changes in the permanent variance
  45 If, in addition to the decision of whether or not to work, hours of work were flexible, individuals would be able to

self-insure to a greater extent than in our model.



                                                            37
                                                    Figure 6: Eﬀect on Employment of Varying σ ς

                                               High Education                                   Low Education

                                      1                                                1
         Proportion Participating



                                    0.9                                σ ζ = 0.053 0.9                                   σ ζ = 0.053
                                    0.8                                 σ ζ = 0.095 0.8
                                    0.7                               σ ζ = 0.106    0.7
                                                                                                                                σ ζ = 0.095
                                    0.6                                              0.6
                                                                       σ ζ = 0.159                    σ ζ = 0.159                σ ζ = 0.106
                                    0.5                                              0.5

                                          25   35     45        55      65                 25    35     45          55          65
                                                                     Age                                                  Age




have a somewhat muted eﬀect on the variance of earnings growth.

7.2    Employment Risk

The two important parameters associated directly with employment risk are job destruction and

the variance of the match specific eﬀect. We now consider the implications of varying each of these

parameters.


   Job Destruction Figure 7 shows the impact on welfare and output of varying job destruction,

δ. Increases in job destruction have large eﬀects on output partly through increasing unemployment

and partly through limiting the time that individuals are matched with the best firms. Individuals are

willing to pay to avoid the increase in job destruction. There are three aspects to this willingness to

pay: there is a loss of income reflected in the overall loss in output; there is an increase in employment

risk; and there is an oﬀsetting increase in leisure time. For both education groups, the eﬀect of the

increased riskiness, which otherwise would have raised the welfare loss above the loss of output, is

oﬀset by the value of increased leisure resulting from the fall in employment shown in Figure 8. More

details of the eﬀects of varying δ on behavior is provided in Table 11 in the appendix. There it is

shown that increasing δ from 0.1 to 0.7 causes the standard deviation of earnings growth to double

for both education groups. A large part of this change in variability of earnings occurs because of

the periods of non-employment that job destruction induces.

   Durations of unemployment are shorter when δ is higher because of a composition eﬀect: more

of the unemployed are out of work because of job destruction rather than because of low produc-



                                                                                38
                                    Table 4: Comparative Statics: Varying σζ

        σζ                 π        ∆ ln y         σy     Mean              Mean                       Median (∆A/y)         Age
                                                         Duration           ∆ ln ct                                         at max
                                                          47-52         25-44 45-62              25-35    36-50   51-62

 High Education
      0.053            0.125        0.021        0.299        2.0       0.033          0.005     0.026    0.16     0.18      62
      0.095            0.033        0.006        0.324        4.7       0.029          0.012      0.11    0.24     0.10      62
     0.106              0.0          0.0         0.332       6.0        0.029          0.013     0.14     0.25    0.076      62
      0.159            -0.188       -0.039       0.367       13.1       0.030          0.015     0.27     0.24    -0.068     58

 Low Education
     0.053             0.085         0.050       0.400        2.9       0.018          0.005     0.014    0.19      0.085    62
     0.095              0.0           0.0        0.420       8.1        0.017          0.010     0.10     0.17    -0.010     57
     0.106             -0.027       -0.012       0.425        9.4       0.017          0.011     0.14     0.17     -0.036    57
     0.159             -0.161       -0.056       0.449       14.2       0.019          0.014     0.24     0.16      -0.16    55

 Note - σ y is the standard deviation of annual earnings growth. For the columns concerning the amount of assets, the
 denominator is average realized earnings (net of the fixed cost of work) in the education-specific baseline. Consumption
 growth is annualized consumption growth. Duration is measured in quarters. The baseline case is in bold.



               Figure 7: Welfare Costs and Output Eﬀects of Varying Job Destruction
                               High Education                                        Low Education

                                                                            ∆ ln y
                0.2                                               0.2

                0.1        ∆ ln y                                 0.1
                       π                                                π
                0.0
                           0.025     0.05       0.075
                                                         δ        0.0
                                                                            0.025       0.05   0.075
                                                                                                           δ
               − 0.1                                           − 0.1

               − 0.2                                           − 0.2



tivity, and so are more likely to receive job oﬀers above their reservation wage. The rate of wealth

accumulation decreases with a higher value of δ because the increase in time unemployed reduces

opportunities for accumulation.



   Firm Heterogeneity Figure 9 shows the impact on welfare and output of varying firm het-

erogeneity, σa . Increasing firm heterogeneity implies a greater variety of firms in terms of their

productivity. However, because of on-the-job search the best firms tend to be over-represented in

terms of accepted oﬀers, which pushes output up, as clearly seen in the figure. This eﬀect of selec-

tion into the best firms leads to greater employment among older individuals when heterogeneity is

increased, as shown in Figure 10. Increased heterogeneity therefore pushes welfare up, but not as



                                                             39
                                                Figure 8: Eﬀect on Employment of Varying Job Destruction

                                                     High Education                                       Low Education


               Proportion Participating    1                                                    1

                                          0.9                                  δ = 0.01        0.9

                                          0.8                                                  0.8
                                                                                 δ = 0.028                                           δ = 0.01
                                          0.7                                     δ = 0.049 0.7
                                                                                                                                    δ = 0.028
                                                                            δ = 0.07
                                          0.6                                                  0.6                                 δ = 0.049
                                          0.5                                                  0.5                                δ = 0.07
                                                25   35      45       55       65                    25     35     45     55         65
                                                                            Age                                                Age




              Figure 9: Welfare Costs and Output Eﬀects of Varying Firm Heterogeneity

                                                High Education                                                   Low Education
        0.2                                                                                    0.2
                                                                  ∆ ln y                                                       ∆ ln y
        0.1                                                                                    0.1                                              π
                                                                           π
        0.0 0.1                                       0.2                  0.3         σα      0.0 0.1             0.2                    0.3       σα
       -0.1                                                                                 -0.1

       -0.2                                                                                 -0.2




much as output: increasing heterogeneity implies an increase in the cost of job loss because workers

are in danger of loosing a more coveted job. Interestingly the eﬀect is not symmetric around our

baseline estimates: decreasing firm heterogeneity decreases welfare as much as it does output.

   More details of the eﬀects of varying σa on behavior are provided in Table 12 in appendix C.

For those age 25-35, greater firm heterogeneity leads to faster wealth accumulation for the high

education group, but to slower wealth accumulation for the low education group. This reflects the

oﬀsetting incentives caused on the one hand by greater risk inducing faster accumulation, while on

the other hand, the greater expected future income induces slower accumulation.


   Oﬀer Arrival Rates The impact of varying the arrival rate of job oﬀers when unemployed

is shown in Table 13, and better described through text. Varying the quarterly arrival rate, λn ,

between 0.66 and 0.96 increases output for the low educated by 2%, and for the high educated who

experience less unemployment by 1%. Further, average unemployment durations decrease by about



                                                                                          40
                                                 Figure 10: Eﬀect on Employment of Varying Firm Heterogeneity

                                                      High Education                                      Low Education

                                       1                                                        1
           Proportion Participating


                                      0.9                                                      0.9

                                      0.8                                   σ α = 0.33         0.8
                                                                                  σ α = 0.22
                                      0.7
                                                                             σ α = 0.11
                                                                                               0.7                              σ α = 0.33
                                      0.6                                                      0.6                                σ α = 0.22
                                                                                                                                σ α = 0.11
                                      0.5                                                      0.5

                                            25       35     45         55         65                 25     35      45    55      65
                                                                            Age                                                Age




1 month. These eﬀects translate into welfare gains of 1.6% and 1.2% respectively. Compared to the

output change, this suggests the high educated value the increased arrival rate more highly. This is

because the opportunity cost of being unemployed is greater for the high educated: the high educated

receive higher wage oﬀers and are not as well insured as the low educated by the unemployment

insurance and food stamps programs. For both groups, rates of wealth accumulation are hardly

aﬀected by the changing arrival rate.

7.3      Comparing Wage Risk and Job Destruction

In this section we carry out the following simple experiment as one way of comparing the relative

importance of wage risk with the risk of job destruction.46 For each education group, we compute

the unconditional variance of annual income growth (∆ ln yit ) as implied by our model (and which

matches the data closely). We then consider the welfare eﬀects of decreasing this variance by 5%,

first by decreasing the job destruction rate and then by decreasing the variance of the permanent

shock to wages. This provides a metric for comparing the two types of risk. The required change in

the parameter to achieve this is presented in Table 5 with the other results of this experiment.

   For both education groups, the willingness to pay for lowering of the variance of annual income

growth by 5% via a reduction in the variance of productivity shocks is substantially higher than

when this is achieved based on a reduction in the rate of job destruction. The output eﬀect of

these reductions is diﬀerent for the two education groups: for the low education group a reduction

in job destruction leads to a higher increase in output than does a reduction in the variance of
 46 We   thank Richard Rogerson for this suggestion.




                                                                                          41
the productivity shocks. The reverse is true for the higher education group. This however does not

change the fact that both groups would rather see a reduction in the variance of productivity shocks.

Based on this metric productivity risk is more costly than employment risk. Part of the reason for

this is that productivity risk tends to increase the variance of the permanent component of earnings,

whereas job destruction has less persistent eﬀects on income.



             Table 5: Welfare Loss Comparing Productivity Risk and Job Destruction

           Scenario                        ∆P arameter         Willingness to pay %          ∆ ln y
                                                                     (π × 100)              (×100)

                                                             High Education

           Job Destruction, δ            0.028 −→ 0.026                 0.49%               0.95%

           Productivity Shocks, σζ       0.106 −→ 0.094                 3.48%               0.66%

                                                              Low Education

           Job Destruction, δ            0.049 −→ 0.045                 0.74%               1.67%

           Productivity Shocks, σζ       0.095 −→ 0.077                 4.05%               2.73%

               Note: The Table shows the implications of a reduction in the job destruction rate
               and in the standard deviation of the innovations to wages that each respectively
               lead to a decrease in the variance of annual income growth by 5%. The standard
               deviation of income growth decreases from 0.332 to 0.324 for the low educated and
               and from 0.420 to 0.409 for the high educated.




7.4    Implications of Government Insurance

Our framework is well suited for evaluating the welfare eﬀects of the various programs. Such an

evaluation requires a life-cycle model where risk plays an important role, and where labour supply

is endogenous in order to capture the key source of moral hazard and a further mechanism of self-

insurance over and above savings. The Food Stamps program tends to provide partial insurance

for income loss whatever the source of the loss, while UI oﬀers compensation when income loss is

associated with job destruction. As such each program can be thought of as targeting diﬀerent

risks, although they are unlikely to provide anything close to full insurance. We now turn to a brief



                                                      42
examination of the welfare eﬀects of these two social insurance programs.47


                            Table 6: Welfare eﬀects of government programmes

                                             High Education                Low Education
                  Scenario                 Willingness to pay %          Willingness to pay %
                                                 (π × 100)                     (π × 100)
                  Unemp. Insurance                  0.19                          0.24

                  Food stamps                         0.25                          0.30

                  Tax Change                          0.08                          0.15



    We consider a small (1%) increase in the government spending on social insurance and compare

the welfare eﬀects of channelling this change, in turn, into UI and into the Food Stamps-type

program. This calculation focuses on the insurance benefit of these programs because there is no

cross-group redistribution. The results are presented in rows 1 and 2 of Table 6. Row 3 considers the

welfare benefit of using the extra spending to reduce the proportional tax rate. For both education

groups the most valuable program is the means-tested program because it provides some insurance

against large negative (and permanent) shocks. In considering the tax cut, the two groups are willing

to pay 0.08% and 0.15% of consumption, respectively, to see the 1% increase in expenditure going

to a tax cut. This implies both groups prefer the money to be spent on UI or the means-tested

program, rather than on a decrease in taxation within their own group.48


8     Conclusions

The nature and sources of risk are particularly important in understanding how to design public

insurance programs such as unemployment and disability insurance, Food Stamps and other income

support programs found across many countries. In this paper we take the first step in understanding

and quantifying diﬀerent sources of risk that we broadly define as productivity and employment risk.
  47 There are two caveats to these comments: first, these calculations ignore the interactions that may arise between

increases in the tax rate needed to fund increased generosity of a program and the take-up of that program: the
increased tax rate will make programs more valuable by reducing the benefit of being at work. Second, in practice
these programs are funded by taxing the general population and consequently involve a large component of cross
group insurance.
  48 We do not present numbers for increasing the spending on the disability insurance programme. In our model,

spending on the Disability Insurance and Social Security program is valued less than the tax cut. However, our model
of DI in eﬀect abstracts from the impact of large or catastrophic health shocks against which insurance is likely to be
very valuable and which is provided mainly by DI in reality.




                                                          43
In our model productivity risk is identified by permanent shocks to wage rates, while employment

risk is generated by job destruction and by the fact that matches are heterogeneous and so the nature

of the job obtained has a random component to it. We demonstrate the welfare eﬀects of varying

each type of risk and show the output implications of these changes. Varying productivity risk has

relatively low impact on output, because low draws are counteracted by high productivity outcomes

for other people. However the welfare eﬀects of changing productivity risk are very high. On the

other hand, increasing job destruction rates has a large impact on output through the increased

periods of non-employment, as well as increasing the variance of income. The eﬀect on welfare is

relatively low however because its impact is transitory. Finally, the large heterogeneity in match

quality is highly valued for the possibilities it oﬀers for wage growth over the lifecycle.

   Our paper is clearly only a step in understanding the role of risk and the way it interacts with

welfare programmes. One important avenue for further research, taken up by Low and Pistaferri

(2009) is that of modelling the nature of diﬀerent shocks (such as health shocks) using direct infor-

mation. This will allow modelling in a more complete setting the participation and entitlement to

programmes such as disability insurance.

   We have also highlighted the importance of modelling the wage process and disentangling the

impact of exogenous fluctuations to that of fluctuations resulting from responses to shocks, such as

moving jobs or quitting work. Indeed we show that our approach leads to a much lower estimate for

the variance of the productivity shock, than that implied by the usual modelling of the stochastic

process for income. The next step in this research agenda is to model explicitly the sources of these

shocks, derive the implications for equilibrium pay setting and linking these to the match specific

eﬀect and its stochastic properties. This will allow one to model explicitly how pay would change as

risk parameters are modified or in response to welfare programmes. Some first steps in this direction

is the model of Lise, Meghir and Robin (2008). However, these models still do not allow for risk

aversion, which would be a crucial component for applying them in this setting. Finally, allowing for

macroeconomic shocks would allow us to revisit their relative importance to idiosyncratic shocks as

in Lucas (1987), in a richer setting and to examine the way that micro and macro shocks interact.




                                                   44
A      Appendix: Numerical Solution

Households have a finite horizon and so the model is solved numerically by backward recursion from

the terminal period. At each age we solve the value function and optimal policy rule, given the

current state variables and the solution to the value function in the next period. This approach is

standard. The complication in our model arises from the combination of a discrete choice (to work

or not) and a continuous choice (over saving). This combination means that the value function will

not necessarily be concave. The discrete choice about whether to move or not is less problematic

because we assume that there is no cost of moving. This means that the decision to move depends

only on the relative size of the match eﬀect in the current and new firm.

    There are five state variables in this problem: age, employment status, the asset stock, the per-

manent component of earnings, uit , and the match component, aij(t0 ) . Age and employment status

are both discrete. We also discretize both the permanent component of earnings and the distrib-

ution of possible matches, leaving the asset stock as the only continuous state variable. Since the

permanent component of earnings is non-stationary, we are able to approximate this by a stationary,

discrete process only because of the finite horizon of the process. We select the discrete nodes in this

process to match the paths of the mean shock and the unconditional variance over the life-cycle. In

particular, the unconditional variance of the permanent component must increase linearly with age,

with the slope given by the conditional variance of the permanent shock. Our estimates of the wage

variance are for annual shocks, but the model period is one quarter. We reconcile this diﬀerence by

imposing that each quarter an individual receives a productivity shock with probability 0.25, and

this implies that productivity shocks occur on average once a year. This timing means individuals

who stay with the same firm expect pay to be constant over a year.

    Value functions are increasing in assets At but they are not necessarily concave, even if we condi-

tion on labor market status in t. The non-concavity arises because of changes in labor market status

in future periods: the slope of the value function is given by the marginal utility of consumption,

but this is not monotonic in the asset stock because consumption can decline as assets increase and

expected labor market status in future periods changes. This problem is also discussed in Lentz

and Tranaes (2001). By contrast, in Danforth (1979) employment is an absorbing state and so the

conditional value function will be concave. Under certainty, the number of kinks in the conditional


                                                  45
Figure 11: Consumption as a function of current assets conditional on current period work status

                     cT −1
                      y              high aij(.)                working
                             2.0


                                   low aij(.)                      not working
                         1.0



                                         0.33      0.66        1.0 A       1.33
                                                                    T −1

                                                                     y



value function is given by the number of periods of life remaining. If there is enough uncertainty,

then changes in work status in the future will be smoothed out leaving the expected value function

concave: whether or not an individual will work in t + 1 at a given At depends on the realization

of shocks in t + 1. Using uncertainty to avoid non-concavities is analogous to the use of lotteries

elsewhere in the literature. In the value functions (7) and (8), the choice of whether or not to work

in t + 1 is determined by the maximum of the conditional value functions in t + 1.

   In solving the maximization problem at a given point in the state space, we use a simple golden

search method. We solve the model and do the calibration assuming this process is appropriate.

We then check that the results in our baseline case are unaﬀected when we use a global optimizing

routine, simulated annealing. It is worth stressing that there are parameter values for which the

techniques we used do not work. In particular, as the variance of shocks gets suﬃciently low, the

non-concavities in the expected value functions become problematic.


   To give a clear example of this, we show the solution without retirement and so the life-cycle ends

at age 62. The same qualitative pictures are observed with retirement. Figure 11 shows consumption

as a function of assets in the period preceding the end of life, T −1, for workers and non-workers, and

for diﬀerent firm types, conditioning on individual productivity. The sharp decline in consumption

when working at a given firm in T − 1 arises at the asset stock which induces the individual not to

work in the next period, T. Because the individual is not working in period T , lifetime income is


                                                   46
lower and consumption falls in both periods. On the other hand, since leisure is higher in the next

period, overall welfare is higher: the value function is monotonically increasing in assets. The extent

of the fall depends on the degree to which consumption and leisure are substitutes. If we look at

the solution in earlier time periods or the solution with retirement included, these sharp drops are

smoothed out. This is partly because the fall in income associated with a change in employment

in one period in the future can be smoothed out over several periods. It is also partly because

uncertainty smooths the discreteness: a marginal increase in asset holdings in period t will only

change employment in t + 1 in particular states and so has less of an impact on consumption in

period t than if employment in t + 1 changed in all states.


B     Appendix: Deriving Moments for the Variance of Wages

In our preferred model, wages are given by



                                ln wit = dt + x0it ψ + uit + eit + aij(t0 )

where uit = uit−1 + ζ it is the permanent component, eit the measurement error, and aij(t0 ) is the

match eﬀect. Thus wage growth is



                           ∆ ln wit = ∆dt + ∆x0it ψ + ζ it + ∆eit + ξ it Mit
            ¡                 ¢
where ξ it = aij(t) − aij(t0 ) denotes the change in the match eﬀect for those who switched employ-

ment. The latent indices associated to working and moving are:




                                           Pit∗      0
                                                  = zit γ + πit

                                          Mit∗       0
                                                  = kit θ + µit


for all t. Define workers in period t by (Pit = 1) ≡ (Pit∗ > 0) and similarly those who have changed

workplace since the previous year by (Mit = 1) ≡ (Mit∗ > 0).

    Wage growth is measured annually. However, all decisions by the individual are made quarterly

in the model. To make these two consistent we assume that the individual receives a wage shock each

quarter with 0.25 probability. Then when we observe a wage over a year we assume it is the result of


                                                    47
aggregating wages over the quarters that the individual worked in this firm. Thus the employment

Mills ratio we use is the average Mills ratio over the number of quarters the individual worked with

the firm he is currently observed. This eﬀectively assumes that the employment and wage shocks

are both independent over time.49 Denoting the number of quarters the individual worked by Q
                                                                                0
                                                                             φ(zi(q) γq )
and noting that the Mills ratio for a working quarter is λP
                                                          i(q) =
                                                                              
                                                                                0
                                                                                           (with φ and Φ being the
                                                                             Φ zi(q) γq

standard normal density and probability functions respectively), for annual wages the Mills ratio
                                                                1 PQ
                                                                                0
                                                                           φ(zit(q)  γq)
we use is the average of the quarterly Mills ratios, i.e. λP
                                                           it = Q   q=1 Φ z 0
                                                                                        . When computing
                                                                                     γ
                                                               ½                it(q) q
                                                                                         ¾
                                            0   P      1
                                                         PQ         0
                                                                 φ(zit(q) γq ) 0
higher order moments we also construct zit γλit = Q q=1           
                                                                    0
                                                                              zit(q) γ q . This procedure
                                                                           Φ zit(q) γ q

is not exact aggregation, but an approximation because the dependent variable is the log of the

average wage and the right hand side is a model for the average log wage (both within the year).

However, the approximation error is likely to be negligible for two reasons: first, it is proportional

to the diﬀerence between the arithmetic and geometric mean of wages within a year that depends

on the within year/within firm variance of wages, which is small. Second, any systematic error in

the levels is removed by taking the growth of wages and the remaining part will be absorbed by the

measurement error, leaving the estimate of the variance of the permanent eﬀect σζ unaﬀected.

    In all calculations the mobility equation is kept constant across quarters and measures the prob-

ability that an individual changes jobs between any two years, which is what we need to correct for

mobility selection.

    Conditioning on working in periods t and t − 1, we obtain:




     E (∆ ln wit |Pit = Pit−1 = 1) = E (∆ ln wit |Mit = 0, Pit = Pit−1 = 1) (1 − Pr (Mit = 1))

                                              +E (∆ ln wit |Mit = 1, Pit = Pit−1 = 1) Pr (Mit = 1)

                                         = ∆dt + ∆x0it ψ + Git


where

                Git = ρζπ σ ζ λP             P      0                   0               P        0
                               it + ρξπ σ ξ λit Φ (kit θ) + ρξµ σ ξ φ (kit θ) + ρξπ−1 σλit−1 Φ (kit θ)


    The ρls are correlation coeﬃcients between stochastic terms l and s. Thus, Git is a “selection
  49 We make this assumption for tractability: otherwise we would have to jointly condition on an eight dimensional

selection vector, i.e. the sequence of decisions to work in each quarter over two years. As we do it we still condition
on each of the employment outcomes but not on the joint event.



                                                          48
term” accounting for conditioning on multiple indices. The estimation of the equation above is

standard (Heckman 2-step method).

   The variances of the wage shocks are identified by the restrictions imposed on the moments of

residual wage growth git ≡ ζ it + ∆eit + ξ it Mit . Using formulae from Tallis (1961), the first moment

for job stayers and movers respectively is:




                                              eM + ρζπ σζ λP
 E (git |Pit = Pit−1 = 1, Mit = 0) = −ρζµ σ ζ λ                                                             (12)
                                               it          it

                                             ¡               ¢     ¡                 ¢ P
 E (git |Pit = Pit−1 = 1, Mit = 1) =          ρζµ σζ + ρξµ σξ λM                                       P
                                                               it + ρζπ σ ζ + ρξπ σ ξ λit + ρξπ−1 σ ξ λit−1
                                                                                                         (13)

                 0                        0
              φ(kit θ)                 φ(kit θ)
where λM                       eM =
       it =   Φ( 0 θ
                kit    )
                           and λit    1−Φ(kit
                                           0 θ
                                               )
                                                   . The parameters of the model are clearly not identified

from the first moments alone. Consider then the second moment for workers that either stay or

move:

                                                         Ã                                    !
            ¡ 2                           ¢                             0 γλP + ρ2 k0 θλ
                                                              1 − ρ2ζπ zit              eM
           E git |Pit = Pit−1 = 1, Mit = 0 = σ 2ζ                           it    ζµ it
                                                                                    M
                                                                                         it
                                                                                                  + 2σ 2e   (14)
                                                                     −2ρζπ ρζµ λP e
                                                                                  λ
                                                                                it it

and


                                                                                                          
                                                            0 γλP − 1 ρ2 z 0
                                               1 − 12 ρ2aπ zit                   γλ P
                                                                                         − 2ρ2
                                                                                                k 0
                                                                                                    θλ M
  ¡ 2                               ¢                           it   2  aπ  it−1    it−1     aµ  it    it
                                                                                                          
 E git |Pit = Pit−1    = 1, Mit = 1   = σ2ξ            +2ρaµ ρaπ λM     P               M P
                                                                    it λit − 2ρaµ ρaπ λit λit−1            
                                                                        2    P P
                                                                    −ρaπ λit λit−1
                                              Ã                                    !
                                                            0 γλP − ρ2 k 0 θλM
                                                 1 − ρ2ζπ zit
                                            2
                                        +σ ζ                    it     ζµ it
                                                                     M P
                                                                               it
                                                                                      + 2σ2e              (15)
                                                         +2ρζµ ρζπ λit λit

   Finally, we consider the first order autocovariance E (git git−1 |. ). At least in principle, we could

use information on those who work for three periods in a row and classify them on the basis of their

mobility decisions. In practice, there are too few observations in the relevant categories to be able to

get structural identification in this case. We thus assume Pr (Mt = 1, Mt−1 = 1) ≈ 0 and consider

only the restrictions on the unconditional autocovariance, namely



                                              E (git git−1 ) = −σ2e




                                                         49
                               Table 7: Summary Statistics, SIPP 1993 panel

                         Variable                                         Mean       Standard
                                                                                     deviation
                         Earnings                                        6755.03      5209.55
                         Typical weekly hours                             37.69        17.09
                         Employed                                          0.87         0.33
                         Age                                              40.19         9.91
                         White                                             0.88         0.32
                         Married                                           0.71         0.45
                         Unearned income (net of transfers)              1037.62      2205.08
                         High education                                    0.55         0.50
                         Public sector                                     0.07         0.26
                         Northeast                                         0.21         0.41
                         North Central                                     0.27         0.45
                         South                                             0.26         0.44

              Note: The table report quarterly averages. Earnings and unearned income are converted
              in real terms using the CPI (CPI=1 in 1992:10).



C      Appendix: Tables on Employment, Mobility, Calibration

D      The Alternative model

Consider a model in which the matching eﬀect follows a random walk over the life of a job:




        αij(t0 )t   = αij(t0 )t−1 + ω ij(t0 )t
                                                                                    t
                                                                                    X
                    =                αij(t )                 +                            ωij(t0 )s
                                     | {z 0}                                    s=t0 +1
                        initial “fixed” matching component                      |       {z       }
                                                                 cumulative shocks to the initial match component

    The notation is as follows: j (t0 ) indexes a job that started in period t0 . In the first year in a

new job (say t0 ), the match component is αij(t0 ) . In the second year, it’s αij(t0 ) + ω ij(t0 )t0 +1 , and

so forth.

    Assume wages are now given by:



                                    ln wit = dt + x0it ψ + fi + eit + αij(t0 )t

where fi is an individual time-invariant random eﬀect with variance σ2f (b) that varies by cohort b.

Define the growth residual as:



                                                         50
                            Table 8: The Employment Probit for each Quarter

                                      High school or less                                    College dropout or more
                           Q1           Q2         Q3              Q4                Q1           Q2         Q3        Q4
Age                      0.0129       0.0107     0.0140          0.0150            0.0167       0.0140     0.0140    0.0192
                         (0.0033)      (0.0033)     (0.0033)     (0.0031)         (0.0016)      (0.0016)   (0.0016)    (0.0016)
Age2 /100               −0.0227       −0.0205      −0.0243      −0.0252          −0.0219        −0.0188    −0.0188    −0.0252
                         (0.0039)      (0.0039)     (0.0039)     (0.0036)         (0.0020)      (0.0019)   (0.0019)    (0.0019)
White                    0.1207        0.1153       0.1082       0.1040            0.0557       0.0652     0.0600      0.0596
                         (0.0137)      (0.0135)     (0.0134)     (0.0125)         (0.0097)      (0.0099)   (0.0097)    (0.0093)
Married                  0.1410        0.1571       0.1555       0.1505            0.0579       0.0592     0.0569      0.0695
                         (0.0103)      (0.0103)     (0.0103)     (0.0095)         (0.0067)      (0.0064)   (0.0064)    (0.0064)
Region dummies            28.51        34.68         34.57          38.93          11.29         12.87      7.35        11.83
                          (3, 0%)      (3, 0%)      (3, 0%)         (3, 0%)        (3, 1%)      (3, 0%)    (3, 6%)     (3, 1%)
Year dummies               0.35         1.02          0.05           3.90           0.16         0.44       0.42        4.95
                         (2; 84%)     (2; 60%)      (2; 98%)     (2; 14%)         (2; 93%)      (2; 80%)   (2; 81%)    (2; 8%)
Unearned income         −0.0480       −0.0424      −0.0396      −0.0468          −0.0119        −0.0116    −0.0129    −0.0116
                         (0.0020)      (0.0019)     (0.0017)     (0.0020)         (0.0007)      (0.0007)   (0.0007)    (0.0007)
UI generosity           −0.0010       −0.0009      −0.0009      −0.0007            0.0001       −0.0002    −0.0001     0.0000
                         (0.0004)      (0.0004)     (0.0004)     (0.0004)         (0.0002)      (0.0002)   (0.0002)    (0.0002)


Note - The table reports marginal eﬀects. Asymptotic standard errors in parenthesis. For region and year dummies
we report the value of the χ2 statistics of joint significance and, in parenthesis, the degrees of freedom and the p-value
of the test.




                                       Table 9: The Mobility Equation

                                            High school or less        College dropout or more
                  Age                            −0.0128                       −0.0148
                                                   (0.0031)                          (0.0025)
                  Age2 /100                        0.0112                            0.0142
                                                   (0.0038)                          (0.0031)
                  White                           −0.0300                            0.0091
                                                   (0.0129)                          (0.0091)
                  Married                         −0.0096                           −0.0177
                                                   (0.0089)                          (0.0071)
                  Not-for-profit                  −0.0549                            0.0057
                                                   (0.0180)                          (0.0144)
                  Industry dummies                  81.20                            65.66
                                            (4 df; p-value χ2 0%)             (4 df; p-value χ2 0%)
                  Region dummies                    6.81                              2.35
                                            (3 df; p-value χ2 8%)             (3 df; p-value χ2 50%)
                  Year dummies                      35.65                            76.50
                                            (2 df; p-value χ2 0%)             (2 df; p-value χ2 0%)
                  Unearned income                  0.0027                            0.0016
                                                   (0.0006)                          (0.0004)
                  UI generosity                    0.0008                           −0.0001
                                                   (0.0004)                          (0.0003)


Note - The table reports marginal eﬀects. Asymptotic standard errors in parenthesis. For region and year dummies
we report the value of the χ2 statistics of joint significance and, in parenthesis, the degrees of freedom and the p-value
of the test.




                                                         51
                               Table 10: Observed and Matched Moments

                  Statistic                Age        High Education        Low Education
                                                      Data   Model          Data Model
                                           22 − 31    0.97    0.95          0.91   0.91
                                           32 − 41    0.95    0.94          0.89   0.89
                  Employment Rate          42 − 51    0.92    0.92          0.82   0.84
                                           52 − 61    0.73    0.79          0.56   0.65

                                           22 − 26     1.65       1.65       1.88      1.93
                                           27 − 31     2.08       2.11       2.38      2.38
                                           32 − 36     1.93       2.30       3.03      2.62
                  Mean Duration            37 − 41     2.47       2.34       2.60      2.90
                                           42 − 46     2.84       2.78       3.51      3.51
                                           47 − 51     5.41       5.96       4.18      8.08
                                           52 − 56     7.45       6.49       8.40      7.21
                                           57 − 61     5.50       4.09       4.86      4.05




                 Table 11: Comparative Statics: Varying the job destruction rate δ
        δ             π     Output     σy       Mean           Mean            Median (∆A/y)                             Age
                                              Duration        ∆ ln ct                                                   at max
                                                47-52     25-44 45-62 25-35 36-50         51-62

High Education
      0.01           0.056       0.111     0.233         8.5        0.030     0.014      0.14     0.24       0.09        62
    0.028             0.0         0.0      0.332         6.0        0.029     0.013     0.14      0.25      0.076        62
     0.049           -0.049     -0.087     0.399         5.0        0.028     0.012      0.10     0.24      0.066        62
      0.07           -0.090     -0.153     0.448         4.4        0.027     0.012     0.071     0.24      0.058        62

Low Education
     0.01            0.099       0.254     0.240         13.5       0.019     0.011      0.18     0.21      0.037        59
    0.028            0.043       0.099     0.345          9.7       0.018     0.011      0.18     0.20      0.012        58
    0.049             0.0         0.0      0.420         8.1        0.017     0.010      0.10     0.17     -0.010        57
     0.07            -0.038     -0.085     0.473          7.2       0.016     0.010      0.08     0.15      -0.025       57

Note: For the columns concerning the amount of assets, the denominator is average realized earnings (net of the fixed
cost of work) in the education-specific baseline. Duration is measured in quarters. The baseline case is in bold.




                                                       52
 Table 12: Comparative Statics: Varying the standard deviation of the match specific eﬀect σα

       σα               π      Output        σy        Mean             Mean                Median (∆A/y)                Age
                                                      Duration          ∆ ln ct                                         at max
                                                       47-52        25-44 45-62         25-35     36-50     51-62

High Education
     0.11            -0.185     -0.185     0.274         7.8        0.025     0.013      0.10     0.22      0.065        61
     0.22             0.0         0.0      0.332         6.0        0.029     0.013      0.14     0.25      0.076        62
     0.33            0.130       0.180     0.363         5.6        0.032     0.012      0.19     0.26      0.086        62

Low Education
    0.11             -0.149     -0.170     0.359         10.1       0.014     0.010      0.12     0.16      -0.019       56
    0.22               0.0        0.0      0.420         8.1        0.017     0.010     0.10      0.17     -0.010        57
    0.33              0.124      0.184     0.455          7.1       0.020     0.010     0.067     0.20      -0.006       58

Note: For the columns concerning the amount of assets, the denominator is average realized earnings (net of the fixed
cost of work) in the education-specific baseline. Duration is measured in quarters. The baseline case is in bold.




       Table 13: Comparative Statics: Varying the job arrival rate for the Unemployed λn

       λn               π      Output        σy        Mean             Mean                Median (∆A/y)                Age
                                                      Duration          ∆ ln ct                                         at max
                                                       47-52        25-44 45-62         25-35     36-50     51-62

High Education
     0.96            0.005       0.003     0.331         6.0        0.029     0.013      0.14     0.25      0.078        62
     0.82             0.0         0.0      0.332         6.0        0.029     0.013      0.14     0.25      0.076        62
     0.76            -0.002     -0.002     0.331         6.0        0.029     0.013      0.14     0.25      0.075        62
     0.66            -0.006     -0.006     0.337         6.3        0.029     0.013      0.15     0.25      0.074        62

Low Education
    0.96             0.010       0.013     0.416         7.7        0.017     0.010      0.11     0.17      -0.001       58
    0.82             0.003       0.004     0.420         8.0        0.017     0.010      0.11     0.17      -0.005       58
    0.76              0.0         0.0      0.420         8.1        0.017     0.010      0.10     0.17     -0.010        57
    0.66             -0.006     -0.007     0.424         8.3        0.017     0.010      0.10     0.17      -0.016       57

Note: For the columns concerning the amount of assets, the denominator is average realized earnings (net of the fixed
cost of work) in the education-specific baseline. Duration is measured in quarters. The baseline case is in bold.




                                                       53
                                               git = ∆ (ln wit − dt − x0it ψ)

Then


                     "                           t−1
                                                               #
                         ¡                    ¢  X
           git   =        αij(t)t − αij(t0 )t0 −     ω ij(t0 )s Mit + ξ ij(t0 )t (1 − Mit ) + ∆eit
                                                        s=t0 +1
                     "             t−1
                                                    #
                                   X
                 =       ξ it −             ωij(t0 )s Mit + ξ ij(t0 )t (1 − Mit ) + ∆eit
                                  s=t0 +1
            ¡                    ¢
where ξ it = αij(t)t − αij(t0 )t0 is the innovation in the “initial" match component.
                                                                  0
   Assume as before that an individual moves (Mit = 1) if µit > −kit θ and works at time t if
        0
πit > −zit γ. Identification is based on the following assumption

                                                                 ½
                                        ¡              ¢              0      for s 6= t
                                       E ω ij(t0 )s πit =
                                                                      σ ωπ   for s = t

   and e is a pure measurement error term (no selection issues). The first moment of git conditional

on moving is:




            E (git |Mit = 1, Pit = 1, Pit−1 = 1) = σ ξ ρξµ λP             P             P
                                                            it + σ ξ ρξπ λit − σ ω ρωπ λit−1


                                                                       − (t − t0 − 1) σω ρωµ λM
                                                                                              it     (16)

                                        ¡              ¢
where we have made the assumption that E ω ij(t0 )s µit = σ ωµ for s ≤ t. The first moment of git

conditional on staying is



                                                                     eM
                     E (git |Mit = 0, Pit = 1, Pit−1 = 1) = −σ ω ρωµ λ              P
                                                                      it + σ ω ρωπ λit               (17)

   The second moment of git conditional on moving or staying is



  ¡ 2                              ¢      ³                                                  ´
 E git                                               0 γλP − ρ2 k 0 θλM + 2ρ ρ λM λP
       |Mit = 1, Pit = 1, Pit−1 = 1 = σ 2ξ 1 − ρ2ξπ zit  it   ξµ it   it       ξµ ξπ it it
                                            Ã                                                     !
                                                               P
                                          2   1 − ρ2ωπ zit−1
                                                         0                               0
                                                             γλit−1 − (t − t0 − 1) ρ2ωµ kit θλMit
                                      +σω
                                                             +2ρωµ ρωπ λM    P
                                                                         it λit−1
                                                        +2σ 2e                                       (18)


                                                                 54
and

                                                     Ã                                    !
          ¡ 2                              ¢                                       eM
                                                                   0 γλP + ρ2 k 0 θλ
                                                         1 − ρ2ωπ zit
         E git |Mit = 0, Pit = 1, Pit−1 = 1 = σ2ω                      it   ωµ it
                                                                               M
                                                                                    it
                                                                                              + 2σ 2e   (19)
                                                                          P
                                                              −2ρ ρ λit−1 λ  e
                                                                    ωπ ωµ         it

   Finally, we assume as before



                                          E (git git−1 |.) = −σ2e                                       (20)

   Notice that σ2f (b) (the variance of the individual random eﬀect) remains not identified from

growth terms alone. Identification must come from using levels. Conditional on working,


                                                     ¡                             ¢
                  E (ln wit |Pit = 1) = dt + x0it ψ + σ f(b) ρfπ + σα ρaπ + σ ω ρωπ λP
                                                                                     it


   Hence, we controlling for selection into work adding λP                           P
                                                         it0 and the interaction of λit0 with year of

birth dummies and with tenure, using only data on workers. Define next the residual in levels


                            εit = (ln wit − dt − x0it ψ) = fi + αij(t0 )t + eit


   >From here, σ 2f (b) can be identified from using the two restrictions:



                    ¡                               ¢
  E (εit |Pit = 1) = σf (b) ρf π + σ α ραπ + σω ρωπ λPit                                  (21)
   ¡             ¢         ³                  ´     ³              ´    ³               ´
                                       0 γλP + σ 2 1 − ρ2 z 0 γλP + σ 2 1 − ρ2 z 0 γλP + 2σ
  E ε2it |Pit = 1 = σ2f (b) 1 − ρ2f π zit                                                   2
                                                                                          (22)
                                           it     α      απ it  it    ω      ωπ it   it     e



   As before, these moments depend partly on some of the parameters characterizing unexplained

wage growth. We follow a two-step strategy. We first estimate σ e , σω , σα , ρξπ using the restrictions

on unexplained wage growth (16)-(20). We then use (21) and (22) to estimate σ f(b) separately for

each cohort.

D.0.1    Estimates of Wage Variances in the Alternative Model

The expressions above make clear that one needs data on tenure (t − t0 ) to identify the parameters

of interest in the alternative model. The first SIPP interview contains a special module collecting

labor market data, including information on tenure with the current employer. We then update

tenure over subsequent interviews using information on firm mobility.


                                                    55
                        Table 14: Standard deviations for the alternative model

                                 Parameter       Estimate     Standard error
                                 σω               0.099           0.038
                                 σe               0.084           0.021
                                 σa                0.20           0.013
                                 σf (b)            0.34           0.008

 Note - σ f is the mean over all cohorts. The standard error of σ f is computed under the assumption of independence
 of the σf (b) . Standard errors are not corrected.



   Using a similar estimation procedure with all the suitable corrections for selection for job mobility

and employment, we produce estimates for the key parameters, shown in Table 14 just for the low

education group for simplicity. Thus σ ω is the standard deviation of the permanent shock to the

match specific eﬀect (ω ij(t0 )t ), σe is the standard deviation of the measurement error (eit ), σ a is the

standard deviation of the initial value of the match specific eﬀect (aij(t0 ) ) and σ f is the standard

deviation of individual heterogeneity (fi ). The estimated standard deviation of the innovation

is similar to what we obtain in our preferred model. However, we need a much higher level of

heterogeneity upfront than we do in our model so as to match the cross sectional variance of wages.

As we discuss in the main text, this implies a much higher variance of wages for the young and a

far too low variance for older individuals.




                                                       56
References

 [1] Abowd, J. and D. Card (1989), “On the covariance structure of earnings and hours changes”,

    Econometrica 57, 411-45.

 [2] Abowd, J.M., Kramarz, F. and D.N. Margolis (1999) “High Wage Workers and High Wage

    Firms” Econometrica, 67(2), 251-333.

 [3] Abowd, J.M. and M. H. Stinson (2005) “Estimating Measurement Error in SIPP Annual Job

    Earnings: A Comparison of Census Survey and SSA Administrative Data” Cornell University,

    mimeo.

 [4] Altonji, J. G. and N. Williams (2005) “Do wages rise with job seniority? A reassessment,”

    Industrial and Labor Relations Review, ILR Review, ILR School, Cornell University, vol. 58(3),

    pages 370-397, April.

 [5] Attanasio, O., J. Banks, C. Meghir, and G. Weber (1999), “Humps and Bumps in Lifetime

    Consumption”, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 17(1), 22-35.

 [6] Attanasio, O. and Davis, S. (1996) “Relative wage movements and the distribution of consump-

    tion” Journal of Political Economy 104: 1227-1262

 [7] Attanasio, O., and G. Weber (1995), “Is Consumption Growth Consistent with Intertemporal

    Optimization? Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure Survey”, Journal of Political Econ-

    omy, 103(6), 1121-57.

 [8] Baker, M. (1997), “Growth-rate Heterogeneity and the Covariance Structure of Life-Cycle Earn-

    ings”, Journal of Labor Economics, 15, 338-375.

 [9] Blundell, R., M. Browning and C. Meghir, (1994), “Consumer Demand and the Life-Cycle

    Allocation of Household Expenditures.” Review of Economic Studies, 61:57-80

[10] Banks, J., R. Blundell, and A. Brugiavini (2001), “Risk pooling, precautionary saving and

    consumption growth”, Review of Economic Studies.

[11] Blundell, R., and I. Preston (1998), “Consumption inequality and income uncertainty”, Quar-

    terly Journal of Economics 113, 603-640.

                                               57
[12] Borjas, G.J. and S. Rosen (1980) “Income prospects and job mobility of younger men,” in R.

    Ehrenberg (ed.), Research in Labor Markets, Vol.3. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 159-18I.

[13] Bound, J., J. Cullen, A. Nichols, L. G. Schmidt (2004), “The Welfare Implications of Increasing

    Disability Insurance Benefit Generosity”, Journal of Public Economics, 88 (12): 2487-2514.

[14] Brown, J.N. and A. Light (1992), “Interpreting Panel Data on Job Tenure”, Journal of Labor

    Economics, 10(3), 219-257.

[15] Browning, M. and T. Crossley (2001) ”Unemployment Benefit Levels and Consumption

    Changes” Journal of Public Economics, 80(1), 1-23

[16] Carroll, C. (1992), “The Buﬀer-Stock Theory of Saving: Some Macroeconomic Evidence”,

    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1992(2), 61-156.

[17] Carroll C., and A. Samwick (1997), “The Nature of Precautionary Wealth”, Journal of Monetary

    Economics 40.

[18] Cochrane, J. H. (1991) “A Simple Test of Consumption Insurance” The Journal of Political

    Economy, Vol. 99, No. 5 (Oct., 1991), pp. 957-97

[19] Costain, J. (1997), ”Unemployment Insurance with Endogenous Search Intensity and Precau-

    tionary Saving”, mimeo.

[20] Cuhna, F., J. J. Heckman and S. Navarro (2005) Separating Uncertainty from Heterogeneity in

    Life Cycle Earnings,” NBER Working Papers 11024

[21] Danforth, J. P. (1979) “On the Role of Consumption and Decreasing Absolute Risk Aversion

    in the Theory of Job Search” in: Studies in the Economics of Search, ed. by S. A. Lippman,

    and J. J. McCall, pp. 109-131. North-Holland, New York.

[22] Deaton, A. (1991) “Saving and liquidity constraints” Econometrica 59(5), 1121-1142

[23] Deaton, A. and C. Paxson (1994) “Intertemporal Choice and Inequality” Journal of Political

    Economy, University of Chicago Press, vol. 102(3), pages 437-67, June.

[24] Domeij, D. and M. Floden (2006) “The labor supply elasticity and borrowing constraints: why

    estimates are biased” Review of Economic Dynamics 9(2):242-262.

                                                58
[25] Farber H. and R. Gibbons (1996) “Learning and Wage Dynamics.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-

    nomics, 111(4): 1007-1047

[26] Flinn, C. and J. Heckman (1983), “Are Unemployment and Out of the Labor Force Behaviorally

    Distinct Labor Force States?”, Journal of Labor Economics, 1(1), 28-42.

[27] French, E., (2005) “The eﬀects of health, wealth and wages on labour supply and retirement

    behavior” Review of Economic Studies 72(2): 395-427

[28] Gourinchas, P., and J. Parker (2002), “Consumption over the Life-Cycle”, Econometrica 70(1):

    47-89

[29] Gruber, J. (1997), “The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance”, The

    American Economic Review, Vol. 87(1),192-205.

[30] Guvenen, F. (2007), “Learning Your Earning: Are Labor Income Shocks Really Very Persis-

    tent?”, American Economic Review, 97(3), pp. 687-712.

[31] Guvenen, F. (2008), “An Empirical Investigation of Labor Income Processes", Review of Eco-

    nomic Dynamics (fortcoming).

[32] Guvenen, F. and T. Smith (2008), “Inferring Labor Income Risk from Economic Choices: An

    Indirect Inference Approach”, mimeo.

[33] Haider, S. and G. Solon (2006) “Life-cycle variation in the association between current and

    lifetime earnings” American Economic Review 96(4): 1308-1320.

[34] Hansen, G. and A. Imrohoroglu (1992) “The role of unemployment insurance in an economy

    with liquidity constraints and moral hazard” Journal of Political Economy 100(1):118-142

[35] Harris, M and B. Holmstrom (1982), “A Theory of Wage Dynamics", The Review of Economic

    Studies, Vol. 49, No. 3, pp. 315-333

[36] Heathcote, J., Storesletten, K. and G.Violante (2007) “Consumption and labor supply with

    partial insurance: an analytical framework” University of Oslo, mimeo




                                               59
[37] Heckman, J. J. (1974): “Life-cycle Consumption and Labour Supply: An Explanation of the

    Relationship Between Income and Consumption over the Life-Cycle,” American Economic Re-

    view, 64, 188-194.

[38] Horowitz, J. (2002) “Bootstrap Methods for Markov Processes,” Econometrica 71: 1049-1082.

[39] Hubbard, R.G., J. Skinner, and S. Zeldes (1995), “Precautionary Saving and Social Insurance,”

    Journal of Political Economy, 103(2), pages 360-99.

[40] Jacobson, L. S., LaLonde, R. J. and Sullivan, D.G. (1993) “Earnings Losses of Displaced Work-

    ers.” The American Economic Review, 83(4), pp. 685-709.

[41] Krusell, Per L., Mukoyama, Toshihiko, Rogerson, Richard and Aysegul Sahin (2008) “Aggregate

    Implications of Indivisible Labor, Incomplete Markets, and Labor Market Frictions”. NBER

    Working Paper No. W13871

[42] Lentz, R. (2003) “Optimal Unemployment Insurance in an Estimated Job Search Model with

    Savings” Boston University, mimeo

[43] Lentz, R. and T. Tranaes (2005), “Job Search and Savings: Wealth Eﬀects and Duration

    Dependence”, Journal of Labor Economics, 23(3), 467-490.

[44] Lise, Jeremy, Costas Meghir and Jean Marc Robin (2009) “Matching, Sorting and Wages”,

    UCL mimeo.

[45] Ljungqvist, L. and T. Sargent (1998), “The European Unemployment Dilemma”, The Journal

    of Political Economy, 106(3), 514-550.

[46] Low, H. (2005) “Self-insurance and unemployment benefit in a life-cycle model of labor supply

    and savings”, Review of Economic Dynamics 8(4): 945-975.

[47] Low, Hamish and Luigi Pistaferri (2009) Disability Risk, Disability Insurance and Life Cycle

    Behavior, Stanford mimeo.

[48] Lucas, R.E. (1987) “Models of Business Cycles”, Basil Blackwell, New York

[49] MaCurdy, T. (1982) “The Use of Time Series Processes to Model the Error Structure of Earnings

    in a Longitudinal Data Analysis” Journal of Econometrics 18(1): 83-114.

                                               60
[50] MaCurdy, T., Green, D. & Paarsch, H. (1990), “Assessing Empirical Approaches for Analyzing

    Taxes 53 and Labor Supply”, The Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 25, No. 3, pp 415 – 490

[51] MaCurdy, T. and T. Mroz (1995). “Measuring Macroeconomic Shifts in Wages from Cohort

    Specifications". Technical report, Stanford University.

[52] Manski, C. (2004), ”Measuring Expectations,” Econometrica, Econometric Society, vol. 72(5),

    pages 1329-1376.

[53] Meghir, C. and D. Phillips (2008), “Labour Supply and Taxes”, Prepared for the Report of a

    Commission on Reforming the Tax System for the 21st Century, Chaired by Sir James Mirrlees,

    forthcoming Oxford University Press.

[54] Meghir, C. and L. Pistaferri (2004) “Income variance dynamics and heterogeneity ” Economet-

    rica.

[55] Meyer, B. (2002) “Unemployment and workers’ compensation programs: rationale, design,

    labour supply and income support” Fiscal Studies 23: 1-49

[56] Moﬃtt, R. (1989), “Estimating the value of an in-kind transfer: The case of Food Stamps”,

    Econometrica 57: 385-409

[57] Moﬃtt, R. and P. Gottschalk (1995), “Trends in the Covariance Structure of Earnings in the

    U.S.: 1969-1987”, unpublished.

[58] Pencavel, J. (2002), “A Cohort Analysis of the Association between Work Hours and Wages

    among Men”,The Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 37, No. 2, pp 251 – 274

[59] Pijoan-Mas, J. (2006) “Precautionary savings or working longer hours” Review of Economic

    Dynamics 9(2):326-352

[60] Pissarides, Christopher (2000) Equilibrium Unemployment Theory, MIT Press, Cambridge,

    USA

[61] Pistaferri, L. (2001), “Superior information, income shocks, and the permanent income hypoth-

    esis”, Review of Economics and Statistics.



                                                 61
[62] Pistaferri, L. (2003), “Anticipated and unanticipated wage shocks, wage risk, and intertemporal

    labor supply”, Journal of Labor Economics.

[63] Postel-Vinay, F., J.-M. Robin (2002) “Equilibrium Wage Dispersion with Heterogeneous Work-

    ers and Firms” Econometrica, 70: 2295-1350

[64] Rendon, S. (2006), “Job Search and Asset Accumulation under Borrowing Constraints”, Inter-

    national Economic Review, 47(1), 233-263.

[65] Rogerson, R. and M. Schindler (2002) “The welfare costs of worker displacement” Journal of

    Monetary Economics, vol. 49(6), pages 1213-1234.

[66] Stinson, M.H. (2003), “Technical Description of SIPP Job Identification Number Editing in the

    1990-1993 SIPP Panels", U.S. Census Bureau, mimeo.

[67] Storesletten, K., Telmer, C., and A. Yaron (2001) “The welfare cost of business cycles revisited:

    Finite lives and cyclical variation in idiosyncratic risk” European Economic Review 45, 1311-

    1339

[68] Tallis G.M. (1961), “The Moment Generating Function of the Truncated Multi-normal Distri-

    bution”, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), 23(1), 223-229.

[69] Topel, Robert H. (1984) “Equilibrium Earnings, Turnover, and Unemployment: New Evidence

    Equilibrium Earnings, Turnover, and Unemployment: New Evidence” Journal of Labor Eco-

    nomics, Vol. 2, No. 4, pp. 500-522

[70] Topel, Robert H. (1991) “Specific Capital, Mobility, and Wages: Wages Rise with Job Seniority”

    Journal of Political Economy, 99(1): 145-176

[71] Topel, Robert H, and Michael P. Ward (1992) “Job Mobility and the Careers of Young Men”

    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(2): 439-79.

[72] Zeldes, Stephen P., (1989). “Optimal Consumption with Stochastic Income: Deviations from

    Certainty Equivalence,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 104(2), pages 275-98.




                                                 62
