                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               FINANCE AND DEVELOPMENT:
                                 A TALE OF TWO SECTORS

                                        Francisco J. Buera
                                         Joseph Kaboski
                                         Yongseok Shin

                                       Working Paper 14914
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14914


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2009




Buera and Shin gratefully acknowledge the support of the National Science Foundation under grant
number SES-0820318. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Francisco J. Buera, Joseph Kaboski, and Yongseok Shin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Finance and Development: A Tale of Two Sectors
Francisco J. Buera, Joseph Kaboski, and Yongseok Shin
NBER Working Paper No. 14914
April 2009
JEL No. E44,O11,O16,O41

                                               ABSTRACT

Income differences across countries primarily reflect differences in total factor productivity (TFP).
More disaggregated data show that the TFP gap between rich and poor countries varies systematically
across industrial sectors of the economy: Poor countries are particularly unproductive in tradable and
investment goods sectors. In this paper, we develop a quantitatively-oriented framework to explain
such cross-country patterns in aggregate and sectoral TFP. We start by documenting that an important
distinction between sectors is their average establishment size. For example, establishments in tradable
and investment goods sectors operate at much larger scales than those in the non-tradable sector. In
our model, sectors with larger scales of operation have more financing needs, and are hence disproportionately
affected by financial frictions. Our quantitative exercises show that financial frictions account for a
substantial part of the observed cross-country patterns in TFP, both at the aggregate and at the sectoral
level. Our model also has novel implications for the impact of financial frictions on the relative scale
between the tradable and the non-tradable sectors, which are shown to be consistent with the data.


Francisco J. Buera                                    Yongseok Shin
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles                 Washington University in St. Louis
8283 Bunche Hall Office 8357                          1 Brookings Dr
Mail Stop: 147703                                     Saint Louis, MO 63130
Los Angeles, CA 90095                                 yshin@wustl.edu
and NBER
fjbuera@econ.ucla.edu

Joseph Kaboski
Department of Economics
Ohio State University
415 Arps Hall
1945 N. High Street
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
kaboski.1@osu.edu
1       Introduction
Income per capita differences across countries are primarily accounted for by low total factor
productivity (TFP) in poor countries (Klenow and Rodrı́guez-Clare, 1997; Hall and Jones,
1999). More disaggregated data show that the TFP gap between rich and poor countries
varies systematically across industrial sectors of the economy. For instance, poor coun-
tries are particularly unproductive in producing tradables and investment goods (Hsieh and
Klenow, 2007b).1 In this paper, we first document that an important distinction between
sectors is their average establishment size: Establishments in tradable and investment goods
sectors are on average much larger than those in the non-tradable sector. Our premise is that
such scale differences reflect sectoral differences in the technology used by their production
units. We propose and quantify a theory of aggregate and sectoral TFP based on cross-sector
differences in the optimal scale of establishments and cross-country differences in financial
development.
    Financial frictions affect productivity of sectors by distorting the allocation of capi-
tal among heterogeneous establishments and also their entry and exit decisions. In our
model, consistent with the data, those sectors in which poor countries are particularly
unproductive—e.g. investment goods and tradable goods sectors—differ from others in that
their establishments operate most efficiently at larger scales. Larger scales come with more
financing needs, rendering the large-scale sector disproportionately more vulnerable to finan-
cial frictions. In the large-scale sector, it takes longer for a talented-but-poor entrepreneur
to self-finance the capital needed for operating at a profit-maximizing scale. The selection
of entrepreneurs into the large-scale sector is also based more on individuals’ wealth (or self-
financing capability) and less on their entrepreneurial talent. These effects explain why, for
example, tradable and investment goods sectors (i.e. large-scale sectors) are particularly un-
productive relative to non-tradable and consumption goods sectors (i.e. small-scale sectors)
in countries with underdeveloped financial markets.
    More specifically, we study an economy with two sectors that differ in their per-period
fixed costs required of running an establishment. Differences in fixed costs lead to differences
in the optimal scale of establishments. In the model, individuals choose in each period
whether to operate an establishment—become an entrepreneur—or to supply labor for a
wage. Individuals differ in their productivity as an entrepreneur and in their wealth, with the
latter being endogenously determined by forward-looking saving decisions. The productivity
of entrepreneurs evolves stochastically, generating the need to reallocate factors of production
from previously-productive to currently-productive entrepreneurs.
    Financial frictions hinder this reallocation process. We model financial frictions in the
    1
    Balassa (1964) and Samuelson (1964) are the classic citations for tradables and non-tradables. Jones
(1994), Eaton and Kortum (2001), and Herrendorf and Valentinyi (2006) are more recent contributions.


                                                   1
form of collateral constraints on capital rental, which ultimately arise from imperfect en-
forceability of contracts. In an economy with perfect credit markets, sectoral and occupa-
tional choices are based on comparative advantage: The most talented individuals become
entrepreneurs and the allocation of capital equalizes marginal products of capital across
sectors and establishments. With financial frictions in the form of collateral constraints,
entrepreneurs’ production and individuals’ occupational decisions are constrained by their
available wealth. This leads to distortions along three margins that lower sectoral and ag-
gregate TFP. First, for a given set of heterogeneous production units in operation, financial
frictions distort the allocation of capital among them (misallocation of capital). Second, for
a given number of production units in operation, financial frictions distort the allocation of
talents into entrepreneurship and into sectors, with talented-but-poor individuals delaying
their entry and incompetent-but-rich entrepreneurs remaining in business for longer (misal-
location of talent). Third, financial frictions distort the number of production units for a
given distribution of entrepreneurial talent in an economy.
    We use our model to provide a quantitative analysis of the cross-country pattern in aggre-
gate and sectoral TFP. We discipline the analysis by requiring that a benchmark model with
well-functioning financial markets matches US data on the establishment size distribution
across and within sectors (e.g., average scale and thick right-tails of broadly-defined sectors),
the dynamics of establishments, and income concentration. We then employ data on the use
of external financing to calibrate the variation in financial development across countries and
quantify its effect. Finally, we use cross-country data on the establishment size distribution
across sectors as over-identifying restrictions and test additional implications of our model.
    We find that financial frictions have sizable effects on per-capita income, aggregate TFP
and sectoral TFP.
    The variation in financial development can explain a factor-of-two difference in per-capita
income across countries, or almost 80 per cent of the difference in per-capita income between
Mexico and the US. One thing to note is that the agricultural sector is not modeled or
analyzed here. This factor-of-two difference goes a long way in explaining the factor-of-five
difference in non-agricultural per-capita income between the richest fifth percentile and the
poorest fifth percentile of countries. Consistent with the consensus view in the literature,
most of per-capita income differences in our model are accounted for by lower TFP in less
developed economies. For example, our model predicts that a country ranking in the bottom
third of the world in terms of financial development will have TFP at least 40 per cent below
that of the US.
    Financial frictions generate particularly low TFP in sectors with large scales of operation,
e.g. the tradable and investment goods sectors. While TFP declines by up to 30 per cent in
the small-scale sector, TFP in the large-scale sector declines by more than 50 per cent. These


                                               2
differential effects on productivity lead to a large impact on relative prices, with a higher
relative price of goods produced with large-scale technologies in financially-underdeveloped
economies. For instance, the model accounts for almost all (95 per cent) of the observed
elasticity of the relative price of tradables to non-tradables with respect to per-capita income
(the Balassa-Samuelson effect).
    Our quantitative analysis provides a clear decomposition of the main margins distorted
by financial frictions. While there is a significant role for the misallocation of capital in
explaining the absolute differences in TFP across countries, the misallocation of talent into
entrepreneurship and into sectors has a prominent role in explaining the particularly large
differences in the TFP of the large-scale sector. Whereas the misallocation of capital explains
90 per cent of the lower TFP in the small-scale sector, it only explains half of the TFP
differences in the large-scale sector. It is the misallocation of talent that accounts for the
other half of the TFP differences in the large-scale sector. The distortion on the number of
entrepreneurs per se has only minor impact on productivity in either sector.
    Our theory is built on two premises: cross-country differences in financial development
and cross-sector differences in the optimal scale of establishments. Both of these underlying
premises have strong empirical support.
    The first premise, cross-country differences in financial development—underdevelopment
in poor countries in particular, has been well established in the literature. King and Levine
(1993a) and Beck et al. (2000) show that aggregate measures of credit and financial devel-
opment are closely correlated with output per capita across countries, while La Porta et al.
(1998) document that these macro indicators are strongly related to underlying institutional
differences such as the enforcement of contracts, creditor protection, and so on. Banerjee and
Duflo (2005) review the literature documenting micro-level evidence for credit constraints
in poor countries and for the resulting misallocation of capital. In his detailed analysis of
Thailand, Townsend (2006) links observed misallocation to micro-level credit constraints and
shows how their relaxation through financial development leads to faster economic growth.
    One empirical contribution of our paper is to establish the second premise: cross-sector
differences in scale, defined as workers per establishment. Using detailed sector-level data
from the OECD countries (the US in particular), we document that the average size of
establishments varies substantially across broadly-defined sectors. For example, the average
establishment in the tradable sector is three times as large as that in the non-tradable
sector. This sectoral difference in establishment size is robustly observed in a wide range
of countries. Furthermore, using price data from a cross-section of countries, we show that,
at a more disaggregate level, poor countries are particularly unproductive in industries with
larger scales.
    In our model, financial frictions have differential impacts on sectors with different scales


                                               3
because our notion of scale (establishment size) translates directly into financing needs. The
most widely-used empirical metric of financing needs is “external dependence” constructed
by Rajan and Zingales (1998). We compute the external dependence for broadly-defined
sectors in the US, and find that sectors with larger scales (manufactured consumption and
equipment investment, which compose the tradable sector) also have larger external depen-
dence, providing additional support for our mechanism.
    Our mechanism for differential impact of financial frictions across sectors produces a
novel and testable implication on the relative scale of sectors in an economy with financial
frictions. Financial frictions, together with the resulting higher relative price of the large-
scale sector output and lower wages in the equilibrium, lead to too many entrepreneurs with
too small establishments in the sector with small fixed costs, and too few entrepreneurs
with too large establishments in the sector with large fixed costs. Using OECD data on
11 countries in different stages of economic development, we show that the relative size
of establishments/enterprises in the large-scale, tradable sector to those in the small-scale,
non-tradable sector is indeed larger in less developed economies, consistent with our model
prediction. We supplement this evidence with a detailed case study of the US and Mexico,
using data on absolute scale from their respective Economic Census data (based on the com-
mon, and hence comparable, North American Industrial Classification System) and a survey
of small businesses in Mexico (which provides data on small-scale, mobile, and informal en-
trepreneurs). We find empirical support for our model prediction on how financial frictions
have differential impacts on the absolute scale of different sectors. Average scale in Mexico
is substantially smaller overall, but within the tradable sector, industries with large-scale
establishments in the US tend to have even larger establishments in Mexico. To the best of
our knowledge, these empirical findings at the sector level have not been documented in the
literature.2

Related Literature This paper contributes to a vast literature relating financial frictions
and entrepreneurship to development, including theoretical contributions by: Banerjee and
Newman (1993), King and Levine (1993b), Aghion and Bolton (1997), Piketty (1997), and
Lloyd-Ellis and Bernhardt (2000); and relatively fewer quantitatively-oriented macro studies
by: Giné and Townsend (2004), Amaral and Quintin (2005), Caselli and Gennaioli (2005),
Jeong and Townsend (2007), and Buera and Shin (2008).3
   This paper is more closely related and complementary to two others in the literature
   2
     Our findings do conform to the conventional wisdom of a “missing middle” in poor countries (Tybout,
2000).
   3
     This paper builds on Buera and Shin (2008) by extending their analysis to a multi-sector environment
with fixed-cost technologies. The effects of financial frictions on per-capita income are two-thirds larger in
an economy with fixed-cost technologies relative to the environment in Buera and Shin that abstracts from
sectoral differences in fixed costs and scale.


                                                      4
that emphasize the differential effects of financial frictions on different industries. Rajan and
Zingales (1998), an empirical paper, creates an index of dependence on external sources
of financing for various manufacturing industries, and tests whether industries that are
particularly dependent on financing grow relatively faster in countries with more developed
financial markets. We reconstruct their measure of industry-specific financial dependence
for our analysis, and show that our measure of sectoral scale (workers per establishment) is
closely related to external dependence. For instance, the tradable sector not only has a larger
scale than the non-tradable sector, but also has a higher external dependence.4 Note that
we study the impact of financial frictions on the level of sectoral productivity rather than
their impact on the growth rate of sectoral output. Erosa and Hidalgo Cabrillana (2008)
is a theoretical paper showing how financial frictions can have differential effects on the
productivity of manufacturing industries with different fixed-cost requirements. Our paper
differs from these two papers in three ways. First, our analysis explicitly combines data and
theory to quantify the effect of financial development on sectoral productivity. Second, we
introduce scale as an empirical measure related to fixed costs and financing needs. Finally, we
broaden the analysis to encompass both tradable (large-scale) and non-tradable (small-scale)
sectors.
    A literature in international trade provides theoretical analyses and empirical evidence
for how financial frictions may affect the comparative advantage of countries. Theoretical
contributions include Kletzer and Bardhan (1987), Matsuyama (2005), Wynne (2005) and
Manova (2008b). Beck (2002) and Manova (2008a), among others, show empirically that
financially-underdeveloped countries tend to specialize in sectors that are not financially
dependent. We complement this literature by developing a quantitatively-oriented dynamic
model that can potentially be used to assess the role of financial development on the pattern
of trade.
    Finally, we add to the broader literature on the role of micro-level distortions (Hsieh and
Klenow, 2007a; Guner et al., 2008; Restuccia and Rogerson, 2008). Our results complement
the empirical findings of Hsieh and Klenow (2007a) in particular. They find a factor-of-
two difference in manufacturing TFP due to the misallocation of capital and labor. We
explicitly model one source of such misallocation (financial frictions), and include the non-
tradable sector in our analysis. Furthermore, we explore how distortions affect the entry and
exit decisions of establishments.
    The next section documents the key facts that motivate our analysis. Section 3 develops
the model, and characterizes the perfect-credit benchmark. Section 4 presents the quanti-
tative experiments and evaluates the model implications on sectoral scales using detailed
   4
    A strand of the empirical literature has examined the independent effects of scale and financing needs
(Beck et al., 2008).



                                                    5
sectoral data from the US, Mexico and other OECD countries. Section 5 concludes.


2       Facts
This section documents the key empirical facts motivating our study. First, we revisit a
well-known case of sectoral productivity differences across countries, the Balassa-Samuelson
effect—the positive relationship between relative productivity in tradable goods and output
per worker. We also show that a similar relationship holds between relative productivity
and financial development. Second, we point out that there are large differences in scale of
operation among broadly-defined sectors, e.g. tradable vs. non-tradable sectors. We empha-
size this sectoral difference in scale, rather than tradability of goods per se, in interpreting
the relative productivity of sectors. We further show that this relationship between relative
productivity and scales of operation holds at a more disaggregated level as well: Goods
that are produced with large-scale technologies in developed countries tend to be relatively
more expensive in developing economies, reflecting their low relative productivity in these
industries.

Relative Productivity and Development The first example of cross-country differ-
ences in relative productivity of sectors was documented by Balassa (1964) and Samuelson
(1964). The Balassa-Samuelson fact is that in poor countries the prices of tradable goods
are high relative to those of non-tradable goods. Figure 1 confirms this fact using the 1996
ICP benchmark by plotting the relative price of tradables against output per worker from
the Penn World Tables 6.2.5 Here the relative price is compiled by creating Geary-Khamis
aggregated prices for the tradable and the non-tradable sectors using 27 disaggregated prod-
uct categories.6 The log relative prices (tradables to non-tradables) have a strong negative
relationship with the log of output per worker across countries. The slope coefficient of -0.37
is highly significant with a standard error of 0.04, and the regression has an R2 of 0.42.
    This relationship can be interpreted as reflecting a lower total factor productivity of trad-
ables relative to non-tradables in poor countries. Indeed, in models with constant-returns-
to-scale aggregate production functions and equal factor shares across sectors, relative prices
    5
      ICP stands for the International Comparison Programme of the United Nations. There are 115 ICP
benchmark countries in 1996. For the sake of maintaining a consistent sample, we present results based on
the 102 countries for which Beck et al. (2000) constructed data on financial development. The results using
all 115 countries are virtually identical.
    6
      The tradables category consists of clothing, nine food and beverage categories, footwear, fuel, fur-
niture/floor coverings, household appliances, household textiles and other household goods, machin-
ery/equipment, tobacco, and transportation equipment. The non-tradables category consists of commu-
nication, construction, education, medical/health, recreation/culture, rent and water, restaurants/hotels,
and transportation services. We do not classify four final goods price categories: changes in stocks, collective
consumption by government, net foreign balance, and other goods and services.


                                                       6
                                                          (each dot is a country)
                                               2.5




                               Non-Tradables
                                                 2


                        Log Rellative Price:
                                               1.5
                                                 1
                     Tradables/N               05
                                               0.5
                                                                                    y = -0.37ln(x) + 3.93
                                                 0
                                               -0.5
                                                -1
                                                 $1,000        $10,000                        $100,000
                                                          GDP/Worker at PPP




          Fig. 1: Relative price of tradables to non-tradables against GDP per worker.


equal the inverse of relative TFP. See, for example, Hsieh and Klenow (2007b). Differences
in factor shares and the relative supply of factors (e.g., higher levels of physical capital
or human capital per worker) could break this inverse relationship, but empirically factor
shares do not vary much across sectors, and if anything, the non-tradable sector tends to
be more intensive in human and physical capital.7 In this paper, we explore the root of this
relationship between the relative TFP of sectors and output per worker.

Relative Productivity and Financial Development A common measure of a country’s
level of financial development is its ratio of external financing (the sum of private credit,
private bond market capitalization, and stock market capitalization) to GDP (La Porta
et al., 1998; Rajan and Zingales, 1998; Beck et al., 2000). The relationship between relative
prices and external financing to GDP ratios is quite similar to the one between relative prices
and GDP in Figure 1. The estimated elasticity of 0.32 is slightly lower, but the R2 of 0.50
is slightly higher.
    The strength of the relationship suggests that financial development is potentially closely
related to the Balassa-Samuelson fact. In the model we develop, it is financial development
that is the causal force behind the cross-country differences in both relative prices and output
per worker.
  7
   See Valentinyi and Herrendorf (2008) for physical capital intensity, and Buera and Kaboski (2008) for
human capital intensity.



                                                                  7
Scale Differences across Sectors Another key empirical fact that motivates our study is
the clear difference in the scale of production units across broadly-defined sectors. Our inter-
pretation is that this sectoral scale difference reflects differences in production technologies
across these sectors. We will argue that these technological differences interact with finan-
cial development, so that financial development affects large-scale and small-scale sectors
differently.
    Here we use two measures for scale of operation: workers per establishment and workers
per enterprise. Establishments are locations of business, so that a single enterprise, Walmart,
for example, may have multiple establishments. Table 1 presents measures of average scale
across broadly-defined final goods sectors of the US and other OECD countries, and com-
pares these scale measures with other sector-level technological characteristics like financial
dependence and factor intensities.8

                                                                                External
                                        Workers per         Workers per                          Capital
                                                                               Dependence
                                       Establishment        Enterprise                            Share
                                                                                 Ratio
                                                               OECD
                                            U.S.                                   U.S.            U.S.
                                                              Averages
Manufactured Consumption (M)                  42                 20                0.27            0.33
Services (S)                                  16                  8                0.09            0.27
Equipment Investment (E)                      81                 35                0.14            0.29
Construction (C)                              10                  7                0.08            0.17
Tradables (M+E)                               48                 28                0.21            0.31
Non-tradables (S+C)                           15                  8                0.08            0.26

Table 1: The averages are worker-weighted averages across four-digit industries in the OECD
SSIS data, and across eight-digit industries in the US census data. The OECD data cover nine
countries, and are complete at the enterprise level: Czech Republic, France, Germany, Hungary,
Slovakia, Poland, Portugal, the UK and the US. The external dependence ratio is calculated using
the formula of Rajan and Zingales (1998). They measure the ratio of the difference between capital
expenditures and cash flow to capital expenditures. In order to negate the influence of outliers, we
follow their methodology of using the total capital expenditures and total cash flow over the sample
period (1993–2003) to compute firm-specific numbers, and then report the median value within an
industry as the industry-specific value. Capital shares are from Valentinyi and Herrendorf (2008).
They correspond to the capital share of gross output in each of these broadly-defined sectors, and
are calculated using input-output data from the Industry Accounts of the Bureau of Economic
Analysis.
   8
    These sectors are constructed to be consistent with the final goods categories in the ICP data. Manu-
facturing consumption includes food/beverages, textiles, clothing, medicine, furniture, appliances, TVs and
radios, cars, household items, and media. Equipment includes all manufactured equipment not included
in consumption. Together, these two constitute tradables. Services include accommodation/food services,
arts/entertainment, communication, education, FIRE, health, retail, sewage, transportation, and wholesale.



                                                    8
    The first column is based on data from the 2002 US Economic Census, which uses an
establishment basis and the NAICS eight-digit classification. The second column is based on
the OECD Structural Statistics for Industry and Services (SSIS) database for 2002. These
data follow the common ISIC 3.2 four-digit classification, enabling comparison across OECD
countries. Enterprise-level data permit comparison over the largest set of countries: Czech
Republic, France, Germany, Hungary, Slovakia, Poland, Portugal, the UK and the US.9
    Whether establishments or enterprises are the unit of measurement, the average scale
varies considerably across these broadly-defined sectors. The top panel shows the average
scale in manufactured consumption, services, equipment investment, and construction. Man-
ufactured consumption and equipment investment establishments tend to operate at a large
scale, while services and construction establishments have smaller scales. This distinction
is precisely the tradables vs. non-tradables dichotomy in the bottom panel. The tradable
sector has a substantially larger scale than the non-tradable sector.10 In the US census data
for workers per establishment, the typical tradable establishment is over 3.2 times as large
as its non-tradable counterpart (48 vs. 15). The relative scale of tradables to non-tradables
is even larger with enterprises as the unit of observation. For the OECD average, the ra-
tio is 3.5 (28 vs. 8). Establishments are our preferred unit of analysis because we think
they embody production technologies, but some technologies (e.g., the distribution system
of Walmart) may be at the firm level. Data availability dictates which measure we use in
certain cases.
    In our model, financial frictions have differential impact on sectors with different scales
because our notion of scale (workers per establishment or enterprise) coincides with financ-
ing needs. Support for this interpretation can be obtained by comparing other measures
of financing needs across sectors. The third column reports the measures of external de-
pendence (Rajan and Zingales, 1998) that we construct using the US Compustat data for
1993–2003.11 In the Compustat data, firms in the tradable sector are substantially more
financially-dependent than those in the non-tradable sector, with a median of 0.21 vs. 0.08.12
   9
     There are also subtle differences in the definition of workers between the two samples. In particular, the
SSIS data measure “number of persons engaged,” which can include some temporary or contract workers.
The census data record “number of employees,” which excludes proprietors. For some countries, SSIS data
have both measures, and the two mirror each other closely.
  10
     We lack comparable scale data for agriculture, another component of tradables. In advanced economies,
land/capital investment per farm is substantial, but workers per farm may not be large.
  11
     Rajan and Zingales measure the ratio of the difference between capital expenditures (Compustat #128)
and cash flow (Compustat #110, or the sum of #123, 125, 126, 106, 213, and 217, for format code 7) to
capital expenditures. In order to negate the influence of outliers in noisy firm-level data, they take the total
capital expenditures and total cash flow over the sample period to compute firm-specific numbers, and then
pick the median value within an industry as the industry-specific value. Note that Rajan and Zingales only
included the manufacturing sector in their study.
  12
     Alternative measures of firms’ financing needs give a similar picture. For example, we have constructed
a measure of setup costs. In particular, for each firm in Compustat, we have located the first period with


                                                       9
Furthermore, differences in external dependence line up fairly closely with differences in scale
at a more disaggregated level (top panel of Table 1). While external dependence may be a
more direct measure of financing needs or investment requirements, we decide to focus on
scale (employment), a measure that is available for all firms and sectors in the economy, as
opposed to just the publicly-traded firms in Compustat.13
    Finally, the fourth column reports the sectoral differences in factor intensities. These
numbers are from Valentinyi and Herrendorf (2008), and correspond to the capital share
of gross output in each of these broadly-defined sectors. Unlike differences in scale and
external dependence, the variation in factor intensity is relatively small and does not show a
consistent pattern across sectors. The difference between services and equipment investment
is negligible, and only for construction we observe a significantly lower capital intensity. Chari
et al. (1997) also find little difference in factor shares between investment and consumption
goods sectors, with, if anything, investment goods producers being more labor-intensive.
The relatively small variation in factor intensity across sectors leads us to follow the recent
literature (Chari et al., 1997; Hsieh and Klenow, 2007b) and build a model that abstracts
from these differences. Our focus is instead on the large observed differences in scale across
sectors.

Relative Prices and Scale We have seen that the relative price of tradables is high in
poor countries, and that tradable establishments operate at larger scales than non-tradable
establishments. A natural question to ask is whether relative prices and the scale of produc-
tion technologies are related at a more disaggregated level as well. We examine this issue
using disaggregated ICP price data from its 1996 benchmark. The scale of operation in an
industry is constructed by averaging across eight countries for which comparable data are
available.14 We then map ICP categories into closely related groups of industries and calcu-
late the average scale for these industry groups.15 Finally, we run a cross-country regression
positive excess investment, and calculated the average excess investment over following consecutive periods
with positive excess investment. For the firms in the tradable sector, the ratio of this measure over annual
sales has a median of 0.65, while for those in the non-tradable sector, a median of 0.12.
  13
     See Davis et al. (2006) for an example where conclusions drawn from the universe of firms and from the
set of publicly-traded firms can be very different.
  14
     OECD SSIS data—which cover all industries, not just manufacturing—are available for eight countries
(Czech Republic, France, Germany, Hungary, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, and the UK), but only at the
enterprise level. We therefore use number of persons engaged per enterprise as our measure of scale. For
any given industry at a disaggregated level, there is a strong correlation in scale across countries. Still,
we average across many countries to smooth out idiosyncratic variations that may arise from local market
structures, government regulations, and so on.
  15
     A reliable mapping could not be done for four of the 29 ICP categories: other household goods, operation
of transportation equipment, other goods and services, and collective consumption by the government. Also,
due to the lack of comparable data on agriculture, only the scale of food manufacturing establishments could
be used. It is at least comforting that none of the food categories appears to be outliers.



                                                     10
of 2,794 disaggregated ICP price data from 112 countries on log output per worker, log in-
dustry scale, and their interaction. The estimation result is (with t-statistics in parentheses):

      log pi,j = −7.25 + 0.71 log yi + 0.97 log ¯lj − 0.10 log yi log ¯lj ,                                                                                R2 = 0.21,
                 (−13.0)                                 (12.2)                          (6.5)                        (−6.2)


where pi,j is the 1996 price of industry j goods in country i, yi is the output per worker
of country i in 1996 international prices, ¯lj is the average number of workers engaged per
enterprise for industry j. The negative coefficient on the interaction term indicates that
prices of the output of industries with larger scales are relatively higher in low income
countries. Given the log difference between tradables and non-tradables scales in Table 1—
i.e., log(48/15) = 1.2, the coefficient of -0.10 implies a relative price elasticity with respect
to output per worker of 12 percent, about one-third of the full relationship in Figure 1.
     The general magnitude and significance of this result at the five-percent level are robust.
Alternative specifications used country-specific fixed effects instead of controlling for log yi ,
and/or category-specific fixed effects instead of controlling for log ¯lj . Yet another specification
substituted countries’ ratios of external finance to GDP for log yi . The significance of the
result at the five-percent level is also robust to clustering standard errors by country or by
ICP category.



                                                                                  (each point is an "industry")
                                                        0.8
                      Cross-country Income Elasticity




                                                        0.6
                                                                   Rent
                                                        0.4                                Transport. Services
                                    ative Price




                                                        0.2                                 Medical
                                                                                              Communication
                                                          0                                            Furniture
                                                                                    Restaurants/hotels                                        Household
                                                                            Construction                                                  Tobacco
                                                                                                              Footwear                        appliances
                                                        -0.2                                    Clothing
                                                                                                                Fuel
                              of Rela




                                                                          Education
                                                                                 B d/
                                                                                 Bread/cereals
                                                                                            l                    FishDairy/eggs Meat
                                                                                                                 Oils/fats
                                                        -0.4                                                           Fruit/vegetables
                                                                                      Recreation Alcoholic bevNon-alcoholic bev
                                                        -0.6                                                                         y = -0.15ln(x) + 0.329
                                                                                                        Machinery/equipment
                                                        -0.8
                                                         -1
                                                                                                                                  Automobiles
                                                        -1.2
                                                               5                                                 50                                        500
                                                                             Workers/Establishment in the U.S., 2002




Fig. 2: Industry-specific elasticity of relative price with respect to income across countries (vertical
axis) plotted against industry-specific scale (horizontal axis).

   We visually represent this result in Figure 2. First, for each sector j, we run a cross-
country regression of the log of sectoral price (pi,j relative to country PPP) on log output

                                                                                                          11
per worker (log yi ). These sector-specific regression coefficients (income elasticities of relative
prices, vertical axis) are plotted against sectoral scales (horizontal axis) in Figure 2. These
coefficients have a downward slope of -0.15; that is, the relative price of goods produced in
larger-scale industries will increase more when moving from rich to poor countries.
    We conclude that, even at a more disaggregate level, poor countries are particularly un-
productive in industries with larger scales. This is further evidence supporting our emphasis
on sectoral scale differences.


3      Model
We model an economy with two sectors, S (small-scale, non-tradable sector) and L (large-
scale, tradable consumption and investment goods sector). In each sector, there are two
occupations: worker and entrepreneur. The economy is open and takes the price of goods
produced with large-scale technologies (tradables) as given; in the stationary equilibria that
we consider, with only one tradable good, openness will simply fix the price of the tradable
output, which is our numeraire.
    There are a measure N of infinitely-lived individuals, who are heterogeneous in their
wealth and the quality of their entrepreneurial ideas, z = (zS , zL ). Individuals’ wealth is
determined endogenously by forward-looking behavior. The vector of entrepreneurial ideas
is drawn from a distribution µ(z). Entrepreneurial ideas “die” with a constant hazard rate
of 1 − γ, and a new vector of ideas is independently drawn from µ(z). The parameter γ
therefore controls the persistence of the entrepreneurial idea process.16
    In each period, individuals choose their occupation: whether to work for a wage or to
operate a business in sector S or L. Their occupational choices are based on their comparative
advantage as an entrepreneur (z) and their access to capital. Access to capital is limited
by agents’ wealth because capital rental contracts may not be perfectly enforceable in our
model, giving rise to an endogenous collateral constraint.
    One entrepreneur can operate only one production unit (establishment) in a given period.
Entrepreneurial ideas are inalienable, and there is no market for managers or entrepreneurial
talent. The way we model an establishment draws upon the span of control of Lucas (1978)
and per-period fixed costs as in Rossi-Hansberg and Wright (2007).

Preferences Individual preferences are described by the following expected utility function
over sequences of consumption ct = (cS,t , cL,t ):
  16
     This shock can be interpreted as changes in market conditions that affect the profitability of individual
skills. Alternatively, in a life-cycle interpretation of the model, the current generation dies and is replaced
with an offspring that does not share the same talent. In either of these interpretations, we model productivity
to follow a very persistent process in between the arrival of idea shocks.


                                                      12
                     "∞               #
                      X
        U (c) = E            β t u (ct ) ,                                                              (1)
                       t=0
                                                  1−σ
                                                 1−1/ε
                            1−1/ε       1−1/ε
where u (ct ) =         +  cS,t        cL,t
                                       /(1 − σ), β is the discount factor, σ the coefficient of
risk-aversion (and the reciprocal of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution), and ε the
intratemporal elasticity of substitution between goods produced with small and large-scale
technologies. The expectation is over the realizations of entrepreneurial ideas (z), which
depend on stochastic death of ideas (1 − γ) and on draws from µ(z).

Technology At the beginning of each period, an individual with vector of entrepreneurial
ideas z and wealth a chooses whether to work for a wage w or operate a business in either
sector j = S, L. To operate a business in a sector, individuals must pay a sector-specific
per-period fixed cost of κj , in units of the sector’s output. The crucial assumption is that
the fixed cost to run an establishment in the large-scale sector is higher than that in the
small-scale sector, κL > κS . This will generate the scale difference between the two sectors
that we observe in the data. In our quantitative analysis, we will set κS to zero.
    After paying the fixed cost, an entrepreneur with talent zj produces using capital (k) and
labor (l) according to:
        zj f (k, l) = zj k α lθ ,

where α and θ are the elasticities of output with respect to capital and labor, and α + θ < 1,
implying diminishing returns to scale in variable factors at the establishment level. Note
that the factor elasticities are assumed to be the same in both sectors, which is consistent
with the empirical findings in the literature (Chari et al., 1997; Valentinyi and Herrendorf,
2008).
   Given factor prices w and R (rental rate of capital), the profit of an entrepreneur is:
        πj (k, l; R, w, p) = pj zj k α lθ − Rk − wl − (1 + r)pj κj ,

where r is the interest rate, and pj is the price of sector j goods. Sector S produces non-
tradable consumption goods, and the output from sector L is investment goods and tradable
consumption goods. We normalize pL to one. For later use, we define the optimal level of
capital and labor inputs when production is not subject to financial constraints:
         kju (zj ), lju (zj ) = arg max pj zj k α lθ − Rk − wl .
                                      
                                       k,l

    The key feature of this technology is that the fixed costs introduce non-convexity. For any
strictly positive fixed cost κj , the technology is feasible only if operated above the minimum
scale; i.e., zj k α lθ ≥ (1 + r)κj .17
 17
      The model can be extended to allow for a choice of technologies within each sector: a technology with

                                                            13
Credit and Rental Markets Individuals have access to competitive financial intermedi-
aries, who (i) receive deposits, (ii) rent capital k at rate R, and (iii) lend to entrepreneurs
their fixed cost pj κj . In the benchmark model, we restrict the analysis to the case where both
borrowing and capital rental are within a period—that is, a ≥ 0. The zero-profit condition
implies R = r + δ, where r is the deposit and lending rate and δ is the depreciation rate.
    Borrowing and capital rental by entrepreneurs are limited by imperfect enforceability of
contracts. In particular, we assume that, after production has taken place, entrepreneurs
have the option to renege on the contracts. In such cases, the entrepreneurs can keep
a fraction (1 − φ) of the undepreciated capital and the revenue net of labor payments,
(1 − φ) [pj zj f (k, l) − wl + (1 − δ) k]. The only punishment is the garnishment of their
financial assets deposited with the financial intermediary, a. In the following period, this
entrepreneur in default will regain access to financial markets, and will not be treated any
differently despite the history of default.
    Note that φ indexes the strength of an economy’s legal institutions enforcing contractual
obligations. This one-dimensional parameter captures the extent of frictions in the financial
market due to imperfect enforcement of credit and rental contracts. This specification allows
for a flexible modeling of limited commitment that spans economies with no credit (φ = 0)
and with perfect credit markets (φ = 1).
    We consider equilibria where the borrowing and capital rental contracts are incentive-
compatible and are hence fulfilled. In particular, we study equilibria where the rental of
capital is quantity-restricted by an upper bound k̄ j (a, zj ; φ), which is a sector-specific func-
tion of the individual state (a, zj ). We choose the rental limits k̄ j (a, zj ; φ) to be the largest
limits that are consistent with entrepreneurs choosing to abide by their rental and borrow-
ing contracts. Without loss of generality, we assume k̄ j (a, zj ; φ) ≤ kju (z), where kju is the
profit-maximizing capital inputs in an unconstrained (static) problem in sector j.
    The following proposition provides a simple characterization of the set of enforceable
contracts and the rental limits k̄ j (a, zj ; φ), for j = S, L.

Proposition 1 Capital rental k in sector j by an entrepreneur with wealth a and talent zj
is enforceable if and only if

       max {pj zj f (k, l) − wl} − Rk − (1 + r) pj κj + (1 + r) a
        l
                                                         
          ≥ (1 − φ) max {pj zj f (k, l) − wl} + (1 − δ) k .                                                  (2)
                       l


a small fixed cost and low productivity, A1,j zj k α lθ − κ1 , and a technology with a large fixed cost and high
productivity, A2,j zj k α lθ − κ2 , with A2,j > A1,j for j = S, L and κ2 > κ1 . Note that in this extension fixed
costs are technology specific and not sector specific. One can think of our current setup as a case where the
productivity gains associated with the κ2 -technology is substantially larger for the large-scale sector; i.e.,
A2,L ≫ A2,S .


                                                       14
Therefore, the upper bound on capital rental that is consistent with entrepreneurs choosing to
abide by their rental and borrowing contracts can be represented with a function k̄ j (a, zj ; φ),
which is increasing in a, zj and φ.

    Condition (2) states that the economic resources of an entrepreneur repaying her rental
and credit obligations (left-hand side) have to be at least as large as those of a defaulting
entrepreneur (right-hand side). This condition is sufficient to characterize enforceable allo-
cations because we assume that defaulting entrepreneurs regain access to financial markets
in the following period.
    This proposition also provides a convenient way to operationalize the enforceability con-
straint into a simple rental limit k̄ j (a, zj ; φ).18 As long as the unconstrained level of capi-
tal rental is not enforceable, the rental limit k̄ j (a, zj ; φ) is implicitly defined as the larger
root of the equation given by the equality in condition (2). Rental limits increase with
the wealth of entrepreneurs, because the punishment for defaulting (loss of collateral) gets
larger. Similarly, rental limits increase with the talent of an entrepreneur because defaulting
entrepreneurs keep only a fraction 1 − φ of the output. In the rest of the paper, we restrict
individuals’ capital inputs to be less than or equal to the rental limit k̄ j (a, zj ; φ).
    While the enforceability of contracts as measured by φ is not sector-specific, the equi-
librium enforceable rental contracts, as captured by the rental limits k̄ j (a, zj ; φ), do vary
across sectors because of the differences in technology and in output prices across sectors.

Recursive Representation of Individuals’ Problem Here we discuss the problem
solved by individuals. In particular, we define the value for an individual before the oc-
cupational choice, v (a, z), as well as the value of being a worker, v w (a, z), and being an
entrepreneur in sector j, v j (a, z), for j = S, L.
    Individuals maximize (1) by choosing sequences of consumption, financial wealth, occu-
pations (including the sector), and capital/labor inputs if they choose to be entrepreneurs,
subject to a sequence of period budget constraints and rental limits.
    At the beginning of a period, an individual’s state is summarized by her wealth, a, and
the vector of abilities, z. The individual then chooses between being a worker or being an
entrepreneur in sector S or L for the period. The value for an individual at this stage,
v (a, z), is the maximum over the value of being a worker, v w (a, z), and the value of being
an entrepreneur in sector j, v j (a, z), for j = S, L:

          v (a, z) = max v w (a, z) , v S (a, z) , v L (a, z) .
                        
                                                                                                                 (3)
     18
     In general, the set of enforceable capital rentals dictated by (2) does not exactly correspond to k ≤
 j
k̄ (a, zj ; φ). For example, an entrepreneur who is only offered a very low (and unprofitable) level of capital
will default if pj κj is large enough. Notwithstanding this, the solution to the individual’s problem subject to
(2) coincides with the solution to the individual’s problem subject to the simpler rental limit k ≤ k̄ j (a, zj ; φ).

                                                                  15
Note that the value of being a worker, v w (a, z), depends on her assets a and on her en-
trepreneurial ideas z, which may be implemented at a later date. Similarly, the value of
being an entrepreneur in sector j, v j (a, z), depends on the entire vector of entrepreneurial
ideas, as she may switch sectors at a later date.
   As a worker, an individual chooses consumption bundle c = (cS , cL ) and the next period’s
assets a′ to maximize her continuation value subject to the period budget constraint:

      v w (a, z) = max u (c) + β [γv (a′ , z) + (1 − γ) Ez′ [v (a′ , z ′ )]]                   (4)
                    ′c,a ≥0

      s.t. pc + a′ ≤ w + (1 + r) a,

where w is her labor income, and p denotes the vector of goods prices. The continuation
value is a function of the end-of-period state (a′ , z ′ ), where z ′ = z with probability γ and
z ′ ∼ µ (z ′ ) with probability 1 − γ. In the subsequent period, she will face an occupational
choice again, and the function v (a, z) appears in the continuation value.
     Alternatively, individuals can choose to become an entrepreneur in sector j. The value
function of being an entrepreneur in sector j is as follows.

      v j (a, z) =     max u (c) + β [γv (a′ , z) + (1 − γ) Ez′ [v (a′ , z ′ )]]               (5)
                     c,a′ ,k,l≥0

      s.t. pc + a′ ≤ pj zj f (k, l) − Rk − wl − (1 + r)pj κj + (1 + r) a

          k ≤ k̄ j (a, zj ; φ)

Note that an entrepreneur’s income is given by period profit pj f (zj , k, l) − Rk − wl net of
fixed costs (1 + r)pj κj plus the return to her initial wealth, and that her choices of capital
inputs are constrained by the rental limit k̄ j (a, zj ; φ).

Stationary Competitive Equilibrium A stationary competitive equilibrium is com-
posed of: an invariant distribution of wealth and entrepreneurial ideas G (a, z); occupation
choice function o (a, z), and policy functions c (a, z), a′ (a, z), l (a, z), and k (a, z); rental
limits k̄ j (a, zj ; φ), j = S, L; and prices w, R, r, and p such that:

  1. Given k̄ j (a, zj ; φ), w, R, r and p, the individual policy functions o(a, z), c (a, z),
     a′ (a, z), l (a, z), k (a, z) solve (3), (4) and (5);

  2. Financial intermediaries make zero profit, i.e., R = r + δ;

  3. Rental limits k̄ j (a, zj ; φ) are the most generous limits satisfying condition (2), and
     k̄ j (a, zj ; φ) ≤ kju (zj );

  4. Credit, labor, non-tradable consumption goods, and tradable consumption/investment
     goods markets clear;

                                                             16
   5. The joint distribution of wealth and entrepreneurial ideas is a fixed point of the equi-
      librium mapping:
                                             Z                                                      Z
               G (a, z) = γ                                 G (dã, dz̃) + (1 − γ) µ (z)                            G (dã, dz̃) .
                              (ã,z̃)∈{z̃≤z,a′ (ã,z̃)≤a}                                  (ã,z̃)∈{a′ (ã,z̃)≤a}


Perfect-Credit Benchmark To clarify the basic mechanics of the model, we analyze the
perfect credit benchmark, φ = 1. This is an economy with unconstrained within-period
borrowing and capital rental for production (i.e., k̄ j (a, zj , φ) = kju (z) for all a) but without
between-periods borrowing or consumption insurance. We present two results characterizing
the production side of the perfect-credit economy under the assumption that entrepreneurial
talents for the two sectors follow mutually independent Pareto distributions with the same
tail parameter η, (zL , zS ) ∼ η 2 (zL zS )−(η+1) . This assumption permits approximate closed-
form expressions for net sectoral production functions (i.e., sectoral output net of fixed
costs), factor shares, and the establishment size distribution. The assumption of mutually-
independent Pareto distributions also implies that the establishment size distribution within
each sector exhibits a thick right tail, a salient feature of the data.19 These characterizations
will help us pin down the technological parameters of the model using data on establishment
size distributions across and within sectors.20
    The first result is that the net output of a sector is given by a Cobb-Douglas, constant-
returns-to-scale function of the population size (N), sectoral capital inputs (Kj ) and labor
inputs (Lj ).

Proposition 2 Assume that entrepreneurial talents for the two sectors follow mutually-
independent Pareto distributions with the same tail parameter η, (zS , zL ) ∼ η 2 (zS zL )−(η+1) ,
and that active entrepreneurs are a small fraction of the population. Then the output of a
sector net of fixed costs equals:
                                       1/η          α              θ
        Yj (Kj , Lj ; N ) = Aj N α+θ+1/η Kjα+θ+1/η Ljα+θ+1/η ,

where
               h                         1
                                  i 1+η(α+θ)  h                              i
                     (1−α−θ)                           p κj
                   η(1−α−θ)−1 η                1 − pj κjj +w   1 − α − θ − η1
        Aj =                           pj κj      η(1−α−θ)−1                   .
                                          w   + 1    1+η(α+θ)



  19
     If instead entrepreneurial ideas were to be correlated across sectors, the model would deliver a thin tail
for the distribution of establishments in the sector with low fixed costs, which is inconsistent with data.
  20
     We solve the perfect-credit benchmark in two steps. First, given an aggregate supply of capital and the
intratemporal (homothetic) consumption decisions, we solve for optimal production decisions, occupation
choices, and prices. We then use the wage and entrepreneurial profits coming from the production side of
the economy to solve for the saving decisions of individuals facing idiosyncratic shocks to entrepreneurial
ideas. By aggregating over individuals, we obtain the aggregate supply of capital. A stationary equilibrium
with perfect credit markets is a nested fixed point of these two problems.

                                                                       17
   It follows that, as in the standard neoclassical sectoral growth model, the elasticities of
                                                              α           θ
output with respect to capital and labor are constant, α+θ+1/η     and α+θ+1/η , respectively.
Unlike in the standard model, however, the elasticities are not equal to the factor shares,
because entrepreneurs earn rents. In particular, payments to capital as a share of income
equals:
                    RKj                                 α
      sK,j =                     =                                   .
               Yj (Kj , Lj ; N )   1−
                                             pj κj
                                                       1 − α − θ − η1
                                           pj κj +w

    For realistic parameterizations of the model, 1 − α − θ − η1 is close to zero, and hence
factor shares in the two sectors are approximately equal.
    Our second result pertains to the establishment size distribution in the perfect-credit
benchmark. In particular, we show that the establishment size in each sector follows a
Pareto distribution with tail coefficient η (1 − α − θ), and that the overall establishment size
distribution in the economy is a mixture of Pareto distributions. We also show that there
is a direct mapping between the ratio of fixed costs to wage (pj κj /w) and the ratio between
the average establishment sizes (¯lj ) of the two sectors.

Proposition 3 Assume that entrepreneurial talents for the two sectors follow mutually-
independent Pareto distributions with the same tail parameter η, (zS , zL ) ∼ η 2 (zS zL )−(η+1) ,
and that active entrepreneurs are a small fraction of the population. Then the establishment
size distribution in each sector follows the power law:
        h       i  l (ẑ ) η(1−α−θ)
                         j
      Pr l̃j > l =                    ,              l ≥ l (ẑj ) ,
                       l
where l (ẑj ) is the employment in the marginal establishment. Furthermore, the establishment
size distribution in the aggregate economy is given by a mixture of Pareto distributions:
                               η(1−α−θ)                         η(1−α−θ)
        h      i       l (ẑS )                     l (ẑL )
      Pr l̃ > l = nS                      + nL                               ,   l ≥ l (ẑS ) ,
                           l                     max {l, l (ẑL )}
where nS and nL are respectively the fraction of small and large-scale establishments in the
economy, with nS + nL = 1. Also, the ratio of the average establishment size between the two
sectors is:

      l̄j /l̄j ′ = (pj κj + w) / (pj ′ κj ′ + w) .

    This last result suggests a simple way of identifying the relative magnitude of fixed
costs across sectors from the relative scale of sectors. In our model, the large scale of a
sector arises from the large fixed costs at the establishment level. In addition, the tail
of the establishment size distribution identifies the parameter governing the distribution of
entrepreneurial talents. In the next section, these observations will enable us to calibrate the
model in a transparent manner. We then study the impact of financial frictions on aggregate
and sectoral productivity, and on the establishment size distribution.

                                                                      18
4     Quantitative Analysis
In this section, we first calibrate the perfect-credit benchmark of our model economy to the
US economy. We then conduct experiments to assess the effect of financial frictions. In
particular, we vary φ, the parameter governing the degree of financial frictions, to obtain
variations in external finance to GDP ratios that are comparable to the range observed in
a cross-section of countries. We evaluate our model predictions for aggregate and sectoral
TFP, relative prices, and output per worker. Finally, we explore our model implications for
the relative scale of establishments across sectors using data from developing and developed
countries.
    In our quantitative analysis we hold fixed all technological parameters across countries,
and vary only the parameter governing financial frictions (φ). In particular, we assume
(rather counterfactually) that countries are endowed with the same entrepreneurial talent dis-
tribution. We maintain this assumption because our goal is to isolate and quantify the direct
impact of financial frictions. One of our main results is that, starting with the same potential
pool of entrepreneurs, financial frictions distort the selection into active entrepreneurship.
The productivity distribution of entrepreneurs in operation therefore differs across countries,
with financial frictions lowering the mean and raising the variance of this distribution. The
effect on the mean conforms to the conventional wisdom on aggregate productivity differ-
ences across countries. The increase in variance is consistent with recent empirical work
of Hsieh and Klenow (2007a), who find that less developed countries’ establishment-level
productivity (TFPQ in their terminology) dispersion is at least as large as that of the US. It
would be straightforward to incorporate cross-country differences in the average productivity
of potential entrepreneurs and workers by considering human capital and exogenous TFP
differences. It is less obvious how one would model exogenous cross-country differences in
higher moments of the entrepreneurial talent distribution.

4.1    Calibration
We calibrate preference and technology parameters so that the perfect-credit economy
matches key aspects of the US, a relatively undistorted economy. In particular, our target
moments include standard macroeconomic aggregates, features of the establishment size
distribution within and across sectors, establishment dynamics, and the concentration of
income in the population.
    In our quantitative analysis we identify our small-scale sector with the non-tradable
sector, and our large-scale sector with those producing investment goods and tradable goods.
That is, we focus on the best-known case of sectoral productivity differences across countries,



                                              19
the Balassa-Samuelson effect (Section 2).21
    We need to specify values for ten parameters: four technological parameters, α, θ, κS , and
κL , and the depreciation rate δ; two parameters describing the process for entrepreneurial
talents, γ and η; the subjective discount factor β, the reciprocal of the intertemporal elasticity
of substitution σ, and the intratemporal elasticity of substitution ε.
                                                                                    α
    Two preference parameters, σ and ε, and two technological parameters, α+θ         and δ, can
                                                                                 22
be set to standard values in the literature. We let σ = 1.5 and ε = 1.0. The one-year
                                                             α
depreciation rate is set at δ = 0.058, and we choose α+θ        to match the aggregate capital
income share of 0.33.
    We are thus left with the six parameters that are more specific to our study: α + θ, κS ,
κL , η, γ, and β.23 We calibrate them to match six relevant moments in the US data as shown
in the first column of Table 2: the average size of establishments in non-tradables (15) and in
investment goods/tradables (48); the employment share of the top decile of establishments
(0.63); the share of income generated by the top five percentile of earners (0.30); the annual
exit rate of establishments (0.10); and the annual real interest rate (0.05).

        Target Moments                                             US Data      Model      Parameter
        Top 10% employment share                                      0.63       0.63       η = 5.30
        Top 5% income share                                           0.30       0.29     α + θ = 0.80
        Avg. scale in non-tradable sector                              15         15       κS = 0.00
        Avg. scale in tradable/investment goods sectors                48         46       κL = 2.00
        Exit rate                                                     0.10       0.10       γ = 0.89
        Interest rate                                                 0.05       0.05       β = 0.92

                                            Table 2: Calibration

    The identification of these six parameters follows the basic logic given in our discussion
of the perfect-credit benchmark. We calibrate the fixed costs, κS = 0.0 and κL = 2.0, to
match the average establishment size in the small-scale (non-tradables) and the large-scale
(investment goods/tradables) sectors (15 and 48, respectively). The per-period fixed cost in
the large-scale sector, κL = 2.0, is tantamount to about three times the equilibrium wage in
the perfect-credit benchmark. Given the returns to scale, α + θ, we choose the tail parameter
  21
     One alternative is to classify industries (at a more disaggregated level) into small vs. large scale sectors,
on the basis of some industry-specific scale measures. This way, we would maximize the scale differences
between these two broadly-defined sectors, and hence their differences in fixed costs. We choose the non-
tradable vs. tradable mapping, to be on the conservative side in model specification, and to draw upon the
existing body of work on this topic.
  22
     The intratemporal elasticity of 1.0 is within the range of the estimates in the literature. Ostry and
Reinhart (1991) estimate it to be 1.24 for a group of developing countries, and Mendoza (1995) reports an
elasticity of 0.74 for a group of industrialized countries.
  23
     As is common in heterogeneous-agent models with financial frictions, the discount rate must be jointly
calibrated with the parameters governing the stochastic income process.


                                                       20
of the entrepreneurial talent distribution, η = 5.3, to match the employment share of the
largest ten percentile of establishments, 0.63. We can then infer α + θ = 0.8 from the income
share of the top five percentile of earners. Top earners are mostly entrepreneurs (both in
the US data and in the model), and α + θ controls the fraction of output going to the
entrepreneurial input. The parameter γ = 0.89 leads to an annual establishment exit rate of
ten per cent in the model. This is consistent with the job destruction rate in the US reported
by Davis et al. (1996). Finally, the model requires a discount factor of β = 0.92 to match
the annual interest rate of five per cent.
                    ln(fraction of establishments to the right of s)




                                                                        0

                                                                       −1

                                                                       −2

                                                                       −3

                                                                       −4

                                                                       −5
                                                                            Sector S (model)
                                                                       −6   Sector L (model)
                                                                            All (model)
                                                                       −7   Non−tradable (data)
                                                                            Tradable (data)
                                                                       −8
                                                                                     5     10     20      50    100     250   500   1000
                                                                                           s = employment (log scale)


Fig. 3: Establishment size distributions in the data and in the model. The horizontal axis is the
number of employees (s) in log scale. For each s, one computes the fraction of establishments whose
number of employees is greater than or equal to s, and takes log of this fraction (vertical axis). As we
assume a Pareto distribution for entrepreneurial talent in each sector, the perfect-credit benchmark
yields straight lines for the small-scale sector (solid line) and the large-scale sector (dashed line).
One can construct such a line using all the establishments in our perfect-credit benchmark (inclusive
of both sectors), which is the dotted line. We do the same calculation using the US data. The
establishment size distribution for the tradable/investment goods sector (the large-scale sector) is
traced with ∗, while the circles (◦) are for the non-tradable sector (the small-scale sector).

    Figure 3 shows the establishment size distribution from the calibrated perfect-credit
benchmark, and compares it with the US data. The model is able to fit the tails of the em-
pirical distribution, the distance between the two within-sector distributions, and the initial
concavity in the overall (inclusive of both sectors) distribution of establishment size. The
assumption that productivities for both sectors are drawn from the same Pareto distribution
generates the identical slope for the right tails. The model cannot capture the initial con-
cavity in the distribution of establishment size within a sector, however, presumably because
we are abstracting from within-sector heterogeneity in fixed costs.



                                                                                                    21
4.2    Results
In this section, we quantify the effect of financial frictions on economic development. We
first show that financial frictions have a substantial, adverse impact on per-capita income.
In our exercises, the lower per-capita income in economies with financial frictions is mainly
explained by their low aggregate TFP, with particularly low productivity in the large-scale
sector. These results are consistent with the empirical findings in Section 2.
    We vary φ—the parameter governing the enforcement of contracts in condition (2)—to
span a range of external finance to GDP ratios observed in the data. With quintiles of
countries constructed in terms of per-capita income at PPP, external finance to GDP ratio
averages 0.1 for the bottom quintile and 2.1 for the top quintile. The equilibrium external
finance to GDP ratio is monotonically decreasing in φ in our exercises. We use 14 values of
φ ranging from 0.10 to 0.99, which span variations in external finance to GDP ratios from
0.4 to 2.4. The parameter φ itself has no immediate real-world counterpart. Hence we plot
variables of interest against the ratio of external finance to GDP implied by a given φ.
                                                      Per−Capita GDP vs. External Finance                                  TFP vs. External Finance
                                                       1                                                              1
                 Per−Capita GDP Relative to the US




                                                     0.8                                                             0.8
                                                                                            TFP Relative to the US




                                                     0.6                                                             0.6


                                                     0.4                                                             0.4


                                                     0.2                                                             0.2


                                                      0                                                               0
                                                       0   0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5            3                                0   0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5            3
                                                           External Finance to GDP                                         External Finance to GDP


Fig. 4: Per capita GDP at PPP (left panel) and aggregate TFP (right panel) against the ratio of
external finance to GDP (horizontal axis). Data (countries, •) and model ().



Aggregate Impact of Financial Frictions Figure 4 plots (using diamonds) the simu-
lated effect of financial frictions on per-capita income at PPP, and on aggregate TFP. Both
income and TFP are measured relative to our perfect-credit, US benchmark. The dots in
the figure represent data (countries), also relative to the US. In our model, the variation in
financial frictions can bring down per-capita income to less than half of the US level. This
roughly accounts for the difference between a country like Malaysia and the US, or about
80 per cent of the US-Mexico difference. While this does not come close to the difference

                                                                                          22
between the US and the poorest countries in sub-Saharan Africa, the magnitude is never-
theless sizable, considering that we are varying one single factor—financial markets—across
countries. Furthermore, the factor-of-two difference in per-capita income generated by our
quantitative theory goes a long way, if one were to focus on the factor-of-five difference in
non-agricultural output per capita between the richest fifth percentile of countries and the
poorest fifth percentile.24
    As in the data, the per-capita income differences in our model are primarily accounted
for by differences in TFP (Figure 4, right panel).25 Financial frictions can reduce aggregate
TFP by more than 40 per cent.

Impact on Sectoral Productivity Financial frictions have differential impact on the two
sectors. Note that we identify the investment goods and tradable sectors with the large-scale
sector, and the non-tradable sector with the small-scale sector. The solid lines in Figure 5
trace the effect of financial frictions on the measured TFP of the small-scale, non-tradable
sector (left panel) and the large-scale, tradable sector (right panel). While TFP declines
by up to 30 per cent in the small-scale sector, TFP in the large-scale sector declines by
more than 50 per cent with financial frictions. This result is consistent with the empirical
observation in Section 2 that productivity differences across countries are sharpest for the
large-scale sector.
    Next, we ask what are the driving forces behind these effects on aggregate and sector-level
productivity. Intuitively, financial frictions distort the allocation of productive capital among
entrepreneurs in operation. Those with binding collateral constraints will have a marginal
product of capital higher than the rental rate. In addition, financial frictions distort the
entry and exit of entrepreneurs: Productive-but-poor entrepreneurs delay entry until they
can overcome financing constraints, and incompetent-but-wealthy ones remain in business for
too long. Here we quantitatively analyze how financial frictions affect sectoral and aggregate
productivity by distorting the allocation of capital and the allocation of entrepreneurial
talents.
    In Figure 5, we decompose the effect of financial frictions on sectoral TFP into their effect
on the allocation of capital across active entrepreneurs (intensive margin, or misallocation
of capital), and their effect on the allocation of entrepreneurial talents (extensive margin).
The extensive margin is further decomposed into the number of active entrepreneurs in
each sector, and into the distribution of talent among active entrepreneurs (misallocation
of talent). To quantify this decomposition, we perform three experiments on our simulated
economies. First, we reallocate capital among active entrepreneurs in each sector to equalize
  24
     See Restuccia et al. (2008) for a decomposition of cross-country per-capita income differences into
agricultural and non-agricultural components.
  25
     TFP is calculated as A = Y / K 1/3 L2/3 .
                                            


                                                  23
                                   TFP Sector S                                TFP Sector L

                       1                                           1



                      0.9                                         0.9



                      0.8                                         0.8



                      0.7                                         0.7



                      0.6                                         0.6
                                           total effect                                total effect
                                           + k efficient                               + k efficient
                                           + z efficient                               + z efficient
                      0.5                                         0.5
                         0   0.5     1    1.5     2    2.5           0   0.5     1    1.5     2    2.5
                              External Finance                            External Finance


Fig. 5: Decomposing the impact of financial frictions on sectoral TFP in the small-scale sector
(left panel) and in the large-scale sector (right panel). Solid lines are the sectoral TFP of simulated
economies with financial frictions. TFP is normalized by its level in the perfect-credit benchmark,
and plotted against external finance to GDP ratios. Efficient reallocation of capital among existing
active entrepreneurs raises the sectoral TFP (dashed-crossed lines). When distortions on selection
into entrepreneurship are undone, sectoral TFP further increases (dotted-circled lines).


the marginal product of capital across them. For this experiment, we hold fixed the number
and the talent distribution of active entrepreneurs, as well as the total capital and labor
employed in each sector. The sectoral TFP after this reallocation is the dashed-crossed
lines in both panels. For the small-scale sector, almost all of the lower TFP is explained
by the misallocation of capital among active entrepreneurs. For the large-scale sector, this
intensive-margin distortion explains only half of the lower TFP.
     In the second experiment, while holding fixed the number of active entrepreneurs in each
sector, we select the most talented individuals into entrepreneurship. We also allocate capital
efficiently across the new set of active entrepreneurs.26 The resulting sectoral TFP from this
reallocation of talent and capital is the dotted-circled lines. The misallocation of talent into
entrepreneurship explains about half of the lower TFP in the large-scale sector, and about
one sixth of the lower TFP in the small-scale sector.
     Finally, in addition to the efficient reallocation of talent and capital above, we allow
for the number of entrepreneurs to adjust in each sector at the perfect-credit equilibrium
prices. This additional adjustment affects the sectoral TFP only slightly. The dotted-circled
lines from the second experiment are already quite close to the horizontal line going through
  26
    For each sector, we pick among the individuals that strictly prefer to be unconstrained entrepreneurs in
that sector at the distorted equilibrium prices.


                                                             24
one, which represents the TFP level in the perfect-credit benchmark. This last experiment
suggests that restrictions to entry per se may not have significant quantitative effects unless
the distribution of entrants is distorted.
    The following conclusions can be drawn from these sector-level exercises. Because of
their larger investment needs, establishments in the large-scale sector are more susceptible
to financial frictions. There are more misallocation of capital and more misallocation of
entrepreneurial talent in the large-scale sector than in the small-scale sector. In particular,
the distortions on the entry/exit decisions of entrepreneurs matter vastly more for the large-
scale sector. This result suggests that modeling endogenous entry/exit of entrepreneurs is
pivotal for capturing the large impact of financial frictions on productivity.
                                 Relative Price vs. Per−Capita GDP                       Relative Price vs. External Finance
                               1.5                                                     1.5


                              1.25                                                    1.25


                                1                                                       1
                  )




                                                                        log(pT/pNT)
                       T NT
                  log(p /p




                              0.75                                                    0.75


                               0.5                                                     0.5


                              0.25                                                    0.25


                                0                                                       0
                                −3   −2.5   −2   −1.5   −1   −0.5   0                   −3   −2.5   −2   −1.5   −1   −0.5   0
                              log(Per−Capita GDP Relative to the US)                  log(External Finance Relative to the US)


Fig. 6: Relative price of tradables to non-tradables (log pT /pN T , vertical axis) plotted against log
per-capita GDP (left panel) and external finance to GDP ratios (right panel), all relative to the
US. Data (countries, •) and model (). The dashed lines are the regression line using the data,
while the solid lines are the regression and extrapolation line using model simulations.



Relative Productivity and Relative Prices The pattern of relative productivity be-
tween the two sectors leads to the price of the large-scale sector relative to the small-scale
sector being higher in countries with underdeveloped financial markets. The left panel of
Figure 6 uses a log-log scale to plot the relative price of tradables to non-tradables (pT /pN T )
against per-capita GDP (relative to the US).27 The diamonds represent the model simula-
tions, and the dots represent data (countries). The dashed lines are the regression lines using
the data, and the solid lines are the regression (and extrapolation) lines using model simula-
tions. Our baseline calibration explains nearly all (95 per cent) of the implied cross-country
  27
    Note that we calibrate the two sectors of our model to match the scale differences between non-tradables
and tradables.

                                                                        25
elasticity between the relative price and income per capita. As pointed out in our discussion
of Figure 4, financial frictions alone can span only about a factor-of-two variation in income
per capita, so all the diamonds are concentrated between -1 and 0. The right panel of Figure
6 uses a log-log scale to plot the relative price of tradables to non-tradables against the ratio
of external finance to GDP. Our model explains about half of the elasticity of relative prices
with respect to external finance, leaving room for other explanations of relative productivity
that are correlated with financial frictions.

Impact on Within-Sector Distribution of Establishment Productivity and Size
In addition to their effects on the relative productivity and relative prices, financial frictions
affect the within-sector distributions of establishment-level productivity and size differen-
tially across the two sectors.

                   Average Entrepreneure Talent                             C. V. Entrepreneur Talent
             1.2                                                     0.6
               1                                                     0.5
             0.8
                                                                     0.4
             0.6
                                                                     0.3
             0.4
                                                Sector S             0.2
             0.2
                                                Sector L
               0                                                     0.1
                   0.5        1       1.5        2        2.5              0.5    1      1.5     2      2.5
              Average Size S, Relative Scale L to S                          C. V. Establishment Size
             20                                            10         7
             18                                            8
                                                                      5
             16
                                                           6
             14
                                                                      3
                                  Relative Scale L to S    4
             12
                         Average Size S
             10                                             2         1
                   0.5        1       1.5        2        2.5              0.5    1      1.5     2      2.5
                     External Finance to GDP                                External Finance to GDP

Fig. 7: Impact of financial frictions on the within-sector distributions of establishment-level pro-
ductivity and size. Clockwise from top left, all plotted against the ratio of external finance to GDP
(horizontal axis): Average productivity (z) of active entrepreneurs in the small-scale sector (dashed
line) and in the large-scale sector (solid line), normalized by the average large-scale entrepreneurial
productivity in the perfect-credit benchmark; Coefficient of variation (c.v.) for the productivity
of active entrepreneurs in each sector; Coefficient of variation of the establishment size (number
of workers) in each sector; Average establishment size in the small-scale sector (dashed line, left
scale) and the ratio of average large-scale sector establishment size to average small-scale sector
establishment size (dotted line, right scale).

   The top left panel of Figure 7 plots the average talent or productivity (zj ) of active
entrepreneurs in the large-scale and the small-scale sectors of our simulated economies,

                                                                26
against the ratio of external finance to GDP. With financial frictions, not only entrepreneurial
talent but also an individual’s wealth determines whether she will be an entrepreneur or
not in any given period. As a result, incompetent-but-wealthy entrepreneurs remain in
business, and talented-but-poor individuals do not operate business until they can self-
finance the capital needed to operate at a profitable scale. The positive slopes of the two lines
(dashed line for small-scale and solid line for large-scale) reflect this distorted selection into
entrepreneurship.28 Furthermore, Figure 5 showed that the misallocation of talent is more
rampant in the large-scale sector, which is confirmed here. The average entrepreneurial talent
in the large-scale sector drops by more than 40 per cent in response to financial frictions,
while its counterpart for the small-scale sector goes down by only 20 per cent.29
     With more financial frictions, an individual’s wealth becomes relatively more influential
upon their decisions of entry into and exit from entrepreneurship. As a result, individuals
with more diverse entrepreneurial talents will be operating business in any given period. The
top right panel of Figure 7 reports this. With more financial frictions (and lower ratios of
external finance to GDP), the within-sector distribution of establishment-level productivity
(zj , j = S, L) becomes more disperse, increasing the coefficient of variation.
     Next, we focus on the lower panels of Figure 7 to explore how financial frictions affect the
within-sector establishment size distribution. For given output and factor prices, the size (or
the number of workers) of an establishment is determined by the entrepreneurial productivity
and the collateral constraint. Therefore, entrepreneurs with the same productivity may
operate at different scales, as they may have different levels of wealth (collateral). We
have already seen that financial frictions increase the dispersion of the establishment-level
productivity (entrepreneurial talent). This is compounded with the increased dispersion of
scale for given entrepreneurial talent, and the within-sector establishment size distribution
becomes more disperse when there are more financial frictions (Figure 7, bottom right panel).
In our model, the dispersion of the overall (inclusive of both sectors) establishment size
distribution also increases with financial frictions. This is consistent with the conventional
wisdom of a “missing middle” in less developed economies. See Tybout (2000) for a survey.
     In the bottom left panel of Figure 7, we trace how the average establishment size of the
two sectors changes in response to financial frictions. The dotted line is the ratio of the
  28
     Note that financial frictions decrease the equilibrium ratio of external finance to GDP, which is on the
horizontal axis.
  29
     Note that the average entrepreneurial talent in the large-scale sector goes up modestly while the ratio
of external finance to GDP falls from 2.4 to 2.2. This “positive” selection into entrepreneurship arises from
the fact that highly productive entrepreneurs can overcome the collateral constraint more easily than low
productivity ones. Firstly, for a given level of output and factor prices, they make more profits. In addition,
our financing limit k̄(·) is an increasing function of z. These forces seem to dominate with very mild degrees
of financial frictions (high φ’s), generating the hump in the average entrepreneurial talent in the tradable
sector.



                                                      27
average establishment size in the large-scale sector to the average establishment size in the
small-scale sector, ¯lL /¯lS (right-hand side vertical axis). The relative scale of these two sectors
increases when there are more financial frictions. The larger scale and more financing needs
in the sector with larger fixed costs make it harder to set up an establishment there with
financial frictions, reducing the number of these establishments relative to the small-scale
sector. At the same time, the relative output price of the large-scale sector goes up with
financial frictions. These forces seem to dominate the relatively steeper fall in the average
entrepreneurial talent in the large-scale sector (top left panel), and push up the relative scale
of these establishments. This is a novel prediction of our model, and is further pursued in
the next section.
    Of course, our model also has implications on the absolute scale of establishments in each
sector. The dashed line in the bottom left panel of Figure 7 is the average establishment size
in the small-scale sector (left-hand side vertical axis). As financial frictions get more severe
(and the ratio of external finance to GDP falls from 2.4 to 0.4), the average establishment
size in the small-scale sector goes from 15 to 19, and finally to 10. In our model, the number
of small-scale establishments falls in response to more financial frictions over the range where
the ratio of external finance to GDP is between 2.5 and 1.75. This reflects increased difficulty
in starting a business even in the small-scale sector, when there are more financial frictions.
In addition, factor prices fall in response to more financial frictions. These forces contribute
to the scale of 19 workers per establishment, which is larger than that of our perfect-credit,
US benchmark. However, with an even higher degree of financial frictions—one comparable
to Mexico’s, for example, with the ratio of external finance to GDP close to 0.5, the scale
of establishments in the small-scale sector is absolutely smaller than in our US benchmark
(10 vs. 15). In this region, the dominating force is the low equilibrium wage, which makes
more individuals, including those who are not particularly talented, choose entrepreneurship
instead. These marginal entrepreneurs overwhelmingly choose to start businesses in the
small-scale sector, whose establishment-level technology commands less financing needs. In
this sense, financial frictions generate too many establishments that are too small.
    Absent from the figure is the average establishment size in the large-scale sector, although
it can be easily inferred from the other two series. As financial frictions lower the ratio of
external finance to GDP from 2.4 to 0.4, the average establishment size in the large-scale
sector goes from 60 to 115, and finally to 80. In our model, financial frictions particularly
deter entry into the large-scale sector because of its large financing needs. In addition, factor
prices fall in response to financial frictions. These forces lead to an increased establishment
size in the large-scale sector. In particular, our model predicts that a country with severe
financial frictions will have establishments in the large-scale sector that are on average bigger
than those in the US. This is another novel prediction of our model, and on the face of it, it


                                                 28
seems to defy the conventional wisdom that establishments in less developed countries are on
average much smaller than those in advanced economies. However, the overall—inclusive of
both sectors—average establishment size of our model economy with financial frictions (the
one with an external finance ratio of 0.5) is smaller than that of the perfect-credit benchmark.
This is because there are fewer of these large-scale establishments and more of the small-scale
establishments in this economy with financial frictions than in the perfect-credit benchmark.
We address this model prediction in the next section.

4.3     A Testable Implication
Our exercises confirm the intuition that financial frictions are more harmful to the sector
with higher fixed costs, larger scales, and more financing needs (i.e. investment goods and
tradables). One novel result is the effect of financial frictions on the average establishment
size of sectors in the equilibrium. Financial frictions lead to greater disparity in establishment
size between the large-scale sector and the small-scale sector (Figure 7, bottom left panel).
As discussed above, this result stems not only from the direct effect of financial frictions on
entrepreneurial entry decisions, but also from the general equilibrium effect on wage, capital
rental rates, and output prices. With financial frictions, wages go down, and small-scale
entrepreneurship becomes more desirable because the opportunity cost—the income from
being a worker—is lower. On the other hand, reasonably-able entrepreneurs who have the
means to meet the financing needs of large-scale production face relatively higher output
prices and lower factor prices, which lead to even larger establishments.
    In the real world, many country-specific distortions that we do not consider in our model
affect the absolute scale of establishments, particularly in developing countries.30 For this
reason, we first focus on our model prediction on the relative scale of establishments across
sectors. Then we revisit our model predictions on how financial frictions affect the absolute
scale of sectors.

4.3.1   Cross-Country Analysis of Relative Scale

Evaluating this implication requires data sources for scale that have full coverage and are
comparable across countries. The available OECD SSIS is designed for comparability of
industries, but its coverage is not well documented: Our concern is that small, informal
establishments are not well accounted for in the data. Furthermore, not all countries have
complete coverage of industries, and only the US provides both establishment-level and
enterprise-level data. We have ten additional countries with comparable data: the three large
  30
   Hsieh and Klenow (2007b) and Guner et al. (2008) highlight the importance of such distortions, for
example.



                                                 29
advanced economies (France, Germany, and the UK) and the seven “less-developed” coun-
tries available (Czech Republic, Hungary, Korea, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, and Turkey).
Korea and Turkey provide establishment-level data, while the others provide enterprise-level
data.31
    For both measures of scale (workers per enterprise or per establishment), we calculate the
average for the tradable and the non-tradable sectors in each country, and take the ratio of
the two. Using enterprise-level data, we find that in each of the five less-developed countries,
the relative scale of the tradable sector (ranging from 3.4 to 4.1, with a median of 3.8) is
larger than in the US (3.1). With establishment-level data, we find much more striking
disparities: 10.6 for Korea and 35.0 for Turkey, against 3.7 for the US.32
    While available OECD data show that the relative size of tradable establish-
ments/enterprieses (to non-tradable ones) is larger in less-developed countries than in
the US, these data seem to suffer from coverage issues. We now turn to a case study of the
US and Mexico, using data sets with vastly superior comparability and coverage.

4.3.2    A Case Study of the US and Mexico

Data for the US and Mexico allow a more detailed analysis. We use them to revisit our model
implication on how financial frictions affect the absolute scale of establishments across sec-
tors. We use Mexico’s 1998 National Survey of Micro-Enterprises (ENAMIN) to impute
corrections that make the US and Mexican data fully comparable, even on a detailed level.
These corrections include adjustments to remove non-employers, which are included in the
Mexican Census but not for the US, and adjustments to add small-scale entrepreneurs with-
out a fixed location, who are included in the US Census (though presumably unimportant)
but not for Mexico, where they play an important role. We analyze data at the four-digit
level, dropping industries that have a high level of government involvement or provision.33
    The average establishment size is substantially smaller in Mexico than in the US (7 vs.
16 workers per establishment overall), particularly in non-tradables: retail, transportation,
  31
      The data are for 2002. When not available, we use those for 2001 or 2003. Data on three additional
advanced economies (Australia, Canada, and Japan) and one additional “less-developed” country (Mexico)
lacked coverage of too many sectors of the economy. Given our focus on financing, we drop government, as
well as industries that are extreme outliers and are substantially government-financed: air transportation,
central banking, postal service, and rail transportation.
   32
      We also considered classifying industries into large-scale vs. small-scale sectors. For a given industry, we
compute its average workers per enterprise in France, Germany, the UK and the US. This quantity is used
to sort industries into the large-scale sector and the small-scale sector. The results are consistent with our
findings based on tradable vs. non-tradable sectors: The relative size of enterprises/establishments in the
large-scale sector to those in the small-scale sector is bigger in the less-developed economies than in the rich
economies.
   33
      More precisely, we drop health, education, petroleum mining and transportation, urban and inter-city
passenger rail, air transportation, gambling and casinos, and some other social service industries in which
government establishments constitute at least 50 percent of all establishments.


                                                       30
and construction, for example. Comparison of non-tradables at a more detailed level is not
possible, unfortunately, since the US and Mexican classification schemes do not correspond
at a further disaggregated level for non-tradables.



                                                        Mexico Scale vs. US Scale: Tradables
                                                                  (each dot is an 4-digit tradable industry)
                                                    8
                                                                                                             Auto
                                                                               AV
                       Log Scale (Workers/Estab.)

                                                    7                          Equip.            Steel
                                                                                        Comp.
                                                    6
                                in Mexico




                                                    5
                                                    4       Apparel
                                                            Access.
                                                    3
                                                            Misc.
                                                            textiles
                                                    2                                                 Dairy
                                                                                     Misc.            Prod.
                                                    1                      Bakery & Wood             Clay
                                                                           Tortillas Prod.           Prod.
                                                    0
                                                        0         1    2       3        4    5           6          7   8

                                                               Log Scale (Workers/Estab.) in U.S.




Fig. 8: Average establishment size in a given industry in Mexico (logarithmic vertical axis) against
that in the US (logarithmic horizontal axis). 88 industries in the tradable sector.

    Tradables, however, show perfect correspondence between the two countries, a goal of the
NAICS system. In the tradable sector, many industries have larger average establishment
size in Mexico than in the US (those lying above the 45-degree line in Figure 8), although on
average Mexican tradables establishments are smaller than those in the US. Figure 8 plots
the average establishment size (workers per establishment) of a given industry in Mexico
(logarithmic vertical axis) against that in the US (logarithmic horizontal axis) for 88 four-
digit industries in the tradable sector. The data show a slope that is clearly steeper than
the 45-degree line. That is, within the tradable sector, the industries that are of a large
scale in the US are even larger in Mexico, while those that are small scale in the US are
even smaller in Mexico. The regression coefficient is 1.27 with a standard error of 0.14.
This finding is consistent with our simulation results on absolute scale of establishments. In
addition, the fact that, at the disaggregated industry level, Mexico has wider variation of
scale than the US is consistent with the model’s prediction of a higher coefficient of variation
of establishment size for financially less developed countries (Figure 7, bottom right panel).
Testing this prediction, however, would require more detailed establishment-level data.
    To summarize, one of our model predictions in Section 4.2 is that, in an economy with


                                                                                             31
financial frictions, the large-scale sector has an even larger average establishment size, and
the small-scale sector has an even smaller average establishment size, when compared to the
perfect-credit benchmark. This implication on absolute scale in the tradable vs. non-tradable
context is rejected: The tradables establishments in Mexico are on average smaller than
those in the US. However, at a more disaggregated level, using comparable establishment-
level data, we have shown that large-scale industries tend to have an even larger average
establishment size in Mexico than in the US, while small-scale industries have an even smaller
average establishment size in Mexico than in the US. This finding, hitherto undocumented
in the literature, renders some support to our model implication on absolute scale across
sectors. Another conclusion we draw from this case study is that our mechanism, in which
scale difference induces differential impact of financial frictions across sectors, will also work
at a more disaggregated level, not just for the tradable vs. non-tradable dichotomy.

4.4     Robustness
We briefly discuss the robustness of our results to alternative model specifications. We
first consider other ways of generating scale differences between the two sectors. We have
constructed numerical examples for a version of our model where the sectoral scale difference
is driven by one-time setup costs, rather than by per-period fixed costs.34 While these
numerical examples were not precisely-calibrated exercises, we found that financial frictions
have an even larger impact on aggregate and sectoral productivity, reflecting the stronger
non-convexity that (front-loaded) setup costs impose. We chose our fixed-cost specification
to avoid the risk of exaggerating the impact of financial frictions, especially when there are
no reliable data on setup costs.35
    We have also considered the possibility that the sectoral scale difference hinges on the
establishment-level span of control. In particular, we set αj and θj , j = S, L, such that
αS + θS < αL + θL , while the ratio αj /θj is the same for j = S, L. The latter assumption
reflects the empirical facts on factor shares reported in Table 1. In calibrated exercises
with span-of-control differences and no fixed cost in either sector, we find that the effects
of financial frictions are broadly consistent with our findings in Section 4.2, although not as
  34
     In the recursive formulation of this specification, we need to carry an additional state variable indicating
whether in the previous period an individual was a worker, an entrepreneur in the S sector, or an entrepreneur
in the L sector. More important, we allow for between-periods borrowing, i.e., a < 0. We assume that debt
contracts are contingent on idea shocks such that the debt of those entrepreneurs hit with an idea shock
(with probability 1 − γ) at the end of a period is forgiven. The lower bound on asset a is defined to be
the most generous debt limit that is enforceable when the borrower is not hit with an idea shock. The
zero-profit condition of the financial intermediary will determine the spread between the deposit and the
borrowing rates.
  35
     See, for example, Paulson and Townsend (2004) and McKenzie and Woodruff (2006) for discussions on
setup and fixed costs for small establishments in developing countries. Sutton (1991) explains the difficulties
of estimating setup costs using data from oligopolistic industries in developed countries.


                                                       32
large in magnitude. One important distinction is the implication on how relative scale of
the two sectors responds to financial frictions. With span-of-control differences, the relative
scale of the two sectors (L to S) decreases with financial frictions. Recall that our model
with fixed cost differences predicts the opposite, consistent with our empirical findings in
Section 4.3. It is mainly for this reason that we chose the fixed-cost model for our analysis.
    Finally, we have also tried an alternative specification for the collateral constraint: a
capital rental limit that does not depend on the entrepreneurs’ talent z. More specifically,
the sum of the capital rental and the fixed cost could not exceed λa, where λ is a parameter
governing the degree of financial frictions, and a is the financial wealth of an entrepreneur
at the beginning of a period. Note that λ = 1 corresponds to financial autarky, and that
λ → +∞ to the perfect-credit benchmark. In calibrated exercises with this simpler collateral
constraint, the results are very similar to our results in Section 4.2, both qualitatively and
quantitatively. One nice feature of this specification is that the absolute scale (average
workers per establishment) of small-scale sector establishments are monotonically decreasing
in the degree of financial frictions, unlike the hump in the bottom left panel of Figure 7. We
nevertheless decided to go with a more general specification where collateral constraints are
determined by both entrepreneurs’ financial wealth and talent.


5    Concluding Remarks
We have developed a quantitative theory linking countries’ level of financial development
to their per-capita GDP, aggregate TFP, relative productivity and prices across sectors.
Financial frictions distort the allocation of capital and entrepreneurial talents, and are found
to have sizable effects on a country’s output per worker and aggregate productivity. The
sectors characterized by large fixed costs at the establishment level operate most efficiently
at larger scales, and hence have bigger financing needs. For this reason, they are more
vulnerable to financial frictions than small-scale sectors. We have shown that this mechanism
is quantitatively important, explaining half of the observed relationship between financial
development and relative productivity of sectors in the data. We have also shown that our
mechanism is also consistent with the larger differences in average establishment sizes across
sectors observed in financially less developed countries.
    Our analysis shows how micro-level (firm or establishment) technological differences
across sectors help us better understand macroeconomic issues such as relative productivity
and relative prices. In this context, we view the study of other micro-level distortions—e.g.
size-dependent policies of Guner et al. (2008), and entry barriers of Djankov et al. (2002)—
and their interaction with financial frictions as promising avenues for future research.



                                              33
Proof of Proposition 1 The rental of capital k in sector j is enforceable iff:

      ṽ j (k; a, z) ≥ v d ad , z ,
                                 
                                                                                                             (6)

where ṽ j (k; a, z) is the value of a non-defaulting entrepreneur with wealth a and ability z
that operates in sector j with rented capital k:

      ṽ j (k; a, z) = max {u (c) + β [γv (a′ , z) + (1 − γ) Ez′ v (a′ , z ′ )]}
                         ′ c,a
                     ′
      s.t. pc + a ≤ max {pj zj f (k, l) − wl} − Rk − (1 + r) pj κj + (1 + r) a.
                             l


We define v d ad , z to be the value of a defaulting entrepreneur with ability z who gets to
                    

keep ad = (1 − φ) [maxl {pj zj f (k, l) − wl} + (1 − δ) k]:

      v d ad , z = max   {u (c) + β [γv (a′ , z) + (1 − γ) Ez′ v (a′ , z ′ )]}
                
                    c,a′
                                                                        
                  ′
      s.t. pc + a ≤ (1 − φ) max {pj zj f (k, l) − wl} + (1 − δ) k .
                                      l


It is straightforward to see that ṽ j (k; a, z) ≥ v d ad , z iff:
                                                             

                                                                                                               
      max {pj zj f (k, l) − wl} − Rk − (1 + r) pj κj + (1 + r) a ≥ (1 − φ) max {pj zj f (k, l) − wl} + (1 − δ) k ,
        l                                                                                l


which is equivalent to:

      (1 + r) (a − pj κj ) ≥ (1 − φ + r + φδ) k − φ max {pj zj f (k, l) − wl} .
                                                            l


As long as limk→0 fk (k, l) = ∞ and limk→∞ fk (k, l) = 0, there exists a unique function
k̄ j (a, zj ; φ) defined implicitly by:

      (1 + r) (a − pj κj ) = (1 − φ + r + φδ) k̄ j (a, zj ; φ) − φ max pj zj f k̄ j (a, zj ; φ) , l − wl .
                                                                                                  
                                                                        l


It is straightforward to see that k̄ j (a, zj ; φ) is strictly increasing in a, zj , and φ.

Proof of Proposition 2 In an economy with perfect credit markets, selection of individ-
uals into entrepreneurship and sectors is determined by their entrepreneurial talents and
relative prices. In particular, there exist two threshold ideas ẑj , j = S, L, and a function
ẑj (z−j ), (j, −j) = (S, L), (L, S), dividing the space of entrepreneurial ideas (zS , zL ) into
workers and entrepreneurs in the S and L sectors. These thresholds are defined by the
following three indifference conditions:

                                            θ
                                  α
                           α  1−α−θ   1−α−θ
                    1                  θ
      (pj ẑj )   1−α−θ
                                                (1 − α − θ) = w + pj κj ,          s = S, L,                 (7)
                            R          w


                                                                34
                                           θ
                                 α
                          α  1−α−θ   1−α−θ
                                1      θ
     (pj ẑj (z−j ))          1−α−θ
                                               (1 − α − θ) − pj κj
                           R           w
                                             θ
                                   α
                            α  1−α−θ   1−α−θ
                       1                 θ
        = (p−j z−j ) 1−α−θ
                                                  (1 − α − θ) − p−j κ−j .                                                                                   (8)
                             R           w

Integrating over individual output of entrepreneurs in sector j net of fixed costs, we obtain
an expression for the net output of sector j,
                   Z      ∞     Z    ẑ−j (zj )                                                             Z     ∞   Z   ẑ−j (zj )
                                                              α             θ
     Yj = N                                       zj k (z) l (z) µ (dz) − κj N                                                         µ (dz) .             (9)
                      ẑj       0                                                                               ẑj   0

                                    1                                                     1
                          z 1−α−θ Kj                                                z 1−α−θ Lj
Using k (z) =                 1   N
                                                      and l (z) =                       1   N
                                                                                               ,              which follow from the first order conditions
                          Zj1−α−θ                                                   Zj1−α−θ
of the firms’ problem, we can rewrite (9) as:
                                   1
                                           α      1
                                                           θ
                   Z      ∞          ẑ−j (zj )
                               zj1−α−θ Kj
                                Z
                                                zj1−α−θ Lj
                                                                                Z ∞ Z ẑ−j (zj )
     Yj = N               zj      1
                                                  1
                                                              µ  (dz) − κ j N                   µ (dz)
              ẑj  0           Zj1−α−θ Nj       Zj1−α−θ Nj                       ẑj   0

           N 1−α−θ Kjα Lθj ∞ ẑ−j (zj ) 1−α−θ
                          Z Z               1
                                                              Z ∞ Z ẑ−j (zj )
        =         α+θ                  z j     µ (dz) − κ j N                  µ (dz) .
               Zj1−α−θ     ẑj  0                              ẑj   0



Then,
                                                                  Z    ∞     Z      ẑ−j (zj )
     Yj = N 1−α−θ Kjα Lθj Zj − κj N                                                              µ (dz) ,                                                  (10)
                                                                      ẑj       0

                                                         1
                                                                                    1−α−θ
                      R ∞ R ẑ−j (zj )
where Zj =                ẑj        0
                                                     zj 1−α−θ
                                                                  µ (dz)                          .

   Assuming µ (dz) = η 2 (zS zL )−(η+1) and that entrepreneurs are a small fractions of the
population (i.e., ẑj is large for j = S, L), we obtain
              "Z                                                            #1−α−θ               "Z                                           #1−α−θ
                       ∞    Z       ẑ−s (zj )                                                            ∞
                                                       1                                                            1        −(η+1)
     Zj =                                        z   1−α−θ    µ (dz)                       ≈                  z   1−α−θ    ηzj      dzj                ,
                    ẑj         0                                                                     ẑj
     Z   ∞    Z   ẑ−j (zj )
                                µ (dz) ≈ ẑj−η .
        ẑj   0


                          α              Kj1−α          1               θ             L1−θ
                                                                                       j     1
   Using (7),             R
                                =         Lθj        p j Zj
                                                              and       w
                                                                                =      Kjα pj Zj
                                                                                                 ,          we obtain

                                                                                  1
                                       h                            iα+θ  1+η(α+θ)
                                    w           (1−α−θ)
               κj +
              
                                    pj        η(1−α−θ)−1 η
                                                                            
                                                                            
     ẑj =                                                                                            .                                                    (11)
              
                      (1 − α − θ) N −α−θ Kjα Lθj                                   
                                                                                    


Substituting into (10),
                                                       αη               θη
                                1
     Yj = Aj N 1+η(α+θ) Kj1+η(α+θ) Lj1+η(α+θ) ,


                                                                                                      35
where
                 h                                 1
                                            i 1+η(α+θ)  h                              i
                       (1−α−θ)                                   p κj
                     η(1−α−θ)−1 η                        1 − pj κjj +w   1 − α − θ − η1
        Aj =                                     pj κj      η(1−α−θ)−1                   .
                                                    w   + 1    1+η(α+θ)




Proof of Proposition 3 From the first order conditions of an entrepreneur of productivity
z and that of the marginal entrepreneur (ẑj ), we obtain
                                  1
                                1−α−θ
                          z
        l (z) =                             l (ẑj ) .
                         ẑj

Thus,
                       "  1                 #   "              1−α−θ            #           η(1−α−θ)
          h       i       z 1−α−θ                           l                           l (ẑj )
        Pr l̃j > l = P            l (ẑj ) > l = P z >                   ẑj z ≥ ẑj =                     .
                         ẑj                             l (ẑj )                          l

The aggregate establishment size distribution in the economy is then given by a mixture of
Pareto distributions:
                                  η(1−α−θ)                         η(1−α−θ)
          h       i       l (ẑS )                     l (ẑL )
        Pr l̃j > l = nS                      + nL                               ,                  l ≥ l (ẑS ) .
                              l                     max {l, l (ẑL )}
                                                                1
                                                             z 1−α−θ Lj
Finally, by integrating l (z) =                                  1   N
                                                                          over z, we calculate the average establishment size
                                                             Zj1−α−θ
in sector j:
                     Lj
        l̄j =                    .                                                                                       (12)
                N (1 − µ (ẑj ))

The optimal allocation of labor Lj and entrepreneurs N (1 − µ (ẑj )) to sector j implies:

        θpj N 1−α−θ Zj Kjα Lθ−1
                            j   = w,                                                                                     (13)

        (1 − α − θ) pj N −α−θ Zj Kjα Lθj = pj κj (1 − µ (ẑj )) + wµ (ẑj ) .                                            (14)

Taking the ratio of these two conditions, we obtain:
        1−α−θ      Lj                    p j κj     µ (ẑj )
                               = (1 − γ)        +              .                                                         (15)
          θ   N (1 − µ (ẑj ))             w      1 − µ (ẑj )

Substituting (14) into (11), we obtain:
                                                                         1
                                     h                     iα+θ  1+η(α+θ)
                                  w           (1−α−θ)
                 κj +
                
                                  pj        η(1−α−θ)−1 η
                                                                   
                                                                   
        ẑj =                  pj κj (1−µ(ẑj ))+ pw µ(ẑj )
                                                                                ,                                        (16)
                
                                                        j          
                                                                    
                                              Zj
                                                       
        p j κj     µ (ẑj )       p j κj     µ (ẑj )     η (1 − α − θ) − 1
               +              =          +                                  .                                            (17)
          w      1 − µ (ẑj )       w      1 − µ (ẑj )     η (1 − α − θ)

Combining (12), (15) and (17), we obtain the desired expression:
         l̄j     p j κj + w
              =                .
        l̄j ′   p j ′ κj ′ + w




                                                                              36
References
Aghion, P. and P. Bolton (1997): “A Theory of Trickle-Down Growth and Develop-
 ment,” Review of Economic Studies, 64, 151–172.
Amaral, P. and E. Quintin (2005): “Financial Intermediation and Economic Develop-
 ment: A Quantitative Assessment,” Manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
Balassa, B. (1964): “The Purchasing Power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal,” Journal of
 Political Economy, 72, 584–596.
Banerjee, A. V. and E. Duflo (2005): “Growth Theory through the Lens of Develop-
 ment Economics,” in Handbook of Economic Growth, ed. by P. Aghion and S. N. Durlauf,
 Amsterdam: Elsevier, vol. 1A, 473–552.
Banerjee, A. V. and A. F. Newman (1993): “Occupational Choice and the Process of
 Development,” Journal of Political Economy, 101, 274–298.
Beck, T. (2002): “Financial Development and International Trade: Is There a Link,” World
 Bank Economic Review, 57, 107–131.
Beck, T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt, L. Laeven, and R. Levine (2008): “Finance, Firm
 Size, and Growth,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 40, 1327–1554.
Beck, T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt, and R. Levine (2000): “A New Database on the
 Structure and Development of the Financial Sector,” World Bank Economic Review, 14,
 597–605.
Buera, F. J. and J. P. Kaboski (2008): “The Rise of the Service Economy,” Manuscript,
 UCLA.
Buera, F. J. and Y. Shin (2008): “Financial Frictions and the Persistence of History: A
 Quantitative Exploration,” Manuscript, Washington University in St. Louis.
Caselli, F. and N. Gennaioli (2005): “Dynastic Management,” Manuscript, London
 School of Economics.
Chari, V. V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (1997): “The Poverty of Nations:
 A Quantitative Investigation,” Staff Report 204, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Davis, S. J., J. C. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2006): “Volatility and
 Dispersion in Business Growth Rates: Publicly Traded versus Privately Held Firms,” in
 NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2006, ed. by M. Gertler and K. Rogoff, Cambridge, MA:
 MIT Press, 107–156.
Davis, S. J., J. C. Haltiwanger, and S. Schuh (1996): Job Creation and Destruction,
 Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Djankov, S., R. La Prota, F. Lopez-de Silanes, and A. Shleifer (2002): “The
 Regulation of Entry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 1–37.
Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2001): “Technology, Trade, and Growth: A Unified Frame-
 work,” European Economic Review, 45, 742–755.


                                          37
Erosa, A. and A. Hidalgo Cabrillana (2008): “On Finance as a Theory of TFP,
 Cross-Industry Productivity Differences, and Economic Rents,” International Economic
 Review, 49, 437–473.
Giné, X. and R. M. Townsend (2004): “Evaluation of Financial Liberalization: A Gen-
 eral Equilibrium Model with Constrained Occupation Choice,” Journal of Development
 Economics, 74, 269–307.
Guner, N., G. Ventura, and Y. Xu (2008): “Macroeconomic Implications of Size-
 Dependent Policies,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11, 721–744.
Hall, R. E. and C. I. Jones (1999): “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
 Output per Worker than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 83–116.
Herrendorf, B. and A. Valentinyi (2006): “Which Sectors Make the Poor Countries
 so Unproductive,” Manuscript, Arizona State University.
Hsieh, C.-T. and P. Klenow (2007a): “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China
 and India,” Manuscript, Stanford University.
——— (2007b): “Relative Prices and Relative Prosperity,” American Economic Review, 97,
 562–585.
Jeong, H. and R. M. Townsend (2007): “Sources of TFP Growth: Occupational Choice
  and Financial Deepening,” Economic Theory, 32, 197–221.
Jones, C. I. (1994): “Economic Growth and the Relative Price of Capital,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 34, 359–382.
King, R. G. and R. Levine (1993a): “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right,”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 717–737.
——— (1993b): “Finance, Entrepreneurship and Growth: Theory and Evidence,” Journal
 of Monetary Economics, 32, 513–542.
Klenow, P. J. and A. Rodrı́guez-Clare (1997): “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth
 Economics: Has it Gone Too Far?” in Macroeconomics Annual 1997, ed. by B. S. Bernanke
 and J. J. Rotemberg, Cambridge: MIT Press, 73–102.
Kletzer, K. and P. Bardhan (1987): “Credit Markets and Patterns of International
 Trade,” Journal of Development Economics, 27, 57–70.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez de Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny (1998): “Law
 and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 1113–1155.
Lloyd-Ellis, H. and D. Bernhardt (2000): “Enterprise, Inequality and Economic
  Development,” Review of Economic Studies, 67, 147–168.
Lucas, Jr., R. E. (1978): “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” Bell Journal of
 Economics, 9, 508–523.
Manova, K. (2008a): “Credit Constraints, Equity Market Liberalizations and International
 Trade,” Journal of International Economics, 76, 33–47.


                                          38
——— (2008b): “Credit Constraints, Heterogeneous Firms, and International Trade,”
 Manuscript, Stanford University.
Matsuyama, K. (2005): “Credit Market Imperfections and Patterns of International Trade
 and Capital Flows,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 3, 714–723.
McKenzie, D. J. and C. M. Woodruff (2006): “Do Entry Costs Provide an Empirical
 Basis for Poverty Traps? Evidence from Mexican Microenterprises,” Development and
 Cultural Change, 55, 3–42.
Mendoza, E. (1995): “The Terms of Trade, the Real Exchange Rate, and Economic
 Fluctuations,” International Economic Review, 36, 101–137.
Ostry, J. and C. Reinhart (1991): “Private Saving and Terms of Trade Shocks: Evidence
 from Developing Countries,” Manuscript, International Monetary Fund.
Paulson, A. L. and R. M. Townsend (2004): “Entrepreneurship and Financial Con-
  straints in Thailand,” Journal of Corporate Finance, 10, 229–262.
Piketty, T. (1997): “The Dynamics of the Wealth Distribution and the Interest Rate with
  Credit Rationing,” Review of Economic Studies, 64, 173–189.
Rajan, R. G. and L. Zingales (1998): “Financial Dependence and Growth,” American
 Economic Review, 88, 559–586.
Restuccia, D. and R. Rogerson (2008): “Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity
 with Heterogeneous Establishments,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11, 707–720.
Restuccia, D., D. T. Yang, and X. Zhu (2008): “Agriculture and Aggregate Pro-
 ductivity: A Quantitative Cross-Country Analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55,
 234–250.
Rossi-Hansberg, E. and M. L. J. Wright (2007): “Establishment Size Dynamics in
 the Aggregate Economy,” American Economic Review, 97, 1639–1666.
Samuelson, P. A. (1964): “Theoretical Notes on Trade Problems,” Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 46, 145–154.
Sutton, J. (1991): Sunk Costs and Market Structure, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Townsend, R. M. (2006): “The Thai Economy: Growth, Inequality, Poverty and the
 Evaluation of Financial Systems,” Manuscript, University of Chicago.
Tybout, J. R. (2000): “Manufacturing Frims in Developing Countries: How Well Do They
 Do, and Why?” Journal of Economic Literature, 38, 11–44.
Valentinyi, A. and B. Herrendorf (2008): “Measuring Factor Income Shares at the
 Sector Level,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11, 820–835.
Wynne, J. (2005): “Wealth as a Determinant of Comparative Advantage,” American
 Economic Review, 95, 226–254.




                                          39
