                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE LONG TERM CONSEQUENCES OF FAMINE ON SURVIVORS:
EVIDENCE FROM A UNIQUE NATURAL EXPERIMENT USING CHINA'S GREAT FAMINE

                                              Xin Meng
                                              Nancy Qian

                                         Working Paper 14917
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14917


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2009




This paper is a companion to “The Institutional Causes of Famine in China, 1959-61” by Xin Meng,
Nancy Qian and Pierre Yared. This paper supercedes the previous versions “The Long Run Health
and Economic Consequences of Famine on Survivors: Evidence from China’s Great Famine,” (2005);
and “The Causes of Cross-Sectional Inequity in Exposure to China’s Great Famine and Its Long Run
Health and Economic Consequences on Survivors” (2006). We thank Daron Acemoglu, Andrew Foster,
Joshua Angrist, Abhijit Banerjee, Angus Deaton, Esther Duflo, Oded Galor, Bob Gregory, Ivan Fernandez-Vál,
Vernon Henderson, Larry Katz, Ashley Lester, Ted Miguel, Gerard Padró-i-Miquel, Rohini Pande,
Gerard Roland, Yona Rubinstein, David Weil and Noam Yuchtman for their insights; seminar participants
at Brown , UC Berkeley, Princeton, Maryland, CEPR, LSE, Oxford, IIES, IGIER, the SF Federal Reserve,
the World Bank and the CCER PKU for useful comments; Tal Levy, Sara Lowes, Katherine Wilson
and Ang Sun for excellent research assistance; and the Michigan Data Center and the China Health
and Nutrition Survey, funded by NIH (R01-HD30880, DK056350, and R01-HD38700), and the Carolina
Population Center and the Chinese CDC for providing data. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Xin Meng and Nancy Qian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Long Term Consequences of Famine on Survivors: Evidence from a Unique Natural Experiment
using China's Great Famine
Xin Meng and Nancy Qian
NBER Working Paper No. 14917
April 2009, Revised March 2010
JEL No. I1,J01,J1,O1

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper estimates the long run impact of famine on survivors in the context of China’s Great Famine.
To address problems of measurement error of famine exposure and potential endogeneity of famine
intensity, we exploit a novel source of variation in regional intensity of famine derived from the unique
institutional determinants of the Great Famine. To address attenuation bias caused by selection for
survival, we estimate the impact on the upper quantiles of the distribution of outcomes. Our results
indicate that in-utero and early childhood exposure to famine had large negative effects on adult height,
weight, weight-for-height, educational attainment and labor supply.


Xin Meng
Australian National University
xin.meng@anu.edu.au

Nancy Qian
Department of Economics
Yale University
27 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520-8269
and NBER
nancy.qian@yale.edu
The Long Term Consequences of Famine on Survivors:
   Evidence from China’s Great Famine, 1959-61
                              Xin Meng                Nancy Qian∗
                                      December 5, 2009


                                             Abstract
            This paper estimates the long run impact of famine on survivors in the context
        of China’s Great Famine. To address problems of measurement error of famine
        exposure and potential endogeneity of famine intensity, we exploit a novel source
        of variation in regional intensity of famine derived from the unique institutional
        determinants of the Great Famine. To address attenuation bias caused by selection
        for survival, we estimate the impact on the upper quantiles of the distribution of
        outcomes. Our results indicate that in-utero and early childhood exposure to famine
        had large negative effects on adult height, weight, weight-for-height, educational
        attainment and labor supply. (O1 Development, I0 Health, J1 Demography)


1       Introduction
The impact of famine has been a question of long-standing interest amongst economists.
In the twentieth century, over 100 million individuals have perished from exposure to
famines.1 In 1959-61, an estimated 16-30 million people died in China’s Great Famine
    ∗
     This paper is a companion to “The Institutional Causes of Famine in China, 1959-61” by Xin Meng,
Nancy Qian and Pierre Yared. This paper supercedes the previous versions “The Long Run Health and
Economic Consequences of Famine on Survivors: Evidence from China’s Great Famine,” (2005); and
“The Causes of Cross-Sectional Inequity in Exposure to China’s Great Famine and Its Long Run Health
and Economic Consequences on Survivors” (2006). We thank Daron Acemoglu, Andrew Foster, Joshua
Angrist, Abhijit Banerjee, Angus Deaton, Esther Duflo, Oded Galor, Bob Gregory, Ivan Fernandez-Vál,
Vernon Henderson, Larry Katz, Ashley Lester, Ted Miguel, Gerard Padró-i-Miquel, Rohini Pande, Gerard
Roland, Yona Rubinstein, David Weil and Noam Yuchtman for their insights; seminar participants at
Brown , UC Berkeley, Princeton, Maryland, CEPR, LSE, Oxford, IIES, IGIER, the SF Federal Reserve,
the World Bank and the CCER PKU for useful comments; Tal Levy, Sara Lowes, Katherine Wilson
and Ang Sun for excellent research assistance; and the Michigan Data Center and the China Health
and Nutrition Survey, funded by NIH (R01-HD30880, DK056350, and R01-HD38700), and the Carolina
Population Center and the Chinese CDC for providing data. Comments and suggestions are welcomed
at xin.meng@anu.edu.au and nancy.qian@yale.edu.
   1
     See Sen (1981) and Ravallion (1997).


                                                 1
alone.2 Both the fear of future famines and the lingering consequences of those that have
already passed are ever relevant as we begin the new millennium. Hundreds of millions of
people alive today in developing countries have been affected by a famine at some point
during their lifetime. And as recently as 2002, the United Nation’s World Food Programme
calculated that up to 38 million Africans were living under the threat of famine. In China’s
case, survivors who were exposed to the Great Famine during early childhood or in-utero
have only just passed the middle of their lives. While much attention has been paid to
the effects of famine on mortality, surprisingly little has been paid to the effects on the
millions of those who survived. The net effect of famine exposure on survivors is not a
priori obvious for either health or labor market outcomes. On the one hand, severe food
deprivation can only have adverse effects on the health of any given individual. Besides
the direct mechanism of starvation, malnutrition also decreases the human body’s ability
to resist disease. On the other hand, it has been observed that conditional on survival,
children who are malnourished exhibit rapid “catching-up” if proper care and nutrition are
given.3 Furthermore, studies have argued that when the famine is severe and mortality
rates are high, survivors tend to be comprised of a small number of selected individuals
who have naturally stronger constitutions and are better able to resist the negative effects
of famine.4 In the extreme scenario, these few survivors may be resilient to the extent
that they do not exhibit symptoms of the adverse effects. For labor market outcomes,
one must in addition consider the impact of famine in reducing labor supply, which could
increase wages for survivors. This could potentially offset negative effects of the famine
on survivors’ health and work capacity.
       This study addresses these questions by examining the net effect of childhood expo-
sure to China’s Great Famine on adult health and labor supply outcomes thirty years
afterwards. We find that exposure to famine in-utero and during early childhood had
significant negative effects on adult health, educational attainment and labor supply. The
results also indicate that selection for survival and measurement error in the intensity of
exposure cause standard OLS estimates of famine impacts to be severely attenuated.
       Existing studies of the impact of famine on survivors provide somewhat ambiguous
results. Epidemiological studies on the long run impact of the Dutch Famine (1944-
   2
     See Coale (1981), Yao (1999), Peng (1987), Ashton et al. (1984) and Banister (1987).
   3
     Outside of the famine context, there is evidence that conditional on survival, the negative impact
of adverse childhood nutritional shocks is mitigated by rapid “catch-up” (Krueger, 1969; Hoddinott and
Kinsey, 2001).
   4
     For example, see Gorgens et al. (2002, revised 2007) and Deaton (2008).


                                                  2
1945) find that famine is positively correlated with psychological disorders in adulthood
(Neugebauer et al., 1999; Brown et al., 2000; Hulshoff et al., 2000); obesity (Ravelli et al.,
1999); and glucose intolerance (Ravelli et al., 1998). In contrast, Stanner et al. (1997)
study a sample of approximately 600 survivors of the Leningrad siege (1941-1944) and
find no effects of exposure. And Luo et al. (2006) find little or no difference in outcomes
between survivors and a control group of individuals who were never exposed to China’s
Great Famine.
   All studies of the long-run impact of famine face several empirical difficulties. First,
it is difficult to measure the intensity of exposure. Researchers are generally not able
to collect data at the time of the famine. The migration typically induced by famine
makes it difficult to determine an individual’s level of exposure after the fact. Even if
researchers can learn of a survivor’s location during the famine, the constructed measure of
exposure intensity is likely to be measured with error. Second, famine typically occurs in
concurrence with other events such as conflict, which can confound causal interpretation.
Additionally, one may suspect that famine is more likely to strike in less agriculturally
productive regions. In that case, the correlation between famine intensity and survivor
outcomes may reflect the effect of being born in a particularly impoverished region rather
than the causal impact of famine on survivors.
   Finally, selection for survival can attenuate the estimated impact of famine. Sur-
vivors are typically from the top of the distribution of important characteristics, such as
physical resilience, income, and access to nourishments (Gorgens et. al., 2002, revised
2007). Those from the lower parts of the distribution die. Since these characteristics are
likely to be correlated with health and labor market outcomes later in life, comparing
the mean of the distribution of survivors to the mean of the distribution of the control
group could underestimate the true impact of famine. A recent study by Bozzoli, Deaton
and Quintana-Domeque (2008) used cross-country data on infant mortality, which they
interpreted as a measure of the disease and nutritional burden in childhood, and the mean
adult height of surviving children, to develop a model of selection and stunting. They
find that poor nutrition and disease during early childhood is not only responsible for
mortality in childhood but also increases long-term health risks for survivors, risks that
express themselves in adult height, as well as in late-life disease. Interestingly, their model
predicts that, at sufficiently high mortality levels, selection can dominate scarring, leaving
a taller population of survivors. This is consistent with the finding that survivors born
close before and during the Chinese famine are not obviously shorter in stature relative

                                              3
to those never exposed.
   Several recent studies have carefully constructed empirical strategies to address some
of these issues for studying the long run effects of China’s Great Famine. Gorgens et al.
(2002, revised 2007) argue that the observed similarity between survivors and unexposed
individuals is driven by attenuation bias from selection and that genetic determinants for
survival are more likely to be transmitted to children than exposure to famine. Under this
assumption, they show that selection bias can be mitigated by controlling for attributes
of children. Their study does not address the problem that exposure to famine may
be endogenous to other factors. To establish causal identification, Chen and Zhou (2002)
use a difference-in-differences (DD) strategy. They compare exposed cohorts to unexposed
cohorts between provinces where famine era mortality rates were high to those where they
were low, finding that individuals who were one or two years of age during the famine were
shorter in stature on average. Shi (2008) uses a similar strategy and finds that famine
exposure as young children reduced education attainment and labor supply for women.
Also using a DD strategy, Almond et al. (2006) focus on the effect of in-utero exposure.
They compare children born to parents in Hong Kong who were never exposed to those
born to parents who immigrated from mainland China and were exposed. They find
that in-utero famine exposure has adverse effects on the adult labor supply and marriage
outcomes for men. Their results are consistent with the findings of Brandt, Siow and
Vogel (2008), who use a decomposition approach and find that the famine cohort is less
attractive on the marriage market relative to the cohorts that immediately preceded and
followed. These latter three studies do not attempt to address problems from selection.
All of the studies mentioned could suffer from measurement error, which if random, would
attenuate their estimates of the impact of famine exposure.
   The principal contribution of this paper is to improve upon existing studies of the
impact of famine for survivors by attempting to simultaneously address the problems of
measurement error, endogeneity and selection. We use the average county level cohort size
of survivors born during the famine to retrospectively measure exposure. This provides us
with a continuous measure of famine intensity at a more disaggregated level than previous
studies that have relied on province level variation. Next, to address the issue of positive
selection for survival, we estimate the effect of exposure on the upper quantiles of the
distribution of outcomes. Assuming that survivors are from the top of the distribution
of outcomes, these estimates will more accurately reflect the true effect of exposure to
famine. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to apply quantile analysis

                                             4
or to use survivor cohort size for studying the impact of famines. Finally, to address
the problems of measurement error and omitted variable bias (OVB), we instrument for
famine intensity with a unique source of variation derived from the institutional causes of
what’s often called the “Great Leap Forward Famine”.
   The Great Famine is widely believed to have been caused by over-procurement. In
a companion paper, Meng, Qian and Yared (2009) show that the centrally-planned pro-
curement institution transformed the small drop in production in 1959 into the largest
famine in history. More importantly for this study, it produced a striking geographic pat-
tern: regions that produce more grain suffered more during the famine. This pattern was
a reversal from normal years, when these productive regions had lower mortality rates.
In this paper, we use this institution driven cross-sectional variation in famine intensity,
measured as two predictors of famine intensity, grain productivity measured as the suit-
ability for cultivation predicted by natural conditions and area sown for grain in 1997, in
combination with birth cohort variation to instrument for exposure. The more grain a
region normally produced, the more intense the famine in that region; and the younger an
individual was at the time of the famine, the more vulnerable she was to exposure. Only
the combination of the two sources of variation can be interpreted as plausibly exogenous.
   Note that county level data on historic production is not available. At that disaggre-
gated level, production data is only available for 1997. Using geographic suitability and
the area sown for grain in 1997 together to instrument for famine intensity is similar in
spirit to proxying for historic production with area sown 1997, which suffers the caveat
that production patterns may have changed during the fourty interim years, and then
instrumenting for area sown with suitability for cultivation based on natural conditions
to address this problem. However, this more structured approach would require specific
assumptions about the production function of grain based on natural conditions and the
changes over time. Lacking a reliable model for making such predictions, we use a more
reduced form approach. This has the advantage of transparency while still addressing
key endogeneity and measurement error issues. The main challenge in using our strategy
is that regions that produced more grain and suffered more during the famine are also
regions that typically were better off (e.g. lower mortality rates). Since survivors presum-
ably recover more fully and quickly under better conditions, our 2SLS estimates should
be interpreted as the lower bound estimates of the true impact of famine exposure.
   The analysis uses data from several existing sources: the 1990 Population Census, the
1989 China Health and Nutritional Survey, the 1997 China Agricultural Census, and the

                                             5
FAO GAEZ data set on crop suitability. In addition, we supplement the main county-
level analysis with data on historical grain production and death rates at the province
level. Our study focuses on agricultural households. They suffered the most from the
famine and were relatively undisturbed by the Cultural Revolution (1966-1976) which
closed secondary and tertiary education institution during the late 1960s and early 1970s.
Our results for individuals in the 90th percentile of the distribution of outcomes indicate
that in-utero exposure to famine on average caused a 1.7% (2.8 cm) reduction in height,
a 2.3% (1.4 kg) reduction in weight and an 8.6% (0.6 years) reduction in educational
attainment. For those exposed during early childhood, the famine on average reduced
height by approximately 1.6% (2.7 cm), weight by 5% (3 kg), WFH by 1.2% (0.004
kg/cm) and labor supply by 13.9% (12.6 hours per week).5
       The adverse effects are consistent with results from other studies of the famine. How-
ever, by mitigating the attenuation bias caused by measurement error and selection, our
estimated impact of early childhood exposure is larger in magnitude than most previous
studies. The OLS estimates show that our crude correction for selection bias – estimating
the effect of exposure to famine for survivors in the 90th percentile – doubles the magni-
tude of the estimated effect that one would obtain from estimating for those in the mean
of the distribution. These results are important for both interpreting previous and con-
ducting future studies on the long run impact of famine on survivors. They demonstrate
that important long-term effects may be missed or underestimated when improper control
groups are used. The 2SLS estimates show that correcting for measurement error further
doubles the magnitude of the OLS estimates (for both individuals in the 90th percentile
and the mean of the distribution).
       The main caveat for interpreting the estimated effects on the 90th percentile as the
mean effect is that one needs to assume that exposure to famine does not have heteroge-
nous effects for individuals on the different quantiles of the distribution of outcomes that
would produce the same patterns as selection. One could argue that this is unlikely be-
cause it would mean that the healthiest individuals were most vulnerable to exposure to
famine. Casual observation would suggest that the opposite should be true: those who
are naturally weak should be more vulnerable to shocks. However, there is little we can
do to test this directly and the medical literature gives us little insight on the presence or
patterns of heterogenous effects. Hence, one should extrapolate the results on the 90th
   5
     For average effects, we report only the statistically significant outcomes for each group. The estimated
effects for each group are shown for all outcomes in the section on results.


                                                     6
percentile with caution. In any case, the insight that the effects on the 90th percentile are
much larger than the effects on the mean is important for any study of impacts of large
shocks (e.g. war) on survivor’s outcomes. Subject to the caveats we describe above, our
method of addressing selection has the benefit that it is easy to apply to other contexts
where researchers have similar priors about the pattern of selection, and the assumptions
necessary for interpretation are transparent.
       This study makes several contributions in addition to providing an improved estimate
of the long run impact of exposure to famine. The results can shed some light on the
impact of severe childhood malnutrition.6 As recently as 2004, World Development Indi-
cators reported that, worldwide, 30% of children under the age of five are estimated to be
severely malnourished.7 Our results show that these deprivations can have large, adverse
long run effects even amongst a sample of “strong” individuals selected to survive severe
famine. And this could in turn affect long run economic development.8 This study also
makes a methodological contribution. It shows that under certain conditions, estimation
of the impact on the upper quantiles of the distribution of outcomes can potentially be
one way for addressing attenuation bias caused by selection for survival. This method is
straightforward and can be easily employed for impact evaluations of other events where
similar patterns of selection for survival is present.
       There are several advantages to studying the long run impact of famine in the con-
text of China’s Great Famine. The institutional causes of the Great Famine provide an
unusual natural experiment. It is unlike any other famine in history with the exception
of the Ukrainian famine (1932-33) in that migration was strictly restricted. This allows
us to measure regional famine intensity with the cohort size of survivors with reasonable
accuracy. Second, it is a relatively good setting for isolating the effect of famine. Com-
pared to other famines, it occured in a time of relative prosperity and political stability.
Unlike notable famines such as the Ethiopian famine, the Chinese famine was not a direct
   6
     Recent studies on long run effects of health shocks during childhood include studies by Almond and
Mazumder (2005), Almond et al. (2005), Berhman and Rosenzweig (2005), Black et al. (2005), Bleakley
(2002), Case et al. (2004), Glewwe et al. (2001), and Maccini and Yang (2008).
   7
     Prevalence of child malnutrition is the percentage of children under five years of age whose height-
for-age is more than two standard deviations below the median for the international reference population
for ages 0 to 59 months. The reference population adopted by the WHO in 1983 is based on children
from the United States, who are assumed to be well-nourished.
   8
     The correlation between improved health status and economic factors has been found in studies by
Fogel (1994), Fogel and Costa (1997), and Smith (1999). Bloom et al. (2001) find a correlation between
longer life expectancy and higher economic growth rates. Weil (2005) finds that 26% of the cross-country
variation in income can be explained by differences in health.



                                                   7
outcome of civil war or other types of conflict. Famine stricken regions are not known
to have received special treatment from the government which could confound our esti-
mates. For political reasons, the Chinese government actually denied the extent of the
famine domestically and internationally for three decades. Finally, as a study of the long
run effects of childhood malnutrition, the interpretation of the effect of the region-cohort
level shocks from the Great Famine are not confounded by omitted variables related to
parental heterogeneity.9
        The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the background, the empirical
strategy and the conceptual framework. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 presents
the results. Section 5 interprets the results. Section 6 offers conclusions.


2        Background
Officially, the cause of the famine, called the “three years of natural disasters” (san nian
zi ran zai hai), was a fall in grain output due to bad weather. However, recent studies
have argued that very little can be explained by weather.10 Today, it is widely accepted
that although there was a fall in agricultural output, the extent of the famine was largely
driven by a set of misguided policies.11 Specifically, we argue that over-procurement of
grain from rural areas was a major contributor to the famine. Over-procurement in 1959
led to a decrease in nutrition in rural areas, which in turn led to a decrease in rural
workers’ physical capacity to produce grain. The reduction in work capacity along with
the consumption of inputs such as seeds in the winter of 1959 prolonged the famine. In
1960, the central government had decreased procurement. The famine ended in 1961,
when grain reserves were distributed to aid stricken regions. Production recovered to
pre-famine levels in few subsequent years. The government is not known to have targeted
any subsidies or compensation programs toward famine stricken regions after the event.
This is not wholly surprising given that the government has typically tried to minimize
    9
     If "bad" parents invest less in children’s nutrition and education, then the correlation between the
outcomes will reflect parental preferences rather than the causal impact of malnutrition on educational
attainment.
  10
     For example, see Li and Yang (2005), and Meng and Qian (2009).
  11
     The suspected causes of the famine include labor and acreage reductions in grain production (e.g.,
Peng, 1987; Yao, 1999), implementation of radical programs such as communal dining (e.g., Yang, 1996;
Chang and Wen, 1997), reduced work incentives due to the formation of the people’s communes (Perkins
and Yusuf, 1984), and the denial of peasants’ rights to exit from the commune (Lin, 1990). Lin (1990)
argues that the removal of exit rights destroyed reduced work incentives for shirkers, and hence decreased
overall grain production. See Li and Yang (2005) and Meng and Qian (2008) for a detailed discussion.



                                                    8
people’s perceptions of the famine’s severity (Li and Yang, 2005). Figure 1 plots average
county level cohort sizes by birth year from the 1990 Population Census. The most severe
reductions in cohort size are for those born close before and during the famine. The
reduction in cohort size is several orders of magnitude larger for agricultural populations
relative to non-agricultural populations.
       Meng, Qian and Yared (2009), henceforth MQY, expanded on previous studies of the
causes of the famine. In this companion paper, we show that despite the small fall in
production in 1959, had distribution of food been equal across regions, more than enough
food was produced in 1959 to prevent starvation or famine. (The most conservative
estimates of production in 1959 show that it was 50% more than what was needed to
prevent mortality). More importantly, for this paper, we show a striking geographic
pattern in famine intensity. The regions which produced more grain in 1959, the same
regions which were always more productive, suffered famine more intensely. This is a
reversal from the pattern during normal years, where we find that these same productive
regions have lower mortality rates. See Columns 3 and 4 in Table 1 which is taken from
that paper.12 This rather surprising pattern of the distribution of famine is consistent
with the observation of journalist, Jasper Becker (1996), who noted that unlike previous
famines in China, the Great Famine was most severe in grain rich regions rather than the
traditional famine belt. In the companion paper, we provide a theory for how the famine
and the geographic patterns of famine were an outcome of the centrally-planned grain
procurement system, which was constrained by imperfect information and bureaucratic
incapacity.13
  12
      The estimate for famine years in Column (4) of Table 1 is insignificant, most likely to due insufficient
sample size and measurement error in mortality rate data. MQY (2009) addresses this by supplementing
the provincial analysis with a county level analysis. The county level analysis shows the same patterns.
For brevity, we do not discuss it further in this paper.
   13
      We consider a stochastic endowment economy in which a utilitarian government is interested in
equalizing food consumption across regions. The government is subject to two constraints. First, though
the government knows the expected food production in a given region, it cannot verify its realization since
farmers can under-report or hide their production in order to avoid procurement (taxation). Second, the
report of production and procurement (collection of taxes) in a given region occurs independently of
other regions. Thus, the government is constrained in its bureaucratic capacity since it cannot condition
procurement for a particular region on production reported by other regions. (This refers to a context
where the central government sends out numerous officials to procure grain in far outlying areas. These
officials procure grain and return to cities to report information. It is only then, after procurement has
taken place, that the administration can cumulate the information from across regions, and then send
the information to provincial capitals and then finally to Beijing. Given the low level of development in
communication infrastructure in China in the 1950s, this tedious process could take weeks if not months.)
We consider an economy in which all regions can be affected by a binary aggregate proportional shock
to food production. In this setting, optimal constrained policy assigns a constant procurement tax or


                                                      9
    For the purposes of this paper, the most important finding of MQY (2009) is the strong
positive correlation between grain production in 1959 and famine intensity, which was a
reversal from normal years when production was negatively correlated with mortality. In
that paper, production is measured as both historical production data at the province
level, and by using a proxy – county level data on suitability as predicted by natural
conditions. The latter is a robustness check in case the historical data on production
suffers from reporting errors. In this paper, we will similarly use both a measure of
real production and a measure of suitability for production which does not suffer from
reporting or other endogeneity concerns to instrument for famine intensity.
    Figure 2, which we also take from MQY (2009), plots the coefficients of the interaction
terms of grain suitability and birth cohort dummies from a regression of county level cohort
size in 1990 on these interaction terms, birth county and birth year fixed effects.14 Using
cohort size in 1990 as a measure of survival, this shows that for agricultural populations
who were affected by the grain procurement system, grain suitability in the county of birth
as predicted by natural conditions is negatively correlated with survival for those born
closely before or during the famine. For non-agricultural populations living in the same
counties but who were not affected by the grain procurement system, grain suitability is
uncorrelated with survival for non-agricultural populations.15 We will use this peculiar
institution-driven pattern in regional famine intensity to create our instrumental variables.
subsidy for each region. The model predicts that under the negative shock, mortality risk is sharpest in
regions which produce more food since they experience a heavier tax burden. The model also predicts no
rise in mortality risk for non-agricultural populations during a drop in food production since these receive
constant subsidies. Moreover, consistent with the evidence, the model predicts a positive relationship
between food production and food consumption in the absence of a negative shock (MQY, 2009).
   14
      MQY (2009) uses data from the 1990 Population Census to estimate the following equation for the
population of agricultural households and non-agricultural households separately. Figure 2 plots the
vectors of coefficients, β̂t .
                               1966
                               X
                 ln popct =            βt (ln grain_suitabilityc × biryrt ) + α + γc + δt + εct         (1)
                              t=1943

  ln popct , the natural logarithm of the cohort size of individuals born in county c and birth year t is
a function of: the interaction terms between the per capita area suitable for grain cultivation in birth
county c, grain_suitabilityc , and dummy variables for being born in birth year t, biryrt ; and birth
cohort dummy variables; county fixed effects, γc ; and birth year fixed effects, δt . The reference group is
comprised of individuals born in the period 1930-1942. This group and all of its interactions are dropped.
βt is the correlation between grain suitability and cohort size for those born in year t. The coefficients
and standard errors are reported in Appendix Table A1.
  15
     This finding is robust to controlling for province × year fixed effects. We do not show them in this
paper




                                                        10
2.1       Empirical Strategy
Our strategy exploits cross sectional and cohort variation in famine exposure. Individuals
living in regions that had intense famines will suffer more deprivation. Exposure to famine
is likely to have different effects depending on the age of the individual. The elderly and
the very young are most likely to suffer. This could be because they are biologically more
vulnerable or because households decide to allocate more food to individuals who can
work and bring in food or income. Because we can only observe survivors thirty years
after the fact, our study focuses on those who were in-utero or very young children at the
time of the famine.
       We treat exposure during early childhood separately from exposure in-utero. Malnu-
trition is likely to have different effects at different stages of development. For very young
children, exposure to famine will cause severe malnutrition and decrease the quality of
care received from adults. For those who were in-utero, exposure to famine is transmitted
through malnutrition of the mother and during infancy.16 Moreover, the attributes that
determine survival is different for the two groups. Both groups will be selected based
on characteristics that determine one’s own survival. For the in-utero group, parents’
decisions to have children when there is a famine also play a role. Overall fertility rates
were extremely low during the famine. Hence children born during the famine are likely
to be very different on average than children born prior to the famine.
       Our second stage equation is the following:



                Yct = β54−58 (ln f ampopc × born54_58t )                                             (2)
                         +β59−61 (ln f ampopc × born59_61t ) + α + γc + ρt + εct

       The outcome for individuals born in county c during year t is a function of: the
interaction between the intensity of the famine in that county measured as the natural
logarithm of the average cohort size of individuals born during 1959-61, ln f ampopc , and
a dummy variable for whether that individual was born during 1954-58, born54_58t ; the
interaction between the intensity of famine and a dummy variable for whether she was
born during the famine, born59_61t ; county fixed effects, γc , and birth year fixed effects,
ρt . Individuals born before 1954 and after 1961 form the reference groups. They and
  16
    Aizer, Stroud and Bubka (2009) provide evidence that stress-induced elevatation of cortisol levels in
pregnant mothers have long term adverse effects on children. Almond et al. (2006) provide a detailed
discussion of the differences between in-utero exposure to health shocks.

                                                   11
their interaction terms are dropped. Standard errors are clustered at the province×year
level. We do this because for some of the outcomes, we only have data from the seventeen
CHNS counties. Clustering on such a small number of counties introduces small sample
bias.17 Each observation is a county-birth year cell. The outcomes are the means of
each cell. The cell size is used to weight the regressions by population. The coefficients
and standard errors from these population weighted cell level regressions are numerically
identical to regressions with individual level data.
       Like difference-in-differences, changes across cohorts that affect different regions sim-
ilarly are controlled for by the comparison across regions. Cohort invariant differences
between regions are controlled for by the comparison across cohorts. For example, if re-
gions with bad institutions are more prone to famines and institutions do not change over
short periods of time, then differences in institutions will be controlled for by region fixed
effects.
       There are several reasons why a straight-forward OLS estimate as in equation (2) would
under-state the true impact of exposure. First, cohort size may measure famine intensity
with error. Since measurement error is most likely random, this will attenuate the OLS
estimate. Second, selection bias suggests that the mean of the outcomes in the control
group are below the mean of the group of individuals who are “naturally equivalent” to
the treated group. Alternatively, OLS may also over-state the true effect. If famine was
more severe where local politicians, seeking promotion, allowed more grain to be delivered
to the upper levels of government, then these same politicians may also have implemented
other policies that had adverse effects on the population.
       To address the problems of measurement error and endogeneity, we instrument for
famine intensity with the interaction between non-famine grain production and birth year.
Two facts are exploited: 1) the grain procurement system caused the famine to be more
severe in regions that typically produced more grain; and 2) children who were younger
at the onset of the famine were more vulnerable to disease and malnutrition,and children
born after the famine were not exposed. We proxy for non-famine grain productivity with
the per capita area suitable for grain production as predicted by geographic and climatic
suitability, and observed per capita area of grain sown in 1997. Historical production data
is not available at the county level. In any case, our proxies have the advantage that they
  17
    For the first stage estimate of the effect of grain suitability on survival and the second stage estimate
of the effect of famine on educational attainment, we can expand our data to contain all counties in the
1990 Population Census. When we do so, we can cluster at the county level or at the province×year
level. The standard errors are similar in the two cases. We do not report the estimates for brevity.


                                                     12
do not suffer from systematic over-reporting by the government, which wanted to deny
the extent of the famine and show the outcomes of GLF policies in as favorable of a light
as possible.
       The instruments are the interaction terms between the grain suitability of the county
of birth and birth cohort dummy variables; and the interaction terms of the 1997 per
capita grain sown area in the county of birth and birth cohort dummy variables. Only the
interaction terms can be interpreted as exogenous. Note that using both sets of instru-
ments is similar to proxying for historical county level production with the 1997 data on
production, which by itself may suffer from the problem that it measures true historical
production with error, and then instrumenting for this proxy with and geographic suitabil-
ity which addresses the measurement error (and potential endogeneity) issues. However,
this method would require us to make many assumptions about the structure of the re-
lationship between suitability and production, and about how this relationship may have
altered from the famine era to 1997. After a thorough review of the agricultural science
literature, we could not find a model that would allow us to reliably make the necessary
predictions. Hence, rather than doing this, we choose to impose the minimal amount of
structure and use suitability and area sown in 1997 as two separate instruments. This
method has the same advantages of addressing endogeneity and measurement issues as the
more structured method. Namely, because we are using suitability as one of the instru-
ments, our estimates are not vulnerable to bias if the 1997 production data measures true
historical production with error or if the famine influenced factors which partly determine
production levels in 1997. In addition, this method has the advantage of transparency.18
       We estimate two first stage equations for the two endogenous independent variables:
ln f ampopc × bornt , where t = {54 − 58 ,59 − 61}.
  18
    An alternative is to only use interaction terms between birth cohort dummies and natural conditions
as instruments. Doing this predicts a similar pattern as when we use both sets of instruments but is
much less precise. This is most likely because there are factors besides natural conditions which predict
grain production. For example, many cities are situated in regions that are very suitable for agricultural
production (e.g. Shanghai). But in practice, very little grain is produced in the regions near Shanghai
due to the proximity to that large urban metropolis. Adding interaction terms of birth cohorts with 1997
production levels as an additional set of instruments addresses this issues. For brevity, we only report
results using both sets of instruments in this paper.




                                                   13
                                 59−61
                                  X
  ln f ampopc × bornt =                   βt ln(grain_pcsuitc ) × bornt                                (3)
                                t=54−58
                                     59−61
                                      X
                                +             βt ln(grain_pcprod97c ) × bornt + α + γc + δt + εct
                                    t=54−58

       The key identification assumption is that suitability for grain production and the
adult outcomes of famine survivors in 1990 are not jointly determined by some omitted
variable. The most likely problem is that areas that produce more grain normally would
recover from the famine sooner. This may be because in non-famine years, there is more
food. Individuals born in those regions are better nourished prior to the famine and may
be better able to recover. And after the famine, when production recovered, the local
population would once again receive better nutrition. The first possibility is not very
likely since for many years before and after the famine, agricultural households were left
with little surplus (Perkins, 1966). And if it were true, it would bias our estimates towards
zero.
       Similarly, because these regions are typically richer, they may have better institutions
or public goods (e.g. provision of health and education infrastructure) that mitigate the
negative effects of famine and aids in the subsequent recovery. If this is true, then the
most likely direction of the bias is also towards zero. Survivors in places with better
schools and health care are likely to recover better and faster.
       We are able to partially check whether this assumption is true to the extent that the
institutions that can mitigate the effects of famine are provided for at the county level
and provided similarly for agricultural and non-agricultural households. We can compare
the effect of grain suitability for agricultural households who were under the procurement
system to non-agricultural households living in the same county who were not under
the grain procurement system. Figure 2 shows that grain suitability had no effect on
cohort sizes for the latter. These results should be interpreted loosely since much public
goods provision in China are specific to rural or urban households. Nevertheless, the clear
distinction between the effect of grain suitability on agricultural and non-agricultural
households lends credibility to our strategy.19
  19
     Note that despite being isolated from the full extent of the famine, non-agricultural populations
cannot be used as a comparison group for rural areas in the second stage because they are subject to
different policies regarding the access to labor market and schooling opportunities. These differences also
differed by cohort and hence can produce confounding results.


                                                     14
    Our instrumental variables strategy aims to correct for biases due to measurement
error and omitted variables. But it cannot address attenuation bias caused by selection.
“Survival of the fittest” is a general concern in estimating the impact of severe deprivations
on survivors. For China’s Great Famine, findings from Gorgens et al. (2002; revised 2007)
indicate that individuals with higher stature were more likely to survive. This means
that the estimated impacts on average height or other outcomes that are correlated with
the determinants for survival may be attenuated by selection bias. For example, if the
underlying determinants of other outcomes such as labor supply are correlated with the
latent indicators of health measured by these outcomes, then the estimated impact on
those other outcomes will also be attenuated. Assuming that it is the strongest (or
tallest) who survive, the attenuation bias will be smaller in magnitude for individuals
on the higher quantiles of the distribution of outcomes because those individuals have
comparable control groups. For individuals in the lower quantiles, the strategy compares
individuals in the control group with those in the treatment group who would be higher
on the distribution absent the famine-induced selection.
    Therefore, we can address the problem of selection by estimating the impact of famine
on the upper quantiles of the distribution of outcomes. We calculate the sample means
of the different quantiles for every birth year-county cell and repeat the same estimation.
If height, weight and weight-for-height are correlated with the determinants for survival,
then estimates on the upper quantiles (e.g. 90th percentile) will be less attenuated by
selection relative to estimates for the lower quantiles. If those determinants are also
correlated with education and labor supply, a similar logic implies that estimates at
higher quantiles will also be more accurate for those outcomes. Since famine intensity,
the treatment variable, is only measured at the birth county and birth year level, this
aggregation does not change the independent variables. The only difference between the
analysis on the quantiles and the analysis on the mean is in the outcome variables. This
strategy is similar to Quantile Regressions and Quantile Instrumental Variables in spirit.
It has the advantage that we are able to control for fixed effects.
   Another difference is the Cultural Revolution (1966-1976) which targeted non-agricultural populations
(Unger, 1982; Meng and Gregory, 2005; Giles et al., 2006). The Cultural Revolution caused widespread
closings of schools for approximately three years (1966-1969). Children who survived the famine would
have been in school during the Cultural Revolution. Hence, comparing the famine cohort between urban
and rural areas would compare outcomes for two different treatments rather than a treatment and a
control. We therefore restrict the sample to individuals living in rural areas. Our empirical strategy
will be robust to the occurrence of school disruptions in rural areas as long as school closings were not
correlated with famine intensity.



                                                   15
       Using this method to address selection assumes that differences in the estimated effects
of famine exposure across quantiles is due to selection bias rather than to heterogenous
treatment effects. We have no way of testing this assumption directly. Hence, this is by no
means a fool-proof method of addressing selection bias. We choose this method because
the assumptions are transparent and not obviously unreasonable, not many are needed,
and the method is simple to replicate. A more detailed discussion is provided later in the
paper.

2.2       Conceptual Framework
Exposure to famine at young ages affects adult health and labor market outcomes through
two main channels. First, it adversely affects childhood health, which is a product of
genetic endowment, fetal health (in-utero nutrition), nutrition and other forms of in-
vestment (e.g., health care). The famine potentially also reduced the quality and/or
quantity of other forms of investment into children by reducing the health status of par-
ents. Childhood health can in turn affect adult outcomes directly and indirectly (Kuh
and Wadsworth, 1993), as poor childhood health can affect adult health directly, which
consequently can affect work capacity and labor supply. Barker (1995) and Ravelli et al.
(1998) have found that nutrition in-utero can affect health status in middle age, through
its impact on chronic conditions such as coronary heart disease and diabetes, in a phe-
nomenon widely known as the “Barker Hypothesis”.20 Poor childhood health could also
decrease educational attainment by decreasing returns to education or by increasing the
costs of school attendance (Curie and Madrian, 1999; Miguel and Kremer, 2004). This
may in turn affect labor supply and/or wages later in life.21 Second, exposure to famine
could potentially have a positive effect by reducing the cohort size of exposed individuals,
  20
     Experimental work by Ozanne and Hales (2004) using laboratory mice find that lab mice that are
underfed in-utero but who are well-fed after birth catch up rapidly. However, they die earlier than mice
that are also well-fed in-utero.
  21
     Poor health in children has been associated with lower education and/or labor market outcomes in
the U.S. (Case et al., 2004; Doblhammer, 2002), Canada (Currie and Stabile, 2004), Great Britain (Case
et al., 2002; Kuh and Wadsworth, 1993; Marmot et al., 2001) and many developing countries (Behrman,
1996; Bleakley, 2002; Brinkley, 1994; Glewwe and Jacoby, 1995; Glewwe et al., 2001; Miguel and Kremer,
2004; and Strauss and Thomas, 1998). See Curie and Madrian (1999) and Curie and Hyson (1998) for a
review of studies linking health to educational attainment and labor market outcomes. The latter focuses
on the effects of low birth weight. Smith (1999) shows a strong correlation between reported health and
income of adults in the U.S. Reduced height has been associated with lower education and labor market
outcomes in many countries (Maccini and Yang, 2005; Perisco et al., 2002; Strauss and Thomas, 1998;
Schultz, 2001; Schultz, 2002; Strauss and Thomas, 1998).




                                                  16
hence reducing labor market competition and competition for family resources.22 This
paper will estimate the net effect of exposure to famine: the sum of the adverse effect of
malnutrition and the potentially positive effects from smaller cohort sizes.
         In addition to the health channels that we describe above, famine also affects those
exposed in utero by affecting parents’ decisions to bear children. The extremely low fer-
tility rates during the famine suggests that very few parents were able to or chose to
have children. Because we cannot observe parents of survivors, we cannot investigate
the attributes driving this selection. Nor will we be able to reliably predict how these
attributes would affect the impact of famine exposure. Therefore, without wild specula-
tion, we cannot say more about the differential impacts between exposure in-utero and
exposure during early childhood. The most we can do is to allow the effects for in-utero
exposure to differ from the effects of early childhood exposure.


3          Data
This paper constructs a panel of birth cohorts by matching several existing data sets:
the 1% sample of the 1990 Population Census, the 1989 China Health and Nutritional
Survey (CHNS), the 1% sample of the 1997 Agricultural Census, and GIS data on suit-
ability for grain cultivation which we construct using data from the Food and Agricultural
Organization’s GAEZ database.
         The 1990 Population Census contains 32 variables including birth year, region of res-
idence, and how long an individual has lived in a region of residence. We use these data
to count the number of “missing people” from the 1959-61 cohort. The average cohort
size across these three birth years for each county is our measure of famine intensity. The
large sample size of the Census gives us more precise measures of famine intensity than
smaller samples such as the CHNS. We restrict the sample to individuals who report as
living in the same county for five or more years and interpret their county of residence as
their birth county. For this, we assume that there is little migration between when the
famine occured and 1990. Our assumption is supported by studies on migration in China,
which find that strict migration controls were well enforced until the early to mid 1990s.23
    22
     Easterlin (1980) discusses how the size of a generation affects the personal welfare of its members
through family and market mechanisms. See Becker and Lewis (1973), Becker and Tomes (1976), Galor
and Weil (2000), Hazan and Berdugo (2002) and Moav (2005) for theoretical discussions of the quantity-
quality tradeoff; and see Angrist et al. (2006), Black et al. (2004), Qian (2006), Rosenzweig and Zhang
(2006), and Schultz (2005) for recent empirical evidence on the quantity-quality tradeoff.
  23
     Migrants had no access to government-controlled food rations, housing, schools and medical care


                                                  17
    Our outcome data come from the 1989 CHNS. It uses a random cluster process to
draw a sample of approximately 2,520 rural households with a total of 10,534 individu-
als across seven provinces that vary substantially in geography, economic development,
public resources, and health indicators. The survey includes a physical examination of
all individuals as well as information on labor supply, work intensity and wages. For this
study, we use height, weight and weight-for-height (WFH). The CHNS also report dias-
tolic and systolic blood pressure. We use these to create a dummy variable for whether an
individual has hypertension (>140/90mmHg). These data have the advantage that they
are measured by the surveyor and hence avoid measurement problems from self-reported
data. The CHNS also reports education level, which we translate to a continuous vari-
able for the years of educational attainment. The wage data are not used in this study
because the majority of rural workers are involved in non-wage earning production and
because wages in China during this period do not reflect marginal productivity. Instead,
we use labor supply to measure the physical capacity to work. It is calculated as the sum
of the number of hours per week spent in wage labor, agricultural labor (e.g. farming,
gardening, tending livestock, fishing), and home production.
    We create two proxies for regional grain productivity. The first measure is the per
capita area suitable for cultivating rice and wheat, the two main crops subject to cen-
tral procurement targets. This is calculated using the model and data provided by the
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization’s (FAO) Global Agro-Ecological Zones
(GAEZ), 2002 database, which provides data for 50km by 50km grids for the world. The
data are the result of over twenty years of research and are the product of a joint collab-
oration between the FAO and the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
(IIASA). Their measure is based purely on the biophysical environment of a region and it
is not influenced by which crops were actually adopted in an area. Factors that are easily
affected by human actions, such as soil pH, are not parameters in their model. Nunn and
Qian (2009) provide a detailed description of the construction of this data and how to
calculate suitability measures at the regional level. We use the same method.
    We are able to choose the level of inputs that the calculation is based on. Great Leap
once they left their registered homes. The first wave of rural migration did not occur until the early
to mid 1990s, during the urban construction boom, and most of those migrants were young adult men.
Consequently, it is highly unlikely that the results of this paper are confounded by migration. Using data
from China’s Ministry of Agriculture RCRE’s National Fixed Point Survey for 1986-90, we find that the
probability of having a household member work away from the home village is very low and similar for
regions that suffered very different levels of famine intensity. They are not reported in the paper. Also
see West and Zhao (2000) and De Brauw and Giles (2006) for detailed discussions on migration.


                                                   18
Forward policies required collectives to not use chemical fertilizers. To the best of our
knowledge, the use of heavy machinery such as tractors was extremely rare. Hence, our
chosen level of inputs allows for rain-fed irrigation but no heavy machinery or chemical
fertilizers. We assign a cell with a value of one indicating that it is “suitable” if it can
produce 40% or more of the maximum output. The measure of suitability is the fraction
of cells in a county that is suitable. We multiply this by the total area of the county
and then divide by county population in 1990 to obtain per capita area suitable for grain
production. This threshold was arbitrarily chosen, but moderately changing it will not
affect the 2SLS estimates. A higher threshold (e.g. suitable defined as cells that can
produce 60% or more of the maximum output) will mean that the suitable land can
produce more grain per grid. However, this will be offset by the fact that in each region,
there will now be fewer grids that are classified as suitable. Our second proxy for non-
famine production is the per capita area of rice and wheat sown as reported in the 1997
Agricultural Census. This is the only source of county level data that uses a consistent
measure across regions. For each county, we divide the area reported as sown for rice or
wheat by county population in 1997.
   The data are collapsed and matched by county of residence and birth year. All re-
gressions will be weighted by the county-birth year cell size. To mitigate potentially
confounding effects from the Cultural Revolution, which was primarily an urban dis-
turbance, and rural-urban migration, we exclude cities. The CHNS data and the 1990
Population Census matched for seventeen counties within seven provinces. The number of
individuals in each county-birth year cell is retained so that we can weight our regressions
by population. Figure 1 plots the cohort sizes of agricultural and non-agricultural popu-
lations by birth year. The vertical line indicates the beginning of the famine. It shows a
significant decrease in cohort size for those born closely before and during the famine in
both urban and rural areas. For those born before the famine, the decrease most likely
reflects increased mortality due to the famine. For those born during the famine, the de-
crease is likely to reflect a combination of increased mortality and reduced fertility. This
only reflects a part of the estimated 16.5-30 million deaths during the famine because
we cannot observe the mortality of the elderly in the 1990 data. The elderly, like the
very young, are more vulnerable to health shocks and experienced higher mortality rates
relative to other age groups. But because this cohort would be approximately 100 years
old in 1990, they do not appear in the 1990 Census.
   For ease of interpretation, we measure famine intensity as the natural logarithm of

                                            19
the average cohort size of those born during 1959-61.24 Figure 3A is a histogram of this
measure. It shows that there was much variation in famine intensity. For illustrative
purposes, we can also measure 1959 cohort sizes as a fraction of the average cohort size
of those born in 1952-54. Figure 3B is a histogram of this normalized measure of famine
intensity. In some counties, there were no births during 1959, resulting in this ratio
being zero. In other counties, there was little difference in the 1959 cohort size relative
to previous cohort sizes. The geographic dispersion of famine can also be observed in
Figure 4, where we map the main famine measure (broken up into five equal-frequency
categories) by county. Lighter shades reflect more intense famines. The counties on this
map are all the counties of the CHNS provinces for which we were able to match the
Population Census and the GAEZ data. The counties for which we have survey data
from the CHNS are a randomly sampled subset of this map. However, we show all the
matched counties in these provinces map to better highlight two facts. First, neighboring
counties can have very different famine intensities. Second, the famine was more severe
in the south, which is better suited for grain production.
       Table 2 shows the summary statistics of our outcome variables by birth year. All
of these variables are from the 1989 CHNS data, except for years of schooling, which is
obtained from the 1990 population census data. Height is a commonly used measure of
the stock of nutritional investments during the fetal and childhood stages of life (Fogel et
al., 1982; Fogel, 1994; Steckel, 1986; Micklewright and Ismail, 2001). Average height is
approximately 160 cm, four centimeters less than the average height of the same cohort
in Japan. Weight, weight-for-height and BMI are crude measures of the body’s inabil-
ity to retain body mass after recovering from a severe nutritional shock. This could be
due to the inability to absorb nutrition after suffering severe shocks to the gastrointesti-
nal system such as severe repeated diarrhea during early childhood (Cutler, Deaton and
Lleras-Muney, 2006). The sample means for both of these outcomes are similar to compa-
rable cohorts from Japan. Individuals have on average 5.3 years of education. The main
economic outcome we examine is total hours worked per week. Adults in the sample work
over 73 hours per week, on average. Comparing the outcomes of individuals born prior
to or during the famine in columns (2), (3) and (4) to those born after shown in column
(5) do not show cohorts affected by the famine as systematically worse off than those not
affected. This most likely reflects the strong secular trends in improvement in nutrition,
  24
     County-birth year cells for which there are zero births are retained by adding calculating cohort size
as ln f ampop = ln(1959 − 61_cohort_size + 0.1).


                                                    20
sanitation and public health during this period.


4     The Long Run Impact of Exposure to Famine
4.1    OLS
The estimates from equation (2) are shown with their standard errors in Table 3. Recall
that a positive coefficient reflects adverse effects of the famine since famine reduced cohort
size. To address the attenuation bias from positive selection for survival, we estimate this
equation on the 90th percentiles, the means and the 10th percentiles of the distribution
of outcomes. For almost all outcomes, the estimates are larger in magnitude and more
precisely estimated for the 90th percentile shown in Panel A. For example, columns (1)-
(3) show that for the early childhood cohort, the estimated correlation between famine
exposure and the relevant outcome variable for the 90th percentile in Panel A is over
twice the magnitude as the estimated correlation for the sample mean shown in Panel B.
The difference is larger when compared to the 10th percentile shown in Panel C.
    We focus the discussion of the results on the 90th percentile in Panel A. For the
in-utero cohort, the estimates show that exposure to a famine that decreased average
famine cohort size by 1% reduced height by 0.024%, weight by 0.053%, and educational
attainment by 0.174%. These estimates are statistically significant at the 5% or 1% levels.
The coefficients for WFH, BMI and labor supply have similar signs but are not statistically
significant. For the early childhood cohort, exposure to a famine that decreased the famine
cohort size by 1% is associated with a 0.027% reduction in height, a 0.1% reduction in
weight, a 0.026% in WFH and a 0.01% decrease in BMI. These estimates are statistically
significant at the 10% or 5% levels.

4.2    First Stage Estimates
The estimates from equation (3) are shown in Table 4. Columns (1) and (4) show the
correlation between the first set of instruments and the endogenous variables. Columns
(2) and (5) show the correlation between the second set of instrument and the endogenous
variables. Columns (3) and (6) shows the first stage estimates using all of the instruments.
The instruments are strongly significant and inclusion of both sets of instruments in
columns (3) and (6) does not change the signs or greatly affect the first stage coefficients.




                                             21
4.3    Two Stage Least Squares
Table 5 shows the 2SLS estimates. Like the OLS estimates, the effects of the famine are
more adverse and more precisely estimated for the 90th percentile. Once again, we focus
our discussion on those results in Panel A. For the in-utero cohort, exposure to a famine
that reduces famine cohort size by 1% decreases height by 0.047%, weight by 0.065%,
WFH by 0.018%, BMI by 0.008%, and educational attainment by 0.238%. The estimates
are statistically significant at the 1% or 5% levels with the exception of those for WFH
and BMI, which are significant at the 20% level. For the early childhood cohort, exposure
to a famine that decreased the famine cohort by 1% caused a 0.045% reduction in height,
a 0.138% reduction in weight, a 0.033% reduction in WFH, a 0.007% reduction in BMI,
and a 0.387% reduction in labor supply. These estimates are statistically significant at
the 1% or 5% levels with the exception of the estimate for BMI, which is significant only
at the 20% level.

4.4    Selection or Heterogeneous Effects?
Based on previous studies, we entered this study with the presumption that there is
non-random selection for survival (Gorgens et al., 2002; Bozzoli, Deaton and Quintana-
Domeque, 2008). The finding that the estimated effects are more adverse and larger in
magnitude for individuals on the 90th percentile of the distribution of outcomes is con-
sistent with this. However, the same pattern could exist if there are heterogenous effects
of exposure to famine such that individuals on the upper quantiles of the distribution
are more adversely affected. To the best of our knowledge, there is no evidence from the
medical or epidemiological literature arguing this case. Without a concrete prediction of
the pattern of heterogenous effects across quantiles, we will not be able to directly test
for them or to rule them out empirically. However, we can look for suggestive evidence in
the data based on a few reasonable, albeit crude assumptions.
   First, we can compare the effect of exposure on the two extreme tails of the distribu-
tion. If those that survived were on average the “strongest” or “most able” individuals of
the population, and these attributes are correlated with the outcomes of interest, then we
would expect the estimated effect of exposure to vary for the lower quantiles but to sta-
bilize for the upper quantiles. In contrast, if the results on the 90th percentile are driven
solely by heterogenous effects, and the occurrence of heterogenous effects is symmetric for
both tails of the distribution, then the effects should be very different for individuals on


                                             22
the lower and upper quantiles relative to those on the mean. Figures 5A and 5B plot the
estimated effects and their 95% confidence intervals for exposure on labor supply for the
early childhood cohort. The coefficients and standard errors are reported in Appendix
Table A2. The OLS and 2SLS estimates exhibit similar patterns. The estimated impact
of exposure is monotonically increasing with quantile. However, the rate of increase is
much lower above the 30th percentile. The evidence is consisten with the presence of
selection but does not rule out heterogenous effects.
   Second, we provide a speculative argument. Height is typically positively correlated
with other measures of health. And healthier individuals are widely believed to be more
resilient to health shocks. If this is true, then heterogenous effects would cause the effects
of famine exposure to be smaller in magnitude at the 90th percentile. In contrast, our
results indicate the adverse effects are larger when estimated at the 90th percentile.

4.5    Average Effects
In Table 6, we calculate the average effect for those exposed to famine during early
childhood. The 2SLS estimates for the effect on the 90th percentile from Table 5 Panel A
are shown in rows (A) and (B) of Table 5. We use only the estimates that were statistically
significant at the 5% or 1% levels. The estimates reveal the effect of exposure to a famine
which reduced the population of the 1959 cohort size by 1%. The average effect of famine
exposure is the product of the 2SLS estimate and the average percentage reduction of the
1959 cohort size. We measure the latter as one minus the ratio of the average 1959-61
cohort size cohort size to the 1952-54 cohort size. Hence, if we assume that 1959-61 cohort
sizes would be equal to 1952-54 cohort sizes, then we calculate that the famine reduced the
1959-61 cohort size by 36%. Row (C) shows that on average, exposure to famine reduced
height of the in-utero cohort by 1.7%, weight by 2.3% and educational attainment by
8.6%. Row (D) shows that for the early childhood cohort, exposure on average decreased
height by 1.6%, weight by 5%, WFH by 1.2% and labor supply by 13.9%. The average
effect in levels are shown in Row (F) and (G). They are the products of the sample
means for the 90th percentile shown in Row (E) and the average percentage effects. They
show that in-utero exposure on average reduced height by 2.8 cm, weight by 1.42 kg, and
educational attainment by 0.6 years. For the early childhood cohort, exposure on average
decreased height by 2.7 cm, weight by 3.03 kg, WFH by 0.004 kg/cm, and labor supply
by 12.7 hours per week.


                                             23
5     Interpretation
The main finding of this study is that in-utero and childhood exposure to famine signifi-
cantly reduces adult health outcomes and labor supply. There are several caveats to the
interpretation of the results. If grain rich regions are able to recover more quickly from
the famine, then our strategy will cause us to underestimate the adverse effects of famine
on survivors. As an estimate of the impact of childhood malnutrition, our results should
be interpreted as the lower bound of the magnitude of adverse effects for the additional
reason that we are not able to disentangle potentially offsetting effects from being part of
a small cohort.
    The second caveat arises from our using the results on the 90th percentiles to calculate
the average effects of exposure. As we discussed earlier, we cannot empirically rule out
the presence of heterogenous effects. This does not affect the validity of our estimates
as the estimated impact for each quantile. But it means that caution should be born in
mind when extrapolating the estimated effects of the higher quantiles for other segments
of the population. A casual look at Figures 5A and 5B suggests that one conservative
interpretation of our calculated average effects is that they are relevant for individuals
above the 30th percentile.
    The contribution of this paper does not hinge on the assumption that the larger ef-
fects for individuals on the 90th percentile is due to selection rather than the presence of
heterogenous effects. Even if we assume that there are heterogenous effects and conserva-
tively only interpret the estimated effects for those on the mean of the distribution, the
instrumental variables strategy, in addressing measurement error and OVB, show that
exposure to famine had negative long term effects on height, weight, weight-for-height
and labor supply.
    An interesting finding is that exposure to famine seems much worse for health outcomes
than economic outcomes. This is consistent with the hypothesis that a reduced cohort size
could benefit survivors in terms of labor market competition or access to public schools;
and potentially offset the negative effects of famine through health channels. A direct
examination of the effect of cohort size would be an interesting avenue for future research.
    One result which we examined and for brevity did not report in the paper is the effect
on hypertension, the most commonly used indicator of heart disease. It can be used
to investigate the Barker Hypothesis which predicts that individuals who suffer severe
malnutrition will recover and appear healthy until the middle of their life, when they


                                             24
will be more likely to suffer from conditions such as coronary heart disease. We did not
find any evidence that exposure to famine increased the rates of hypertension for either
those who were exposed as children or those who were exposed in-utero. In addition to
the 1989 survey, we used a later wave of the CHNS in 1997, when those born during
1954-61 would have been 36-43 years of age. One possible explanation is that the effects
of famine are non-linear in age so that we may only observe the effects as the survivors
reach their 50s and 60s. We plan to use future waves of the CHNS to investigate this
hypothesis. In addition, we plan to use a similar empirical strategy with mortality inferred
from comparing the 2000 and 2010 Chinese Population Censuses to examine the effect of
famine exposure on life expectancy (conditional on survival into adulthood). The later
censuses will also allow us to investigate whether childhood exposure to famine causes
survivors to exit the labor force earlier than those who were never exposed.


6       Conclusion
This paper attempts to overcome significant empirical difficulties to estimate the causal
impact of childhood exposure to famine. Our estimates show that exposure in-utero and
as very young children can have severe adverse consequences on adult health, educational
attainment and labor supply. The instrumental variables strategy we use comes from
the specific institutional context of China’s Great Famine and cannot be easily used to
evaluate the impact of other famines. However, examining the impact on the upper
quantiles of the distribution of outcomes to address positive selection for survival can be
easily applied to any context that experienced similar patterns of selection. It is important
to note that China’s Great Famine is far from the most severe in terms of mortality as a
fraction of total population. Applying this method to famines with higher mortality rates
and more severe selection should make a larger difference than in our context.
    In addition to providing a sense of the magnitude of the long term damage caused
by one of the largest human devastations in history, the findings of this study provide
generalizable insights on the consequences of severe malnutrition during the early stages
of life. They suggest that reducing nutritional deprivation in utero and during early
childhood should be considered as an extremely worthwhile objective for policy makers.
    .




                                             25
References
 [1] Aizer, Anna, Laura Stroud and Stephen Buka (2009) “Poverty, Stress and the Inter-
    generationsal Transmission of Human Capital” Brown University Working Paper.

 [2] Almond, Douglas and Mazumder, Bhashkar. 2005. “The 1918 Influenza Pandemic
    and Subsequent Health Outcomes: An Analysis of SIPP Data.” American Economic
    Review 95(2): 258-62.

 [3] Almond, Douglas, Kenneth Y. Chay and David S. Lee. 2005. “The Costs of Low Birth
    Weight.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3): 1031-83.

 [4] Almond, Douglas, Lena Edlund, Hongbin Li and Junsen Zhang. 2006. “Long-term
    effects of the 1959-1961 China Famine: Mainland China and Hong Kong.” Columbia
    University Working Paper.

 [5] Angrist, Joshua, Victor Lavy and Annalia Schlosser. 2006. “New Evidence on the
    Causal Link Between the Quantity and Quality of Children.” MIT Working Paper.

 [6] Ashton, Basil, Kenneth Hill, Alan Piazza, and Robin Zeitz. 1984. “Famine in China,
    1958-1961.” Population and Development Review 10 (December): 613-45.

 [7] Banister, Judith. 1987. China’s Changing Population. Stanford, CA: Stanford Uni-
    versity Press.

 [8] Barker, DJP. 1995. “Fetal Origins of Coronary Heart Disease.” British Medical Jour-
    nal 311(6998): 171-174.

 [9] Becker, Gary S. and Lewis, H. Gregg, 1973. “On the interaction between the quantity
    and quality of children.” The Journal of Political Economy 81(2) Part 2: S279-S288.

[10] Becker, Gary S. and Tomes, Nigel. 1976. “Child endowments and the quantity and
    quality of children.” The Journal of Political Economy 84(4) Part 2: S143-S162.

[11] Becker, Jasper, 1996, Hungry Ghosts: China’s Secret Famine, London: John Murray
    Publishers

[12] Behrman, Jere. 1996. “The Impact of Health and Nutrition on Education.” World
    Bank Research Observer 11: 23–37.


                                          26
[13] Behrman, Jere R., and Mark R. Rosenzweig. 2005. “The Returns to Birth Weight.”
    Review of Economics and Statistics 86: 586 – 601.

[14] Black, Sandra E., Devereux, Paul J. and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2004. “The more the
    merrier? The effect of family composition on children’s education.” NBER Working
    Paper No. W10720.

[15] Black, Sandra E., Devereux, Paul J. and Salvanes, Kjell G. 2005. “From the Cradle to
    the Labor Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes.” NBER Working
    Paper No. W11796.

[16] Bleakley, Hoyt. 2006. “Disease and Development: Evidence from Hook Worm Erad-
    ication in the American South.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.

[17] Bloom, David E., David Canning, and Jaypee Sevilla. 2001. “The Effect of Health on
    Economic Growth: Theory and Evidence.” NBER Working Paper No. 8587.

[18] Bozzoli, Carlos and Angus Deaton and Climent Quintana-Domeque. "Adult Height
    and Childhood Disease." Demography 46.4 (2009): 647-669.

[19] Brandt, Loren, Aloysius Siow and Carl Vogel. 2008. “Large Shocks and Small Changes
    in the Marriage Market for Famine Born Cohorts in China,” University of Toronto
    Working Paper.

[20] Brinkley, Garland. 1994. “The Economic Impact of Disease in the American South,
    1860–1940,” Ph.D. Dissertation, University of California at Davis.

[21] Brown, A.S., J. van Os, C. Driessens, H.W. Hoek and E.S. Susser. 2000. “Further Evi-
    dence of Relation between Prenatal Famine and Major Affective Disorder.” American
    Journal of Psychiatry 157(2): 190-5.

[22] Case, Anne, Darren Lubotsky and Christina Paxson. 2002. “Socioeconomic Status
    and Health in Childhood: The Origins of the Gradient.” The American Economic
    Review 92(5): 1308-34.

[23] Case, Anne, Angela Fertig and Christina Paxson. 2004. “The Lasting Impact of Child-
    hood Health and Circumstance.” Princeton Working Paper.




                                           27
[24] Chang, Gene Hsin, and Guanzhong James Wen. 1997. “Communal Dining and the
    Chinese Famine of 1958–1961.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 46 (Oc-
    tober): 1–34.

[25] Chen, Y. and L-A. Zhou. 2002.“The Long Term Health and Economic Consequences
    of 1959-1961 Famine in China”. SSRN Working Paper 841764. Revised 2007. “The
    long term health and economic consequences of 1959-1961 famine in China.” Journal
    of Health Economics, 26, pp.659-681.

[26] Coale, Ansley J. 1981. “Population Trends, Population Policy and Population Studies
    in China.” Population and Development Review 7 (March): 85-97.

[27] Curie, Janet and Hyson, Rosemary. 1998. “Is the Impact of Health Shocks Cushioned
    by Socio-

[28] Economic Status? The Case of Low Birthweight.” UCLA Working Paper.

[29] Curie, J. and Madrian, B. 1999. “Health, health insurance, and the labor market”.
    In Ashenfelter, O. and Card, D. (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3. North
    Holland: Amsterdam, pp. 3309-3415.

[30] Currie, Jane and Mark Stabile. 2004. “Socioeconomic Status and Health: Why is
    the Relationship Stronger for Older Children?” American Economic Review 93(5):
    1813-23.

[31] Cutler, David, Angus Deaton and Adriana Lleras-Muney (2006) “The Determinants
    of Mortality” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(3), pp: 97-120.

[32] De Brauw, Alan and Gile, John “Migrant Opportunity and the Educational Attain-
    ment of Youth in Rural China” Michigan State University Working paper, 2006.

[33] Doblhammer, Gabrielle. 2002. “Differences in Lifespan by Month of Birth for the
    United States: The Impact of Early Life Events and Conditions on Late Life Mortal-
    ity.” Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research Working Paper WP 2002-019.

[34] Easterlin, Richard A. 1980. Birth and Fortune: The Impact of Numbers on Personal
    Welfare. The University of Chicago Press.




                                           28
[35] Fogel, R. 1994. “Economic growth, population theory and physiology: The bearing of
    long-term processes on the making of economic policy.” American Economic Review
    84 (3), 369–395.

[36] Fogel, Robert and Dora Costa. 1997. “A Theory of Technophysio Evolution, with
    Some Implications for Forecasting Population, Health Care Costs, and Pension
    Costs.” Demography 34(1), 49-66.

[37] Fogel, R., S. L. Engerman, and J. Trussell (1982). “Exploring the uses of data on
    height.” Social Science History 6 (4), 401–421.

[38] Friedman, G. C. 1982. “The height of slaves in Trinidad.” Social Science History 6
    (4), 482–515.

[39] Galor, Oded and Weil, David. 2000. “Population, Technology, and Growth: From
    Malthusian stagnation to demographic transition and beyond.” The American Eco-
    nomic Review 90(4): 806-828.

[40] Gertler, Paul and Simon Boyce. 2001. "An Experiment in Incentive-based Welfare:
    The Impact of PROGRESA on Health in Mexico.” University of California Berkeley
    Working Paper.

[41] Giles, John, Albert Park and Juwei Zhang. 2006. “The Great Proletarian Cultural
    Revolution, Disruptions to Education, and Returns to Schooling in Urban China”
    Michigan State University.

[42] Glewwe, Paul, and Jacoby, Hanan. 1995. “An Economic Analysis of Delayed Pri-
    mary School Enrollment in a Low Income Country: The Role of Early Childhood
    Nutrition,” Review of Economics and Statistics 77: 156–169.

[43] Glewwe, Paul, Hanan Jacoby and Elizabeth M. King. 2001. “Early Childhood Nu-
    trition and Academic Achievement: A Longitudinal Analysis.” Journal of Public
    Economics 81: 345–368.

[44] Gorgens, T., Meng, X., and Vaithianathan, R. (2002, revised in 2007) “Selection and
    stunting effects of famine: Case study of the Great Chinese Famine.” ANU Working
    Paper and IZA Working Paper.



                                          29
[45] Gregory, Robert and Xin Meng. Mimeo. “The impact of interrupted education on
    earnings: the educational cost of the Chinese Cultural Revolution”. ANU Working
    Paper.

[46] Hazan, M. and Berdugo, B. 2002. “Child Labor, Fertility and Economic Growth,”
    The Economic Journal, 112(October): 467-475.’

[47] Hoddinott, J. and B. Kinsey. 2001. “Child growth in the time of drought.” Oxford
    Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 63(4): 409–436.

[48] Hulshoff Pol, H.E., H.W. Hoek, E, Susser, A.S. Brown, A. Dingemans, H.G. Schnack,
    N.E. van Haren, L.M. Pereira Ramos, C.C. Gispen-de Wied and R.S. Kahn. 2000.
    “Prenatal Exposure to Famine and Brain Morphology in Schizophrenia.” American
    Journal of Psychiatry 157(7): 1170-2.

[49] Johnson, D. Gale. 1998. “China’s Great Famine: Introductory Remarks.” China Eco-
    nomic Review 9(Fall): 103-9.

[50] Krueger, R. H. 1969. “Sole long-term effects of severe malnutrition in early life.”
    Lancet 2: 514–517.

[51] Kuh, D.J. and M.E. Wadsworth. 1993. “Physical Health Status at 36 Years in a
    British National Birth Cohort.” Social Science and Medicine 37(7): 905-916.

[52] Wei, Li and Dennis Yang. 2005. “The Great Leap Forward: Anatomy of a Central
    Planning Disaster.” Journal of Political Economy 113(4): 840-77.

[53] Lin, Justin Yifu. 1990. “Collectivization and China’s Agricultural Crisis in 1959-
    1961.” Journal of Political Economy 98: 1228-52.

[54] Luo, Zhehui, Ren Mu, and Xiaobo Zhang. 2006. “The Long Term Health Impact of
    the Chinese Great Famine.” Michigan State University Working Paper.

[55] Maccini, Sharon and Dean Yang. 2008. “Under the Weather: Health, Schooling, and
    Economic Consequences of Early-Life Rainfall” American Economic Review, Forth-
    coming.

[56] Marmot, M, Shipley, Bruner and Heminway. 2001. “Relative Contributions of Early
    Life and Adult Socioeconomic Factors to Adult Morbidity in the Whitehall II Study.”
    Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 55: 301-307.

                                            30
[57] Meng, Xin and Qian, Nancy, 2005. “The Long Run Health and Economic Conse-
    quences of Famine on Survivors: Evidence from China’s Great Famine,” Yale Uni-
    versity Working Paper.

[58] Meng, Xin Nancy Qian and Pierre Yared (2009) “The Institutional Causes of Famine
    in China, 1959-61” Yale University Working Paper.

[59] Micklewright, J. and S. Ismail. 2001. “What can child anthropometry reveal about
    living standards and public policy? An illustration from Central Asia.” Review of
    Income and Wealth 37(1): 65–80.

[60] Miguel, Edward and Kremer, Michael. (2004) “Worms: Identifying impacts on ed-
    ucation and health in the presence of treatment externalities.” Econometrica 72(1):
    159–217

[61] Moav, Omer. 2005. “Cheap Children and the Persistence of Poverty.” The Economic
    Journal 115: 88-110.

[62] Neugebauer, Richard, Hans W. Hoek and Ezra Susser. 1999. “Prenatal Exposure
    to Wartime Famine and Development of Antisocial Personality Disorder in Early
    Adulthood.” JAMA 281(5): 455-462.

[63] Oi, Jean. 1989. State and Peasant in Contemporary China: The Political Economy
    of Village Government. Berkeley: University of California Press, XXI.

[64] Ozanne, Susan E. and C. Nicholas Hales. 2004. “Catch-up Growth and Obesity in
    Male Mice.” Nature 427(29): 411-412.

[65] Peng, Xizhe. 1987. “Demographic Consequences of the Great Leap Forward in China’s
    Provinces.” Population and Development Review 13: 639–70.

[66] Perkins, Dwight H. (1966), Market Control and Planning in Communist China, Cam-
    bridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

[67] Perkins, Dwight H., and Shahid Yusuf. 1984. Rural Development in China. Baltimore:
    Johns Hopkins University Press (for The World Bank).

[68] Persico, Nicola, Andrew Postlewaite and Dan Silverman. 2004. “The Effect of Ado-
    lescent Experience on Labor Market Outcomes: The Case of Height.” Journal of
    Poliical Economy 112(5): 1019-53.

                                           31
[69] Qian, Nancy. 2006. “Quantity-Quality and the One Child Disadvantage: Evidence
    from China”. NBER Working Paper.

[70] Ravallion, Martin. 1997. “Famines and Economics.” Journal of Economic Literature
    35 (September): 1205-42.

[71] Ravelli, ACJ and JHP van der Meulen, RPJ Michels, C. Ostmond, DJP Marker, CN
    Haels and OP Bleker. 1998. “Glucose Tolerance in Adults After Prenatal Exposure
    to Famine.” The Lancet 351: 173-177.

[72] Ravelli, A.C.J., J.H. van de Meulen, C. Osmond, D.J. Barker and O.P. Bleker “Obe-
    sity at the Age of 50 in Men and Women Exposed to Famine Prenatally.” American
    Journal of Clinical Nutriton 70(5): 811-6.

[73] Rosenzweig, Mark and Zhang, Junsen. 2006. “Do Population Control Policies Induce
    More Human Capital Investment? Twins, Birthweight, and China’s ’One Child’
    Policy.” Yale Working Paper.

[74] Salama, P., F. Assefa, L. Talley, P. Spiegel, A. van der Veen, and C. A. Gotway. 2001.
    “Malnutrition, measles, mortality and the humanitarian response during a famine in
    Ethiopia.” Journal of the American Medical Association 286(5): 563–571.

[75] Sen, Amartya. 1981. Poverty and Famines: An Essay on Entitlement and Depriva-
    tion. Oxford: Clarendon.

[76] Schultz, T. P. 2001. “Productive benefits of improving health: Evidence from low
    income countries.” Paper for the meetings of the Population Association of America,
    Washington DC, March 29–31., Yale University.

[77] Schultz, T. Paul (2002). “Wage Gains Associated with Height as a Form of Health
    Human Capital.” AEA Papers and Proceedings 92 (2): 349-353.

[78] Schultz, T.P. “Effects of Fertility Decline on Family Well-Being: Evaluation of Pop-
    ulation Programs.” Draft for MacArthur Foundation Consultation Meeting, 2005.

[79] Shi Xinzheng (2008) “Famine, fertility, and fortune in China” University of Michigan
    Working Paper.




                                            32
[80] Smith, James P. 1999. “Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets: The Dual Relation Be-
    tween Health and Economic Status.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 13 (2): 145-
    166.

[81] Stanner, S.A.,K. Bulmer , C. Andres, O.E. Lantseva, V. Borodina, V.V. Poteen and
    J.S. Yudkin. 1997. “Does Malnutrition in-utero Determine Diabetes and Coronary
    Heart Disease in Adulthood? Results from the Leningrad Study, a Cross-sectional
    Study,” British Medical Journal 315: 1342-8.

[82] Steckel, R. 1986. “A peculiar population: The nutrition, health and mortality of
    American slaves from childhood to maturity.” Journal of Economic History 46 (3):
    721–741.

[83] Strauss, John and Thomas, Duncan. 1998. “Health, Nutrition, and Economic Devel-
    opment,” Journal of Economic Literature 36: 766–817.

[84] Thomas, Duncan, Elizabeth Frankenberg, Jed Friedman, Jean-Pierre Habicht, Mo-
    hammed Hakimi Jaswadi, Nathan Jones, Gretel Pelto, Bondan Sikoki, Teresa See-
    man, James P. Smith, Cecep Sumantri, Wayan Suriastini, and Siswanto Wilop. 2003.
    “Iron Deficiency and the Well-Being of Older Adults: Early Results from a Random-
    ized Nutrition Intervention.” UCLA Working Paper.

[85] Unger, Jon, 1982, Education Under Mao, New York: Columbia University Press.
    82(3): 393-408.

[86] Walker, Kenneth R.. 1984, Food Grain Procurement and Consumption in China,
    Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[87] Weil, David. 2005. “Accounting for the Effect of Health on Economic Growth.” Brown
    University Working Paper.

[88] West, Lorraine and Zhao, Yaohui. Rural-urban migration in China: the past and
    present. Institute for East Asian Studies, University of California, Berkeley, 2000.

[89] Wen, Guanzhong James. 1993. “Total Factor Productivity Change in China’s Farming
    Sector: 1952–1989.” Econonomic Development and Cultural Change 42 (October):
    1–41.



                                           33
[90] Yang, Dali L. 1996. Calamity and Reform in China: State, Rural Society, and In-
    stitutional Change since the Great Leap Famine. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
    Press.

[91] Yao, Shujie. 1999. “A Note on the Causal Factors of China’s Famine in 1959-1961.”
    Journal of Political Economy 107(6), pt 1: 1365-69.




                                         34
                                             Table 1: The Effect of Pre-Famine Grain Production on Famine Mortality and Population
                  Coefficients of provincial level grain production; coefficients for the interaction term of provincial level grain production in 1959 and a dummy variable for 1960; and
                                               coefficients of the interaction term of provincial level grain production during 1954-58 and a dummy for 1960


                                                                                                                 Dependent Variables
                                              LnTotalPop                    LnDeaths                       LnTotalPop                  LnDeaths                  LnTotalPop                      LnDeaths
                                            Non-                          Non-
                                           Famine     Famine             Famine   Famine                  All        All             All        All             All         All                All       All
                                              (1)          (2)              (3)         (4)               (5)        (6)             (7)        (8)             (9)        (10)               (11)      (12)


Ln Grain Prod                               0.256       0.00375           -0.261       0.373
                                            (0.172)     (0.0859)         (0.165)      (0.445)


Ln Grain Prod 1959 x 1960 Dummy                                                                       -0.0804      -0.0685         0.0797     0.0702
                                                                                                     (0.0337)     (0.0257)        (0.104)     (0.101)

Ln Grain Prod 1954-58 x 1960
Dummy                                                                                                                                                        -0.0800      -0.0659            0.0995    0.0817
                                                                                                                                                             (0.0305)    (0.0242)            (0.106)   (0.103)


Controls
Province x Year Time Trends                   N                N            N            N                N           Y              N          Y               N            Y                 N         Y
Government Spending on Agriculture            N                N            N            N                N           Y              N          Y               N            Y                 N         Y
Government Spending on Health,
Edu & Science                                 N                N            N            N                N           Y              N          Y               N            Y                 N         Y
Number of Teachers in Primary and
Secondary                                     N                N            N            N                N           Y              N          Y               N            Y                 N         Y


Observations                                 416           84              369           81              499        357             448        333             503          357               452       333
R-squared                                   0.970         0.999           0.564        0.661             0.969      0.974          0.558      0.764           0.970        0.974             0.561     0.765
All regressions control for year and province fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered at the province level.
                                   Source: Meng, Qian and Yared (2009) Note: The historical data used in this regression is at the province and year level.




                                                                                                     1
                                              Table 2: Descriptive Statistics



                                                                          Birth Cohort
                                      All               Before 1955        1955-1958          1959-61          After 1961
                                      (1)                   (2)                (3)              (4)                (5)
Variable                          Obs    Mean          Obs     Mean      Obs      Mean     Obs     Mean     Obs       Mean
Height                            337  159.546         171 159.192       59     159.367    39    158.802    68      161.020
                                        (0.326)               (0.456)            (0.765)          (1.085)            (0.671)

Weight                            335     55.485       169    55.673      59    55.636     39     54.644    68      55.369
                                          (0.346)             (0.493)           (0.908)           (1.107)           (0.636)

WFH                               334      0.347       169     0.349      58     0.350     39      0.343    68       0.343
                                          (0.002)             (0.002)           (0.004)           (0.006)           (0.003)

BMI                               334     21.768       169    21.920      58    21.935     39     21.634    68      21.324
                                          (0.101)             (0.140)           (0.245)           (0.377)           (0.182)

Years of Education                333      5.347       178     4.929      50     5.577     34      6.522    71       5.667
                                          (0.110)             (0.158)           (0.247)           (0.272)           (0.215)

Total Hours Worked Per Week       313      73.919      174    74.505      49    71.974     31     69.220    59      76.272
                                           (1.883)            (2.760)           (4.389)           (5.775)           (3.390)
Note: Observations are county-birth year cells.




                                                                  2
            Table 3: The OLS Estimates of the Effect between Famine Exposure
       Coefficients of the interaction terms between the logarithm of 1959-61 cohort size and birth year
                                              categorical variables




                                                             Dependent Variables
                                LnHeight      LnWeight        WFH         BMI          LnEduYrs      LnTotWk
                                  (1)           (2)            (3)         (4)            (5)          (6)
A. 90th Percentile
Sample Mean (Not Logged)         165.291       61.191         0.376        23.500        6.797        90.802

LnFampop x Born 1959-61           0.024         0.053         0.017        0.008         0.174         0.042
                                 (0.014)       (0.033)       (0.012)      (0.006)       (0.090)       (0.179)

LnFampop x Born 1955-58           0.027         0.101         0.026        0.009        -0.065         0.098
                                 (0.008)       (0.022)       (0.008)      (0.004)       (0.124)       (0.119)

Observations                       337           335          334           334           333           313


B. Mean
Sample Mean (Not Logged)         159.546       55.485         0.347        21.768        5.347        73.919


LnFampop x Born 1959-61           0.012         0.037         0.007        0.000         -0.048        0.033
                                 (0.009)       (0.023)       (0.007)      (0.000)       (0.064)       (0.158)


LnFampop x Born 1955-58           0.010         0.051         0.011        0.000         0.004        -0.005
                                 (0.005)       (0.017)       (0.005)      (0.000)       (0.096)       (0.098)

Observations                       337           335          334           334           333           313

C. 10th Percentile
Sample Mean (Not Logged)         153.809       50.100         0.320        20.023        4.132        57.633

LnFampop x Born 1959-61          -0.004         0.001         0.000       -0.002        -0.339         0.009
                                 (0.010)       (0.026)       (0.007)      (0.004)       (0.068)       (0.188)

LnFampop x Born 1955-58          -0.007         0.010         0.000       -0.001         0.012        -0.219
                                 (0.006)       (0.023)       (0.006)      (0.003)       (0.095)       (0.137)

Observations                         337           335            334          334          333          313
All regressions control for birth year and birth county fixed effects. Regressions are population weighted.
Standard errors are clustered at the province-year level.




                                                         3
         Table 4: The First Stage Estimates of the Effect of Grain Suitability and Grain
                             Sown Per Capita on Famine Exposure
          Coefficients of the interaction terms between area suitable for grain cultivation and birth year
       categorical variables, and between the logarithm of per capita grain sown and birth year categorical
                                                     variables


                                                                   Dependent Variables
                                               Ln Fampop x Born 1959-61          Ln Fampop x Born 1955-58
                                                (1)      (2)        (3)           (4)      (5)        (6)
Suitable Area x Born 1959-61                  -2.699              -2.833        0.007                0.003
                                              (0.034)             (0.033)      (0.007)              (0.007)

Suitable Area x Born 1955-58                   0.002                  0.001          -2.680                   -2.831
                                              (0.002)                (0.003)         (0.019)                  (0.018)

Ln Sown Area x Born 1959-61                              -46.007     -47.333                     -0.898       -0.998
                                                         (5.848)     (6.002)                     (1.292)      (1.327)

Ln Sown Area x Born 1955-58                               -0.090     -0.160                      -49.910      -51.171
                                                          (0.603)    (0.612)                     (4.279)      (4.317)

Observations                                     11734      11826        11734         11734      11826       11734
All regressions control for birth year and birth county fixed effects. Regressions are population weighted.
Standard errors are clustered at the province-year level.




                                                         4
                        Table 5: The 2SLS Estimates of the Effect of Famine Exposure
                Coefficients of the interaction terms between the logarithm of 1959-61 cohort size and birth year
                                                       categorical variables




                                                                       Dependent Variables
                                     LnHeight        LnWeight          WFH            BMI             LnEduYrs      LnTotWk
                                        (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)         (6)
A. 90th Percentile
Sample Mean (Not Logged)             165.291          61.191           0.376           23.500           6.797       90.802

LnFampop x Born 1959-61               0.0470          0.0645           0.0178          0.0083           0.2379       0.1119
                                     (0.0168)        (0.0390)         (0.0130)        (0.0068)         (0.1409)     (0.1394)

LnFampop x Born 1955-58               0.0454          0.1376           0.0325          0.0067           0.0926       0.3868
                                     (0.0114)        (0.0257)         (0.0083)        (0.0044)         (0.1213)     (0.1596)


Observations                           337              335             334              334             333          313


B. Mean
Sample Mean (Not Logged)             159.546          55.485           0.347           21.768           5.347       73.919


LnFampop x Born 1959-61               0.0242          0.0483           0.0071          0.0000          -0.0718      0.0180
                                     (0.0118)        (0.0289)         (0.0082)        (0.0001)         (0.0849)     (0.1316)


LnFampop x Born 1955-58               0.0241          0.0661           0.0135          0.0000           0.0984      0.2401
                                     (0.0078)        (0.0173)         (0.0049)        (0.0000)         (0.0992)     (0.1430)


Observations                           337              335             334              334             333          313


C. 10th Percentile
Sample Mean (Not Logged)             153.809          50.100           0.320           20.023           4.132       57.633


LnFampop x Born 1959-61              -0.0054          0.0063          -0.0051          0.0083          -0.5264      -0.1794
                                     (0.0136)        (0.0363)         (0.0086)        (0.0068)         (0.1164)     (0.1658)


LnFampop x Born 1955-58              -0.0023          0.0078           0.0000          0.0067          -0.0204      -0.0349
                                     (0.0089)        (0.0292)         (0.0073)        (0.0044)         (0.1265)     (0.1794)


Observations                           337              335             334              334             333          313
All regressions control for birth year and birth county fixed effects. Regressions are population weighted.
Standard errors are clustered at the province-year level.




                                                                5
                                               Table 6: The Effect of the Great Famine
                                                                                                                    th
                          Average effects of the famine calculated with the sample mean, 2SLS estimates on the 90
                                           Percentile, and the average estimated intensity of famine


                                                                                              Variables
                                                                                                                               Total Work
                                                             Height           Weight            WFH             Edu Yrs           Hrs
                                                               (1)              (2)              (3)                     (4)      (5)


A    Coefficient for LnFampop x Born 1959-61                 0.0470           0.0645                            0.2379


B    Coefficient for LnFampop x Born 1955-58                 0.0454           0.1376           0.0325                           0.3868


     % Effect of famine = 2SLS Coefficient x (1 - 1959-61 cohort size/1952-54 Cohort Size)


C    In Utero Cohort: A x -0.36                              -0.017           -0.023                            -0.086


D    Early Childhood Cohort: B x -0.36                       -0.016           -0.050           -0.012                            -0.139


     Level Effect of famine = % Effect x Sample Mean


E    Sample Mean for 90th Percentile                         165.29            61.19            0.38                 6.80        90.80


F    In Utero Cohort: E x C                                   -2.80            -1.42                                -0.58


G    Early Childhood Cohort: E x D                            -2.70            -3.03           -0.0044                           -12.64

Notes: Estimates in Rows (A) and (B) show 2SLS estimates on the 90th percentile from Table 4 Panel A. These calculations
assume that absent the famine, 1959-61 cohort sizes would be equivalent to the average size of 1952-54 cohorts.




                                                                      6
Figure 1: Population by Rural/Urban and by Birth Year




          Source: Authors’ Calculation




                       7
     Figure 2: The Correlation between Suitability for Grain Cultivation and Cohort Sizes for
              Agricultural and Non-Agricultural Populations in All Counties in China
        Coefficients of the interactions of the fraction of land suitable for grain and birth year dummy variables




Source: Meng and Qian (2009) Note: This sample excludes cities. Counties in China contain both agricultural and non-
                                            agricultural households.




                                                            8
Figure 3A: Famine Intensity across Counties Measured as 1959-61 cohort size




                           Source: Authors’ calculation

              Figure 3B: Famine Intensity across Counties
    Measured as the Ratio of 1959-61 cohort size to1952-54 Cohort Size




                           Source: Authors’ calculation

                                        9
                  Figure 4: Map of County-Level Famine Intensity




Note: Lighter shading reflects greater famine intensity; Source: Authors’ calculation




                                         32
 Figure 5A: Estimated OLS Effect of Exposure on Labor Supply by Quantile
Coefficients of the interaction terms between the logarithm of 1959-61 cohort size and a dummy
      variable for being born during 1954-58; and their 95% Confidence Intervals




Figure 5B: Estimated 2SLS Effect of Exposure on Labor Supply by Quantile
Coefficients of the interaction terms between the logarithm of 1959-61 cohort size and a dummy
      variable for being born during 1954-58; and their 95% Confidence Intervals




                                             33
             Table A1: The Correlation between Grain Suitability and Per Capita Grain Sown with Cohort Size
Coefficients of the interaction terms between of grain suitability and birth year dummies, and between per capita grain sown and birth year dummies


                                                                               Dependent Variable: Ln Population
                                                                                       National Sample
                                                                      Agric                                     Non Agric
                                                                       (1)                                         (2)
             Suitability * Born 1943                                  0.066                                       0.023
                                                                     (0.031)                                     (0.052)
             Suitability * Born 1944                                  0.096                                       0.046
                                                                     (0.028)                                     (0.067)
             Suitability * Born 1945                                  0.111                                       0.065
                                                                     (0.036)                                     (0.075)
             Suitability * Born 1946                                  0.107                                       0.093
                                                                     (0.029)                                     (0.071)
             Suitability * Born 1947                                  0.122                                       0.096
                                                                     (0.039)                                     (0.069)
             Suitability * Born 1948                                  0.178                                       0.132
                                                                     (0.032)                                     (0.066)
             Suitability * Born 1949                                  0.152                                       0.066
                                                                     (0.033)                                     (0.063)
             Suitability * Born 1950                                  0.036                                       0.135
                                                                     (0.041)                                     (0.068)
             Suitability * Born 1951                                  0.166                                       0.193
                                                                     (0.040)                                     (0.067)
             Suitability * Born 1952                                  0.195                                       0.190
                                                                     (0.037)                                     (0.064)
             Suitability * Born 1953                                  0.148                                       0.198
                                                                     (0.037)                                     (0.068)
             Suitability * Born 1954                                  0.155                                       0.206
                                                                     (0.031)                                     (0.069)
             Suitability * Born 1955                                  0.018                                       0.141
                                                                     (0.039)                                     (0.066)
             Suitability * Born 1956                                  0.093                                       0.153
                                                                     (0.034)                                     (0.068)
             Suitability * Born 1957                                  0.030                                       0.211
                                                                     (0.038)                                     (0.072)
             Suitability * Born 1958                                 -0.122                                       0.102
                                                                     (0.047)                                     (0.074)
             Suitability * Born 1959                                 -0.202                                       0.144
                                                                     (0.067)                                     (0.069)
             Suitability * Born 1960                                 -0.296                                       0.012
                                                                     (0.074)                                     (0.063)
             Suitability * Born 1961                                 -0.127                                       0.101
                                                                     (0.062)                                     (0.062)
             Suitability * Born 1962                                 -0.013                                       0.043
                                                                     (0.037)                                     (0.057)
             Suitability * Born 1963                                  0.064                                       0.014
                                                                     (0.037)                                     (0.060)
             Suitability * Born 1964                                 -0.025                                      -0.083
                                                                     (0.027)                                     (0.074)
             Suitability * Born 1965                                 -0.020                                      -0.101
                                                                     (0.026)                                     (0.089)
             Suitability * Born 1966                                  0.010                                      -0.081
                                                                     (0.029)                                     (0.127)
             Observations                                             46212                                       35175
             Regression controls for birth year and birth county fixed effects, and is population weighted. Standard errors are
             clustered at the province x year level. This Table is taken from Meng and Qian (2009).


                                                                        33
               Table A2: The Estimates of the Effects of Famine on Labor Supply by Quantile
    Coefficients of the interaction terms between the logarithm of 1959-61 cohort size and birth year categorical variables


                                                       Dependent Variable: Ln Total Hours Worked Per Week
Quantiles                          10%        20%         30%           40%       50%       60%       70%       80%       90%
                                    (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)
A. OLS
LnFampop x Born 1959-61           0.009      0.040       0.078         0.111     0.061     0.024     0.001     0.036     0.042
                                 (0.188)     (0.180)     (0.178)       (0.179)   (0.151)   (0.135)   (0.145)   (0.170)   (0.179)


LnFampop x Born 1955-58           -0.219     -0.163      -0.079        -0.001    -0.005    -0.009    0.014     0.072     0.098
                                 (0.137)     (0.137)     (0.138)       (0.087)   (0.090)   (0.096)   (0.103)   (0.110)   (0.119)


Observations                       313        313           313         313       313       313       313       313       313


B. 2SLS
LnFampop x Born 1959-61           -0.179     -0.134      -0.076        0.048     0.058     0.057     0.065     0.095     0.112
                                 (0.166)     (0.162)     (0.152)       (0.151)   (0.137)   (0.140)   (0.136)   (0.138)   (0.139)


LnFampop x Born 1955-58           -0.035     0.047       0.137         0.237     0.243     0.247     0.269     0.342     0.387
                                 (0.179)     (0.176)     (0.179)       (0.137)   (0.142)   (0.148)   (0.152)   (0.158)   (0.160)


Observations                       313        313           313         313       313       313       313       313       313
All regressions control for birth year and birth county fixed effects. Regressions are population weighted.
Standard errors are clustered at the province-year level.




                                                                  34
