NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FEAR OF FIRE SALES AND THE CREDIT FREEZE
Douglas W. Diamond
Raghuram G. Rajan
Working Paper 14925
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14925

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2009

Both authors are from the University of Chicago’s Booth School of Business. We thank the Center
for Research in Security Prices for research support. Rajan thanks the Initiative on Global Markets
and the Stigler Center for research support. We thank Viral Acharya, Amit Seru, Jeremy Stein, and
Robert Vishny for helpful discussions, as well as participants in seminars at Federal Reserve Bank
of Richmond, Princeton University, the University of Chicago and the University of Minnesota for
useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram G. Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Fear of Fire Sales and the Credit Freeze
Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram G. Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 14925
April 2009, Revised December 2009
JEL No. E44,G01,G21
ABSTRACT
Is there any need to “clean” up a banking system in the midst of a crisis, by closing or recapitalizing
weak banks and taking bad assets off bank balance sheets, or can one wait till the crisis is over? We
argue that an “overhang” of impaired banks that may be forced to sell assets soon can reduce the current
price of illiquid assets sufficiently that weak banks have no interest in selling them. Anticipating a
potential future fire sale, cash rich buyers have high expected returns to holding cash, which also reduces
their incentive to lock up money in term loans. The potential for a worse fire sale than necessary, as
well as the associated decline in credit origination, could make the crisis worse, which is one reason
it may make sense to clean up the system even in the midst of the crisis. We discuss alternative ways
of cleaning up the system, and the associated costs and benefits.

Douglas W. Diamond
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
d-diamond@uchicago.edu
Raghuram G. Rajan
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
rajan@chicagogsb.edu

In early 2009, the supply of credit in industrial countries appeared to be tightening substantially. Clearly
credit quality deteriorates in a recession, which might suggest why banks were reluctant to lend. But
lending across the quality spectrum seemed to fall in the last quarter of 2008, with new loans to
investment grade borrowers down as much as new loans to below investment grade borrowers (Ivashina
and Scharfstein (2009)). And, of course, the recessionary conditions themselves may not have been
independent of bank lending.1
In what might seem a separate development, banks at that time also held on to large quantities of
“Level 2” and “Level 3” assets – assets that were not frequently traded and for which the price was either
based on models or largely hypothetical. In many cases, these were assets such as mortgage backed
securities, for which a liquid market had existed, but where trading had dried up. The popular view was
that there was a “buyers strike”, as investors who traditionally had bought these assets had been seared by
past negative returns and return volatility, and had abandoned these markets. Of course, an immediate
question is why new “vulture” investors would not be attracted to these markets – the notion of a “buyers
strike”, at least over more than a few days, seems difficult to countenance. After all, there is always a
price at which anything with positive value can be sold.
One explanation is that the banks themselves expected the value of these assets to rise and were
reluctant to sell. This too seems implausible, at least prima facie. Why should banks have different
expectations from the market, especially since the underlying factors driving the fundamental value of
these securities, such as the state of housing markets, were common knowledge among those with
expertise in trading mortgage backed securities? Another explanation is that banks were reluctant to
recognize losses on these illiquid securities, since that would require writing down capital. Yet many of
these banks had substantially more book capital than required by regulators. Moreover, the market could

1

For overviews of the financial crisis, see Adrian and Shin (2008), Brunnermeier (2008), Caballero and
Krishnamurthy (2009), Diamond and Rajan (2009), and Gorton (2009).

1

see the quantity of impaired assets held on bank balance sheets, and must have incorporated estimates of
their value into equity prices. It is implausible to argue that bank management were eager to create
uncertainty about the true value of their balance sheets, with the additional discount in equity valuation
that would be implied, than to sell assets and remove uncertainty.2
We argue in this paper that the seizing up of term credit and the overhang of illiquid assets in
distressed institutions may not be coincidental; they may have common roots, and have potential
explanatory power beyond the Crisis of 2007-2010. The intuition is simple. Let a set of banks have a
significant quantity of assets that have a limited set of potential buyers. One example of such an asset is a
mortgage backed security which, in an environment where some mortgages have defaulted, can be valued
accurately only by some specialized firms. Furthermore, let us assume that with some probability, the
banks will need to realize cash quickly in the future. Such a need for liquidity may stem from unusual
demands of the banks’ customers, who draw on committed lines of credit or on their demandable
deposits. It may also stem from panic, as depositors and customers, fearing a bank could fail, pull their
deposits and accounts from the bank. Regardless of where the demand for liquidity comes from, it would
force banks to sell assets or, equivalently, raise money, quickly. Given that the limited set of potential
buyers or lenders for the bank’s assets have limited resources, the asset would have to be sold at fire sale
prices (as in Shleifer and Vishny (1992) and Allen and Gale (1994)).
One consequence of the fire sale is that it may depress asset values so much that the bank is
insolvent. This may precipitate a run on the bank, which may cause more assets to be unloaded on the
market, further depressing the price. Equally important, the returns to those who have liquid cash at such
times can be extraordinarily high.
2

Of course, one possibility is that what was going on was a form of forbearance -- if banks recognized all the losses,
they would go below the regulatory minimum. Therefore, regulators were willing to suspend disbelief about asset
quality so long as banks did not sell assets and make it impossible for regulators to continue the charade. Given that
the authorities were attempting to get banks to clean up their balance sheets, and were willing to recapitalize banks
up to a point, this explanation does not seem to us the most obvious one.

2

Folding back to today, the prospect of a future fire sale of the bank’s asset can depress its current
value – investors need to be enticed through a discount to buy the asset today, otherwise they have an
incentive to hold back because of the prospect of buying the asset cheaper in the future. More generally,
the high returns potentially available in the future to those who hold cash today can cause them to demand
a high return today for parting with that cash today.
This is similar to standard dynamic asset pricing in financial markets and in markets with
imperfect arbitrage such as Vayanos-Gromb (2002) or Kondor (2009), where future returns influence
current required returns. But the elevated required rate of return now extends to the entire segment of the
financial market that has the expertise to trade the security. If this segment also accounts for a significant
fraction of the funding for potential new loans, the elevated required rate of return will be contagious and
will spread to lending. Illiquidity can depress lending – a feature that may be absent in models where
future asset values are uncertain for other reasons. Moreover, the institutional overhang will affect lending
not only by distressed banks but also by healthy potential lenders, a feature that distinguishes this
explanation from those where the reluctance to lend is based on the poor health of either the bank or its
potential borrowers.
More surprising though, the bank’s management, knowing that the bank could fail in some states
in the future, do not have strong incentives to sell the illiquid asset today, even though such sales could
save the bank. The reason is simple. By selling the asset today, the bank will raise cash that will bolster
the value of its outstanding debt by making it safer. But in doing so, the bank will sacrifice the returns
that it would get if the currently depressed value of the asset recovers. Indeed, because the states in which
the depressed asset value recovers are precisely the states in which the bank survives, bank management
would much rather prefer holding on to the illiquid assets and risking a fire sale and insolvency than
selling the asset and ensuring its own stability in the future. This idea is clearly analogous to the risk
shifting motive in Jensen and Meckling (1976) and the underinvestment motive in Myers (1977), though

3

the bank “shifts” risk or under invests in our model by refusing to sell an illiquid asset than by taking on,
or not taking on, a project.
The ingredients of our model are illiquidity and its effects on pricing combined with the
unwillingness of the potentially insolvent owners of equity to take actions equivalent to buying costly
insurance. These are well understood issues. What is new in our analysis is how they interact to produce
the phenomenon we try to explain. Illiquidity can influence future and thus current returns, but when it
leads to the potential insolvency of sellers it can cause the sellers to be unwilling to sell assets today at the
price that buyers will pay, thus exacerbating the potential insolvency in the future and the associated price
decline.
Our simple model predicts that illiquid banks will be on a “seller’s strike.” Sellers hold on, not
because the available market price is irrationally low compared to its value in the near future, but because
the alternative of holding on is more beneficial. The “ask” price it would take to get the bank to sell assets
is too high given the price potential buyers will bid. Sales of the illiquid asset therefore dry up.
Our point is very general, and applies beyond this specific crisis. It holds whenever a set of
privately owned distressed levered institutions hold any asset (loans, land, securities) that could
potentially have a thin future market. These impaired institutions not only act as an overhang over the
market, elevating required rates of return and further increasing financial fragility, but will also risk future
insolvency by holding on to the assets, further depressing the market. Thus, there is an inherent source of
adverse feedback in any financial crisis, which is why cleaning up the financial system may be an
important contributor to recovery.
To unfreeze asset and credit markets, the authorities will have to move the holdings of potentially
illiquid assets by distressed institutions into safer hands – potentially by forcing timely sales which
effectively force the distressed institutions to purchase insurance, or by increasing the capacity of
potential buyers to buy those assets. They can also remove the overhang of distressed institutions by
4

recapitalizing them. By stabilizing the financial system and eliminating the possibility of fire sales, the
authorities can eliminate the potential for high returns to be made in the market in the future, and increase
the relative profitability of lending today, thus increasing its magnitude.
In section I, we present the model. In section II, we examine the sources of illiquidity; in section
III we explore extensions to the model to show how the possibility of a market freeze is general. In
section IV we explore the effects of several government interventions, especially forced sales. In section
V, we relate the paper to the literature, including papers by Acharya, Gale, and Yorulmazer (2009), Allen,
Carletti and Gale (2009), Allen and Gale (1994, 1998, 2000, 2003), Allen and Carletti (2008),
Bhattacharya and Gale (1988), Bolton, Santos and Scheinkman (2008), Diamond and Rajan (2005),
Heider, Hoerova and Holthausen ( 2009), Holmstrom and Tirole (1998), Shleifer and Vishny (1992,
2009), and Stein (2009). We will describe the relationships once we have described our model. We
conclude in section V.

I. The Model
A set of identical banks at date 0 each owns financial assets (for example, mortgage backed
securities) that will be worth Z at date 2. The bank is financed with demand deposits (or overnight paper)
of face value D , with Z  D .3 For now assume each bank has a local monopoly on financing and can
raise a fixed quantity of deposits if it pays an interest rate of 0 (We discuss other motivations for the
bank’s fixed cost of raising deposits, including possible anticipated government bailouts of depositors or
some long-term debt in section II). Depositors can demand repayment at date 1 or date 2. Everyone is
risk neutral. We assume until section III that Z is a constant, which means that the assets are not risky
when held to maturity. The model’s primary implications are clear in this simple setting.

3

For a model of why this might be the optimal form of financing for a bank in a world where aggregate liquidity
shocks are low probability, see Diamond and Rajan (2001).

5

At date 1, banks face a liquidity shock with probability q , where a fraction f of their depositors
withdraw. We will be more explicit about the sources of this shock later. Depositors demand cash (they
cannot trade in the financial asset market and will not accept the asset in lieu of cash4). The bank will
have to sell some of its asset for cash to meet this liquidity demand. The bank can raise money in
anticipation of the shock by selling assets at date 0 for P0 per unit of date-2 face value, or it can sell
assets, after the shock has been realized at date 1, for P1 per unit of date-2 face value. Note that if the
liquidity shock does not hit at date 1, the bank will not part with the asset at that date for a per unit price
less than 1.
We will describe how the price and trading are determined at date 0, given the date-1 price, first
when the bank remains solvent when the liquidity shock hits (or if it has unlimited liability) and then
when it becomes insolvent given the shock and has limited liability. We will show that trading can dry up
at date 0 in the latter case.
Prices and Trading with Banks that are Solvent Given the Shock
Let us assume there are buyers who are not subject to liquidity shocks (such as banks with more
liquid assets or longer term liabilities, private equity, or Warren Buffet) who can buy at date 1 after the
shock hits, paying cash. The buyer is indifferent between buying at either date if the price gives him the
same expected date 2 payoff per dollar spent, so long as the return is greater than the return on cash (so

P0  1 and P1  1 ). The highest date-0 bid price of the buyer solves

P0bid 

1
1
q  (1  q )
P1

4

1
1
 q  (1  q) , or
P0
P1

(1.1)

Depositors could be thought of as unsophisticated and hence unable to accept or trade mortgage backed securities
or bank loans.

6

Now consider the bank’s decision on when to sell. If the bank postpones any sale until after the shock has
hit at date 1, it will have to sell a fraction 1 of the asset such that 1ZP 1  fD , or 1 

fD
. If 1  1 ,
ZP 1

then the bank would be insolvent and unable to raise fD . For now, we assume that it is either solvent or
it has unlimited liability, so it can raise the necessary amounts (potentially from its other assets) to pay
withdrawing depositors and the depositors who stay till date 2.

The payoff from selling at date 1 with

probability q is q  (1  1 ) Z  (1  f ) D   (1  q )  Z  D  , which on substituting for 1 simplifies to

Z  D  qfD(

1
 1) .
P1

In words, the bank pays an expected “illiquidity” cost of qfD(

1
 1) whenever it has to sell at
P1

date 1 for a price P1  1 , which happens with probability q. Alternatively, the bank can sell at date 0 for

P0 and hold cash from date 0 to 1, to cover the case where it needs liquidity. If it sells early on date 0, it
must sell a fraction of the asset given by 0 

fD
. The bank’s payoff from selling just enough to meet
ZP 0

the liquidity need is (note that with probability q the proceeds of sale of the fraction 0 of the asset
exactly pay off the fD of deposits):

q  (1  0 ) Z  (1  f ) D   (1  q )  (1  0 ) Z  0 P0 Z  D 



= q (1 






fD
fD
fD
) Z  (1  f ) D   (1  q ) (1 
)Z 
P0 Z  D 
ZP0
ZP0
ZP0




=Z  D(

1
 1) fD .
P0

(1.2)

7

That is, by selling at date 0, the bank will pay the “illiquidity” cost of (

1
 1) fD up front with certainty,
P0

which includes the cost of raising cash even though there might be no actual need. The bank is indifferent
between selling at date 0 and date 1 when (1 

P0 Ask 

1
1
) fD  qfD(1  ) or
P0
P1

1
1
q  (1  q)
P1

(1.3)

This is also the bid price (see (1.1)), so both buyers and sellers are willing to trade on both dates so long
as the date 0 price bears this relationship to the (yet-to-be-determined) date 1 price.
We do not model any intrinsic benefit from trade at date 0 as opposed to date 1 so the equilibrium
price at date 0 reflects the future prices that can prevail. If we added some small and offsetting reasons
for trade across banks and buyers, there would be active trading on both dates.
Limited Liability, Fire sales, and No Trade
We assumed above that the bank was solvent when it had to sell to meet the liquidity shock (or it
had unlimited liability). What if the bank becomes insolvent conditional on the liquidity shock at date 1,
and has limited liability? Clearly, the banker will never sell at date 0 if he fails even after doing so.
Intuitively, the banker, in maximizing the value of equity, will want to maximize the value of the bank’s
assets conditional on survival. Since the bank survives only in the state with no liquidity shock, and
because the asset pays off most when the banker holds it to maturity rather than if he sells it prematurely
for a possibly discounted price P0  1 , the banker prefers to hold the asset rather than sell it.

8

Now consider the case where the bank survives if it sells assets at date 0 for P0 but it fails at date
1 if the liquidity shock occurs because assets are sold at fire sale prices.5 From our previous analysis, the
bank is willing to sell at P0ask at date 0 if the price allows it to avoid failure and
if Z  D  (

1

P

 1) fD  (1  q)( Z  D) , where the right hand is the bank’s expected payoff with no

ask

0

asset sales, given it fails conditional on the liquidity shock hitting. This requires

which simplifies to P0Ask 

pay P0bid 

1

P

 1

ask
0

q ( Z  D)
,
fD

1
. We also know that given the price P1 , buyers are willing to
Z D
1  q(
)
fD

1
. The bid price is less than the ask, that is, no asset is offered for sale at
1
1  q(  1)
P1

prevailing prices at date 0 if

1
Z D
1 
. Simplifying, this condition is fD  P1  Z  (1  f ) D  ,
P1
fD

which is satisfied if the bank is insolvent conditional on the liquidity shock at date 1 and not having sold
assets at date 0. We have

Proposition 1: If the bank is insolvent at date 1 conditional on the liquidity shock, it will never sell the
asset at the bid price at date 0, even if by doing so it could remain solvent. No trade will take place for the
asset at date 0.
In sum, so long as the “fire sale” price of the asset is so low at date 1 so as to drive the bank into
insolvency, and the date 0 price reflects that future fire sale price, there will be no trade at date 0 – the
market will freeze up. Intuitively, there is no point selling at date 0 for cash if the banker will not avoid

5

We can allow the bank debt to be bailed out by the deposit insurance corporation, so long as the banker/equity is
wiped out (see later).

9

failure at date 1 by doing so – the sale simply causes him to accept a discounted value for the asset in all
states, including those in which he could hold it to maturity. Even if the banker could avoid failure doing
so, he does so by making a transfer to the depositors in the state of the liquidity shock (from value he
would have enjoyed if he held the asset to maturity in the state with no liquidity shock). Limited liability
allows him to avoid having to make this transfer. Since the date-0 ask price when the bank is always
solvent is exactly equal to the bid price, the date-0 ask price, if the bank is insolvent conditional on the
shock and enjoys limited liability, has to be higher for the selling bank to be indifferent between selling
and not. Hence no trade will occur.
The underlying intuition is a combination of an aggregate liquidity shortage leading to fire sale
prices (Allen and Gale (2004), Diamond and Rajan (2005)), and risk shifting (Jensen and Meckling
(1976)) or underinvestment (Myers (1977)). The banker focuses on the value he will get conditional on
the bank surviving. Rather than selling at the date-0 illiquid value, which transfers some of the value of
the proceeds to the depositors (akin to the Myers debt overhang problem), he would rather focus on
preserving value in the survival states by holding on to the illiquid asset to maturity (akin to the Jensen
and Meckling risk shifting problem). The risk shifting incentives of the banks make them unwilling to sell
the assets because they will be giving up their option to put the assets to the debt holders at a low price
conditional on the liquidity shock – or put differently, they will pay for insurance against default in some
states without benefiting enormously from surviving in those states.
Note that from the banker’s perspective, a sale of assets is equivalent to a sale of stock for cash.
For the same reason that the bank will not sell assets for cash, it will not sell stock for cash given the
prevailing prices in the market place. This is a form of underinvestment (Myers (1977), Ivashina and
Scharfstein (2008)) whereby the bank will not issue stock because of the value transfer that goes to debt

10

in states of insolvency, but it stems not from uncertain fundamental values but from the potentially low
future (and low current) fire sale prices at which illiquid assets will have to be sold.6
In sum then, as expectations of date-1 liquidity fall so that the bank is insolvent conditional on the
future shock, date-0 trading spontaneously dries up. Our model suggests then that distressed banks hold
on to illiquid assets instead of selling them because they believe the price of the asset will be much higher
in the future, conditional on their own survival.

II. The Sources of Illiquidity
Thus far, we have not described how the price P1 is determined Clearly, this is critical to our
analysis, for without a low P1 there would be no illiquidity or potential insolvency at date 1, and no
market freeze at date 0. Let the weight of the potentially “illiquid” banks we have described so far be
normalized to 1. We will now distinguish between securities and loans on the bank’s portfolio, which will
add richness to our analysis, and will not qualitatively affect our previous analysis. Let fraction  of each
bank’s assets be composed of the financial security we have described so far. Let fraction (1   ) of its
assets be loans with face value Z maturing at date 2. We will assume these loans can be recalled by the
bank at date 1 – borrowers will then have to liquidate projects to repay the bank, so as a short hand, we
will say that banks liquidate loans. The bank’s loan portfolio has differing liquidation values, with the
range uniformly distributed between 0 and Z, that is, loans can be liquidated for values ranging from
nothing to full face value. The possibility of liquidating loans gives the bank an alternative source of
liquidity, in addition to selling financial assets. We assume loans cannot be sold at date 0 (they have little

6

An oft mentioned rationale for why banks hold on to illiquid assets rather than selling them is the notion that their
prices will go up in expectation. Indeed, it is easily shown that the price of the asset does rise in expectation so that

P0  qP1  (1  q ) . However, this is merely an artifact of Jensen’s inequality and the need for returns to equalize
over different horizons.

11

value in another lender’s hands) nor can they be recalled immediately (the borrower has no cash after
investing at date 0).
Liquid buyers (private equity, hedge funds, and liquid banks) can purchase the financial asset at
either date, and start with  in cash at date 0. Assume for simplicity that they are equity financed. Also,
let these buyers also have the possibility of making term loans to industrial firms. If R is the date-2 return
on a dollar lent at date 0, let the available volume of loans returning greater than or equal to R be I ( R) ,
with I (1)  I , I ( R )  0 , I ( R)  0 when R  1 . Loans made by liquid banks return nothing at date 1,
though at the cost of additional unneeded complexity, we could assume a somewhat higher date 1 return.
Liquid buyers can store any excess funds at date 0 at a rate of 1. The timeline is
|----------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
Date 0
Illiquid bank sells securities
(or not). Liquid buyers buy
securities, make loans, and
hold cash.

Date 1
Liquidity shock hits (or not) and
depositors withdraw from banks. Banks
decide loans they want to liquidate. Banks
sell securities and buyers buy with cash.

Date 2
Loans and securities pay off.
Banker consumes proceeds
after paying deposits. Buyers
consume.

Fire Sales and Lending
Let us now derive prices. At date 0, the implied interest rate on term loans has to match the return
from buying the financial asset, that is,

I(

1
. This means the amount lent by potential buyers at date 0 is
P0

1
) . Intuitively, the long term effective interest rate, and thus the extent of long term lending, is
P0

determined by the price of financial assets in the market.
Similarly, conditional on the liquidity shock at date 1, the illiquid bank will liquidate any loan at
date 1 with liquidation value greater than PZ
before it sells any securities. This means the total value of
1
12

1
cash generated this way is
Z

 xdx  2 1   P 
Z

Z

1

2

 . Again, the implied interest rate used to judge

P1Z

whether to continue loans or not at date 1 is

1
, which depends on the price of financial assets, and hence
P1

available liquidity, on that date.
If   I  fD , then P0  P1  1 , there is no illiquidity, all industrial projects are funded, and no
loans are liquidated. The asset will trade for full face value Z at all times. But if   I  fD , the asset
will trade at a discount to face value. For the banks’ date-1 needs for cash to be met, it must be that

(1   )






Z
1 
2
1   P1     I ( )   fD
P0 
2


(1.4)

Equation (1.4) incorporates the first order condition for optimal loan liquidation by banks at date 1 and for
optimal lending by buyers at date 0, given that the securities are sold for all of the date 1 cash possessed
by buyers, and that this, together with loan liquidation, provides sufficient liquidity to meet the liquidity
demand, fD. Also, we know that in equilibrium, P0 

1
1
q  (1  q)
P1

. Substituting in (1.4), we can solve

for the single unknown, P1 . Note that P1 is determined by the bank’s need to recall enough loans to meet
the aggregate demand for liquidity. Two conditions have to hold for (1.4) to be the equation determining

P1 : (1) the bank is solvent (2) the bank can actually raise fD in total at those prices. When the bank does
not sell any securities at date 0, the necessary condition for solvency is

1    PZP
1
1  1   





Z
2
1   P1    PZ
 (1  f ) DP1  fD
1
2

13

(1.5)

The first term on the left hand side of (1.5) is the value of the loans that it has not liquidated, the second
term is the amount collected from liquidated loans, and the third term is the value of securities held. The
first term on the right hand side is the value of deposits to be paid out while the second term is the value
of deposits withdrawn. So long as (1.5) is met, the bank will be solvent even if it sells more securities at
date 0 (because P0  P1 ).

As P1 falls, it becomes harder to meet the solvency constraint – asset illiquidity leads to
insolvency as in Diamond and Rajan (2005). If the potential liquidity demand f and bank debt D are very
high or the available cash liquidity net of industrial demand,   I , low, so that (1.5) is not met, then the
bank will be insolvent when the illiquidity shock hits and trading will cease at date 0.
The bank also has to have enough securities at date 1 to raise the needed cash in the hands of buyers,

1
P0

  I ( ) . Equation (1.4) assumes that the bank can meet the liquidity demand by selling financial assets
and liquidating loans with rate of return equal to that of selling a loan. This requires:

 ZP1  fD  1   



Z
2
1   P1 
2



(1.6)

For now, assume this condition is met. If (1.6) holds as a strict inequality, then only a fraction of
securities would be sold at date 1. We have
Lemma 2: (i) An increase in potential liquidity demand, f , or bank debt, D , as well as a decrease in the
relative size of liquid entities,  , will lead to a lower current and future expected price of the long dated
asset Z. (ii) An increase in the probability of the liquidity shock, q , will lead to a decrease in the date 0
price P0 and an increase in the date 1 price P1 . (iii) If there is a f  f R at which all sales of the long
dated asset Z cease at date 0, then ceteris paribus, there will be no sales for any f  f R . If there is a
14

D  D R at which all sales of the long dated asset Z cease at date 0, then ceteris paribus, there will be no
sales for any D  D R . If there is a    R at which all sales of the long dated asset Z cease at date 0,
then ceteris paribus, there will be no sales for any    R .

Proof: See Appendix.
The intuition behind Lemma 2 (i) is straightforward. Turning to lemma 2 (ii), an increase in the
probability of the liquidity shock will make the returns to holding cash to buy assets at date 1 higher, so
the date 0 price of the asset has to fall. In turn, however, this implies less lending, so more cash will be
available to meet the liquidity demand, and the date 1 price of the asset will rise. Therefore the higher the
probability of illiquidity, the greater the precautions the system takes against it, and less the chance of
individual failure conditional on the shock. Lemma 2 (iii) suggests that as expected liquidity conditions
deteriorate, there will eventually be a “sudden stop” in date 0 trading as banks become insolvent
conditional on the liquidity shock.

Proposition 2: An increase in potential liquidity demand, f , the face value of bank debt, D ,or the
probability of the liquidity shock, q , as well as a decrease in the relative size of liquid entities,  , will
lead to a reduction in date-0 lending.
Proof: Lending increases in P0 . P0 decreases in f , D, and q and increases in  from lemma 2. Hence
the proposition. Q.E.D.
As the returns to buying illiquid assets increases, date-0 lending slows. Indeed, if date-0 trading in
the long dated asset halts, liquid buyers may have plenty of cash on their balance sheet which is not being
lent, in anticipation of buying assets cheaply at a date-1 fire sale. To the outsider politician, this may seem
excessive caution (after all, the liquid buyers have no fear of liquidity shocks), and they may want to
mandate more date-0 lending for the liquid buyer. However, as we have argued, this could well be a
15

rational equilibrium phenomenon where potential lenders in effect demand a premium for locking up their
money.
Illiquid Banks
Now let us turn to the bank’s liquidity condition (1.6) – that by selling all of its liquid securities, it can
raise enough to provide the additional cash it needs at date 1 to meet the liquidity demand by depositors
(after it liquidates all loans with returns less than or equal to the return from selling securities). If this
condition is not satisfied, then the bank will have to sell all the securities it has,  Z , for all the cash
buyers have. In this case, P1 solves


1 
P1 Z    I ( ) 
P0 


(1.7)

Now the bank will have recall more loans than specified in (1.4) to meet the remaining cash short fall, and
these will be loans that it would not otherwise recall at the prevailing interest rate of

the bank’s solvency. If  ZP1  fD  1   

1
. This will reduce
P1

Z
, the bank cannot meet the demands of its depositors even
2

after selling all securities and recalling all loans. It is then illiquid as well as insolvent.
Bank runs and Inefficiency
Our focus thus far has been on explaining why the market for specialized assets with limited
liquidity possessed by buyers can freeze and how this effects other lending. We have ignored any
efficiency consequences of bank insolvencies, fire sales, or credit contractions. Provided there are no
externalities from lending (that is, surplus generated by a borrower that the lender does not internalize),

16

fire sales when banks are solvent do not produce inefficient outcomes.7 They are simply a way liquidity
is obtained from buyers and transferred to those claimants on the bank who need liquidity. The expected
payment from buyer to seller is independent of whether the trade is at date 0 or 1. However, insolvency
will precipitate a run on the bank. This will cause the bank sell all its securities for the available cash in
the market, and to recall all its loans regardless of their liquidation value, a source of significant
inefficiency.
An Example
 1 
1 
 P0 

Let the base case be Z=2,  =0.3, f=0.58, q  0.2,  =0.5, I ( 1 )  0.3*1.2
P0

. Given these

parameters, P0 =0.354, P1 =0.0988 and the amount of date 0 lending is 0.215. The bank could sell just
24% of its securities holdings at date 0, not sell any securities at date 1, and be solvent. However, if it
does not sell any at date 0, it will find it has to sell 86 percent of its securities portfolio at the depressed
price conditional on the liquidity shock, and will become insolvent. Yet it prefers not to sell, because the
value of equity is higher conditional on no sale than conditional on the date-0 sale, for reasons we have
explained.
In Figure 1, we plot date 0 and date 1 security prices as we vary the amount of available cash with
liquid buyers,  . At levels of  below 0.32, the banks will fail conditional on the liquidity shock, and
will be run. Securities prices are low and lending even lower. Interestingly, an increase in liquidity from
0.29 to 0.3 makes little difference in prices or lending because it does not alter the fact that the bank will
be run, and that the date-1 fire sale prices conditional on the shock will be very low, so date-0 prices will
be low.

7

Our model has no such externalities, but they are present in Diamond-Rajan (2005).

17

18

However, if enough liquidity is infused into the system so that the bank is not insolvent at date1,
securities prices are considerably higher at date 1 and date 0, and consequently, date-0 lending (see Figure
2) jumps.
In sum then, the private sector bank does not internalize the consequences of its own illiquidity
and failure on future economy-wide liquidity conditions, on future available returns, and thus on current
required returns and lending today. While the bank could sell today and avoid future failure (and the
spillovers from its failure to the price of securities as well as to interest rates), it prefers not to, focusing
instead on maximizing value in the future states in which it expects to survive.

Key Assumptions of the Basic Model
It may be useful to discuss our key assumptions. We have referred to the bank’s required need at
date 1 of fD of cash as a liquidity shock, without specifying the source. It could be a need by depositors
for working capital for their own businesses during a period of limited liquidity, or represent a fear-based
withdrawal by some (uninsured) depositors or other short-term creditors who come to doubt the bank’s
viability. One example is the loss of access to interbank loan markets where other banks anticipate future
problems with the bank and prefer to collect before the bank fails or is closed (as in Smith (1991)).
Diamond-Rajan (2005) provides a general equilibrium model of this type of run-based withdrawals with a
shortage of liquidity, stressing the two-way causality between illiquidity and insolvency.
The key contractual element that can lead to a fire sale is that short-term debt can be withdrawn
(or committed lines of credit can be drawn down) before the assets mature. If there was no possibility of
needing to sell assets before date 2, then the market values of the assets would not be depressed by forced
fire sales and as a result there would be no risk of insolvency. With no insolvency, the market would not
freeze.

19

In our model, banks refuse to sell at date 0 as soon as there is any possibility they might default.
If there were some frictional reasons for trade (for example, some buyers are willing to buy at a slightly
higher price than the bid price we calculate), then there would be some trade at date 0 if banks expect to
be solvent at date 1 or if the probability of bank insolvency were very small (the benefits would exceed
the small value of the put foregone), but not if the probability becomes higher. If the chance of receiving
a liquidity shock that causes insolvency varies across otherwise identical banks, we would see the extent
of asset trade varying with the probability of the liquidity shock in a more continuous way.
The assets are illiquid in our model because the set of (equally) informed buyers is limited and
they have finite borrowing capacity (as in Shleifer and Vishny (1992)).8 Hence buying capacity, rather
than asymmetry of information between buyers and sellers of assets, drives our results. Of course, over
time we would expect that if there were substantial quantities of illiquid assets, more potential buyers
would acquire the necessary skills. So illiquidity of this kind would, at best, be a medium term
phenomenon.
Term lending (as opposed to overnight lending) would be curtailed so long as such lending is
done by either the illiquid banks or the potential buyers of their assets. In other words, it is because of the
future high expected cost of capital/rate of return for entities that suffer the liquidity shock, or can buy the
illiquid assets, that today’s required rate of return is high and lending is depressed. For firms that can
borrow from institutions outside this group (such as small firms borrowing from local financiers, who
have no capacity to understand, and hence buy, the illiquid assets), lending would be less constrained.
There are, of course, many channels through which illiquidity can spill into the rest of the economy – the
inter-bank market would be one channel.

8

The notion is that any buyers outside the set of the skilled would find it hard to tell the few bad securities from the
majority of good ones, and could well face a substantial lemons problem if they tried to buy.

20

Finally, we have assumed banks’ cost of funding does not vary if they do or do not sell assets.
Implicit in this is the assumption that bank depositors do not have the expertise to trade the illiquid asset,
and as a result changes in the expected return offered in secondary markets available to banks do not lead
them to change the interest rates offered to depositors. Also, we assume that when a bank subject to
liquidity shocks sells assets early and reduces the default risk to depositors, the deposit rate does not fall - This is based on our assumption that banks have a local monopoly over deposits and depositors inelastically supply a fixed quantity of deposits at date 0 at the offered interest rate (normalized to 0) and do
not demand additional compensation for greater default risk. This assumption allows us to focus on the
essential driving force of the model.
More generally, the lack of full adjustment of the bank’s cost of funding to asset sales arises when
one portion of bank debt (such as insured deposits, or deposits which might, ex-post, end up being
insured, or existing long-term debt as in Myers (1977)) is relatively insensitive to bank actions, while
another portion of debt (such as overnight borrowing, uninsured demand deposits, and cash in brokerage
accounts) is sensitive to the bank’s health and susceptible to run. The unwillingness to sell which causes
the freeze occurs even if all deposits are insured, as long as the bank’s equity value is wiped out when the
liquidity shock makes it insolvent. The implications would be qualitatively similar.

III. Two Extensions
Before we move to discussing interventions, let us discuss two possible extensions. The first is to
allow heterogeneity in the exposure to the liquidity shock.

3.1. Heterogeneity in the Shock
Suppose the probability of the aggregate liquidity shock is q as before, but conditional on a liquidity
shock, each bank i has a probability  i  1 of getting the shock. Assume further that the fraction of banks
21

that get a shock, conditional on the shock occurring, is constant – there is no aggregate uncertainty
conditional on the shock.
One might expect that banks with a lower anticipated exposure to the shock might require a
higher price to sell at date 0 – after all, they are less likely to need liquidity. Simple algebra suggests,
however, that if banks remain solvent given the shock, the probability of the shock does not affect the
price they ask for the asset. As before, therefore, the bid and ask prices are identical when there is no
insolvency. The intuition is interesting. The ask price at date 0 that we computed earlier in (1.3) fully
compensated banks for the cost of selling early and having spare liquidity if the aggregate shock does not
hit. In addition, the ability to reinvest spare date-0 cash at the low security price P1 , conditional on the
aggregate shock, fully compensates them for having spare liquidity at date 0 and having the aggregate but
not the bank-specific shock hit. This is why the size of the idiosyncratic shock does not matter if banks
are solvent.
But if banks are insolvent conditional on the shock hitting (that is, if

Z

i

 ZP1  (1   )   (1  P12 )  fD  (1   ) PZ
1  1  f  D  P1  0 ), 
2

does determine the size of

the put option. Noting that if a bank survives at the ask price that gives it the incentive to forego its put
option, the bank will sell all its securities at date 0, and not just enough to meet the liquidity shock, we
have after some simple algebra

P0Ask ,

i



Z
2
 fD  (1   )  2  (1  P1 )

 
   q(1   i )  (1  q)   Z
(1
)
q i 
f
D
 1    PZ


1
P1





q

 P  (1  q)   Z
 1


22

(1.8)

If the bank is insolvent conditional on the liquidity shock in the absence of any sales at date 0, the
numerator increases in
shock

 i . Hence we have the ask price now increasing with the size of the idiosyncratic

i.

Proposition 3: If banks have differing exposure  i to the aggregate liquidity shock, the ask price does not
vary with  i if banks are solvent conditional on the liquidity shock hitting them, but increases in  i if they
are insolvent conditional on the shock hitting them.
If there are reasons to trade at date 0, as mentioned at the end of the previous section, then the
banks with the lowest probability of receiving a liquidity shock will be the most willing to trade at date 0.
This has implications for government actions to eliminate a market freeze. We discuss this in section IV.

3.2. Risky vs Illiquid Assets
Thus far, we have assumed that the illiquid assets have a value Z with certainty. This simplifying
assumption creates some expositional difficulty, for it is hard to imagine then why the asset is illiquid,
since anyone with cash could buy the asset and hold it to maturity. In particular, there would be no cost to
the government of liquidity intervention, as long as the market price per unit of face value is less than
one.
One reason why the government could be reluctant to intervene is that the asset might require
management (as with a bank loan), and the government may not have management capability. But this is
not a plausible explanation for arm’s length mortgage backed securities. Another reason, and one we have
relied on so far, is that only the specialist knows the value of the security or, equivalently, a fraction of the
illiquid assets could be very poor in quality, so any casual buyer will end up with an adversely selected lot
of securities (unless he buys the whole portfolio, which even the government may not have the funds to
do). But a third reason, is there could be fundamental uncertainty about the asset’s value, which overlays
23

(and is partly responsible) for its illiquidity. To analyze this, let us start by examining an asset whose
value is uncertain, ignoring illiquidity for the moment, then bring back illiquidity.
Risky assets
Suppose the date 2 value is not Z with certainty, but is Z with probability 1-q and PZ
 Z with
1
, is now low because date 2 payments are expected to be low. In
probably q, where the date 1 value, PZ
1
this case, the asset is liquid and the gross rate of return from buying it at the low value at date 1 is the
normal expected rate of return (one each period). Of course, because the asset is risky, a bank that would
fail if the lower asset value were realized at date 1 might still ask for a price at date 0 that exceeds the
fundamental value of the asset, because it values the option to shift risk to lenders, as in Allen and Gale
(2000b).
Note that the ask price required by the risky bank would be the same as derived for the base case
earlier, because the bank’s payoff from not selling is (1-q)(Z-D) as before. The bid price would be
somewhat higher than the bid price we found earlier (because buyers require a gross rate of return of only
1 in the future, implying that their highest bid would be the fundamental value of the asset, that is
Bid
qPZ
). Because the hurdle rate for new date-0 lending would not be elevated by
1  (1  q ) Z > Po

expectations of future fire sales, lending by potential buyers is normal.9 Therefore, to explain both a
general credit freeze, including few new loans by healthy unlevered buyers, and a freeze in securities
markets, the fear of fire sales is, we believe, a more relevant model.

Illiquid and Risky Assets
Adding the possibility that assets are illiquid, in addition to being risky, is straightforward, so we
will not pursue it. There is though a final but subtle consequence of considering both illiquidity and risk at
9

This also means injecting future liquidity would have no effect on current or future asset prices. The market would
still be frozen.

24

the same time. Suppose the realization of the fundamental value of Z%conditional on the liquidity shock
is either low, Z L , or high, Z H , with expected value Z. At date 1 the available pool of liquidity will tend
to bind more when asset prices are high – the departure from fundamental value will be greater because

P1 will be smaller, and the prospective returns,

1
, for investors from purchasing at that time will be
P1

higher. As a result, using Jensen’s inequality, a mean preserving spread in the fundamental date-2 value
of the asset, conditional on the liquidity shock, will result in an increase in the expected return to having
cash in those states. Thus risk overlaid on illiquidity will further depress lending at date 0.

Figure 3: Risk, iIliquidity, and Expected Returns
1/P1

1

P1

ZL

E(Z)

Ž

25

ZH

The point of introducing an overlay of risk on our basic model of illiquidity was to show how
illiquidity is fundamental to the point we have made. There are interesting interactions between illiquidity
and risk, however, which deserve further exploration.

IV.

Interventions

There are several reasons that government regulators or central banks might consider intervening to
eliminate the market freeze and even influence the market price.
(i)

Interventions that force some banks to sell securities early can keep banks from being run and
their assets being dumped on the market. Interventions that reduce the fire sale pricing can have a
similar effect.

(ii)

The authorities may need a market price to help determine if the banks are solvent. When Z is
random, banks and expert buyers may know the long-run value of assets, Z, but the regulators
may not know. In addition, regulators may not know the amount of available liquidity,  .
Therefore, useful valuation information can be obtained about both fundamental values and
expected liquidity conditions by unfreezing the market. Note that illiquidity would depress the bid
price below fundamentals, while the put option, stemming from both illiquidity and risky
fundamentals, could elevate the ask price, even above fundamental value.

(iii)

An intervention that reduces the fire sale pricing can increase the flow of credit from potential
buyers and sellers, both at date 0 (new loans) and at date 1 (reduce unnecessary liquidation of old
loans).
Possible interventions include forcing distressed institutions’ to sell, paying enough to induce

voluntary sales to the authorities, increasing the capacity and incentive of potential buyers to buy
distressed assets, providing liquidity directly to banks, or removing the overhang of distressed institutions
26

by recapitalizing or closing them. In any intervention, the authorities may be handicapped by not knowing
the fundamental value of assets themselves. In what follows, we examine various interventions and the
insights offered by the model on their likely costs and benefits.

Forced Date-0 Asset Sales
We argued earlier that because the security is illiquid, the bank may be insolvent conditional on
the shock if it holds to sell at date 1. This, of course, makes it even more determined to hold the security
till date 1. If, however, it sold the security at date 0, it would get a higher price and perhaps avoid default.
To the extent that this reduces the number of banks that are run at date 1 and that therefore sell all their
securities into the market, it could also push up bid prices for the securities, and thus increase lending at
both dates. Of course, banks that expect to fail conditional on the liquidity shock do not have an incentive
to sell assets at date 0 at the price buyers are willing to pay, so sales will have to be forced by the
government. We state the result for the standard case where the bank is liquid but insolvent.

Theorem 4: Let P1 be determined by (1.4), let the liquidity condition (1.6) hold, but let the bank be
insolvent if it retains all its securities till date 1 so that (1.5) is violated.
(i) Then if there is an 0 with 0  (0,1] such that

1    PZ
1 .P1  1   





Z
2
1   P1    Z (0 P0  (1  0 ) P1 )  (1  f ) DP1  fD
2


0 P0    I (


1 
)
P0 

then all the banks can be made fail-safe by requiring them to sell 0 of their securities at date 0.

27

(1.9)

(1.10)

(ii) If there is no 0 with 0  (0,1] such that (1.9) and (1.10) are satisfied, then not all the banks
can be saved through forced date-0 sales. The maximum fraction of banks that can be saved
is given by  , where  , P1 , and 0 solve



0 P0    I (




1 
)
P0 



(1.12)

Z
2
1   P1    Z (0 P0  (1  0 ) P1 )  (1  f ) DP1  fD
2

(1.13)


Z
1 
2 

(1   )  ZP1    fD  (1   ) 1   P1      I ( ) 
P0 
2

 

1    PZ
1 .P1  1   

(1.11)





(iii) If no feasible solution exists to (ii), then the banking system cannot be prevented from failing
through securities sales at date 0.

(iv) If some banks can be saved from failing through securities sales at date 0, both P0 and P1 are
higher (relative to the situation where all banks fail conditional on the shock), as are date 0
and date 1 lending.
Proof: Omitted
The reason a forced sale at date 0 could contribute to bank solvency is that the sales price pools
the value of the security across future states (buyers essentially provide the bank insurance). So the bank
is worth more conditional on the liquidity shock if it sold at date 0 than it would be worth if it did not sell
and got hit by the liquidity shock. Indeed, the price of the security conditional on the shock is also now
higher because failed banks do not now depress the price by dumping all their securities on the market.
This implies that the sale at date 0 also fetches a higher price.
28

One problem, of course, may be that the value of securities that have to be sold at date 0 to ensure
bank solvency may exceed the available cash with buyers -- (1.10) may not hold. This may occur even if
the available cash, coupled with loans that are liquidated by the bank at date 1, is enough to meet the
needs of depositors – i.e., even if there is enough liquidity to meet the demands of depositors. In this case,
only a fraction  of banks can then be saved through sales at date 0. Of course, these banks may now
have excess liquidity even when hit with the liquidity shock, and can use the excess to purchase securities
cheaply from other firms. Finally, forced asset sales will not work if there is little cash with buyers (so
securities prices are low and solvency cannot be assured) or if the probability of the liquidity shock is
high (so selling at date 0 does not add much to the value).
Another interesting case, different from the one we have examined above, is one where the
liquidity shock is so high, and therefore the date 1 price is so low, that a bank would need to sell all its
securities and would also need to liquidate loans with higher future returns than

1
((1.6) does not hold).
P1

Securities are priced to draw out all the cash in the market (and the price is determined by (1.7)). We
know that the bank would be insolvent at date 1 at this price (otherwise, it would have been willing to sell
at date 0). Interestingly, if the authorities force a sale at date 0, the date-0 price will be the cash-in-themarket price – it will be based on the cash available to purchase securities, and not on the potentially
higher expected value of the security given by (1.3) (which incorporates the higher value in the no-shock



state). Selling all of the security at date 0 will set a price that solves P0  Z    I (



1 
)  , which is the
P0 

same as the date-1 price. Even so, forced sales may help bank solvency – at the low cash-in-the-market
date-0 price, P0, buyers will set aside more cash to purchase securities, thus boosting their date 0 price
relative to the date 1 price that prevailed when date 0 sales were not mandated. Forced sales produce a

29

lower P0, and lower lending by potential buyers, I (

Only if this margin of lower I (

By contrast, if I (

1
) , who divert the proceeds to security purchases.
P0

1
) is large, will there be a benefit to forced sales.
P0

1
) were unchanged at the lower P0, the equilibrium P0 would equal the P1 from
P0

(1.7) and the banks will be insolvent at date 0. This is the potential downside to forced sales when
liquidity is in short supply. Because the forced date-0 sale makes sellers accept a cash-in-the market price,
it will reduce their date-0 value beyond just the loss of the put option (and buyers will now get a windfall
because the security will sell for lower than the value implied by date-1 returns without forced sales). If
the authorities are mistaken about the extra available liquidity, forced sales would render banks insolvent
at date 0, even if they were solvent at date 0 without the forced sale.

Voluntary Sales to the Authorities
Thus far, we have looked at forced sales. The authorities can offer to buy securities at date 0 at a
price banks will voluntarily sell at, so as to establish securities prices, keep the securities off market in an
entity like the Resolution Trust Corporation, and prevent some bank failures. The problem, however, is
that a bank will sell only at or above the ask price given in (1.8), which depends on a given bank’s
likelihood of receiving the liquidity shock, and which is above the private buyer’s bid price.10
So long as the magnitude of the purchase by the authorities is such as to not eliminate bank
failure, the value of the put option of the marginal selling bank will determine the price that banks will set
in a reverse auction (similar to that considered in the initial TARP program in the United States in 2008).
10

Unlike the private market, though, the authorities may be willing to tolerate some losses because they internalize
the economy-wide positive spillovers from having a healthy, functioning, financial sector. The losses could take the
form of rents needed to ensure incentive-compatibility for buyers that can acquire the asset on their behalf, subsidies
to induce banks to sell and partly reveal the value of assets, or losses made in buying the illiquid assets or claims on
the illiquid assets that the authorities do not have great expertise in.

30

A reverse auction will provide a price, but if authorities are unsure of the motivation for the lack of selling
(and do not know q,  i , or f ), it will not reveal the value of Z to them. Three additional features of the
reverse auction are clear.
(i)

If there are banks with different exposures to the liquidity shock, the banks with the lowest value
of the put option (the lowest exposure to the liquidity shock) would agree to sell at the lowest
price (this is from expression (1.14)) .

(ii)

Conditional on agreeing to sell, they would want to sell all their securities, since at any price over
the bid price, selling and reinvesting conditional on the liquidity shock beats holding to
maturity.11 If these selling banks were banned from repurchasing the illiquid security if they did
not receive a liquidity shock on date 1, they would demand a higher price for parting with it at
date 0.

(iii)

The price at which banks will sell will increase with the amount of money the government puts
into purchasing assets – because the fewer the assets left with the banks after the reverse auction,
the lower the date-1 price discount conditional on the liquidity shock (this is assuming that the
cash the authorities put into purchasing is additional to that in the hands of private buyers). At the
same time, the price will also approach the price private buyers will pay because a higher date-1
price will eliminate the possibility of failure and hence the put option. Interestingly, therefore,
government purchases can restart an illiquid private market at a higher price. Note that if date-1
illiquidity is not the problem but the problem is low fundamentals, the price will not move
regardless of the amount the government puts in.

11

is

To see this, the value of selling at the date 0 bid price and reinvesting conditional on the liquidity shock at date 1
P0
P1

q  P0 (1  q )  1

when P0  P0

Bid



1
q

 (1  q )

P1

31

Liquidity infusion 1: Lend to liquid buyers at date 0 or date 1.
We have already examined one form of liquidity infusion, which is for the government to buy
assets directly. An alternative is for it to lend to liquid buyers at date 0 or date 1, thus augmenting  and
boosting prices (see lemma 2). Buyers certainly have the expertise to value the assets, the real issue being
whether they have the incentives to use government financing in a reasonable way. Some rents/subsidies
may have to be offered to them to give them the incentive to use their expertise on behalf of the
government. To the extent that buyers get these subsidies only if they purchase assets, they may have an
incentive to pay for the put options banks hold. Note that if the government has insured depositors, and
cannot avoid illiquidity induced failures, the subsidy to buyers, which is passed on to banks, reflects the
(perhaps unwise) commitments it has taken through deposit insurance (though, as discussed above, the
government can reduce the put by forcing banks to sell securities). The subsidy is more questionable if the
bank is insolvent, or if the banks are significantly funded through uninsured deposits.

Liquidity infusion 2: Lend to the banks at date 1
An apparently straightforward solution to the problem of a fire sale at date 1 is to lend freely to
the banks experiencing liquidity withdrawals. If the government could commit to do this on a sufficiently
large scale, which would require it to value the banks’ assets at date 1, the illiquid pricing would be
eliminated as would be the date 0 market freeze. However, if as we argue in section 3.1, regulators are
unsure about the asset values (Z), they would be unsure if they were providing liquidity or participating in
a bail out. If the public believed, rightly or wrongly, that lending was a bail out, it might be unwilling to
support it. As a result, it might be difficult for the authorities to commit to unconditional date-1 liquidity
support at date 0, preventing them from ending the freeze.
Close Some Banks at Date 0

32

If there is insufficient liquidity for all banks to survive the liquidity shock, then all will be run and
all will fail if each waits until date 1 to sell assets. There might be sufficient liquidity for some to survive
if the others are closed and their assets taken “off market”.
If banks are insolvent, the authorities can close them (if the banks are not “too big to fail”). To
use solvency as a basis to close banks, the authorities will have to determine the value of assets, for which
they will either need to generate a market price or they will have to hire experts to value the assets.12 They
will also have to hold the illiquid assets in some holding entity (similar to the Resolution Trust
Corporation) and sell them over time once the likelihood of the liquidity shock falls. Closure thus allows
the authorities to remove the overhang of illiquid assets, and bring down required rates of return, but it
does not absolve them of the need to value assets or pump in resources (to finance the holding entity).
The problem comes when the banks appear solvent today and thus cannot be failed, but could
become insolvent in the future – as in our model. Closure may not be an option for the “walking
wounded”. It may also not be an option for the banks that are difficult to fail for a variety of reasons.
Recapitalization
If the authorities are willing to infuse capital they could help when the problem is primarily one
of solvency (if when date 1 interest rates go high enough to generate enough liquidity from calling loans
to meet depositor withdrawals, the bank is insolvent). Indeed, this is the situation in our initial example.
If, for instance, the authorities were willing to give the bank bonds of value 0.018 at date 1 that would pay

12

A market price will be sufficient to value assets held on the books so long as there are easily observable and
verifiable characteristics that put the traded assets in the same equivalence class as the book assets – e.g., mortgage
backed securities based on sub-prime mortgages originated by A in new development B in city C. If, however, there
are still intrinsic differences between assets that require expertise (mortgages originated in the south-side of the
development have different default characteristics than those originated in the north side, and only south side
mortgages are traded), then there is no alternative to hiring experts.

33

off at date 2, they could save the bank from being run. This would increase the date-1 security price above
the “run” price, and increase lending at date 0.
A commitment to inject capital as needed to keep the bank from failing does create moral hazard
because the bank will be bailed out no matter how poorly it does. Moreover, this intervention does not
induce the banker to sell securities early (because the banker knows his stake will be severely diluted
even if the bank is rescued, and thus his down side payoff is very low, much as the situation where he is
run). It does keep some assets off the market by preventing a run, and hence boosts securities prices, and
thus lending. Indeed, the stress tests conducted by the U.S. government on 19 large banks in May 2009
might have been interpreted as a signal that the government would stand behind the banks regardless of
their eventual loss levels. This eliminated the possibility of a large bank failure, and began the process of
raising the prices of illiquid assets

V. Related Literature
Some recent work has explained market freezes by appeals to asymmetric information, along the
lines of the original insight of Ackerlof (1970). Bolton, Santos and Scheinkman (2008) and Heider,
Hoerova and Holthausen ( 2009) present interesting models of securities sales based on private
information of existing banks about the value of their assets. For example, in Bolton, Santos, and
Scheinkman (2008), long horizon investors cannot tell whether short horizon investors sell because they
need liquidity or because they have adverse information about asset quality. This leads to a price discount,
which gets worse over time because the potential seller gets to know more about the asset. The seller thus
has to decide whether to sell now in response to a liquidity need, or to attempt to ride out the crisis with
the possibility of selling in the future at a much greater discount. There are both immediate trading
equilibria and late trading equilibria, with the latter resembling our trading freeze. The clear difference in
our model is the assumption of no information asymmetry within the set of buyers and sellers.
34

Acharya, Gale, and Yorulmazer (2009) show that borrowing freezes can arise when the
information structure in the market shifts from one where the arrival of no news is good news (and the
asset price goes up) to one where the arrival of no news is bad news (and the asset price goes down). In
the latter situation, the borrowing capacity of a bank may be very low when it intends to roll over its
borrowing repeatedly. The shift in information structure in the market can, therefore, cause lending to
banks to dry up. Our paper explains, by contrast, why long term lending to industry, where there is no
rollover risk, can also dry up.
Allen, Carletti and Gale (2009) present a model of freezes without asymmetric information, with
limited liquidity as we assume, but without any risk of default. The market freezes there when there is
ample liquidity but most of the liquidity risk is systematic rather than bank specific. The interbank
market freezes because each bank wants to hold liquidity on its balance sheet rather than to borrow or
lend it when nearly all banks will borrow or lend (rather than take offsetting positions).
There are closely related studies of aggregate liquidity shortages. Diamond-Rajan [2005] model
contagious bank failures due to limited aggregate liquidity. In their model, there is both individual bank
risk about the proportion of their loans that generate liquid repayments quickly and aggregate uncertainty
about the supply of liquidity. The potential failure of enough banks forces banks to call in bank-specific
loans. Banks choose to increase interest rates to attempt to attract deposits from other banks, and this can
bring down all other banks when liquidity is too low. The model assumes that the deposit market is
competitive and that all assets, including bank deposits and short-term debt, must offer the same return as
the loans that banks make. The model we present in this paper has similar features, except we assume
that deposit markets are local monopolies (or at least require a lower return than bank assets, and the
return does not move one for one with returns in asset markets). The effect of limited liquidity is via the
price of banks’ tradable assets, which affects the rate of return expected in the market over time, and thus
lending.
35

Our paper is also related to Shleifer and Vishny (2009), where banks expand and contract lending
based on their ability to securitize loans in a sentiment driven market. In their model, parameters are
assumed such that banks would not want to hoard cash in order to buy assets when market sentiment falls.
This then drives the pro-cyclicality of lending. However, banks would hoard securities and not sell them
at such times, in anticipation of a recovery in prices. Our rationale for why banks hoard securities is
different, since there are buyers in our market who are not infected by negative sentiment. The reason in
our model is that banks prefer the higher return they get conditional on survival by holding on to the
asset, to the lower unconditional return they get from selling.
The model of illiquid asset markets where prices are set by the quantity of liquidity in the market
is closely related to that used in Bhatacharya-Gale (1987) and Allen-Gale (1998, 2003). This is related,
yet somewhat different from the model of liquidity in Holmstrom-Tirole (1998), which relies on collateral
value as the limit to liquidity of an asset, rather than limited purchasing power.
Finally, our paper is related to Phillipon and Schnabl (2009). Unlike our paper, they treat the
problem of credit contraction in a crisis as primarily due to a debt overhang faced by banks as in Myers
(1977). Our focus on the institutional overhang of distressed institutions is clearly different.
Conclusion
While our model is simple, it offers a way to think about the problems that ail any financial market and
lending in a crisis. The simple message is that in a crisis, credit is unlikely to flow freely unless the
problem of institutional overhang is dealt with – unless the solvency of illiquid institutions is assured, or
the illiquid assets they hold are moved to entities that will not unload them quickly. The task of the
authorities is to facilitate such a clean-up at minimum cost to the taxpayer. We have suggested some
possible interventions that could be effective. More work is clearly needed to understand the links
between solvency, liquidity, and lending better.
36

References
Ackerlof, George, (1970), “The Market for Lemons: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84 (3):488-500.
Acharya, Viral, Douglas Gale, and Tanju Yorulmazer (2009), “Rollover Risk and Market Freezes”,
working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Adrian, Tobias and Hyun Shin (2008), “Financial Intermediary Leverage and Value at Risk”, Federal
Reserve Bank Staff Reports 338.
Allen, Franklin and Elena Carletti, 2008, “The Role of Liquidity in Financial Crises”, 2008 Jackson Hole
Conference Proceedings, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 379-412.
Allen, Franklin, Elena Carletti and Douglas Gale, 2009, “Interbank Market Liquidity and Central Bank
Intervention,” working paper, Wharton School.
Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale (1998), “Optimal Financial Crises,” Journal of Finance 1245-1284.
Allen, F. and D. Gale (2000a). “Financial Contagion,” Journal of Political Economy.
108, 1-33.
Allen, F. and D. Gale (2000b). “Bubbles and Crises, The Economic Journal, 110, No. 460: 236-255.
Allen, F. and D. Gale (2003). “Financial Intermediaries and Markets.” Econometrica, 72, 1023-1061.
Bhattacharya, S. and D. Gale (1987), Preference Shocks, Liquidity, and Central Bank Policy, in W.
Barnett and K. Singleton eds., New Approaches to Monetary Policy, Cambridge University Press, 69-88.
Bolton, Patrick, Tano Santos and Jose Scheinkman, Inside and Outside Liquidity, working paper,
Princeton University, November 2008.
Brunnermeier, Markus (2008), “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007-2008”, forthcoming,
Journal of Economic Perspectives.
Caballero, Ricardo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2009, “Global Imbalances and Financial Fragility”,
NBER working paper 14688.
Diamond Douglas W. and Raghuram Rajan, “Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation and Financial Fragility:
A Theory of Banking”, 2001, Journal of Political Economy , vol 109, 2, 287-327.
Diamond Douglas W. and Raghuram Rajan “Liquidity Shortages and Banking Crises.” Journal of
Finance, 2005, 60, (2), 615-647.
Diamond Douglas W. and Raghuram Rajan, 2009. "The Credit Crisis: Conjectures about Causes and
Remedies," NBER Working Papers 14739, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc

37

Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2002, Equilibrium and welfare in markets with financially
constrained arbitrageurs, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 361–407.
Heider, Florian, Marie Hoerova and Cornelia Holthausen, 2009, “Liquidity Hoarding and Interbank
Market Spreads: The Role of Counterparty Risk,” European Central Bank working paper, February 2009.
Gorton, Gary, 2009, “Information, Liquidity, and the (ongoing) panic of 2007”, NBER working paper
14649.
Holmstrom, B. and J. Tirole, “Public and Private Supply of Liquidity,” Journal of Political Economy 106
(1998), 1- 40.
Ivashina, Victoria and David Scharfstein, Bank Lending During the Financial Crisis of 2008, working
paper, Harvard Business School.
Jensen, M.C. and W. Meckling, 1976, "Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs
and Ownership Structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.
Kondor, Péter, 2009, “Risk in Dynamic Arbitrage: The Price Effects of Convergence Trading,” Journal of
Finance 64: 631-655.
Myers, S., 1977, The determinants of corporate borrowing, Journal of Financial Economics 5, 147-175.
Phillipon, Thomas, and Philipp Schnabl, 2009, Efficient Recapitalizations, working paper, NYU.
Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny, 1992, Liquidation value and debt capacity: A market equilibrium approach,
Journal of Finance 47, 1343-1366.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny (2009), Unstable Banking, working paper, University of Chicago.
Smith, Bruce, (1991)) “Bank panics, suspension and geography: Some notes on the ‘contagion of fear’ in
banking,” Economic Inquiry, 24: 230-248.
Stein, Jeremy (2009), Presidential Address, American Finance Association.

38

Proof of Lemma 2;
We sketch the proof when the change in parameters does not cause a change in whether the bank defaults
or not. Incorporating such a change is straightforward. (i) Totally differentiating (1.4), we get

dP1

df

D
 1  P
(1   ) ZP1  I   2  0
 P0  P1

can show

which is negative since the denominator is negative. Similarly, we

dP1
dP
1
 0 and 1  0 . Since P0 
, lemma 2 (i) follows. (ii) Ceteris paribus, an
1
dD
d
q  (1  q)
P1

increase in q leads to a decrease in P0 . From (1.4), this must imply that P1 will increase in equilibrium,
since liquid buyers will lend less and store more cash. (iii) The condition for all sales to cease is that the
bank ceases to be solvent. The solvency condition is given by (1.5), which on simplifying is



Z
Z
P1 (1   )   P1   Z  D   fD(1  P1 )  (1   )   . This is clearly satisfied if P1  1 , so long as
2
2



D  Z . As f increases, P1 falls, from lemma 2 (i). So the right hand side of the inequality increases,
while the left hand side falls. Hence provided the bank fails for some f R , it should fail for all f  f R .
The other conditions follow similarly. Q.E.D.

39

