NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIRMS' EXPORTING BEHAVIOR UNDER QUALITY CONSTRAINTS
Juan Carlos Hallak
Jagadeesh Sivadasan
Working Paper 14928
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14928

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2009

Juan Carlos Hallak thanks the National Science Foundation (grant #SES-05550190) and Jagadeesh
Sivadasan thanks the NTT program of Asian Finance and Economics for supporting this work. We
also thank the Center for International Business Education (CIBE) for support. Part of the research
in this paper was conducted by Jagadeesh Sivadasan as a Special Sworn Status researcher of the U.S.
Census Bureau at the Michigan Census Research Data Center. The results in the paper have been screened
to ensure that no confidential data are revealed. Research results and conclusions expressed are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Census Bureau. We thank Carlo Altomonte,
Inés Armendariz, Paula Bustos, Mariana Colaccelli, Alan Deardoff, Rob Feenstra, David Hummels,
Jim Levinsohn, Diego Puga, Kim Ruhl, Eric Verhoogen and Federico Weinschelbaum for their comments
and suggestions. We also thank seminar and conference participants at Berkeley, Columbia, Georgetown,
LSE, Michigan, Missouri, Oregon, Oxford, Princeton, San Andres, San Diego, Santa Cruz, Stanford,
The World Bank, UBC, U. Montevideo, UT-Austin, UTDT, CREI (Spain), ELSNIT (Italy), LACEA
(Colombia), NBER Summer Institute, RIEF (Italy), and UNIBO (Argentina). Santiago Sautua, Bernardo
D. de Astarloa, Xiaoyang Li and Alejandro Molnar provided excellent research assistantship. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Juan Carlos Hallak and Jagadeesh Sivadasan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Firms' Exporting Behavior under Quality Constraints
Juan Carlos Hallak and Jagadeesh Sivadasan
NBER Working Paper No. 14928
April 2009
JEL No. F10,F12,F14
ABSTRACT
We develop a model of international trade with export quality requirements and two dimensions of
firm heterogeneity. In addition to "productivity", firms are also heterogeneous in their "caliber" —
the ability to produce quality using fewer fixed inputs. Compared to single-attribute models of firm
heterogeneity emphasizing either productivity or the ability to produce quality, our model provides
a more nuanced characterization of firms' exporting behavior. In particular, it explains the empirical
fact that firm size is not monotonically related with export status: there are small firms that export
and large firms that only operate in the domestic market. The model also delivers novel testable predictions.
Conditional on size, exporters are predicted to sell products of higher quality and at higher prices,
pay higher wages and use capital more intensively. These predictions, although apparently intuitive,
cannot be derived from single-attribute models of firm heterogeneity as they imply no variation in
export status after size is controlled for. We find strong support for the predictions of our model in
manufacturing establishment datasets for India, the U.S., Chile, and Colombia.

Juan Carlos Hallak
Universidad de San Andres
Departamento de Economia
Vito Dumas 284 (B1644BID)
Victoria, Provincia de Buenos Aires
ARGENTINA
and NBER
jchallak@udesa.edu.ar
Jagadeesh Sivadasan
University of Michigan
Ross School of Business
701 Tappan, Room D4209A
Ann Arbor, MI 48103
jagadees@umich.edu

1

Introduction

Understanding what determines firms’ export behavior and performance is one of the most important open questions in international trade. At a policy level, the impressive export performances of
rapidly-growing developing countries (World Bank 1987, 1993) suggests that export growth might
play a key role in helping countries attain high income levels. Also, as governments increasingly
view export development as an important objective that justifies policies aimed at fostering it,
understanding what makes firms export should help enhance the eﬀectiveness of such policies.1
More generally, identifying determinants of firms’ exporting behavior is critical for answering the
question of what determines trade patterns across countries, the field’s core question in the last
two centuries.
While work in international trade has traditionally focused on determinants of trade operating
at the sector level, a growing new literature emphasizes the role played by factors operating at
the level of the firm. In this literature a single attribute, heterogeneously distributed across firms,
is usually modeled as the sole determinant of firms’ ability to conduct business successfully, both
domestically and abroad. This attribute is often modeled as productivity (e.g. Bernard et al.
2003, Melitz 2003, Chaney 2008, Arkolakis 2008), or alternatively as the ability to produce quality
(Baldwin and Harrigan 2007, Johnson 2008, Verhoogen 2008, Kugler and Verhoogen 2008). In
either case the models share the property that the endowment of this attribute perfectly predicts
firms’ revenue (henceforth our measure of firm size) and export status. Moreover, the models
predict a threshold firm size above which all firms export — and below which none do.
Although these models parsimoniously explain the salient fact that exporters tend to be large
(Clerides et al. 1998, Bernard and Jensen 1999), the prediction of a threshold firm size for export,
common to single-attribute models, is contradicted in the data by a large number of “anomalous”
firms. Notable among them are “born globals” — small and recently established firms with a strong
export orientation (Oviatt and McDougall 1994, Rialp et al. 2005), and “local dynamos” — large
firms that are successful in their domestic markets but do not sell abroad (Boston Consulting Group
2008). More generally, the models leave much of the observed relationship between firm size and
export status unexplained. As a preview of the data we will describe later in more detail, Figure
1 plots, for each of the four countries in our sample, the fraction of exporters in each of 40 size
quantiles (defined by industry).2 Though this fraction increases with size, there are still many
1
2

The number of export promotion agencies in the world has tripled in the last two decades (Lederman et al. 2007).
To be consistent with our model, Figure 1 uses data for diﬀerentiated products. Appendix figure A.1 shows a

2

exporters among the smallest firms as well as a substantial fraction of firms with no export activity
even among firms at the top of the size distribution.
This paper develops a partial-equilibrium heterogeneous-firm model with endogenous product
quality that can explain the lack of a one-to-one relationship between firm size and export status
observed in these graphs.3 The model embeds two sources of heterogeneity: “productivity” is the
ability to produce output using fewer variable inputs — as is typically modeled in the literature;
“caliber” is the ability to produce quality with fewer fixed outlays. Product quality shifts out
product demand but increases marginal costs of production and fixed costs of product development.
Although caliber is the primary determinant of quality choice, productivity also aﬀects this choice
by reducing the impact of quality on marginal costs. Therefore, both caliber and productivity
increase firm’s optimal choice of quality.
We describe and analyze the equilibrium in a trade environment with export quality constraints.
In the presence of these constraints, high-productivity low-caliber firms are large in size, but refrain
from exporting because they find the cost of satisfying the export quality constraint excessively
onerous. In turn, low-productivity high-caliber firms are active in the export market despite being
small. More generally, the model implies that export success might depend critically on firm
capabilities that are not as essential for domestic success.
We first solve for the industry equilibrium in the closed economy and in a benchmark case of
an open economy with no export quality constraints. In both cases, productivity (ϕ) and caliber
(ξ) can be combined into a single “ability” parameter η (η = η(ϕ, ξ)) such that key variables of
interest can be expressed in terms of this scalar parameter. For example, regardless of the particular
combinations of ϕ and ξ, firms with the same value of η have identical revenue, profits, and export
status (though they choose diﬀerent quality levels and charge diﬀerent prices). Furthermore, the
model allows for a representation isomorphic to Melitz’s (2003) model. A threshold ability level
(η) determines survival, while another threshold ability level (η u ) determines firms’ participation
in the export market. The isomorphism with Melitz’ model is appealing as it makes the case with
no export quality constraints a transparent benchmark.
Next we analyze the full model, where we assume that firms are required to meet a minimum
quality requirement to export.4 Although simplistic, this assumption captures a wealth of evidence
similar pattern including all industries.
3
We later discuss alternative dimensions of heterogeneity that could also explain the patterns observed in Figure
1 but not all the remaining predictions of the model.
4
A similar assumption is made by Rauch (2007) in a model with homogenous firms.

3

suggesting that export success is associated with firms’ ability to satisfy quality constraints.5 While
diﬀerent reasons — discussed later — can be invoked to justify the existence of these constraints, our
aim in this paper is not to identify their particular source but rather to identify their presence by
examining its impact on firms’ exporting behavior.
In the presence of export quality constraints, our model implies that the size of a firm is no
longer suﬃcient information to infer its export status. In particular, a firm that does not export
(high ϕ, low ξ) might have equal sales revenue as an exporting firm (low ϕ, high ξ). Because
of its high productivity, the former firm can compensate its lack of foreign revenue with higher
domestic sales. This prediction can explain the heterogeneity in exporting behavior within size
groups observed in Figure 1.
While a variety of economic forces diﬀerent from those we propose here can potentially explain
Figure 1, our assessment of the model’s empirical relevance relies on empirically testing the distinct
set of additional predictions it delivers. In particular, our model predicts systematic diﬀerences
between exporters and non-exporters conditional on firm size. Specifically, conditional on firm
size exporters are predicted to produce higher quality and sell at higher prices than non-exporters.
Also, to the extent that production of quality goods requires more intensive use of skilled labor and
capital, exporters should pay higher average wages and be more capital intensive. In sum, the model
predicts conditional exporter premia in quality, price, average wage, and capital intensity. Thus,
in a regression framework with quality, price, average wage or capital intensity as the dependent
variable and size controls, the conditional exporter premia should manifest in a positive coeﬃcient
on an export dummy.
The prediction of conditional exporter premia in our model is conceptually very diﬀerent from
the unconditional exporter premia predicted by recently proposed single-attribute models with
quality heterogeneity (Baldwin and Harrigan 2007, Johnson 2008, Kugler and Verhoogen 2008,
Crozet et al. 2008).
5

In those models, exporters are predicted to be systematically diﬀerent

The international management literature widely acknowledges quality as a key requisite to access foreign markets

(e.g. Guler et al. 2002, Gosen et al. 2005). In particular, several studies based on firm-level surveys both in
developed and developing countries (e.g. Weston 1995, Erel and Ghosh 1997, Mersha 1997, Anderson et al. 1999,
Corbett 2005) document satisfying the demands of international buyers as a critical motivation for obtaining quality
management certification (ISO 9000). Studies in international trade, using census or large firm—level datasets, find
that quality strongly influences firms’ ability to export (Brooks 2006, Verhoogen 2008, Iacovone and Javorcik 2008).
Finally, international organizations emphasize the attainment of quality standards as a crucial requirement for export
competitiveness (International Trade Center 2005, World Bank 1999).

4

from non-exporters, particularly in size. But since size, quality, prices, and export status are
all monotonically-related variables, once size is conditioned upon there is no variation left in the
other variables. As a result, in the regression specification described above the coeﬃcient on the
export dummy should be zero. While estimation of positive conditional exporter premia has been
customary in the empirical literature (e.g. Bernard and Jensen 1999, Fajnzylber and Fernandes
2006, Iaccovone and Javorcik 2008, Kugler and Verhoogen 2008) our paper is the first to provide a
framework that makes sense of this empirical finding.
We test the predictions of our model employing manufacturing firm-level data from four countries: India, the United States, Chile, and Colombia. Since quality is not observable, our main
testable prediction is the conditional exporter price premium. This prediction is tested using data
for India and the U.S. as these countries’ datasets include product-level information on revenue
and quantities that allows us to calculate unit values. For Chile and Colombia, the datasets do
not include such information but contain data on firms’ wages and capital that can be used to
test the ancillary predictions of conditional exporter premia on factor use. Consistent with the
model predictions, we find positive and significant conditional exporter premia for prices, average
wage and capital intensity.6 We find that the results are consistent across countries and robust to
a number of alternative specifications. Also, our robustness analysis addresses potential concerns
about measurement error in revenue and rules out potential alternative explanations of our results.
This paper is related to a growing literature proposing international trade models with more
than one source of heterogeneity. In section 5.2.1, we reference the relevant studies and discuss why
those models cannot account for the empirical facts we document here.7
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our theoretical model. Section
3 describes the data. Section 4 presents our baseline results. Section 5 performs several robustness
checks. Section 6 concludes.

2

Productivity and quality in a two-factor heterogeneous-firm model

This section develops a two-factor heterogeneous-firm model. In section 2.1, we characterize the
equilibrium in a closed economy. In section 2.2, we examine the case of a benchmark open economy with no export quality constraints. In section 2.3, we introduce minimum export quality
6
7

The only exception, concerning capital-intensity in the U.S., is discussed later.
Sutton (2007) allows for firm heterogeneity in “productivity” and “quality” in the close economy but not in the

open economy.

5

requirements and analyze the open-economy equilibrium in the presence of those requirements.

2.1
2.1.1

The closed economy
Set up

The model is developed in partial equilibrium. We assume a monopolistic competition framework
with constant-elasticity-of-substitution (CES) demand. The demand system here is augmented to
account for product quality variation across varieties (as in Hallak and Schott 2008):
σ−1
qj = p−σ
j λj

E
,
P

σ > 1,

(1)

where j indexes product varieties while pj and λj are, respectively, the price and quality of variety
j. Each firm produces only one variety, so j also indexes firms. E is the (exogenously given) level
R
λσ−1
dj.8
of expenditure, and the “price aggregator” P is defined as P ≡ p1−σ
j
j
j

Product quality is modeled as a demand shifter that captures all attributes of a product — other

than price — that consumers value. The demand system (1) solves a consumer maximization problem
with a Dixit-Stiglitz utility function defined in terms of quality-adjusted units of consumption,
qej = qj λj , and quality adjusted prices pej =

pj
λj .

expressed as:

Thus, firm revenues, rj = pj qj = pej qej , can be

rj = pej 1−σ

E
.
P

(2)

Equation (2) indicates that larger firms charge lower quality-adjusted prices.
The model allows for two sources of firm heterogeneity. Following standard models (Melitz 2003,
Bernard et al. 2003), the first source of heterogeneity is “productivity”, ϕ, which reduces variable
production costs given quality. Productivity enters the marginal cost function in the following form:
c(λ, ϕ) =

c β
λ ,
ϕ

0 ≤ β < 1,

(3)

where c is a constant parameter. β is lower than unity — i.e. marginal costs increase with quality but
not excessively fast — to ensure concavity of the profit function. Also, marginal costs are assumed
to be independent of scale and increasing in product quality (λ).
In addition to productivity, there is a second source of heterogeneity we denote “caliber” (ξ).
Caliber indexes firms’ ability to develop high quality products paying low fixed costs. Fixed costs
are represented by the following function:
F (λ, ξ) = F0 +
8

f α
λ ,
ξ

α > (1 − β) (σ − 1) ,

(4)

P 1−σ is the cost-of-utility index for a CES utility function. Note that P is inversely related to product prices.

6

where F0 is a fixed cost of plant operation and f is a constant.9 Attaining higher quality requires
paying higher fixed costs. Moreover, the condition that α > (1 − β) (σ − 1), imposed to ensure
concavity, implies that fixed costs grow suﬃciently fast with quality. Conditional on attaining a
given quality level, the fixed costs are lower for high-caliber firms.10
2.1.2

Firm’s optimal choice of price and quality

Firms choose price and quality to maximize post-entry profits, Π, which are the diﬀerence between
operative profits, Π0 , and fixed costs. The first order condition with respect to price yields the
standard constant mark-up result of CES demand: pd =

σ c β 11
σ−1 ϕ λd .

Using this result, the first

order condition with respect to quality yields:
∙

1−β
λd (ϕ, ξ) =
α

µ

σ−1
σ

¶σ ³ ´
¸1
ϕ σ−1 ξ E α0
c
fP

(5)

where α0 ≡ α−(1 − β) (σ − 1) > 0. Both productivity (ϕ) and caliber (ξ) have a positive impact on
quality choice since they reduce, respectively, marginal costs and fixed costs of quality production.
Using equation (5) to solve for the optimal price, we obtain
pd (ϕ, ξ) =

µ

σ
σ−1

¶ α−β−(σ−1)
¸β
µ ¶ α−(σ−1)
∙
α0
α0
c
1 − β ξ E α0
.
ϕ
α fP

(6)

Conditional on ϕ, high-ξ firms sell their products more expensively because they produce higher
quality and hence have higher marginal costs. Instead, the eﬀect of ϕ on price conditional on ξ is
ambiguous. On the one hand, productivity lowers marginal costs and thus prices. On the other
hand, it induces a higher quality choice, which in turn raises marginal costs and prices. Whether one
or the other eﬀect dominates depends on the sign of α−(σ−1). In equation (6), prices depend on the
value of two parameters. Therefore, in contrast with the predictions of quality-based models with
a single heterogeneous factor (Baldwin and Harrigan 2007, Johnson 2008, Kugler and Verhoogen
2008), prices here are not monotone functions of productivity and size.
9
10

In Appendix 4, we derive c and f as a function of deeper parameters.
This approach to modeling quality captures the trade-oﬀs present in Yeaple (2005) and Bustos (2005), where the

adoption of a superior technology reduces marginal costs but requires firms to incur a fixed cost. Under our demand
assumptions, this type of investment would be isomorphic to one that shifts out the demand curve, but only in a
world with no export quality constraints.
11
Subindex d denotes “domestic” firms, those that only sell in the domestic market (all firms are d in this section).

7

2.1.3

The cut-oﬀ function

Substituting the solutions for quality and price into equation (2), we obtain firm revenue:
µ ¶ α−α0 0 µ ¶ α0
³ ϕ ´ α(σ−1)
α
ξ
E α
α0
rd (ϕ, ξ) = H
,
c
f
P

H≡

0) ³
´ α−α0 0
¡ σ−1 ¢ (ασ−α
α
1−β
0

σ

α

α

(7)

, as an increasing function of productivity (ϕ) and caliber (ξ).

From standard results of CES demand we know that operative profits equal

r
σ.

Therefore,

Πd = σ1 rd − Fd . Using equations (4), (5), and (7), firm profits can be expressed as
µ ¶ α−α0 0 µ ¶ α0
³ ϕ ´ α(σ−1)
α
ξ
E α
α0
− F0
Πd (ϕ, ξ) = J
c
f
P

where J ≡

¡ σ−1 ¢ ασ0 ³ 1−β ´ αα0 ³
σ

α

α

α0
α−α0

(8)

´
. Profits also are increasing in productivity and caliber.

Firms remain in the market only if they can make non-negative profits (Πd ≥ 0). Since profits
depend on two variables, ϕ and ξ, this condition results in a survival cut-oﬀ function:
ξ (ϕ) = f

µ

F0
J

¶

α0
α−α0

−α
³ ϕ ´ −α µ E ¶ α−α
0
1−β
.
c
P

(9)

For each productivity level ϕ, there is a minimum caliber such that firms above this minimum
earn non-negative profits. The cut-oﬀ function ξ(ϕ) is decreasing in ϕ, highlighting a trade-oﬀ for
survival between ϕ and ξ: more (less) productive firms can aﬀord to be of lower (higher) caliber.
The function ξ(ϕ) is displayed in Figure 2. Each firm, characterized by a pair of draws (ϕ, ξ), can
be represented in the figure by a single point. Firms above ξ(ϕ) survive while those below this
curve exit the market.
A convenient way of summarizing information about firms’ productivity and caliber is to define
their “ability” η as (we include c and f in the definition of η only for notation compactness):
#σ−1
"
³ ϕ ´ α0 µ ξ ¶ 1−β
α0
α
.
η(ϕ, ξ) ≡
c
f
A property of the model is that both revenue and profits can be expressed as functions of η 12
µ ¶ α0
µ ¶ α0
E α
E α
rd (η) = ηH
,
Πd (η) = ηJ
− F0 .
(10)
P
P
The main implication of this property is that η is a summary statistic for ϕ and ξ in both functions,
which depend on these heterogeneous factors only through η. Thus firms with equal η, e.g. those
12

This is also true for pure prices (see (2)). Firms with higher (lower) η charge lower (higher) pure prices.

8

along ξ(ϕ), obtain equal revenue and equal profits regardless of the particular combinations of ϕ
and ξ. In Figure 2, this property implies that iso-ability curves are also iso-revenue curves and
iso-profit curves. Due to this property, the model can be collapsed into a one-dimensional model
iso-morphic to Melitz (2003). In particular, as in the latter model we can think of η as a single
productivity draw that determines entry-exit decisions: firms survive iﬀ η is above a cut-oﬀ value
η, determined such that Πd (η) = 0. This cut-oﬀ value satisfies η = η(ϕ, ξ (ϕ)).13
2.1.4

Free-entry and industry equilibrium

Before entering the industry, firms do not know their productivity or caliber. To learn them, they
have to pay a fixed entry cost fe > 0. Once they pay this cost, they draw ϕ and ξ from a bivariate
probability distribution with density v (ϕ, ξ) > 0 on the support [0, ϕ] × [0, ξ]. There is free entry
into the industry. Firms pay fe to learn their productivity and caliber only if the expected postentry profits, Π, are greater or equal than the entry cost. Since all firms are equal ex-ante, the free
entry condition imposes:

Π(P ) =

Zϕ Zξ

Πd (ϕ, ξ, P ) v (ϕ, ξ) dξdϕ = fe .

(11)

0 ξ(ϕ,P )

Equation (11) is the condition for industry equilibrium. Solving for P in a closed form would require
assuming a particular shape of the bivariate distribution v (ϕ, ξ). We prefer not to make such an
assumption and keep the analysis general. In Appendix 1(i), we demonstrate that a solution for P
in equation (11) exists and is unique.
Once P is determined, we can solve for the equilibrium prices, quality levels, revenues, profits,
Rϕ Rξ
v (ϕ, ξ) dξdϕ. The producand cut-oﬀ values. The probability of surviving is given by Pin =
0 ξ(ϕ,P )

1
v(ϕ, ξ). P
Pin
can be written as aggregating across productivity and (surviving) caliber levels rather than across
R
α0
α−α0
α0
λσ−1
dj = M α HE α (e
η ) α , where
firms. Making appropriate substitutions we obtain P = p1−σ
j
j

tivity and caliber joint density function conditional on surviving is simply h(ϕ, ξ) =

j

ηe ≡
13

Rϕ

Rξ

η(ϕ, ξ)h (ϕ, ξ) dξdϕ is the (weighted) average ability of surviving firms. Solving for

0 ξ(ϕ,P )

This property stems from the fact that the two components of the profit function, Π0 (λ) and F (λ), are particular

cases of the polynomial form aλb . Thus, their ratio is proportional to the ratio of their derivatives. As a result, fixed
costs are optimally chosen to be proportional to operative profits, which implies that they are also proportional to
revenue and post-entry profits.

9

M yields M = HE

α0 −α
α0

α

P α0 ηe−1 . Since the right-hand-side of this equation is increasing in P , in

equilibrium tougher market competition is associated with a larger number of entrants.

2.2

The open economy with unconstrained export quality

To benchmark our full model, in this section we examine the open-economy equilibrium in a twocountry world economy where export quality is unconstrained. Our analysis focuses on the equilibrium cross-sectional configuration of firm characteristics within a country rather than on diﬀerences
across countries or the eﬀects of trade liberalization. We find that, as in the closed economy, in
this “unconstrained” open-economy case the model can also be collapsed into a model with only
one source of heterogeneity à la Melitz (2003).
The industry has the same structure in the foreign country as in the home country. However,
the foreign parameters F0∗ , c∗ , f ∗ , fe∗ , and E ∗ are allowed to diﬀer. The joint density function that
generates the productivity and caliber draws is v ∗ (ϕ, ξ) > 0, defined on the support [0, ϕ] × [0, ξ].
The (endogenously determined) price aggregator is P ∗ . We describe the equilibrium in the home
country. The qualitative characteristics of the equilibrium in the foreign country are analogous.
In order to export, firms in the home and foreign countries need to pay fixed exporting costs,
respectively fx and fx∗ , and iceberg transport costs τ . Firms need to decide whether to become
exporters or remain domestic. They choose to export if the marginal profits they would make
in the foreign market outweigh the fixed exporting costs. Exporters face CES demand in both
the domestic and the foreign markets and thus charge the same (factory gate) price at home and
abroad. The maximization problem in this case is analogous to that in the previous section, except
that here total demand (q w ≡ q + q ∗ ) is the sum of domestic and foreign demand, and is determined
by q w = p−σ λσ−1 W , where W =

E
P

∗

+ τ −σ E
P ∗ . Exporter’s optimal quality, revenue, and profits are

given by the following expressions:
∙

1−β
λu (ϕ, ξ) =
α
α

ru (η) = ηHW α0 ,

µ

σ−1
σ

¶σ ³ ´
¸ 10
α
ϕ σ−1 ξ
W
c
f
α

Πu (η) = ηJW α0 − F0 − fx .

(12)

(13)

Equations (12) and (13) are analogous to equations (5) and (10), which still determine quality,
revenue and profits for firms that do not export. In particular, η is also a summary statistic for ϕ
and ξ in the exporters’ revenue and profit functions. Thus, iso-ability curves are also iso-revenue
curves and iso-profit curves.
10

Define as ∆u Π ≡ Πu − Πd the diﬀerence in profits between exporting and not exporting. Using
(10) and (13), this diﬀerence can also be expressed as a function of η: ∆u Π(η) = ηJA − fx , where
¡ ¢ α0
α
α > 0. Firms choose to export if ∆ Π(η) ≥ 0. Setting ∆ Π(η) = 0 and solving for
A ≡ W α0 − E
u
u
P

η, we obtain an export cut-oﬀ value, ηu , such that only firms with ability above this value export.

This cut-oﬀ value also determines the export cut-oﬀ function
α0

fx α−α0 ³ ϕ ´−
f
ξ u (ϕ) =
JA
c

α(σ−1)
α−α0

,

(14)

which satisfies ηu = η(ϕ, ξ u (ϕ)). Since η is constant along ξ u (ϕ), this cut-oﬀ function is also an
iso-revenue curve and an iso-profit curve.
Figure 3 shows the equilibrium configuration of firms in the open economy with unconstrained
export quality.14 Firms with caliber below ξ(ϕ) (η < η) exit the market. Firms with caliber
between ξ(ϕ) and ξ u (ϕ) (η ≤ η < η u ) are active in the domestic market but do not export. Firms
with caliber above ξ u (ϕ) (η ≥ η u ) sell domestically and also export.
Since rd (η), ru (η), and ∆u Π (η) are all monotone functions of η, firm size (revenue) is a perfect
predictor of export status. In particular, all firms smaller than rd (ηu ) do not export while all firms
larger than ru (η u ) have positive foreign sales (no firm has sales between these two values). This
stark prediction of the unconstrained model can be represented in a graph showing the fraction of
exporters as a function of firm size. As Figure 4 shows, this fraction is a step function that jumps
from 0 to 1. This prediction, also common to all single-attribute models of firm heterogeneity,
implies that conditional on a given revenue level all firms have the same export status.
Finally, we note that quality decreases as we move down an iso-revenue curve. To see this,
consider iso-revenue curve ξ k (ϕ), defined so that ru (ϕ, ξ k (ϕ)) = k. Solving for ξ and substituting
¡ ¢− σ−1
into equation (12), we obtain λu (ϕ, ξ k (ϕ)) = B ϕc α−α0 (B is a function of constant parameters).

2.3

The open economy with constrained export quality

A substantial amount of evidence suggests that success in foreign markets is associated with firms’
ability to attain high levels of product quality. Brooks (2006) finds that Colombian firms in sectors
with lower quality gaps relative to G-7 countries tend to export a larger fraction of their output.
Verhoogen (2008) finds that Mexican firms invest in quality upgrading in response to export opportunities created by the Peso devaluation. Iacovone and Javorcik (2008) find that Mexican firms
14

α

α0 to ensure that ξ (ϕ) > ξ(ϕ).
We assume that fx > (F0 A) / E
P
u

11

increase their average prices two years before they start exporting, which suggests a process of quality upgrading in preparation to export. Evidence of the existence of export quality requirements is
also provided by studies in international management. Using firm-level surveys in developed and
developing countries, these studies document firms’ need to upgrade quality as a crucial requirement to access foreign markets.15 Finally, policy-oriented research also emphasizes the existence
of quality requirements for exports as part of a broader concern about the impact of standards on
market access (World Bank 1999, WTO 2005, Maskus et al. 2005).
The potential motives for the existence of export quality constraints are various. First, higher
income countries tend to consume higher-quality goods (Hallak 2006, 2008) and therefore are likely
to set higher minimum quality standards. Firms that ship their products to higher income countries
should then find those standards more stringent. Second, transportation costs are proportionally
higher for low-quality goods (Alchian and Allen 1964, Hummels and Skiba 2004). Therefore, below
some minimum quality threshold they can be prohibitive. Third, export quality requirements might
be related to management quality certification (e.g. ISO 9000) which, due to its quality-signaling,
common-language, and conflict-setting properties, can alleviate the severe information asymmetry
problems under which international transactions are often conducted (Guler et al. 2002, Hudson
and Jones 2003, Terlaak and Kind 2006, Clougherty and Grajek 2008).
In our model, we capture the idea that entering the export market imposes more stringent
quality constraints by simply assuming that firms need to attain a minimum quality level to gain
access to the export market. We do not intend to uncover the particular source of these constraints
in this paper. Rather, our aim is to assess their common implications for the exporting behavior
of firms. Thus, we favor a modeling choice that, although very stylized, generates predictions that
are robust to the various potential sources of export quality constraints.
2.3.1

Characterization of the equilibrium

We examine the open-economy equilibrium in a two-country world economy with minimum export
quality requirements. Firms need to reach quality level λ to be able to export (the minimum is
λ∗ for foreign firms exporting to the home country). Except for the minimum export quality, the
“constrained” environment maintains all features of the unconstrained one. We keep our focus on
the cross-sectional configuration of firm characteristics within a country.
15

See Weston 1995 (U.S.), Erel and Ghosh 1997 (Turkey), Mersha 1997 (Africa), Anderson et al. 1999 (Canada

and U.S.), Corbett 2005 (9 mostly-developed countries).

12

The equilibrium is represented in Figure 5. We describe its main features here and leave its
formal characterization to Appendix 2. As in the unconstrained equilibrium (see Figure 3), firms
below ξ(ϕ) do not survive (region I) while firms between ξ(ϕ) and ξ u (ϕ) are only active in the
domestic market (region II). Similarly, firms with suﬃciently high combinations of ϕ and ξ are
(unconstrained) exporters (regions V.a and V.b). In the constrained equilibrium, however, there is
a new set of firms that would otherwise export with quality λu < λ but now are forced to choose
between upgrading their quality or not participating in the export market. Among those firms,
some refrain from investing and remain domestic (region III) while others upgrade quality and
export (region IV).
The curve ξ u (ϕ) is no longer the export cut-oﬀ function. As firms’ unconstrained choice of
quality decreases along ξ u (ϕ), quality is above the minimum requirement only on its left part —
where it coincides with the new export cut-oﬀ function — but drops below the minimum once it
reaches productivity ϕλ . Similarly, firms’ unconstrained quality choice is below the minimum for
all firms in the shaded areas delimited by ξ u (ϕ) and the isoquality curve for λ, ξ λ (ϕ). Those firms
would otherwise find it profitable to sell abroad but they are forced to upgrade quality if they wish
to export in the presence of the export quality requirement.16
In case firms in that area decide to export, they invest just enough to reach quality λ. Thus,
their marginal cost is

c β
ϕλ

and their price is pc (ϕ) =

σ c β
σ−1 ϕ λ

(subindex c denotes “constrained”

firms). Revenue and profits are, respectively,
rc (ϕ) =

µ

σ−1ϕ
σ c

¶σ−1

α−α0

λ

W,

1
Πc (ϕ, ξ) =
σ

µ

σ−1ϕ
σ c

¶σ−1

λα−α0 W −

f α
λ − fx − F0 (15)
ξ

Since ξ does not aﬀect quality choice for constrained exporters, its value has no eﬀect on marginal
costs, prices, or revenues. However, it aﬀects profits since attaining λ is less costly for firms
with higher caliber. Define ∆Πc ≡ Πc (ϕ, ξ) − Πd (ϕ, ξ). The export cut-oﬀ function ξ x (ϕ) is now
implicitly defined by ∆Πc (ϕ, ξ x (ϕ)) = 0. This function cannot be solved in closed form. However,
in Appendix 2 we demonstrate that its slope is negative and it is located between ξ u (ϕ) and ξ λ (ϕ).
Firms in region III find that upgrading quality to satisfy the export requirement is too onerous.
In contrast, firms located in region IV invest in quality upgrade to meet the export requirement.
Those firms are the constrained exporters.
In the case of the foreign country the analysis is analogous. In Appendix 1(ii) we prove existence
16

ξ u (ϕ) can be thought of as the (hypothetical) export cut-oﬀ function for a single firm if the restriction were

removed only for that firm (removing it for all firms simultaneously would change P and hence shift ξ u (ϕ)).

13

and uniqueness of the equilibrium in this world economy.17
2.3.2

Firm size and export status

The presence of the minimum export quality requirements breaks the suﬃciency of η for predicting
firm total revenue (firm size). It also breaks the suﬃciency of revenue for predicting export status.
In Figure 6, we add three representative iso-revenue curves, r1 , r2 , and r3 , to the equilibrium
configuration of firms displayed in Figure 5. Curves r1 and r2 represent families of iso-revenue curves
located, respectively, in region II and in the area below rx in region III. As in the unconstrained
case, along those curves the value of η is constant and all firms are domestic.
Iso-revenue curve r3 requires more careful analysis. Its upper-left portion is located in region
V. On this part of r3 , firms export and have identical η. Since quality decreases along the curve,
at point A quality reaches the minimum level λ. Then, r3 goes straight down to point B, which
is located on ξ x (ϕ). Since ϕ is constant on this segment and all firms produce quality λ, marginal
costs, price, and revenues are also equal. At point B there is a discontinuity in r3 , which reappears
further to the right – in region III – as shown in the figure. This last portion of the iso-revenue
curve contains only domestic firms, which attain revenue level r3 compensating their lack of exports
with more voluminous sales in the domestic market (due to their higher η). The limit case of this
set of iso-revenue curves is rx , the minimum possible revenue for an exporter.
In contrast to the predictions in the unconstrained case and of single-attribute models of firm
heterogeneity, the family of iso-revenue curves represented by r3 includes both exporters and nonexporters. Therefore, for revenue levels in this family the fraction of exporters is strictly between 0
and 1. This prediction is consistent with the evidence presented in Figure 1.18 Revenue level (size)
is not suﬃcient to predict export status.
2.3.3

Testable predictions

In addition to explaining the existence of exporters and non-exporters of the same size, the model
also predicts systematic diﬀerences in quality and price. The following proposition establishes that,
for firms on the same iso-revenue curve, exporters produce higher quality than non-exporters.
17
18

Setting λ = λ∗ = 0, the proof also demonstrates equilibrium existence and uniqueness for the unconstrained case.
In general the fraction of exporters need not be monotonically increasing in revenue. Monotonicity, however, can

be proved for a bivariate uniform distribution for v(ϕ, ξ) (proof available upon request).

14

Proposition 1. Conditional on size (total revenue), quality is higher for exporters than for domestic firms:
∀r, λx (ϕx , ξx )|rx =r > λd (ϕd , ξd )|rd =r ,

x = {u, c}

(16)

For r < rx , this proposition is vacuous since none of the firms exports.
Proof. See Appendix 3.
This result can be verified by visual inspection of Figure 6. Exporters are either firms located
between points A and B, in which case they produce quality λ, or firms located above A, in which
case they produce quality above λ. Instead, non-exporters are located to the right of C, and thus
produce quality below λ. Exporters are firms with relatively high caliber and low productivity
while non-exporters are firms with low caliber but high productivity.
Since quality is unobservable, our empirical investigation relies on corollaries to proposition 1.
Corollary 1 states that, holding size constant, exporters charge higher prices than non-exporters:
Corollary 1. Conditional on size, exporters charge higher prices than domestic firms
∀r, px (ϕx , ξx )|rx =r > pd (ϕd , ξd )|rd =r ,

x = {u, c}

λσ−1
Si , where Si =
Proof. With CES demand, ri = pi qi = p1−σ
i
i
1
1−σ

i = x = {u, c}. Solving for pi , we obtain pi = ri
Then, since W >

E
P

1
σ−1

λi Si

E
P

(17)

if i = d and Si = W if

. On the same iso-revenue curve, rx = rd .

and λx > λd (proposition 1), corollary 1 easily follows. QED

Proposition 1 is the basis of our empirical investigation. Corollary 1 is the main testable
prediction. The predictions of conditional (on size) exporter premia we obtain here are novel.
Models of firm heterogeneity with quality diﬀerentiation predict unconditional exporter premia
for quality and price (Baldwin and Harrigan 2007, Johnson 2008, Verhoogen 2008, Kugler and
Verhoogen 2008). However, those models do not predict exporter premia holding size constant, as
they cannot account for variation in export status among firms of equal size in the first place.
So far we have assumed that fixed and variable production costs increase with quality, leaving the
source of those costs unmodeled. An a priori appealing rationale is the presumption that producing
higher quality goods requires more skilled-labor-intensive and more capital-intensive techniques. In
that case, exporters, who produce higher quality than non-exporters — conditional on size — will
also pay higher average wages and have a higher capital-to-labor ratio.19 In Appendix 4, we provide
19

Exporters will also pay higher average wages if quality production requires paying eﬃciency wages.

15

a background model of the deeper fundamentals that might drive a positive relationship between
quality and fixed and variable costs using an approach that partially draws on Verhoogen (2008).
That relationship, combined with proposition 1, delivers the following additional results:
Corollary 2. Conditional on size, exporters pay higher average wages than non-exporters
Proof. See Appendix 4.
Corollary 3. Conditional on size, exporters are more capital intensive than non exporters
Proof. See Appendix 4.
Finally, proposition 1 and corollaries 1, 2 and 3 can be weakened to be stated in expected values.
We take these predictions to the data in this last form.20

3

Data

3.1

Data sources

Our empirical analysis utilizes establishment-level manufacturing survey data from India, the U.S.,
Chile and Colombia. Because our theory hinges on a diﬀerentiated-product demand structure,
following Rauch’s (1999) classification we focus on industries manufacturing those products in our
baseline analysis. We discuss the data sources briefly below; more specific description of data
sources, data cleaning, and concordances is provided in the Data Appendix.
For India, we use a cross-section of the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI), conducted by the
Central Statistical Organization, for the year 1997-98. In addition to establishment-level information (classified by 4-digit NIC categories), this survey also includes more disaggregate information
on output quantities and values at the product level, which allows us to construct product level
prices (unit values). Also, it has information on whether plants have obtained ISO 9000 certification, which can be used as a direct proxy for quality. The ASI covers all registered industrial
establishments (formal sector) employing more than 20 persons, divided into a “census” sector
20

Another potentially testable prediction, which diﬀers from those of single-attribute models of firm heterogeneity,

is that trade liberalization should induce a reshuﬄing of size rankings in favor of firms with high caliber. Thus, firm
size in the closed economy does not perfectly predict size or export status in the open economy. For example, consider
an iso-revenue curve in Figure 6 that crosses regions III, IV, and V in autarky. Following trade liberalization, firms
lying in regions IV and V of the curve would choose to export and hence expand, whereas those in region III would
remain domestic. We leave the empirical analysis of this prediction for further research.

16

and a “sample” sector.21 All factories in the census sector (employing more than 100 workers or
located in designated backward areas) are surveyed. Factories in the sample sector are stratified
and randomly sampled. Throughout our analysis, we appropriately adjust for sampling weights
(called “multipliers”).
For the US, we use data from the 1997 Census of Manufactures (CMF) collected by the US
Census Bureau.22 The CMF includes detailed information on establishment inputs and outputs
classified at the 4-digit SIC level. Although it covers all manufacturing establishments that employ
at least one paid worker, data for most small plants are collected from administrative records
(“AR plants”). Because many variables for AR plants are imputed rather than directly collected,
following the practice in the literature (e.g. Foster et al. 2008) we exclude them from our analysis.
A distinctive feature of this paper with regard to CMF data is the use of seven-digit SIC productspecific information to derive product-level unit values (or prices).23 One drawback of using unit
values is that quantity data is unavailable for a large fraction of establishments and products.
However, since our model’s predictions relate to comparisons across establishments (firms) within
industries, lack of information for entire products or industries should not bias our results.
We use manufacturing census for Chile and Colombia only to examine exporter premia in
average wage and capital intensity as those datasets do not include product-level information. For
Chile, we use the annual Chilean manufacturing census, which covers all manufacturing plants with
more than 10 employees. We use data for the years 1991-96, the only period with available data on
export activity. For Colombia, we use the Colombian manufacturing census for the years 1981 to
1991. The Colombian census also covers all plants with 10 or more employees. Both the Chilean
and Colombian censuses classify establishments at the 4-digit ISIC level.24

3.2

Definition of variables and summary statistics

Testing the predictions of our theoretical model requires data on export status, revenue, potential
proxies for quality, output price, average wage, and capital intensity (capital to labor ratio).25
Ideally, we would like to have a measure of quality that is directly consistent with λ in our
21

The limit is lower (10 employees) for plants that use electric power for production.
We also use the 1992 CMF for robustness checks.
23
Foster et al. (2008) use unit values at the 7-digit level derived from the CMF for a small set of specific products.
24
Further details about these datasets can be found in Sivadasan (2007) for India, the LRD technical documentation
22

manual (Monahan 1992) for the U.S., and Roberts and Tybout (1996) for Chile and Colombia.
25
In Section 5, as part of our robustness checks, we define and discuss a number of other variables.

17

model. While this ideal measure is unavailable, in the Indian dataset each plant reports if it has
obtained ISO 9000 certification. We discuss in section 4.3 why the ISO 9000 quality management
certification could be a good proxy for quality (λ).
All variables, except for price, are defined at the establishment level. Export status is captured
by a dummy variable defined to equal one for establishments reporting positive exports. Revenue
is total sales. Labor is total employment and average wage is the ratio of total wages to total
employment. Capital, in the case of Chile, is constructed using the perpetual inventory method.
For India, the U.S., and Colombia, capital is measured as reported total fixed assets. The welldefined ownership links available in the U.S. dataset allows us to aggregate establishments into
firms and thus perform robustness analysis defining variables at the firm level.
For India and the U.S., a product price is its unit value, computed as the ratio of output value
to output quantity. While price information is available for each product line - so there are multiple
price observations per establishment - data on export value are reported only at the establishment
level. In our baseline analysis, we assume exporters export all their product lines. However, we
also check robustness to alternative assumptions about which product lines are exported.
Panels 1, 2, 3 and 4 of Table 1 present summary statistics for establishments in “diﬀerentiated”
sectors in our final samples for India, the U.S., Chile and Colombia, respectively. The fact that price
data are not available for all establishments and product lines is evident from the lower number of
product-level price observations than of establishment-level observations for other variables despite
many establishments having multiple products.
Since our analysis focuses on diﬀerences between exporters and non-exporters within industries,
we exclude industries with no exporters from our sample. Hence, the fraction of exporters that
can be inferred from the table is likely to overestimate the prevalence of exporting in the full sample. Subject to this caveat, for India exporters account for 26% of product-level price observations
(1,681/6,494), 20% of establishment-level observations with average wage and capital intensity information, and 18% of establishment-level observations with information on ISO 9000 adoption.
For the US, exporters account for 27% of price observations and 21% of wage and capital observations. The higher prevalence of exporting in the sample of product prices than in the sample of
establishments is due to our assumption that an exporting establishment exports all product lines,
coupled with the fact that larger firms, who are more likely to export, are also more likely to have
multiple product lines. Finally, exporters account for 21% of establishment-year observations in
Chile and 13% in Colombia.
18

To mitigate the influence of outliers, all variables are winsorized by 1% on both tails of the
distribution. For reasons discussed later, in our baseline analysis we standardize all variables (except
dummies), by subtracting industry means and dividing by industry standard deviations. When
using price data, “industries” are product codes. Thus, means and standard deviations reported in
Table 1 correspond to standardized variables.26 The unconditional mean of (standardized) prices is
higher for exporters than for non-exporters in both India (panel 1) and the U.S. (panel 2). Panel 1
also shows that ISO 9000 certification in India is much more common among exporters (17%) than
among non-exporters (3%). Finally, in all four panels, the overall mean values for average wage
and capital intensity are higher for exporters than for non-exporters.

4

Empirical analysis

This section tests the theoretical predictions of the model. In section 4.1 we describe our estimation
strategy. In section 4.2 we test corollary 1, which is the model’s main testable prediction. In section
4.3, we exploit information on ISO 9000 certification available for Indian establishments, using it
as a proxy for quality to test proposition 1. In section 4.4, we test corollaries 2 and 3.

4.1

Estimation strategy

In equilibrium, price, quality, revenue, capital intensity, average wage, and export status are jointly
determined as functions of the exogenous ability draws, ϕ and ξ. Proposition 1 and corollaries 1,
2, and 3 all impose restrictions on conditional expectations derived from that joint distribution.
Defining an indicator variable for export status, D, we can write the weak versions of proposition
1 and the corollaries as
E [Y |r,D=1 ] > E [Y |r,D=0 ] ,

∀r,

¾
½
VK L
,w
.
Y = λ, p,
L

(18)

To test the above predictions, we assume that the conditional expectations take the linear
separable form: E [Y |r,D ] = gY (r) + δY D, where gY (r) is a flexible control for size and δY is the
conditional exporter premium. Given this assumption, a realization of the dependent variable can
be expressed as
y = gY (r) + δY D + u
26

(19)

All our specifications using panel data from Chile and Colombia include industry/year fixed eﬀects. Thus, since

nominal variables (capital intensity and wage) enter regressions in logarithms, our results are invariant to deflating
them using industry level deflators.

19

where u is a random component uncorrelated with the conditioning variables. In our case, u
captures variation in the dependent variable across firms that have the same revenue and export
status but diﬀerent ϕ and ξ. We estimate (19) using a linear regression framework. It is worth
noting that the coeﬃcients in equation (19) do not capture causal relationships. In particular, the
exporter premium δY should be interpreted as the diﬀerence in the expected value of Y when we
compare an exporter and a non-exporter of equal size.
Although our model and its predictions are essentially relevant to a single industry, we pool
observations in all diﬀerentiated-products industries to estimate equation (19). We address the
potential impact of industry heterogeneity in two ways. First, in our empirical implementation
we allow the coeﬃcients of the polynomial gY (r) to vary by industry. Thus, the constant in the
polynomial becomes an industry-specific fixed eﬀect (note that “industries” are defined at the
product-code level for testing corollary 1). Also, to flexibly capture non-linearities, we specify both
a parametric (a third order polynomial) and a semi-parametric (industry-specific size decile fixed
eﬀects) form for gY (r). In contrast to the coeﬃcients of the size control function, we restrict the
coeﬃcient on the export dummy to be constant — but later relax this restriction by interacting the
export dummy with various product characteristics. Second, we standardize both the dependent
and the independent variables using industry-specific means and standard deviations to improve
comparability across sectors. In particular, standardization prevents particular industries from
driving the overall results.27 Nevertheless, we also check robustness to using non-standardized
variables.

4.2

Price results

Since quality is not directly observable, the model’s main testable result is corollary 1, which
predicts a positive conditional exporter premium for price (δp > 0). In this section, we test this
prediction using manufacturing data for diﬀerentiated products in India and the United States.
As explained in section 3.2, we measure price with unit values per product line. For multiproduct establishments, we include one price observation per line of diﬀerentiated product but maintain
establishment revenues as our measure of size. Also, since information on exports is not disaggre27

As an illustration, consider measuring the relative price charged by exporters using data from two industries

with equal number of firms. Suppose in industry 1 exporters price at a premium of 40% relative to non-exporters,
while in industry 2 exporters price at a discount of 10%. If we use non-standardized prices we obtain a mean export
price premium of 15%. This figure could be misleading if the price premium in industry 1 is low relative to the price
dispersion in that industry while in industry 2 the price discount is high relative to the price dispersion.

20

gated by product line, in our baseline analysis we assume that an establishment exports all of its
product lines. To allow for arbitrary correlation between error terms for a given establishment, we
cluster standard errors at the establishment level.
Table 2 presents the results of estimating equation (19) with price as the dependent variable.
Each entry in the table displays the estimate of the exporter premium, δp , in the indicated specification. The first two columns mainly serve as benchmark. In column 1, we include only productspecific fixed eﬀects and no controls for size while in column 2 we include a product-specific size
polynomial of order 2. Columns 3 and 4 are our baseline (preferred) specifications. In column
3, we include a product-specific polynomial of order 3. In column 4, we include product-specific
size-decile fixed eﬀects. Panel 1 presents results for India; panel 2 presents results for the U.S.. In
each panel, row 1 (row 2) displays results using standardized (non-standardized) variables.
The table shows a positive conditional exporter price premium in all specifications. For India,
all standardized specifications yield a statistically significant premium for exporters. In the nonstandardized case, the premium is not statistically significant in columns 1 and 2, but it is larger
and significant in the baseline specifications of columns 3 and 4, where size is flexibly controlled for.
In those specifications the standardized price premium is 17.7% and 16.9%, respectively. For the
U.S., the estimated price premium is statistically significant in all specifications. In particular, the
standardized price premium in the baseline specifications is 13.6% and 13.5%. These results confirm
the main testable prediction of our model: exporters charge higher prices than non-exporters
conditional on size.
We note that conditional exporter price premium regressions have been estimated in the literature (e.g. Fajnzylber and Fernandes 2006, Iaccovone and Javorcik 2008, Kugler and Verhoogen
2008) although lacking a theoretical framework under which the results could be properly interpreted. In fact, size summarizes all relevant information about a firm under single-attribute models.
Thus, those models predict that once size is controlled for the exporter premium should be zero
(δp = 0). We interpret the positive conditional premia typically found by this literature as further
empirical support for the predictions of our model.
Our baseline sample includes only diﬀerentiated products, which are those that most closely
match the assumptions of the model. As a check that our theory applies primarily to diﬀerentiated
products, we implement our empirical strategy also on non-diﬀerentiated products (homogeneous
and reference-priced), where it is less obvious that the theory should apply. The results are presented in Table 3. The conditional exporter price premium is higher for diﬀerentiated goods in
21

both countries. In India, the premium is large and statistically significant for diﬀerentiated products, but insignificant (and negative) in the sample of homogenous products. In the U.S., even
though there is still a price premium for homogeneous good exporters, the premium for exporters
of diﬀerentiated goods is higher. These results justify our focus on diﬀerentiated products.
We perform several robustness checks. The results are available in Table A.1 of the appendix.
First, we redefine the export dummy as equal to one only for those firms with export sales above 2%
of total revenue. For India, the magnitude and significance of the export premium in the baseline
specifications is slightly lower. For the U.S., magnitude and significance are mostly unchanged.
Second, we retain only the largest product line for each establishment to check robustness to the
possibility that establishments export their main line of products but not subsidiary product lines.
For India, the export premium has the same magnitude and is statistically significant when we
control for a cubic function of size (column 3). It is positive but not significantly diﬀerent from
zero when we control for size with size decile dummies. For the U.S. the results follow closely those
of the baseline specification in all cases.
In a number of other (unreported) robustness checks, we found results robust to: (a) using
diﬀerent winsorization cutoﬀs (including no winsorization) for the price variable; (b) excluding
products whose definition includes the terms NEC or NES (“Not Elsewhere Classified/Specified”)
for India, and excluding product codes ending with 0 or 9 for the U.S.; (c) for India, excluding
products measured in “numbers” because of potential heterogeneity in units (e.g. diﬀerent pack
sizes), and for the US excluding potential non-manufacturing product codes (i.e. first digit not 2
or 3); and (d) examining the subset of product codes with available price data for all occurrences
and also with at least 25 observations to ensure that results are not driven by missing observations
within product codes.
One final concern is that our results could be spurious if firms charge higher mark-ups in the
export market than in the domestic market. However, the available empirical evidence shows just
the opposite. Das et al. (2007) use a structural model to estimate the ratio of foreign to domestic
demand elasticities in three manufacturing industries in Colombia. They find demand elasticities
in the foreign market to be almost twice as large as in the domestic market in two sectors, and
no significant diﬀerence in the remaining sector. Aw et al. (2001) compare export and domestic
prices charged by the same firm on the same product in the Taiwanese electronics industry in 1986
and 1991. Out of 54 product/years they investigate, they find higher domestic prices in 40 cases
(8 significant) and negative domestic prices in 14 cases (none significant).
22

4.3

ISO 9000 quality proxy results

Even though we do not have direct measures of product quality, an extensive literature suggests
that ISO 9000 certification may be a good proxy for it, particularly in the context of our model.
First, ISO 9000 certification is correlated with direct measures of product quality (e.g. Brown et
al. 1998, Withers and Ebrahimpour 2001). Second, consistent with our modeling assumption that
upgrading quality is costly but shifts demand out, Guler et al. (2002) document that obtaining
ISO 9000 involves a considerable monetary investment (about $125,000) and time eﬀort (about nine
months to two years), and impacts both local and international demand as a number of governments
and private companies (particularly MNCs) require this certification from suppliers. There is also
evidence that the certification helps improve measures of customer satisfaction (Buttle, 1997).28
Results from estimating equation (19) with ISO 9000 certification as the dependent variable are
presented in Table 4. Since the dependent variable is a dummy, we do not use the standardized
specification here. Also, the unit of observation here is the establishment since only at that level
do we have information on ISO 9000 adoption. Accordingly, the size controls vary at the 4-digit
industry level rather than at the product level. Consistent with the predictions of proposition 1,
we find that exporters are much more likely to obtain ISO 9000 certification, conditional on size.

4.4

Wage and factor intensity results

In this section, we test corollaries 2 and 3 by examining conditional exporter premia in (log) average
wage and capital intensity (measured as the log ratio of capital to labor). For brevity, for each
of the four countries, we only present the preferred specifications with the cubic and size-decile
controls for size. As in the previous section, the unit of observation is the establishment. For each
dependent variable, the first row presents results using standardized variables while the second row
presents results using non-standardized ones.
Table 5 shows that the conditional exporter premium for average wage is significantly positive
for all countries in both specifications. In the standardized case, the estimated exporter premia in
columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 imply a 13.6% of standard deviation exporter wage premium in India, 9.7%
in the U.S., 13.1% in Chile and 9.2% in Colombia. The results in row 2 using the non-transformed
variables are similar.29
28
29

Verhoogen (2008) also uses ISO 9000 certification as a proxy for quality.
Though wage rates better capture unobserved worker ability, we also analyzed the share of non-production workers

in the total wage bill. This share is significantly higher for exporters in the U.S., Chile and Colombia but statistically

23

Next, we examine the empirical validity of Corollary 3. For India, Chile and Colombia, the
results in rows 3 and 4 of Table 4 show a positive and significant conditional exporter premium in
capital intensity in both specifications. For example, the estimation using standardized variables
and the most flexible control for size indicate that exporters in India have 18.8% (of standard
deviation) higher log capital to worker ratio, conditional on revenue. The corresponding premium
is 25.0% for Chile and 14.7% for Colombia.
The results for the U.S. are diﬀerent. Conditional on size, capital intensity appears to be lower
for exporters than for non-exporters. Given that this result is at odds with results previously
reported in the literature using similar specifications (e.g. Bernard and Jensen 1999), we perform
the same estimation using Census data for 1992 rather than 1997 (results are presented in Appendix
Table A.3). We find an insignificant (almost zero) premium on capital intensity in the 1992 data.
In contrast, the 1992 results for average wage and price are very consistent with the 1997 results.
Given the non-robustness of the capital intensity results for the U.S. across years, we are cautious
about adopting any particular interpretation for the negative premium in 1997 and leave it for
further scrutiny in future research.30
Note that these corollaries combine proposition 1 with ancillary assumptions about factor use
of quality production. Thus, rejection of the corollaries need not imply rejecting proposition 1.
Nevertheless, the evidence of this section as a whole supports both that proposition and the implications of our model for factor usage. Conditional on firm size, exporters hire more skilled workers
(as reflected in higher average wages) and, except for the U.S., are more capital intensive.

5

Robustness to alternate models

In this section we evaluate the robustness of our results to alternate models. In section 5.1, we focus
on single-attribute models of firm heterogeneity and address the possibility that the conditional
exporter premia we find are merely driven by measurement error. In section 5.2, we address
robustness against alternate multi-attribute models.
insignificant for India. Looking at the purely physical measure of non-production worker share of employment, we
found a higher share for exporters in the U.S. and Colombia, but a statistically insignificant premium for India and
Chile. These results are reported in Appendix Table A.2.
30
One hypothesis could be that quality upgrading requires increasing the intensity of capital in labor-abundant
countries where production methods are relatively intensive in unskilled labor (e.g. need of machinery to improve
cutting precision) but requires increasing the intensity of skilled labor in capital-abundant countries where production
methods are already intensive in the use of capital (e.g. need of artisan “touches”).

24

5.1

Robustness to single-attribute models

Our results show systematic diﬀerences between exporters and non-exporters conditional on size.
In fact, empirical studies consistently find positive conditional (on size) exporter premia in price,
average wages, and capital intensity.31 As discussed in section 4.2, those results are at odds with
the predictions of single-attribute models, which are in general — explicitly or implicitly — the
theoretical framework underlying those studies. In any event, since firm size and export status are
correlated variables, measurement error in the size control variable could lead to a spurious finding
of a positive conditional exporter premium even when the true premium is zero. We address this
concern in three ways.
First, we alternatively use employment as the measure of firm size. As Kugler and Verhoogen
(2008) argue, sales may be measured with error, especially in developing countries such as India,
for reasons related to avoidance of excise and income taxes, which are less likely to bias measurement of employment. Since, like revenue, employment is monotonically related to firm size in
single-attribute models, it can be used as alternative size control to test those models as the null
hypothesis.32 The estimated exporter premia are presented in panel A of Table 6. Rather than
becoming smaller, as expected if due to measurement error, the estimated magnitudes increase.
Second, a source of error in the size measure could arise from the fact that we use establishment
size rather than firm size in our analysis. This measure of size could be inappropriate for multiestablishment firms if the heterogeneous attributes and the fixed costs are determined at the firm
level. Exploiting information on ownership links available in the U.S. Census Longitudinal Business
Database — but not in the other three datasets — we aggregate establishments up to the firm level
and re-estimate our baseline specification. Panel 1 of Appendix Table A.4 shows that the results
are robust to the use of firm size as control. As an additional robustness check, in panel 2 we repeat
the analysis using only single-establishment firms. The baseline results are robust to this check as
well.
Third, we exploit the panel nature of the data for Chile and Colombia to control for transitional
shocks to revenue. For each establishment, we form four year means for the dependent variables
(average wage and capital intensity) and revenue over the latest available data period — 1993-96
31

Section 4.2 references empirical evidence on conditional exporter premia in price. For evidence on conditional

premia in wages and capital intensity, see Bernard and Jensen (1999) and Bernard et al. (2007).
32
Our model indicates that we should use revenue as size control. Thus, while using employment is appropriate to
test single-attribute models as the null, under our framework as null it could yield biased estimates.

25

for Chile and 1988-91 for Colombia (we exclude firms that enter or exit export status during the
period to avoid transitional dynamics). The results, presented in Appendix Table A.5, confirm the
baseline results.

5.2

Robustness to alternate multi-attribute models

Our paper proposes a multi-attribute model in which firms are heterogeneous in productivity and
caliber. In this section, we evaluate the relevance of this characterization of firms’ heterogeneity to
explain our results against alternate multi-attribute models. We follow two diﬀerent but complementary strategies. In section 5.2.1, we analyze the extent to which other specific multi-attribute
models, some explicitly proposed in the literature, can explain the facts we document here. In
section 5.2.2, we identify industries where the economic mechanisms we emphasize are more likely
to operate and evaluate whether the predictions of our model hold more strongly in those industries
than in others.
5.2.1

Evaluation of specific alternate multi-attribute models

Several multi-attribute models have been proposed in the literature. Although in general built to
explain other implications of firm heterogeneity, we can evaluate whether they can also account
for our results. The most common one is a model that combines productivity diﬀerences à la
Melitz (2003) with heterogeneous fixed or sunk export costs (Das et al., Ruhl 2008, Eaton et al.
2008, Armenter and Koren 2009).33 Under this framework, less productive exporters might be of
equal size as more productive non-exporters if the former have lower export costs. In that case,
the exporters’ lower productivity would imply that they charge higher prices. While this model
can explain conditional exporter price premia, it cannot explain why exporters pay higher wages,
use capital more intensively, or are more likely to acquire ISO 9000 certification. Alternatively,
combining Kugler and Verhoogen’s (2008) framework (rather than Melitz’) with heterogeneous
trade costs yields the opposite predictions, in particular exporters charge lower prices than nonexporters, conditional on size. In either of these two cases, firms with equal productivity should
have equal sales volume in the domestic market. Thus, controlling for domestic sales rather than
total sales, we should not observe systematic diﬀerences between the prices domestic firms and
exporters charge. In panel B of Table 6, we see that this is not the case: exporters charge higher
prices even conditional on domestic sales.
33

Heterogeneity in variable costs would work analogously.

26

A diﬀerent class of models introduces variation in products’ appeal across markets (e.g. Nguyen
2008, Demidova et al. 2008, Eaton et al. 2008, Bernard et al. 2009). While these models can
naturally explain the facts documented in Figure 1, they cannot explain the existence of systematic
conditional exporter premia, as documented here.
We could think of an alternative class of models in which firms are heterogeneous in their
productivity and in their access to financial capital. While the predictions of such a model would
largely depend on assumptions about how financial constraints aﬀect firm size and export status,
it is not a priori obvious that such a model would predict our facts. Nevertheless, we undertake
a crude test to check that heterogeneous access to financing is not driving our results. Using the
measure of dependence on external finance proposed by Rajan and Zingales (1996), we exclude
products above the median for this measure and rerun the baseline price regressions. As the results
in panel 1 of Appendix Table A.6 show, the exporter premium is positive and significant even in
the industries that are less dependent on external finance.
Finally, in addition to productivity firms could be heterogeneous in their access to government
oﬃcials. Then, large purely domestic firms could be those particularly able to secure government
contracts. If less productive firms produce lower quality and sell at lower prices as in Kugler
and Verhoogen (2008), heterogeneous access to government contracts might, in principle, explain
our results. To address this concern, we construct a product-level measure of dependence on
government purchases (fraction of output consumed by state and federal government) using detailed
input-output tables for the United States. Then, we run the baseline price regressions excluding
products above the median for this measure. Panel 2 of Appendix Table A.6 shows that the
exporter premium is positive and significant even in industries that are relatively less dependent
on government purchases.
5.2.2

Channels: exploring sources of export quality constraints

A more general strategy for checking that our results are not driven by other multi-attribute
models is to investigate whether they are stronger in industries where the economic mechanisms we
emphasize are more likely to operate. In particular, since our model predicts conditional exporter
premia only in the presence of export quality constraints, we assess the relative strength of the
premia in industries more closely aﬀected by the sources of the constraints hypothesized in section
2.3, i.e. income per capita, distance to destination, and informational asymmetries. We wish
to stress that the data we use for this analysis is not ideal since, as we discuss below, we know
27

export destinations at the country level but not at the firm level. Thus, the analysis here should be
construed as exploratory, more informative as a whole about the relevance of our model with export
quality constraints than about the particular source of the constraints. Details of data construction
and concordances are provided in the data appendix.
First, since export quality requirements could be related to the income per capita and distance
to destination markets, we would expect firms exporting to rich and/or distant countries to have a
higher quality, and hence price premium. Unfortunately, our data sets do not provide information
on firms’ exports by destination country. Thus, we test whether the exporter price premium is
higher for products sent on average, at the country level, to richer or to more distant countries.
To do that, we construct trade-weighted means of destination GDP per capita and destination
distance for each Indian and U.S. 4-digit SITC category and then interact them, standardized,
with the export dummy. Columns 1 to 4 of Table 7 display the results. In the case of India, the
coeﬃcients on both interactions are positive, as expected, but not statistically significant. For the
U.S., the interaction terms are positive and significant for both GDP per capita and distance.
Export quality constraints could also arise to solve informational asymmetry problems. In this
case, we would expect the export premium to be higher for more highly diﬀerentiated products,
which tend to be more complex and more diﬃcult to contract upon. We use estimates of elasticities
of substitution from Broda and Weinstein (2006) as a measure of product diﬀerentiation. This
measure, standardized, is interacted with the export dummy variable. The results are presented in
columns 5 and 6 of Table 7. For India, consistent with this idea we find that the dummy interaction
is negative, significantly so in the cubic specification. For the U.S., the interaction is negative but
statistically insignificant.
Finally, columns 7 and 8 present results including all 3 interactions simultaneously. While in
general the estimated coeﬃcients on the interaction terms are not significant, in all cases their sign
is consistent with the hypothesized source of the export quality constraint.
The evidence we present here suggests that all three hypotheses play some role as sources of
export quality constraints. However, further research using firm-level data with export destinations
is needed to pin down their relative importance.34 We take the analysis here as exploratory. As
a whole, the results are consistent with the mechanisms we emphasize and thus supportive of our
characterization of firms’ exporting behavior.
34

The fact that it is not clear that one of these sources prevails over the others supports our choice of modeling the

export quality constraint in a simplified yet general form.

28

6

Conclusion

In this paper, we present a model of international trade with two dimensions of firm heterogeneity:
productivity and caliber. Quality choice is endogenous and a minimum threshold needs to be
attained in order to export. The model predicts conditional exporter premia for quality, price,
average wage and capital intensity, which we test using establishment-level data from India, the
U.S., Chile and Colombia. We find strong support for the predictions of the model.
Our characterization of firms’ exporting behavior has important implications beyond what we
explore here. For example, while single-attribute models predict the largest firms to be the ones
to enter foreign markets in response to trade liberalization, our model predicts that many of those
large firms will be unwilling to pay the required quality-upgrading costs. Thus, the export response
to trade liberalization could be substantially lower than otherwise predicted. Similarly, the lack
of a one-to-one relationship between firm size and export status implies diﬀerent intensive-margin
versus extensive-margin export responses to changes in trade costs (e.g. Arkolakis 2008, Chaney
2008, Ruhl 2008) as export volumes of new entrants in the export market might largely exceed those
that cover the fixed export costs. More generally, we hope our model can be used as an alternative
benchmark to evaluate, for example, the eﬀects of exchange rate fluctuations, international price
movements, or trade liberalization.

References
[1] Alchian, A. and W. Allen, 1964. University Economics: Elements of Inquiry. Belmont, California: Wadsworth.
[2] Anderson, S., Daly, J. and M. Johnson, 1999. Why Firms Seek ISO 9000 Certification: Regulatory Compliance or Competitive Advantage?. Production and Operations Management, 8
(1): 28-43.
[3] Arkolakis, C., 2008. Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in International
Trade. NBER WP 14214.
[4] Armenter, R. and M. Koren, 2009. Economies of Scale and the Size of Exporters. Mimeo.

29

[5] Aw, B.Y., Batra, G. and M. Roberts, 2001. Firm Heterogeneity and Export- Domestic Price
Diﬀerentials: A Study of Taiwanese Electronics Products. Journal of International Economics,
54(1): 149-169.
[6] Baldwin, R. and J. Harrigan, 2007. Zeros, Quality and Space: Trade Theory and Trade Evidence. NBER Working Paper 13214.
[7] Bernard, A. and J. B. Jensen, 1999. Exceptional exporter performance: Cause, eﬀect, or both?
Journal of International Economics, 47(1): 1-25.
[8] Bernard, A., Eaton, J., Jensen, J.B. and S. Kortum, 2003. Plants and productivity in international trade. American Economic Review, 93(4): 1268-1290.
[9] Bernard, A., B. Jensen, S. Redding and P. Schott, 2007. Firms in International Trade. Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 21(3), 105-130.
[10] Bernard A., S. Redding., and P. Schott. 2009. Multi-product firms and trade liberalization.
Mimeo.
[11] Boston Consulting Group, 2008. The BCG 50 Local Dynamos. How Dynamic RDE-Based
Companies Are Mastering Their Home Markets —and What MNCs Need to Learn from Them.
[12] Broda, C., and D. Weinstein, 2006. Globalization and the Gains from Variety. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2), 541-585.
[13] Brooks, E., 2006. Why don’t firms export more? Product quality and Colombian plants.
Journal of Development Economics, 80(1): 160-178.
[14] Brown, A., T. van der Wiele, and K. Loughton, 1998. Smaller Enterprises Experiences with
ISO 9000. International Journal of Quality & Reliability Management, 15 (3): 273-285.
[15] Bustos, P., 2005. The Impact of Trade on Technology and Skill Upgrading: Evidence from
Argentina. Mimeo.
[16] Buttle, F., 1997. ISO 9000: Marketing Motivations and Benefits. International Journal of
Quality & Reliability Management, 14(9): 936-947.
[17] Chaney, T., 2008. Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of International
Trade. American Economic Review, 98(4), 1707-1721.
30

[18] Clerides, S., S. Lach, and J. Tybout, 1998. Is Learning by Exporting Important? MicroDynamic Evidence from Colombia, Mexico and Morocco. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
113(3): 903-947.
[19] Clougherty, J. and M. Grajek, 2008. The Impact of ISO 9000 Diﬀusion on Trade and FDI: A
New Institutional Analysis. CEPR DP 6026.
[20] Corbett, C., 2005. Global Diﬀusion of ISO 9000 Certification through Supply Chains. Mimeo.
[21] Crozet, M., K. Head and T. Mayer, 2008. Quality Sorting and Trade: Firm-level Evidence for
French Wine. Mimeo.
[22] Das, S., M. Roberts, and J. Tybout, 2007. Market Entry Costs, Producer Heterogeneity and
Export Dynamics. Econometrica, 75(3): 837-873.
[23] Eaton. J., S. Kortum, and F. Kramarz, 2008. An Anatomy of International Trade: Evidence
from French Firms. Mimeo.
[24] Erel, E. and J. Ghosh, 1997. ISO 9000 implementation in the Turkish industry. International
Journal of Operations & Production Management, 17(12): 1233-1246.
[25] Fajnzylber, P. and A. Fernandes, 2006. International Economic Activities and Skilled Labor
Demand: Evidence from Brazil and China. Mimeo.
[26] Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger and C. Syverson, 2007. Reallocation, Firm Turnover and Eﬃciency:
Selection on Productivity or Profitability? American Economic Review, 98(1): 394-425.
[27] Gosen, J., S. Babbar and S. Prasad, 2005. Quality and developing countries: the role of international and organizational factors. International Journal of Quality & Reliability Management,
22(5): 452-464.
[28] Guler, I., M. Guillén and J. Macpherson, 2002. Global Competition, Institutions, and the
Diﬀusion of ISO 9000 Quality Certificates. Administrative Science Quarterly, 47: 207-232.
[29] Hallak, J.C., 2006. Product quality and the direction of trade. Journal of International Economics, 68(1): 238-265.
[30] Hallak, J.C., 2008. A Product-Quality View of the Linder Hypothesis. The Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
31

[31] Hallak, J.C. and P. Schott, 2008. Estimating Cross-Country Diﬀerences in Product Quality.
NBER WP 13807.
[32] Hudson, J. and P. Jones, 2003. International Trade in “Quality Goods”: Signalling Problems
For Developing Countries. Journal of International Development, 15: 999-1013.
[33] Hummels, D. and A. Skiba, 2004. Shipping the Good Apples Out: An Empirical Confirmation
of the Alchian-Allen Conjecture. Journal of Political Economy, 112: 1384-1402.
[34] Iacovone, L. and B. Javorcik, 2008. Shipping Good Tequila Out: Investment, Domestic Unit
Values and Entry of Multi-product Plants into Export Markets. Mimeo.
[35] International Trade Center UNCTAD/WTO, 2005. Innovations in Export Strategy: A strategic
approach to the quality assurance challenge. Geneva: ITC.
[36] Johnson, R., 2008. Trade and Prices with Heterogeneous Firms. Mimeo.
[37] Kugler, M. and E. Verhoogen, 2008. Product Quality at the Plant Level: Plant Size, Exports,
Output Prices and Input Prices in Colombia. NBER WP 14418.
[38] Lederman, D., M. Olarreaga and L. Payton, 2007. Export Promotion Agencies: What Works
and What Doesn’t. World Bank Policy Research WP 4044.
[39] Maskus, K., T. Otsuki and J. Wilson, 2005. The Cost of Compliance with Product Standards
for Firms in Developing Countries: An Econometric Study. World Bank Policy Res. WP 3590.
[40] Melitz, M., 2003. “The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry
productivity," Econometrica, 71(6), 1695-1725.
[41] Mersha, T., 1997. TQM implementation in LDCs: driving and restraining forces. International
Journal of Operations & Production Management, 17(2): 164-183.
[42] Monahan, J., 1992. Longitidinal Research Database (LRD) Technical Documentation Manual.
Internal Document, Center for Economic Studies.
[43] Nguyen, D., 2008. Learning Demands and Trade Failures. Mimeo.
[44] Oviatt, B. and P. Mc Dougall, 1994. Toward a theory of international new ventures. Journal
of International Business Studies , 25(1): 45-64.

32

[45] Rajan, R. G., Zingales, L., 1998. Financial dependence and growth. American Economic Review 88, 559-586.
[46] Rauch, J., 1999. Networks Versus Markets in International Trade. Journal of International
Economics, 48(1): 7-35.
[47] Rauch, J., 2007. Development Through Synergistic Reform. NBER WP 13170.
[48] Rialp, A., Rialp, J. and G. Knight, 2005. The phenomenon of early internationalizing firms:
what do we know after a decade (1993-20003) of scientific inquiry? International Business
Review, 14: 147-166.
[49] Roberts, M. and J. Tybout. (Ed.), 1996. Industrial Evolution in Developing Countries: Micro
Patterns of Turnover, Productivity and Market Structure. NY: Oxford University Press.
[50] Ruhl, K., 2008. The International Elasticity Puzzle. Mimeo.
[51] Sivadasan, J., 2007. Productivity Consequences of Product Market Liberalization: Microevidence from Indian Manufacturing Sector Reforms. Mimeo.
[52] Sutton, J., 2007. Quality, Trade and the Moving Window: The Globalisation Process. The
Economic Journal, 117: F469-F498.
[53] Terlak, A. and A. King, 2006. The eﬀect of certification with the ISO 9000 Quality Management
Standard: A signaling approach. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 60: 579602.
[54] Verhoogen, E., 2008. Trade, Quality Upgrading and Wage Inequality in the Mexican Manufacturing Sector. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2), 489-530.
[55] Weston, F., 1995. What do managers really think of the ISO 9000 registration process?. Quality
Progress, 28(10): 67-73.
[56] Withers, B. and M. Ebrahimpour, 2001. Impacts of ISO 9000 registration on European Firms:
A Case Analysis. Integrated Manufacturing Systems,12 (2): 139-151.
[57] World Bank, 1987. World Development Report 1987: Barriers to Adjustment and Growth in
the World Economy. Industrialization and Foreign Trade. New York: Oxford University Press.
[58] World Bank, 1993. The East Asian Miracle. New York: Oxford University Press.
33

[59] World Bank, 1999. World Development Report 1998/1999: Knowledge for Development. New
York: Oxford University Press.
[60] World Trade Organization, 2005. World Trade Report 2005: Exploring the Links Between
Trade, Standards, and the WTO.
[61] Yeaple, S., 2005. A simple model of firm heterogeneity, international trade and wages. Journal
of International Economics, 65(1): 1-20.

34

Appendix 1: Equilibrium existence and uniqueness in the closed and open economies
i. Existence and uniqueness in the closed economy. Since Πd (ϕ, ξ, P ) and ξ (ϕ, P ) are continuous
and diﬀerentiable in P , Π(P ) is also continuous and diﬀerentiable in P . Because Π(P ) is continuous,
to demonstrate existence we only need to show that it takes the value fe at least once. Substituting
equations (8) and (9) into (11) it is easy to see that limP →0 Π(P ) = ∞ and limP →∞ Π(P ) = 0.
This implies that there exists at least one value of P such that Π(P ) = fe .
dΠd (ϕ,ξ,P )
dP

Since ∀(ϕ, ξ),

< 0, application of Leibniz’s rule implies that

dΠ(P )
dP

< 0, i.e. Π(P ) is a

strictly decreasing function of P . Therefore, Π(P ) takes the value fe only once. QED
e ,
ii. Existence and uniqueness in the open economy. To save notation, rename ϕ = ϕ/c
e and ξ = ξ/f
letting ϕ
e and ξe denote the original productivity and caliber draws. Hence, ϕ and ξ combine

technology and input cost and can be interpreted as “cost-adjusted productivity and caliber”.
Ex-ante expected profits are given by

∗

Π(P, P ) =

Zϕ Zξ
0

Π (ϕ, ξ, P, P ∗ ) v (ϕ, ξ) dξdϕ,

P > 0, P ∗ > 0,

0

⎧
⎪
0
if (ϕ, ξ) ∈ r(I)
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨ Π (ϕ, ξ, P )
if (ϕ, ξ) ∈ {r(II), r(III)}
d
∗
Π (ϕ, ξ, P, P ) =
⎪ Π (ϕ, ξ, P, P ∗ ) if (ϕ, ξ) ∈ r(IV )
⎪
c
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
Πu (ϕ, ξ, P, P ∗ ) if (ϕ, ξ) ∈ {r(V.a), r(V.b)}

where r(X) denotes region X = {I, II, III, IV, V a, V b} as depicted in Figure 5 and Πd , Πu , and Πc
are respectively given by equations (8), (13), and (15). At the regions borders firms are indiﬀerent,
so Π (ϕ, ξ, P, P ∗ ) does not jump. Thus, this function is continuous in (ϕ, ξ), though not diﬀerentiable
at the limits of integration — of measure zero in R2 . The functions Πd , Πu , and Πc are continuous
and diﬀerentiable in P and P ∗ , as are also the limits of integration for each region. Therefore, the
continuity and diﬀerentiability of the function Π(P, P ∗ ) in P and P ∗ follows directly.
Since Π (ϕ, ξ, P, P ∗ ) is continuous in (ϕ, ξ), by application of Leibniz rule we can find the
derivatives of Π(P, P ∗ ) with respect to P and P ∗ . Since ∀(P, P ∗ , ϕ, ξ) :
∂Πi
∂P ∗

< 0, i = u, c,

can establish that
and

∗

∂Π (P,P ∗ )
∂P ∗

∂Πi
∂P

< 0, i = d, u, c,

∂Πd (ϕ,ξ,P,P ∗ )
= 0, and the derivatives of the limits of integration cancel out, we
∂P ∗
∗
∗)
∗
∂Π(P,P ∗ )
∗ ) : ∂Π (P,P ) < 0
<
0
and
<
0.
Analogously,
∀(P,
P
∀(P, P ∗ ) : ∂Π(P,P
∗
∂P
∂P
∂P

< 0 in the foreign country.

35

Free-entry in each country implies the following system of equations:
Π (P, P ∗ ) = fe

(20)

∗

Π (P, P ∗ ) = fe∗

(21)

We want to show that an equilibrium pair (P, P ∗ ) exists and is unique. First, we make the following
assumption:
Assumption 1 :
∗

a.) limP →∞ Π (P, P ∗ ) < limP →∞ Π (P, P ∗ )
∗

b.) limP ∗ →∞ Π (P, P ∗ ) > limP ∗ →∞ Π (P, P ∗ )
The two inequalities are analogous. When P → ∞ there are no profits to be made in the
Home market so firms only operate in the Foreign market. Then, the first inequality simply states
that Foreign firms’ expected profits in the Foreign market — for any P ∗ — are higher than Home
firms’ expected profits in that market. Analogously, the second inequality states that Home firms’
expected profits in the Home market are higher than Foreign firms’ expected profits there.
Proposition 2. : Under Assumption 1, there exists a unique pair (P, P ∗ ) that solves the system
of equations (20) and (21).
Since Π (P, P ∗ ) is strictly decreasing in P ∗ , for any given P the value of P ∗ that solves equation
H

(20) is unique and implicitly defines a function P ∗ = P ∗ (P ). Similarly, since Π (P, P ∗ ) is strictly
decreasing in P , we can obtain the inverse function P = P H (P ∗ ). Using the Implicit Function
∗¯
¯
Theorem and previous results, we establish that this function is downward sloping: dP
dP H =
∗

∂Π(P,P )/∂P
∗ = P ∗ (P ) and P = P F (P ∗ ) with slope
− ∂Π(P,P
∗ )/∂P ∗ < 0. Analogously, equation (21) defines P
∗
¯
∂Π (P,P ∗ )/∂P
dP ∗ ¯
< 0.
∗
∗
∗
dP F = −
F

∂Π (P,P )/∂P

The existence proof is represented in Figure A.2. Assumption 1.a implies that
³
³
´
´
H
H
∗
∗
fe = limP →∞ Π P, P ∗ (P ) < limP →∞ Π P, P ∗ (P ) . Since Π (P, P ∗ ) is decreasing in P ∗ , this
inequality also implies that

H

F

(22)
lim P ∗ (P ) < lim P ∗ (P ).
P →∞
P →∞
¡
¢
¢
∗¡
Analogously, assumption 1.b implies that fe∗ = limP ∗ →∞ Π P F (P ∗ ), P ∗ < limP ∗ →∞ Π P F (P ∗ ), P ∗ .

Together with the fact that Π (P, P ∗ ) is decreasing in P , this inequality implies that
P H (P ∗ ).
lim P F (P ∗ ) < lim
∗

P ∗ →∞
H

P →∞

F

(23)

Since both P ∗ (P ) and P ∗ (P ) are decreasing, (22) and (23) imply that these two curves must
cross at least once. Thus, an equilibrium exists.
36

To show uniqueness we only need to demonstrate that the two curves satisfy the single crossing
¯
¯ ¯
¯ ¯
¯
∗¯
¯ ¯¯ > ¯¯ dP ∗ ¯ ¯¯. These derivatives are given by the following expressions:
property: ¯ dP
dP
dP
H

F

¯
¯
¯

¯

dP ∗ ¯
dP H

¯ A+ E B
2
¯
¯ = −σ EP∗ ,
τ
B
∗2

¯
¯
¯

P

¯

dP ∗ ¯
dP F

¯
τ −σ PE2 D
¯
¯=
∗
C + E∗2 D
P

where the terms A > 0, B > 0, C > 0, and D > 0 are not displayed to conserve space. Using
simple algebra, is can be shown that the single property holds ∀(P, P ∗ ). Thus, there is a unique
equilibrium. QED

Appendix 2: Formal characterization of the constrained equilibrium
The distinctive feature of the constrained equilibrium is the appearance of firms, in regions III
and IV, that face a binding export quality constraint.
The curve ξ u (ϕ) is the solution to ∆u Π(ϕ, ξ u (ϕ)) = 0. Along this curve, firms’ unconstrained
choice of quality is monotonically decreasing in ϕ (see equation for λu in section 2.2). Thus, there is
a value (ϕλ ) at which this choice is exactly λ.35 From equations (12) and (13), we can easily verify
that both λu and ∆u Π are increasing in ξ — conditional on ϕ. Hence, λu > λ and ∆u Π > 0 for
firms in region V.a. Since the export constraint does not bind for those firms, their export choice
is determined by the sign of ∆u Π. Thus, they prefer to export.
Equating (12) to λ, we obtain the expression for iso-quality curve ξ λ (ϕ) to the right of ϕλ :36
α
ξ λ (ϕ) = λ f
1−β
α0

µ

σ−1
σ

¶−σ ³ ´
ϕ −(σ−1) −1
W .
c

(24)

This curve is also monotonically decreasing in ϕ. Comparing (24) with (14), we can check that the
two curves intersect at ϕλ and ∀ϕ > ϕλ : ξ λ (ϕ) > ξ u (ϕ). Firms located above ξ λ (ϕ) spontaneously
satisfy the export quality requirement, so their export decisions are also governed by the sign of
∆u Π. Thus, firms in region V.b, where ξ ≥ ξ λ (ϕ) > ξ u (ϕ), also prefer to export.
Firms located between ξ u (ϕ) and ξ λ (ϕ) are forced to upgrade quality if they wish to export.
Those that do it just attain quality λ. In section 2.3 we provide the expressions for marginal costs,
price, revenue and profits for those constrained firms. We also define ∆Πc ≡ Πc (ϕ, ξ) − Πd (ϕ, ξ),
which is given by:
1
∆Πc (ϕ, ξ) ≡
σ
35
36

µ

σ−1ϕ
σ c

¶σ−1

α−α0

λ

³ϕ´
f
W − λα − fx − J
ξ
c

α(σ−1)
α0

µ ¶ α−α0 0 µ ¶ α0
α
ξ
E α
.
f
P

The expression for ϕλ can be obtained using equations (12) and (14) to solve for ϕ in λu (ϕ, ξ u (ϕ)) = λ.
The iso-quality curve is discontinuous at ϕλ . Its expression to the left of ϕλ is identical but for E
replacing W .
P

37

The export cut-oﬀ function ξ x (ϕ) is implicitly defined by ∆Πc (ϕ, ξ x (ϕ)) = 0. Since ∆Πc (ϕ, ξ)
is continuous and strictly increasing in its two arguments, by application of the implicit function
theorem, ξ x (ϕ) is continuous and decreasing in ϕ. Its location is shown in the following lemma:
Lemma A.1. The export cut-oﬀ function ξ x (ϕ) is flanked by ξ u (ϕ) and ξ λ (ϕ):
∀ϕ > ϕλ : ξ λ (ϕ) > ξ x (ϕ) > ξ u (ϕ)
Proof. As constrained firms are forced to deviate from their optimal (unconstrained) choice of
quality, Πc (ϕ, ξ) ≤ Πu (ϕ, ξ). This implies that ∆Πc (ϕ, ξ u (ϕ)) < ∆Πu (ϕ, ξ u (ϕ)) = 0. Thus, firms
located on ξ u (ϕ) strictly prefer not to export. On the other hand, since the export restriction is
(just) not binding for firms located on ξ λ (ϕ), ∆Πc (ϕ, ξ λ (ϕ)) = ∆Πu (ϕ, ξ λ (ϕ)) > 0. Therefore,
firms located along ξ λ (ϕ) strictly prefer to export.
These two results, the continuity of ∆Πc (ϕ, ξ), and the fact that this function is strictly increasing in ξ then imply that ∀ϕ > ϕλ : ξ u (ϕ) < ξ x (ϕ) < ξ λ (ϕ). QED

Appendix 3: Proof of Proposition 1
Consider an iso-revenue curve with at least an exporter and a non-exporter. For simplicity,
assume a suﬃciently high upper bound on the caliber support (ξ) so that there is an unconstrained
exporter on the curve whenever there is an exporter. Since both firms are on the same iso-revenue
curve rd (ηd ) = ru (ηu ).
Exporters need to satisfy the export quality constraint; therefore λu > λ. Comparing equations
(10) and (13), W > E/P and rd (ηd ) = ru (ηu ) imply that ηd > ηu . Since exporting is a choice,
∆u Π(ηu ) ≥ 0. The function ∆u Π is increasing in η. Thus, ηd > ηu implies that ∆u Π(ηd ) > 0. This
last inequality means that the non-exporter would make positive marginal profits in the export
market if unconstrained in his choice of quality, i.e. the reason for not exporting is that he does
not attain λ. Hence, λd < λ. QED

Appendix 4: Factor input requirements of quality production
Production requires the use of two primary factors, labor and capital. There are HL types
of labor, indexed by h = 1, ...H, which earn market-determined wages whL . There are also HK
types of capital, indexed by h = 1, ..., HK , and V vintages of each type of capital, indexed by
38

v = 0, ..., V − 1. A unit of capital of vintage v lasts v + 1 remaining periods. All vintages of the
same type of capital are perfect substitutes and equally productive. Therefore, they earn identical
market-determined rental rate whK . The price of a unit of capital of type h and vintage v is phv
P
wK
and equals the discounted future sum of rental rates: phv = vt=0 ρht
, where ρt = Πtt0 =0 (1 + ρt0 )
t
and ρt0 is the one period interest rate.

P −1
Khv the units of capital of type h
Denote by Lh the units of labor of type h, by Kh = Vv=0
P
P
hired by the firm, and define L = h Lh and K = h Kh . Then, the average wage the firm pays

is wL =

P

h

LL
wh
h
L

and the average rental is wK =

P

h

KK
wh
h
.
K

Wages and rental rate gaps across

types of factor inputs can be thought to reflect diﬀerences in relative productivity in an unmodeled
“numeraire” industry. In the case of labor, relative productivity is assumed to depend on skills.
To produce quality λ, a firm needs to pay average wage wL = wL λbL and average rental rate
wK = wK λbK , bL > 0, bK > 0, where wL and wK are the least expensive types of labor and capital,
respectively. This requirement applies to factor inputs associated both with fixed and with variable
costs. Thus, producing higher quality requires hiring more skilled and higher-paid workers and
more expensive types of capital.
The quantity of output only depends on the quantity of inputs used in production, not on their
type. Output is produced using a constant returns to scale Cobb-Douglas production function:
Y = ϕLαL K αK , where αL + αK = 1. Combining this production function with the requirements
of input quality described above yields the unit cost function postulated in equation (3):
c(λ, ϕ) =
where A =

1
αK
ααLL αK

c
A ¡ L ¢αL ¡ K ¢αK
= λβ
w
w
ϕ
ϕ

¡ ¢α ¡ ¢α
, c = A wL L wK K , and β = αL bL + αK bK .

Analogously, we assume that the fixed cost part of quality production requires labor and capital
1/κ

combined in a Cobb-Douglas production function with the same exponents: λ = (ξL0 αL K 0αK )

.

These costs can be thought of as expenses related to the implementation of quality control systems,
worker training, or product development.37 In addition, the firm incurs other fixed costs F0 (such
as annual maintenance expenses or headquarter expenses) unrelated to quality. Accordingly, fixed
costs, conditional on quality λ, are as defined in equation (4):
F (λ, ξ) =
37

f
A ¡ L ¢αL ¡ K ¢αK κ
λ + F0 = λα + F0
w
w
ξ
ξ

In this static framework, sunk and fixed costs are equivalent. In a dynamic setting, sunk costs could still be

considered fixed costs by converting them into an equivalent stream of per-period fixed costs.

39

¡ ¢α ¡ ¢α
where f = A wL L wK K and α = κ + αL bL + αK bK .38 These assumptions, together with the
results of proposition 1, yield Corollaries 2 and 3.

Proof of Corollary 2. The assumption that average wages are monotonically increasing in quality,
combined with proposition 1, implies that
∀r, wL (λx (ϕx , ξx ))|rx =r > wL (λd (ϕd , ξd ))|rd =r .

QED

Firm-level statistics do not report firms’ capital as a simple count of “machine units”. Instead,
capital in the plant is aggregated using their relative prices. Thus, rather than K we observe
P
PV
VK = H
h=1
v=1 phv Khv .
Proof of Corollary 3. To demonstrate corollary 3, we first substitute the pricing equation for capital
KK
PV Pv wht
P
hv
. We assume that relative
goods into the definition of V K to obtain V K = H
h=1
v=1
t=0
ρt

K = υ w K . We also assume that,
prices of diﬀerent types of capital do not change over time: ∀h, wht
t h

although firms’ composition of capital across types of capital goods diﬀers, it does not diﬀer across
P
vintages within types, i.e., ∀h, Khv = av Kh , Kh = Vv=1 Khv . Thus we can write:
VK =

v
H X
V X
X
υt wK av Kh
h

h=1 v=1 t=0

where γ =
wK K
αK

=

PV

wL L
αL ,

v=1

Pv

t=0

υt av
ρt .

ρt

=γ

H
X

whK Kh = γwK K

h=1

Variable costs are Cobb-Douglas, so cost shares are constant. Thus,

which implies that
VK
wK K
αK L
αK L bL
=γ
=γ
w =γ
w λ .
L
L
αL
αL

(25)

Since fixed costs are also Cobb-Douglas with identical coeﬃcients, equation (25) applies to those
costs as well. Thus, it also characterizes the capital intensity of the plant, i.e. including capital
and labor associated with both¡fixed
¢ and variable costs.
d VLK
> 0 if bL > 0. This result, combined with proposition 1,
It is easy to check that
dλ
immediately implies corollary 3.39 QED

38
39

Note that α = κ + β. The assumption that α > (1 − β)(σ − 1) then implies that κ > σ(1 − β) − 1.
Note that bL > 0 implies that β > 0. Hence, while Proposition 1 and Corollary 1 hold even if quality does not

drive up marginal costs (β = 0), this assumption is needed for quality to imply higher wages and capital intensity.

40

Data Appendix
The Indian Manufacturing Survey dataset (ASI 1997-1998) uses the National Industrial Classification (NIC) 1987 revision. Each establishment is classified under a 4-digit NIC code. Thus,
establishment-level information, e.g. export status, wagebill, employment, and capital, is provided
at this level of aggregation. Product-level information for deriving unit values (shipment value and
quantity) is provided at the (5-digit) “item code” level. Unfortunately, item codes do not aggregate
up consistently to the 4-digit NIC classification. We define “industries” at the 4-digit level and
“products” at the 5-digit item code level. After data cleaning — explained below — we are left with
323 4-digit NIC codes and 976 item codes. Establishments in the U.S. Census of Manufactures database (CMF 1997) are classified under the 4-digit Standard Industrial Classification 1987-revision
(SIC 87). Product information is provided at the 7-digit SIC level. We define “industries” and
“products” at the 4-digit and 7-digit SIC levels, respectively. After data cleaning, there are 467
4-digit SIC codes and 2,069 7-digit SIC codes.40 Finally, both the Chilean Manufacturing Census
(1991-1996) and the Colombian Manufacturing Census (1981-1996) use the 4-digit ISIC industry
classification. After data cleaning, we are left with 77 industries in Chile and 88 in Colombia.
As part of our data cleaning process, we drop observations with missing data for our size
proxies (revenue and employment) or for variables required to form our dependent variables (capital
intensity and average wages). When focusing on price information, we also drop products with
missing revenue or quantity information. Also, because we control for size using industry-specific
or product-specific polynomials of order 3, we exclude industries or products with less than 5
observations from our sample as well as those reporting no exporters. Further, to avoid the influence
of outliers, we winsorize all variables by 1% on both tails of the distribution (within each industry).
For India, we also drop codes for aggregate or miscellaneous categories (99920, 99930, and 99999)
and products measured in unspecified units (unit code 999). As discussed in the text, all our
analysis using the Indian dataset adjusts appropriately for sampling probabilities.
For India, price is defined as the “ex-factory value” of goods manufactured divided by the
quantity manufactured. The “ex-factory value” excludes all distribution and transportation costs
associated with the sale of the manufactured products.41 For the U.S., product value of shipments
40

While there is a total of about 13,000 distinct 7-digit product codes, quantity information is not available for

product lines that “are not meaningful” (Monahan, 1992).
41
In the 1997-98 survey, data on transportation and other distribution costs was collected at the plant level and
then imputed to individual products in proportion to the gross sales value data collected for each product.

41

is defined as “net selling value, f.o.b. plant, of shipments, after discounts and allowances and
exclusive of freight charges and excise taxes”.
For various tests we perform, we need to concord our India and U.S. product-level data with
the 4-digit SITC classification. For India, we construct a manual concordance between 5-digit item
codes and 4-digit SITC Rev.3 categories. For the U.S., we construct a manual concordance between
5-digit SIC Rev.1987 codes and 4-digit SITC Rev.2 categories. We also construct a mapping from
4-digit SITC Rev.3 codes to 4-digit SITC Rev.2 codes (Rev.3 → Rev.2) using the concordances
between 10-digit Harmonized System (HS) codes and those two classifications available at the the
Center for International Data (CID) website.42 Specifically, to map a given Rev.3 category into a
Rev.2 category, we first identify all the 10-digit HS codes included in the first category. Then, we
select the Rev.2 category into which most 10-digit HS codes are mapped. Thus, U.S. product codes
are also mapped to the Rev.2 classification.
We also combine our data with other industry classifications as follows:
• Rauch’s classification (RC). Rauch (1999) proposed a classification of 4-digit SITC Rev.2
categories into three classes: “homogenous”, “reference-priced” and “diﬀerentiated” goods.
We use his “liberal” version. For products, we apply RC directly to our earlier mapping of
product codes into SITC Rev.2 categories. For the India dataset, we first manually concord
3-digit NIC codes to the 3-digit ISIC classification. Then, using a concordance between
the 3-digit ISIC classification and the more disaggregate 4-digit SITC Rev.2 classification,43
we define as “diﬀerentiated” any 3-digit ISIC code where more than half of 4-digit SITC
Rev.2 codes that match it are diﬀerentiated according to RC. For industries in the U.S.
dataset, 4-digit SIC codes are defined as diﬀerentiated if more than half of 5-digit SIC codes
within a 4-digit SIC category are diﬀerentiated according to RC. For Chile and Colombia,
“diﬀerentiated” 3-digit ISIC categories are identified as done for India.
• Broda-Weinstein (BW) elasticity of substitution. These estimates are available at the 4-digit
SITC Rev.3 level.44 For India, they can be directly applied to product codes, which are
already mapped to that classification. For the U.S. we first map the elasticities to the 4-digit
SITC Rev.2 classification using the Rev.3 → Rev.2 concordance described earlier.
• Destination (average) GDP per capita. Data on Indian and U.S. exports by 4-digit SITC
42

http://cid.econ.ucdavis.edu/data/sasstata/usxss.html
From http://www.macalester.edu/research/economics/page/haveman/Trade.Resources/.
44
http://faculty.chicagogsb.edu/christian.broda/website/research/unrestricted/TradeElasticities/TradeElasticities.html.
43

42

Rev.2 categories for 1997 was downloaded from the CID website. For India, we convert this
information into 4-digit SITC Rev.3 categories following our earlier concordance. Then, for
each Rev.3 category for India and Rev.2 category for the U.S. we construct the (average)
“destination GDP per capita” measure by weighting the GDP per capita of destination countries with the share of exports (CIF value) shipped to that destination. GDP per capita (in
constant year 2000 $) for 1997 comes from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators
CD-ROM.
• Destination (average) distance. We follow the same procedure as outlined for destination
GDP per capita. Here, bilateral distance data (rather than GDP per capita data) comes
from the CEPII website.45
• Measure of external financial dependence. The Rajan-Zingales measure of dependence on
external finance is available for 2-digit SIC 1987 categories. For India, we use the CID
concordance to map those categories into the 4-digit SITC Rev.3 classification. The modal
2-digit SIC category is chosen as the unique match to any 4-digit SITC Rev.3 code. For the
U.S., 7-digit SIC product categories are directly mapped to their classification.
• Measure of dependence on the government. The Bureau of Economic Analysis of the U.S.
provides Input-Output (I-O) matrices for 1997 based on a 5-digit IO classification code.46
For India, we combine BEA’s IO-HS (10-digit) concordance with a HS-SITC (Rev.3) 4-digit
concordance from the CID website to obtain a 4-digit SITC Rev.3 I-O matrix. For the U.S.
we follow analogous procedure except for the use of a HS-SITC (Rev.2) 4-digit concordance to
obtain a 4-digit SITC Rev.2 I-O matrix. We form a measure of dependence on the government
as the ratio of total output consumed by the government to total output. For a handful of
product codes with missing data, we imputed the fraction of output used by government for
the corresponding 4-digit I-O codes.

45
46

http://www.cepii.fr/anglaisgraph/bdd/distances.htm
http://www.bea.gov/industry/io_benchmark.htm

43

Figure 1: Percentage of establishments that are exporters, by size quantiles
The figures plot the fraction of exporters by 40 size (sales revenue) quantiles in sectors producing
differentiated goods. Each establishment is assigned to one of 40 size quantiles within its 4-digit industry.
Exporter fraction for a quantile is obtained by dividing the number of exporters in that quantile summed
across all industries by the number of establishments in that quantile summed across all industries.

Fraction exporters by size quantile

.8
.6
.4
.2
0

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

U.S.A

1

India

0

10
20
30
Size quantiles (within industry)

40

0

40

.8
.6
.4
.2
0

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Colombia

1

Chile

10
20
30
Size quantiles (within industry)

0

10
20
30
Size quantiles (within industry)

40

0

44

10
20
30
Size quantiles (within industry)

40

Figure 2: Equilibrium in the closed economy
ξ
ξ(ϕ)

Survivors

Non-survivors

ξ (ϕ): cut-off between survivors and non-survivors

Figure 3: Unconstrained export quality equilibrium
ξ

ξu (ϕ )
ξ (ϕ )

Exporters
Domestic
firms
Nonsurvivors
ϕ
ξ (ϕ): cut-off between survivors and non-survivors
ξu(ϕ): export cut-off in the unconstrained regime

45

ϕ

Figure 4: Fraction of exporters as a function of revenue in the unconstrained
export quality equilibrium
1
Fraction of
exporters

0

rd (ηu )

46

ru (ηu )

Revenue

Figure 5: Constrained export quality equilibrium

ξ

Region V.a:
Unconstrained exporters

Region V.b: Unconstrained exporters

ξλ (ϕ)
Region IV: Constrained exporters

ξx(ϕ)

Region II:
Domestic firms

Region III:
Domestic firms

Region I:
Non-survivors

ξu(ϕ)
ξ(ϕ)

ϕ

ϕλ
ξ (ϕ): cut-off between survivors and non-survivors
ξu(ϕ): export cut-off in the unconstrained regime
ξλ(ϕ): iso-quality curve for threshold quality λ
ξx(ϕ): export cut-off in the constrained regime

47

Figure 6: Iso-revenue and iso-quality curves in the constrained export
quality equilibrium

ξ

rx

Region V.a:
Unconstrained exporters

r3
Region V.b: Unconstrained exporters
A

ξλ (ϕ)

B

Region IV: Constrained exporters

ξx(ϕ)

C

Region III:
Domestic firms

Region II:
Domestic firms

ξu(ϕ)

Region I:
Non-survivors

rx

ξu(ϕ)
ξ(ϕ)

ϕλ

r1

ϕ

ξ (ϕ): cut-off between survivors and non-survivors
ξu(ϕ): export cut-off in the unconstrained regime
ξλ(ϕ): isoquality curve for threshold quality λ
ξx(ϕ): export cut-off in the constrained regime

48

r2

ru

r3

Table 1: Summary statistics
Only differentiated sectors are included. All variables (except the ISO 9000 dummy) are winsorized by 1% on both tails of the distribution and
standardized using industry-specific means and standard deviations. In the case of price, “industries” are defined at the product level.
Description

ALL ESTABLISHMENTS
N
Mean
SD

NON-EXPORTERS
N
Mean
SD

N

EXPORTERS
Mean

SD

Panel 1: India (1998)
Standardized (log) price

6,494

0.00

1.00

4,813

-0.01

0.96

1,681

0.06

1.05

Standardized (log) average wage rate
Standardized (log) capital intensity (capital/labor)

11,226
11,226

0.00
0.00

1.00
1.00

8,964
8,964

-0.09
-0.08

0.96
0.99

2,262
2,262

0.50
0.43

1.02
0.90

ISO 9000 dummy

15,937

0.05

0.21

13,009

0.03

0.16

2,928

0.17

0.38

49,203

0.00

1.00

35,772

-0.02

0.98

13,431

0.05

1.03

123,079
123,079

0.00
0.00

1.00
1.00

96,670
96,670

-0.06
-0.01

1.03
0.98

26,409
26,409

0.21
0.02

0.86
1.07

17,053
17,053

0.00
0.00

1.00
1.00

13,446
13,446

-0.17
-0.14

0.96
0.97

3,607
3,607

0.62
0.50

0.87
0.92

39,990
39,990

0.00
0.00

1.00
1.00

34,714
34,714

-0.11
-0.07

0.94
0.99

5,276
5,276

0.73
0.43

1.06
0.89

Panel 2: USA (1997)
Standardized (log) price
Standardized (log) average wage rate
Standardized (log) capital intensity (capital/labor)
Panel 3: Chile (1991-96)
Standardized (log) average wage rate
Standardized (log) capital intensity (capital/labor)
Panel 4: Colombia (1981-91)
Standardized (log) average wage rate
Standardized (log) capital intensity (capital/labor)

49

Table 2: Log price: Baseline results
All reported figures are coefficients on an exporter dummy which equals 1 if the establishment
reports positive exports. Price is defined as a unit value (product revenue/quantity). Standardized
(log) price is (log) price demeaned by the product-specific mean and divided by the productspecific standard deviation. Size is defined as log total sales of the establishment. Standard errors
are clustered at plant level; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Dependent variable: Log price (standardized)

0.112**
[0.050]

0.130**
[0.060]

0.177***
[0.063]

0.169**
[0.073]

Dependent variable: Log price

0.0534
[0.035]

0.0502
[0.041]

0.0872**
[0.040]

0.113***
[0.042]

6,494
296
4,933

6,494
296
4,933

6,494
296
4,933

6,494
296
4,933

0.082***
[0.018]

0.131***
[0.019]

0.136***
[0.019]

0.135***
[0.020]

Dependent variable: Log price

0.030**
[0.012]

0.062***
[0.013]

0.067***
[0.013]

0.066***
[0.014]

Number of observations (plant-product)
Number of products
Number of plants

49,203
860
18,373

49,203
860
18,373

49,203
860
18,373

49,203
860
18,373

Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
No
Yes
No

No
No
No
Yes

Panel 1: India (1997-98)

Number of observations
Number of products
Number of plants
Panel 2: USA (1997)
Dependent variable: Log price (standardized)

Product fixed effects
Product-specific size polynomial (order 2)
Product-specific size polynomial (order 3)
Product-specific size-decile fixed effects

50

Table 3: Log price: Results for differentiated and homogenous goods sectors
All reported figures are coefficients on an exporter dummy which equals 1 if the establishment reports positive exports. Price is defined as a unit
value (product revenue/quantity). Standardized (log) price is (log) price demeaned by the product-specific mean and divided by the productspecific standard deviation. Homogenous products include Rauch’s (1999) “homogeneous” and “reference-price” sectors (liberal version). Size is
defined as log total sales of the establishment. Standard errors are clustered at plant level; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%, *** significant
at 1%.
India (1997-98)
Differentiated
Homogenous
products
products
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Dependent variable: Log price (standardized)

Number of observations (plant-product)
Product fixed effects
Product-specific size polynomial (order 3)
Product-specific size-decile fixed effects

USA (1997)
Differentiated
Homogenous
products
products
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

0.177***
[0.063]

0.169**
[0.073]

-0.0305
[0.0361]

-0.0158
[0.0549]

0.136***
[0.019]

0.135***
[0.020]

0.100***
[0.018]

0.100***
[0.020]

6,494

6,494

18,541

18,541

49,203

49,203

49,499

49,499

Yes
Yes
No

No
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

No
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

No
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

No
No
Yes

51

Table 4: Quality proxy – ISO 9000 certification dummy (India 1997-98)
All reported figures are coefficients on an exporter dummy which equals 1 if the establishment
reports positive exports. The dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the
establishment has obtained ISO 9000 quality certification. Size is defined as log total sales of the
establishment. Only differentiated sectors are included. Standard errors are clustered at the plant
level; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.
(1)
Dependent variable: dummy for ISO 9000
adoption

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.142***

0.0771***

0.0751***

0.0854***

[0.009]

[0.009]

[0.009]

[0.009]

15,937

15,937

15,937

15,937

Industry fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Industry-specific size polynomial (order 2)

No

Yes

No

No

Industry-specific size polynomial (order 3)

No

No

Yes

No

Industry-specific size-decile fixed effects

No

No

No

Yes

Number observations (plants)

52

Table 5: Wage and capital intensity results
All reported figures are coefficients on an exporter dummy which equals 1 if the establishment reports positive exports. Standardized average
wage is the wagebill of the establishment divided by the number of employees. Capital intensity is total capital divided by the number of
employees. Size is defined as log total sales of the establishment. Only differentiated sectors are included. Standard errors are clustered at the
plant level; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.
India
(1)
Dependent variable
Log average wage (standardized)

USA
(2)

(3)

Chile
(4)

(5)

(6)

Colombia
(7)
(8)

0.138***
[0.032]

0.136***
[0.035]

0.082***
[0.014]

0.097***
[0.014]

0.106***
[0.027]

0.131***
[0.027]

0.0458*
[0.025]

0.0922***
[0.026]

0.0743***
[0.017]

0.0748***
[0.018]

0.032***
[0.006]

0.039***
[0.006]

0.0500***
[0.014]

0.0636***
[0.014]

0.0270***
[0.010]

0.0437***
[0.010]

Log capital intensity (standardized)

0.155***
[0.035]

0.188***
[0.037]

-0.191***
[0.015]

-0.178***
[0.015]

0.221***
[0.035]

0.250***
[0.034]

0.130***
[0.031]

0.147***
[0.030]

Log capital intensity

0.224***
[0.047]

0.266***
[0.049]

-0.188***
[0.015]

-0.175***
[0.015]

0.279***
[0.039]

0.310***
[0.039]

0.145***
[0.035]

0.164***
[0.035]

Number of observations (plants)

11,226

11,226

123,079

123,079

17,053

17,053

39,990

39,990

Industry-year fixed effects
Industry-year specific size polynomial (order 3)
Industry-year size-decile fixed effects

Yes
Yes
No

No
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

No
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

No
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

No
No
Yes

Log average wage

53

Table 6: Robustness checks: conditioning on employment and domestic sales
All reported figures are coefficients on an exporter dummy which equals 1 if the establishment reports positive exports. Establishment size is
defined as log employment in panel A and log domestic sales in panel B. Only differentiated sectors are included. Standard errors are clustered
at plant level; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.
India
Dependent Variable
Panel A: conditioning on employment
Log price (standardized)
ISO 9000 dummy
Log average wage (standardized)
Log capital intensity (standardized)

USA

Chile

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.137**
[0.0558]
0.098***
[0.009]
0.432***
[0.0347]
0.483***
[0.0362]

0.170**
[0.0694]
0.106***
[0.009]
0.435***
[0.0356]
0.507***
[0.0365]

0.139***
[0.019]

0.133***
[0.020]

0.223***
[0.014]
-0.090***
[0.016]

0.234***
[0.014]
-0.084***
[0.016]

0.202***
[0.0589]
0.093***
[0.008]
0.349***
[0.0318]
0.323***
[0.0348]

0.245***
[0.0788]
0.101***
[0.009]
0.363***
[0.0332]
0.348***
[0.0357]

0.138***
[0.019]

0.134***
[0.020]

0.133***
[0.012]
-0.152***
[0.014]

0.140***
[0.013]
-0.140***
[0.014]

(5)

(6)

Colombia
(7)
(8)

0.394***
[0.0324]
0.488***
[0.0370]

0.395***
[0.0317]
0.492***
[0.0360]

0.325***
[0.0315]
0.388***
[0.0322]

0.360***
[0.0315]
0.387***
[0.0319]

0.224***
[0.0264]
0.301***
[0.0348]

0.244***
[0.0269]
0.324***
[0.0345]

0.209***
[0.0256]
0.197***
[0.0299]

0.254***
[0.0268]
0.211***
[0.0295]

Panel B: conditioning on domestic sales
Log price (standardized)
ISO 9000 dummy
Log average wage (standardized)
Log capital intensity (standardized)

Product or industry-year fixed effects
Product or industry-year specific size polynomial (order 3)
Product or industry-year size-decile fixed effects

Yes
Yes
No

No
No
Yes

54

Yes
Yes
No

No
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

No
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

No
No
Yes

Table 7: Log price: Interaction results
The dependent variable is log standardized price. EXPDUM is an exporter dummy. DESTGDP is
the standardized (value weighted) average GDP per capita of the destination countries to which a
product is exported; DESTDIST is the standardized (value weighted) average distance. SIGMA is
the (standardized) elasticity of substitution (from Broda and Weinstein, 2006). Only differentiated
sectors are included. Standard errors are clustered at plant level; * significant at 10%; ** significant
at 5%, *** significant at 1%.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.277*** 0.263***

0.278***

0.278***

0.130**

0.122

0.210***

0.208**

[0.0678]

[0.100]

[0.0689]

[0.102]

[0.0657]

[0.0975]

0.0248

0.0997

0.0513

0.0849

[0.0604] [0.0898]

[0.0839]

[0.120]

Panel 1: INDIA (1997-98)
EXPDUM

EXPDUM X DESTGDP
EXPDUM X DESTDIST

0.0284

0.115

0.0363

0.105

[0.0729]

[0.111]

[0.102]

[0.144]

EXPDUM X SIGMA

Observations

4,901

[0.0684] [0.0998]

-0.174***

-0.210

-0.0954

-0.143

[0.0599]

[0.187]

[0.0757]

[0.189]

4,767

4,767

4,901

4,901

4,901

6,321

6,321

0.113*** 0.111***

0.147***

0.143***

0.135***

0.131***

[0.019]

[0.021]

[0.019]

[0.020]

Panel 2: USA (1997)
EXPDUM

[0.019]
EXPDUM X DESTGDP

[0.020]

0.086*** 0.087***
[0.021]

0.065***

0.048**

[0.019]

0.021

EXPDUM X SIGMA

Observations

[0.021]

[0.022]

0.068*** 0.090***

[0.022]

EXPDUM X DESTDIST

0.119*** 0.103***

-0.006

-0.020

[0.031]

[0.035]

[0.026]

[0.029]

0.029

0.001

[0.025]

[0.027]

-0.022

-0.041

[0.031]

[0.034]

49,203

49,203

49,203

49,203

49,203

49,203

49,203

49,203

Product fixed effects

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Product-specific size
polynomial (order 3)
Product-specific size-decile
fixed effects

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

55

Appendix

Figure A.1: Percentage of establishments that are exporters, by size percentile
The figures plot the fraction of exporters by 40 size (sales revenue) quantiles for all manufacturing
sectors. Each establishment is assigned to one of 40 size quantiles within its 4-digit industry. Exporter
fraction for a quantile is obtained by dividing the number of exporters in that quantile summed across all
industries by the number of establishments in that quantile summed across all industries.

Fraction exporters by size quantile

.8
.2 .4 .6
0

0

.2 .4 .6

.8

1

U.S.A

1

India

0

10
20
30
Size quantiles (within industry)

40

0

40

.2 .4 .6
0

0

.2 .4 .6

.8 1

Co lombia

.8 1

Chile

10
20
30
Size quantiles (within industry)

0

10
20
30
Size quantiles (within industry)

40

0

56

10
20
30
Size quantiles (within industry)

40

Appendix

Figure A.2: Existence of equilibrium

P*

P*F (P)
P*H (P)

P

57

Appendix

Table A.1: Log price: Robustness checks
All reported figures are coefficients on an exporter dummy. The exporter dummy equals 1 if the establishment reports positive exports,
except for row 2 where it equals 1 if the establishment exports more than 2% of their total sales. Price is defined as a unit value (product
revenue/quantity). Standardized (log) price is (log) price demeaned by the product-specific mean and divided by the product-specific
standard deviation. Only differentiated sectors are included. Standard errors clustered at plant level; * significant at 10%; ** significant at
5%, *** significant at 1%.
(1)

(2)

(3)

0.112**
[0.050]

0.130**
[0.060]

0.177***
[0.063]

0.169**
[0.073]

0.151***
[0.056]

0.120*
[0.064]

0.161**
[0.068]

0.142*
[0.079]

0.171**
[0.080]

0.125
[0.087]

0.179**
[0.091]

0.126
[0.11]

0.082***
[0.018]

0.131***
[0.019]

0.136***
[0.019]

0.135***
[0.020]

Coefficient on dummy for export share >2%

0.096***
[0.021]

0.133***
[0.021]

0.136***
[0.022]

0.130***
[0.024]

Coefficient on exporter dummy, main product line only

0.112***
[0.020]

0.122***
[0.021]]

0.122***
[0.021]

0.121***
[0.025]

Panel 1: India (1997-98)
Base case: Coefficient on exporter dummy from Panel 1 of Table 2
Coefficient on dummy for export share >2%
Coefficient on exporter dummy, main product line only

Panel 2: USA (1997)
Base case: Coefficient on exporter dummy from Panel 2 of Table 2

Product fixed effects
Product-specific size polynomial (order 2)
Product-specific size polynomial (order 3)
Product-specific size-decile fixed effects

Yes
No
No
No

58

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
No
Yes
No

(4)

No
No
No
Yes

Appendix

Table A.2: Skill intensity measures
All reported figures are coefficients on an exporter dummy which equals 1 if the establishment reports positive exports. The skilled
share of the wage bill is the ratio of non-production worker wages to total wages. Skilled share of employment is the share of nonproduction workers in total employment. Both variables are standardized by using 4-digit industry-specific means and standard
deviations. Only differentiated sectors are included. Standard errors are clustered at plant level; * significant at 10%; ** significant at
5%, *** significant at 1%.
India

USA

Chile

Colombia

Skilled share of the wage bill (standardized)

0.0166
[0.039]

-0.0147
[0.041]

0.244***
[0.016]

0.239***
[0.016]

0.110***
[0.036]

0.151***
[0.036]

0.121***
[0.034]

0.154***
[0.032]

Skilled share of employment (standardized)

0.0096
[0.0403]

-0.0149
[0.0464]

0.192***
[0.016]

0.197***
[0.017]

-0.0228
[0.0391]

0.0071
[0.0420]

0.0678*
[0.0351]

0.0929**
[0.0365]

Number of observations (plants)

11,226

11,226

123,079

123,079

17,053

17,053

39,990

39,990

Industry-year fixed effects
Industry-year specific size polynomial (order 3)
Industry-year size-decile fixed effects

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
No
Yes

59

Appendix

Table A.3: Robustness checks: Using U.S. CMF 1992
All reported figures are coefficients on an exporter dummy which equals 1 if the establishment reports positive exports. The data
covers the differentiated products/industries (defined per the Rauch 1999 classification) of the manufacturing sector for the US in
1992. For standardized log price, “product/industry” in the last four rows refers to 7-digit product codes; for other variables
“product/industry” refers to 4-digit SIC (1987) code. Size is defined as log total sales of the establishment. Only differentiated
sectors are included. Standard errors are clustered at plant level; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.
Dependent variable

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Log price (standardized)

0.147***
[0.015]

0.117***
[0.015]

0.121***
[0.015]

0.131***
[0.015]

Log average wage (standardized)

0.313***
[0.015]

0.100***
[0.017]

0.101***
[0.017]

0.112***
[0.018]

Capital intensity (standardized)

0.233***
[0.018]

-0.001
[0.014]

-0.002
[0.014]

0.006
[0.014]

Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
No
Yes
No

No
No
No
Yes

Product/industry fixed effects
Product/industry-specific size polynomial (order 2)
Product/industry-specific size polynomial (order 3)
Product/industry size-decile fixed effects

60

Appendix

Table A.4: Robustness checks: conditioning of firm sales and using single-establishment firms
All reported figures are coefficients on an exporter dummy which equals one for firms where at least one establishment exports. The
data covers the differentiated products/industries (defined per the Rauch 1999 classification) for the U.S. manufacturing sector in
1997. For price, “product/industry” in the last 4 rows refers to 7-digit product codes; for other variables “product/industry” refers
to 4-digit SIC (1987) code. In all cases, size is defined as the log firm sales. Average wage and capital intensity are defined using firm
level aggregates. (Firm and establishment variables are the same for single-establishment firms in panel 2.) Only differentiated
sectors are included. Standard errors are clustered at plant level; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.
Dependent variable
Panel 1: All variables defined at the firm level
Log price (standardized)
Log average wage (standardized)
Capital intensity (standardized)
Panel 2: Sample restricted to single-establishment firms only
Log price (standardized)
Log average wage (standardized)
Capital intensity (standardized)

Product/industry fixed effects
Product/industry-specific size polynomial (order 2)
Product/industry-specific size polynomial (order 3)
Product/industry size-decile fixed effects

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.015
[0.017]

0.108***
[0.020]

0.121***
[0.021]

0.118***
[0.023]

0.321***
[0.016]
-0.014
[0.018]

0.065***
[0.016]
-0.216***
[0.016]

0.074***
[0.015]
-0.219***
[0.017]

0.080***
[0.018]
-0.210***
[0.016]

0.113***
[0.027]

0.149***
[0.028]

0.151***
[0.028]

0.168***
[0.031]

0.331***
[0.016]

0.068***
[0.016]

0.074***
[0.017]

0.090***
[0.017]

-0.128***
[0.023]

-0.266***
[0.019]

-0.262***
[0.019]

-0.252***
[0.019]

Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
No
Yes
No

No
No
No
Yes

61

Appendix

Table A.5: Robustness to using four-year means of variables
All reported figures are coefficients on an exporter dummy which equals 1 if the establishment reports positive exports. All variables are the 4
year mean values by establishment. Establishments that switched exporter status during the 4 year period, or have fewer than 3 observations in
the four year period are excluded. Only differentiated sectors are included. Standard errors are clustered at plant level; * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.
Chile
(1993-1996 mean)

Colombia
(1988-1991 mean)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Dependent variable: Standardized average wage

0.180***
[0.0498]

0.219***
[0.0531]

0.124**
[0.0540]

0.234***
[0.0604]

Dependent variable: Standardized capital intensity

0.311***
[0.0618]

0.353***
[0.0671]

0.164***
[0.0627]

0.166***
[0.0633]

Number of observations (plants)

1,978

1,978

3,103

3,103

Industry-year fixed effects
Industry-year specific size polynomial (order 2)
Industry-year specific size polynomial (order 3)
Industry-year size-decile fixed effects

Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
No
Yes
No

No
No
No
Yes

62

Appendix

Table A.6: Robustness to excluding sectors dependent on external finance and government purchases
All reported figures are coefficients on an exporter dummy which equals 1 if the establishment reports positive exports. The dependent variable is
standardized log per unit price, i.e. demeaned by the product specific mean and divided by the product specific standard deviation. Only
differentiated sectors are included. Standard errors clustered at plant level; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.
India
(1)

USA
(2)

(3)

(4)

Panel 1: Excluding products with above median dependence on Rajan-Zingales (2006) external finance measure
Dependent variable: Standardized price
0.217**
0.263**
0.086***
[0.0874]
[0.121]
[0.030]

0.083***
[0.033]

Panel 2: Excluding products with above median dependence on government purchases (based on US I-O table)
Dependent variable: Standardized price
0.390***
0.424***
0.169***
[0.0983]
[0.148]
[0.033]

0.174***
[0.036]

Product/industry fixed effects
Product/industry-specific size polynomial (order 2)
Product/industry-specific size polynomial (order 3)
Product/industry size-decile fixed effects

Yes
No
No
No

63

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
No
Yes
No

No
No
No
Yes

