NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EFFICIENT RECAPITALIZATION
Thomas Philippon
Philipp Schnabl
Working Paper 14929
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14929

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2009

We thank seminar participants at the 2010 American Finance Association Meeting, Baruch College,
the CEPR Bank Crisis Prevention and Resolution Conference, the CEPR Gerzensee Corporate Finance
Meeting, the CEPR-HSG Corporate Finance and Economic Performance Conference, the Federal Reserve
Chicago Bank Structure and Competition Conference, Harvard University, the NBER Asset Pricing
and Corporate Finance Meeting, the NBER Monetary Economics Program Meeting, New York University,
the New York Federal Reserve Liquidity Working Group, Princeton University, the OeNB Bank Resolution
Workshop, the UBC Summer Finance Conference, the University of Binghamton, the University of
Chicago, the University of Rochester and our discussants Marco Becht, Arnoud W.A. Boot, Max Bruche,
Itay Goldstein, Ron Giammarino, Adriano Rampini, Gustav Sigurdsson, Juan Sole, and Luigi Zingales,
for helpful comments and suggestions. An earlier version of this paper was circulated under "Efficient
Bank Recapitalization." The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Thomas Philippon and Philipp Schnabl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Efficient Recapitalization
Thomas Philippon and Philipp Schnabl
NBER Working Paper No. 14929
April 2009, Revised September 2011
JEL No. G01,G2,G28,G33,G38,H0,H2,H81
ABSTRACT
We analyze government interventions to recapitalize a banking sector that restricts lending to firms
because of debt overhang. We find that the efficient recapitalization program injects capital against
preferred stock plus warrants and conditions implementation on sufficient bank participation. Preferred
stock plus warrants reduces opportunistic participation by banks that do not require recapitalization,
while conditional implementation limits free riding by banks that benefit from lower credit risk because
of other banks' participation. Efficient recapitalization is profitable if the benefits of lower aggregate
credit risk exceed the cost of implicit transfers to bank debt holders.
Thomas Philippon
New York University
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
tphilipp@stern.nyu.edu
Philipp Schnabl
Leonard N. Stern School of Business
Kaufman Management Center
44 West 4th Street, Room 9-76
New York, NY 10012
schnabl@stern.nyu.edu

Firms invest too little if they are …nanced with too much debt. The reason is that the
cash ‡ow generated by new investments accrues to existing debt holders if the …rm goes
bankrupt. As a result, new investments can increase a …rm’s debt value while reducing
its equity value. A …rm that maximizes equity value may therefore forgo new investment
opportunities and the extent of such under-investment increases as the …rm gets close to
bankruptcy. This is the well-know debt overhang problem …rst described in a seminal paper
by Myers (1977).
This paper asks whether and how a government should intervene in a …nancial sector
that su¤ers from debt overhang. We focus on debt overhang in the …nancial sector because
interactions among …nancial institutions can amplify debt overhang at the aggregate level.
Speci…cally, we analyze a general equilibrium model in which lending to …rms is restricted
when banks su¤er from debt overhang. We assume debt overhang is caused by a negative
aggregate shock to bank balance sheets and analyze whether and how the government can
improve social welfare in this setting. The objective of the government is to increase socially
valuable bank lending while minimizing the deadweight losses from raising new taxes.
We …rst show that one bank’s decision to forgo pro…table lending because of debt overhang reduces payments to households, which increases household defaults and thus worsen
other banks’debt overhang. As a result, some banks do not lend because they expect other
banks not to lend. If an economy su¤ers from such negative externalities, the social costs
of debt overhang exceed the private costs, and the resulting equilibrium is ine¢ cient.
Next, we analyze government interventions in which the government directly provides
capital to banks and banks can decide whether to participate in the program. We assume
that the government’s options are limited. It cannot simply renegotiate with bank debt
holders because debt claims are structured to avoid renegotiation and because bank debt
holders are highly dispersed. We further assume that the government prefers to avoid
regular bankruptcy procedures, possibly because a large-scale restructuring of the …nancial
sector would trigger runs on other …nancial institutions and would impose large costs on
the non-…nancial sector.
We allow banks to di¤er along two dimensions: the quality of their existing assets
and the quality of their investment opportunities. Asset quality determines the severity
of debt overhang, and welfare losses occur when high-quality investment opportunities are
2

not undertaken. We assume that the government cannot observe the banks’ investment
opportunities and the banks’asset values but the banks can.
We …nd that government interventions generate two sources or rents for banks: ‘macroeconomic’ and ‘informational’ rents. Macroeconomic rents occur because of general equilibrium e¤ects. These rents accrue to banks that do not participate in an intervention but
bene…t from the reduction in aggregate credit risk because of other banks’ participation.
As a result, there is a free-rider problem among banks. Informational rents occur because
of private information. These rents accrue to banks that participate opportunistically. In
general, macroeconomic rents imply that there is insu¢ cient participation in the program,
while informational rents mean that there is excessive participation.
We analyze the optimal design of interventions to eliminate both free-riding and opportunistic participation. To address free-riding, the e¢ cient recapitalization policy conditions
the implementation of an intervention on su¢ cient participation by banks. The intuition for
this result is that banks have an incentive to coordinate participation because each bank’s
participation increases asset values in the economy. By conditioning on su¢ cient participation, the government makes each bank pivotal in whether the intervention is implemented
and therefore reduces banks’outside options. In the limit, the government can completely
solve the free-rider problem and extract the entire value of macroeconomic rents from banks.
To address opportunistic participation, the e¢ cient recapitalization policy request equity
in exchange for cash injections. We …nd that equity dominates other common forms of
intervention, such as asset purchases and debt guarantees, because equity requires banks to
share some of their upside with the government, which reduces participation by banks that
can invest on their own. We show that the government can further reduce informational
rents by asking for warrants at a strike price of bank asset values conditional on survival.
Using warrants improves the self-selection of banks into the program: namely, banks that
lend only because of the program. In the limit, the government uses preferred stock with
warrants to completely eliminate opportunistic participation and extracts the entire value
of informational rents from banks.
Finally, the government’s cost of the e¢ cient intervention depends on the severity of
the debt overhang relative to the macroeconomic rents. Severe debt overhang increases the
cost because the e¢ cient intervention provides an implicit subsidy to bank debt holders.
3

Larger macroeconomic rents reduce the cost because they allow the government to extract
the value of lending externalities from banks. If the macroeconomic rents are small, then
the intervention is costly and the government trades o¤ the bene…t of new lending with
the deadweight loss of additional taxation. If the macroeconomic rents are large, then the
government can recapitalize banks at a pro…t.
We discuss several extensions of the model. First, our benchmark model assumes a
binary asset distribution and we show that all our results go through with a continuous
asset distribution if we allow the government to use non-standard warrants that condition
the strike price on the realization of bank asset values. However, such non-standard warrants
may be di¢ cult to implement in practice and, we therefore conduct a calibration to assess
the e¢ ciency loss of using more common interventions. We use data on U.S. …nancial
institutions during the …nancial crisis of 2007-09 and compare pure equity injections with
preferred stock plus standard warrants. We …nd that preferred stock plus standard warrants
signi…cantly outperforms pure equity injections with an e¢ ciency loss that is about two
thirds smaller. Second, we argue that the e¢ cient intervention is more likely to succeed if
a government starts the implementation with a small number of large banks. The reason
is that large banks are more likely to internalize the positive impact of their participation
decision on asset values and that a small number facilitates coordination among banks.
Third, we show that constraints on cash outlays at the time of the bailout do not a¤ect our
results if the government can provide guarantees to private investors. Fourth, we …nd that
heterogeneity among assets within banks generates additional informational rents and, as
a result, using equity becomes even more attractive relative to asset purchases. Fifth, we
show that deposit insurance decreases the cost of the intervention because the government
is partly reducing its own expected insurance payments but it does not change the optimal
form of the intervention.
We emphasize three contributions of our analysis. First, the conditional participation
requirement can be interpreted as a mandatory intervention. Our paper thus provides a
novel explanation for why governments may require participation in recapitalization e¤orts
and why there seems to be insu¢ cient take-up in the absence of such a requirement.1 Second,
1

Mitchell (2001) reviews the empirical evidence and suggests that there is often too little take-up of
government interventions

4

the preferred stock-warrants combination also limit risk-shifting and therefore emerges as
the optimal solution in other studies of optimal security design (Green (1984)). In our
model, banks cannot risk shift with their new investments since they are riskless as in
Myers (1977), but risk shifting occurs through the reluctance to sell risky assets.2 Our
paper thus provides a novel mechanism for the optimality of preferred stock with warrants
under asymmetric information. Third, other work on bank recapitalization mostly focuses
on bank run externalities on the liabilities side of bank balance sheets. In contrast, our
model focuses on lending externalities on the asset side of bank balance sheets. Our model
therefore provides a novel motivation for government intervention even in the absence of
bank runs.
Our results can shed light on the form of bank bailouts during the …nancial crisis of
2007-2009. In October 2008, the US government decided to inject cash into banks under
the Troubled Asset Relief Program. Initial attempts to set up an asset purchase program
failed and, after various iterations, the government met with the nine largest US banks and
strongly urged all of them to participate in equity injections. Even though some banks
were reluctant, all nine banks agreed to participate and the intervention was eventually
implemented using a combination of preferred stock and warrants.
Our model relates to the discussion on the optimal regulation of …nancial institutions,
and our analysis remains relevant even if one takes into account ex-ante moral hazard. Debt
overhang creates negative externalities and, as in other models, it is therefore optimal to
impose ex-ante restrictions on debt …nancing. Moreover, government interventions generate
ex-ante moral hazard that may increase the ex-post cost of government interventions. In
our model, we take debt overhang as given and rely on other research that links the …nancial
crisis to securitization (Mian and Su… (2009), Keys, Mukherjee, Seru, and Vig (2010)) and
the tendency of banks to become highly levered (Adrian and Shin (2008), Acharya, Schnabl,
and Suarez (2010)). We do not model the cost of imposing ex-ante restrictions and therefore
cannot solve for their optimal level. However, we note that ex-ante moral hazard is caused
by the ex-post provision of rents to banks. Our e¢ cient recapitalization minimizes expost rents to banks, and therefore also minimizes ex-ante moral hazard conditional on any
2

Selling risky assets for cash is formally equivalent to reverse-risk-sh…ting. Our result that purchasing
risky assets from banks is expensive is based on this insight.

5

given likelihood of government intervention. Hence, our solution would be part of optimal
ex-ante regulations as long as there is a positively probability of bailout, because of time
inconsistency issues (Chari and Kehoe (2009)), or because some ex-post bailouts are ex-ante
optimal (Keister (2010)).
We note that our model focuses on banks with pro…table lending opportunities that
have risky debt. If banks have no such lending opportunities ("zombie banks"), there is no
reason for the government to recapitalize these banks. However, because of the asymmetric
information between the government and banks, the government is never quite sure which
bank is a zombie bank and which bank simply su¤ers from debt overhang. We therefore
think of our model as the optimal policy after the government has closed down obvious
zombie banks. If the government has su¢ cient time, it can conduct bank stress tests to
identify zombie banks prior to recapitalizing the …nancial sector.
Our model extends the existing literature on debt overhang. Debt overhang arises
because renegotiations are hampered by free-rider problems among dispersed creditors and
by contract incompleteness (Bulow and Shoven (1978), Gertner and Scharfstein (1991), and
Bhattacharya and Faure-Grimaud (2001)). A large body of empirical research has shown
the economic importance of renegotiation costs for …rms in …nancial distress (Gilson, John,
and Lang (1990), Asquith, Gertner, and Scharfstein (1994), Hennessy (2004)). Moreover,
from a theoretical perspective, one should expect renegotiation to be costly for at least
two reasons. First, the covenants that protect debt holders from risk shifting (Jensen
and Meckling (1976)) are precisely the ones that can create debt overhang. Second, debt
contracts are able to discipline managers only because they are di¢ cult to renegotiate (Hart
and Moore (1995)). Our model takes renegotiation costs as given and analyzes whether and
how the government should intervene in this situation.
Our paper relates to the theoretical literature on bank bailouts. Gorton and Huang
(2004) argue that the government can bail out banks in distress because it can provide
liquidity more e¤ectively than private investors. Diamond and Rajan (2005) show that
bank bailouts can back…re by increasing the demand for liquidity and causing further insolvency. Diamond (2001) emphasizes that governments should only bail out the banks
that have specialized knowledge about their borrowers. Aghion, Bolton, and Fries (1999)
show that bailouts can be designed so as not to distort ex-ante lending incentives. Farhi
6

and Tirole (2009) examine bailouts in a setting in which private leverage choices exhibit
strategic complementarities due to the monetary policy reaction. Corbett and Mitchell
(2000) discuss the importance of reputation in a setting where a bank’s decision to participate in a government intervention is a signal about asset values, and Philippon and
Skreta (2009) formally analyze optimal interventions when outside options are endogenous
and information-sensitive. Mitchell (2001) analyzes interventions when there is both hidden
actions and hidden information. Landier and Ueda (2009) provide an overview of policy
options for bank restructuring. Bhattacharya and Nyborg (2010) examine bank bailouts in
a model where the government wants to eliminate bank credit risk. In contrast, our paper
focuses on the form of e¢ cient recapitalization under debt overhang.
Two other theoretical papers share our focus on debt overhang in the …nancial sector.
Kocherlakota (2009) analyzes a model where it is the insurance provided by the government
that generates debt overhang. He analyzes the optimal form of government intervention and
…nds an equivalence result similar to our symmetric information equivalence theorem. Our
papers di¤er because we focus on debt overhang generated within the private sector and we
consider the problem of endogenous selection into the government’s programs. In Diamond
and Rajan (2009) as in our model, debt overhang makes banks unwilling to sell their toxic
assets. In e¤ect, refusing to sell risky assets for safe cash is a form of risk shifting. But
while we use this initial insight to characterize the general form of government interventions,
Diamond and Rajan (2009) study its interactions with trading and liquidity. In their model,
the reluctance to sell leads to a collapse in trading which increases the risks of a liquidity
crisis.
The paper also relates to the empirical literature on bank bailouts. Allen, Chakraborty,
and Watanabe (2009) provide empirical evidence consistent with the main predictions of
our model: they …nd that interventions work best when they target equity injections into
the banks that have material risks of insolvency. Giannetti and Simonov (2009) …nd that
bank recapitalizations result in positive abnormal returns for the clients of recapitalized
banks as predicted by our debt overhang model. Glasserman and Wang (2009) develop
a contingent claims framework to estimate market values of securities issued during bank
recapitalizations such as preferred stock and warrants.
Finally, our paper also relates to the literature on macroeconomic externalities across
7

…rms. Lamont (1995) analyzes the importance of macroeconomic expectations in an economy where …rms may su¤er from debt overhang. In his model the feedback mechanism
works through imperfect competition in the goods market and can generate multiple equilibria. In contrast, we focus on optimal government policy in a setup where banks di¤er in
asset quality and investment opportunities. Moreover, we analyze the feedback mechanism
through the repayment of household debt to the …nancial sector. Bebchuk and Goldstein
(2009) consider bank bailouts in a global games framework with exogenous strategic complementarities. In contrast, our model endogenizes complementarities across banks and allows
for heterogeneity within the …nancial sector.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 sets up the formal model. Section 2 solves for
the decentralized equilibrium with and without debt overhang. Section 3 analyzes macroeconomic rents. Section 4 analyzes informational rents. Section 5 describes two extensions
to our baseline model. Section 6 discusses the relation of our results to the …nancial crisis
of 2007-2009. Section 7 concludes.

1

Model

We present a general equilibrium model with a …nancial sector and a household sector. We
refer to all …nancial …rms as banks and we assume that banks own industrial projects. The
model has a continuum of households, a continuum of banks, and three dates,  = 0 1 2.

1.1

Banks

All banks are identical at  = 0, with existing assets …nanced by equity and long term
debt with face value  due at time 2. At time 1, banks become heterogenous along two
dimensions: they learn about the quality of their existing assets and they receive investment
opportunities. Figure 1 summarizes the timing, technology, and information structure of
the model.
The assets deliver a random payo¤  =  or  = 0 at time 2.3 The probability of a high
payo¤ depends on the idiosyncratic quality of the bank’s portfolio and on the aggregate
3
The assumption that assets pay o¤ 0 in the low state is primarily for notational convenience. As we
show in an the working paper version of this paper, we can also allow banks to hold safe assets that pay o¤
 for sure. The only additional assumption is that senior debt holders have covenants in place to prevent
the sale of  for the bene…t of equity holders. In this case, the model is e¤ectively unchanged where  is
replaced by  ¬ .

8

performance of the economy. We capture macroeconomic outcomes by the aggregate payo¤
, and idiosyncratic di¤erences across banks by the random variable . At time 1, all
private investors learn the realization of  for each bank. We de…ne the probability of a
good outcome conditional on the information at time 1 as:
 ( )

Pr ( = j ) 

The variables are de…ned so that the probability  ( ) is increasing in  and in . Note
that  is also the expected payo¤ per unit of face value for existing assets of quality  in
the aggregate state . The average payo¤ in the economy is simply
Z
 ()
 ( )  () 


where  is the cumulative distribution of asset quality across banks. The variable  is a
measure of common performance for all banks’existing assets and satis…es the accounting
constraint:
 ()  = 

(1)

Banks receive new investment opportunities at time 1. All new investments cost the
same …xed amount  at time 1 and deliver income  2 [0  ] at time 2. The payo¤  is

heterogenous across banks and is known to the …nancial sector at time 1.4 A bank’s type is

therefore de…ned by  the bank-speci…c deviation of asset quality from average bank asset
quality, and , the quality of its investment opportunities.
Let  be an indicator for the bank’s investment decision:  = 1 if the bank invests at
time 1, and zero otherwise. The decision to invest depends on the banks’s type and on the
aggregate state, so we have  (  ). Banks must borrow an amount  in order to invest.
We normalize the banks’cash balances to zero, so that the funding constraint is  =  .
We will later allow the government to inject cash in the banks to alleviate this funding
constraint. At time 2 total bank income  is:
 =  +  
There are no direct deadweight losses from bankruptcy. Let  be the gross interest rate
between  = 1 and  = 2. Under the usual seniority rules at time 2, we have the following
4

As in the original Myers (1977) model.

9

payo¤s for long term debt holders, new lenders, and equity holders:
  = min ( ) ;

  = min( ¬    );

 =  ¬  ¬  

We assume that banks su¤er from debt overhang, or equivalently, that long term debt is
risky.
Assumption A1 (Risky Debt):     .
Under assumption A1, in the high payo¤ state ( = ) all liabilities are fully repaid (  = 
and   = ) and equity holders receive the residual (  =  ¬  ¬ ). In the low payo¤
state ( = 0) long term debt holders receive all income (  = ) and other investors receive
nothing: (  =   = 0). Figure 2 summarizes the payo¤s to investors by payo¤ state.

1.2

Households

At time 0 all consumers are identical. Each consumer owns the same portfolio of long term
debt and equity of banks.5 They also have various types of loans due to the banks at time
2 with face value . These loans could be mortgages, auto loans, student loans, credit card
debt, or other consumer loans.
At time 1, each consumer receives an identical endowment 1 and they have access to a
storage technology which pays o¤ one unit of time-2 consumption for an investment of one
unit of time-1 endowment. Consumers can also lend to banks. Consumers are still identical
at time 1 and we consider a symmetric equilibrium where they make the same investment
decisions. They lend  to banks and they store 1 ¬ . At time 2 they receive income 2

which is heterogenous and random across households. Let   ,   , and   be the aggregate

payments to holders of equity, long term debt, and short term debt. The total income of
the household is therefore:
1 ¬ 
2 = | {z }
safe storage

+ 2
|{z}
risky labor income

+  +  + 
|
{z
}
…nancial income

(2)

The household defaults if and only if 2  . There are no direct deadweight losses of
default so the bank recovers 2 in case of default. The aggregate payments (or average
5
The assumption that all households hold the same portfolio is a simplifying assumption that facilitates
the exposition of the model.

10

payment) from households to banks are therefore:
Z
 = min (2  )  (2 ) 

(3)

Note that the mapping from household debt to bank assets endogenizes the aggregate payo¤
 but leaves room for heterogeneity of banks’assets quality captured by the parameter .
This heterogeneity is needed to analyze the consequences of varying quality of assets across
banks. Finally, we need to impose the market clearing conditions. Let I be the set of banks
that invest at time 1: I
f( ) j  = 1g. Aggregate investment at time 1 must satisfy
RR
 =  (I)   ( ) and consumption (or GDP) at time 2 is:
I

 = 1 + 2 +

ZZ
I

2

( ¬ )  ( ) 

(4)

Equilibrium

2.1

First best equilibrium

We assume that households have su¢ cient endowment to …nance all positive NPV projects.
Assumption A2 (Excess Savings): 1  (1 )
Under assumption A2, the time-1 interest rate is pinned down by the storage technology,
which is normalized to 1.
In the …rst best equilibrium, banks choose investments at time 1 to maximize …rm value
1 = 1 []+ ¬1   subject to the time 1 budget constraint  =  , and the break even
constraint for new lenders 1   = . This implies that …rm value 1 = 1 [] + ( ¬ ) .
Therefore, investment takes place when a banks has a positive NPV project, or equivalently,
when   .
The unique …rst best solution is for investment to take place if and only if   ,
irrespective of the value of  and 1 []. The …rst best equilibrium is unique and …rst-best
R
consumption is   = 1 + 2 +  ( ¬ )  (). We can think of the …rst best as a
world in which banks can pledge the PV of new projects to households (no debt overhang).

Hence, positive NPV projects can always be …nanced. Figure 3 illustrates investment under
the …rst best.
6

6

Notice the equivalence between maximizing …rm value and maximizing equity value with e¢ cient bar-

11

2.2

Debt overhang equilibrium without intervention

Under debt overhang, we assume that banks maximize equity value 1 [  j] = 1  ¬   ¬   j
taking as given the priority of senior debt   = min ( ). Recall that the idiosyncratic
shock  is known at time 1. With probability  ( ) the bank is solvent and repays its
creditors, and shareholders receive  ¬  + ( ¬ ) . With probability 1 ¬  ( ) the
bank is insolvent, and shareholders get nothing. Using the break even constraint for new
lenders,  = 1 ( ), equity holders solve:
max  ( )  ¬  +  ¬



 ( )

 

The condition for investment is  ( )   , which is more restrictive than under the …rst
best because of debt overhang. The investment domain without government intervention is
therefore:
I =  ( 0)

n
o
( ) j  ( ) 



(5)

The index 0 in the investment set indicates that there is no intervention by the government.
At time 2, we aggregate across all banks and we have the accounting identity:
ZZ
+
 ( )
=
 +  + 
|
{z
}
I
payments to households
|
{z
}
aggregate bank income
Using (2) and (6), we can write household income 2 as:
ZZ
2 = 2 + 1 +  +
( ¬ )  ( )

(6)

(7)

I

With the exception of risky time 2 income 2  all terms in household income are identical
across households. The three unknowns in our model are the repayments from households
to banks , the investment set , and the income of households 2 . The three equilibrium
conditions are therefore (3), (5), (7). We solve the model backwards. First, we examine the
equilibrium at time 2, when the investment set is given. We then solve for the equilibrium
at time 1, when investment is endogenous.
gaining. We can always write 1 = 1  ¬   = 1   +   . The maximization program for …rm value
is equivalent to the maximization of equity value 1 [  ] as long as we allow renegotiation and transfer
payments between equity holders and debt holders at time 1.

12

Equilibrium at time 2
Let us de…ne the sum of time 1 endowment and investment as
ZZ
( ¬ )  ( ) 
(I) = 1 +

(8)

I

Note that  is …xed at date 2 because investment decisions are taken at time 1. Using
equation (8), we can write equation (7) as 2 = 2 +  + . Using (3) we obtain the
equilibrium condition for :
=

Z

min (2 +  +  )   (2 ) 

(9)

We now make a technical assumption:

Assumption 3:

R

min (2 + 1  )   (2 )  0.

Assumption A3 rules out a multiple equilibria at time 1 Allowing for multiple equilibria
complicates the analysis but does not a¤ect our main results.
The following Lemma gives the properties of the aggregate performance of existing assets
at time 2:
Lemma 1 There exists a unique equilibrium () at time 2. Moreover,  is increasing
and concave in .
Proof. The slope on the left hand side of equation (9) is 1. The slope on the right hand
side is   (
^2 ) 2 [0 1] where 
^2 =  ¬  ¬  is the income of the marginal household (the
di¤erential of the boundary term is zero since the integrated function is continuous). There
is therefore at most one solution. Moreover, under assumption A3 the RHS is strictly
positive when  = 0. When  ! 1 the RHS goes to , which is …nite. Therefore the
equilibrium exists and is unique. At the equilibrium, the slope of the RHS must be strictly
less than one, so the solution must satisfy  (
^2 )  1. The comparative statics with respect
to  is:

 (
^2 )
=
0

1 ¬  (
^2 )

So the function  is increasing in . Moreover we have


^2

= ¬1 ¬
0


13

Since 
^2 is decreasing in , the slope of  is decreasing and the function is concave.
The shape of the function  is intuitive because the impact of additional income only
increases payment of households in default. Hence, if the share of households in default
decreases with income , the impact of additional income  decreases.
Equilibrium at time 1
We can now turn to the equilibrium at time 1. We have just seen in equation (9) that
 increases with  at time 2. At time 1,  depends on the anticipation of  because
investment depends on the expected value of existing assets through the debt overhang
e¤ect. To see this, let us rewrite equation (8) as:
ZZ
() = 1 +
( ¬ ) ( ) 

(10)

^
()

The cuto¤ ^ is de…ned implicitly by  ( ^)  = , which implies

=


Z



( ¬ )

^



7
= ¬ 
 and therefore:

  ( ^())

 

This last equation shows that  is increasing in  since all the terms on the right-handside are positive. The economic intuition is straightforward. When banks anticipate good
performance on their assets, they are less concerned with debt overhang and are more likely
to invest. The sensitivity of  to  depends on the extent of the NPV gap  ¬ , the
elasticity of  to , and the density evaluated at the boundary of marginal banks (the term
 is simply a normalization given the de…nition of ). Figure 4 illustrates investment
under the debt overhang equilibrium.
The important question here is whether the equilibrium is e¢ cient. The simplest way to
answer this question is to see if a pure transfer program can lead to a Pareto improvement.
This is what we do in the next section.

2.3

Debt overhang equilibrium with cash transfers

We study here a simple cash transfer program. The government announces at time 0 that
it gives 

0 to each bank. The government raises the cash by imposing a tax  on

7

We can restrict our analysis to the space where    since from (5) we know that there is no investment
outside this range.

14

households’ endowments 1 . The deadweight loss from taxation at time 1 is
distorting transfers correspond to the special case where

m. Non

= 0.

Consider the investment decision for banks. Banks receive cash injection . It is
straightforward to show that if a bank is going to invest, it will …rst use its cash , and
borrow only  ¬ . The break even constraint for new lenders remains  = 1 ( ). If the
bank does not invest it can simply keep  on its balance sheet. Equity holders therefore
maximize:
max  ( )  ¬  + 


¬

¬
 ( )

+ (1 ¬ )  

This yields the investment condition ( ¬ )  ¬  which de…nes the investment domain:
I =  ( )

( ) j  ( ) 

¬
¬



(11)

Households do not care about transfers because they are residual claimants: what they pay
as taxpayers, they receive as bond and equity holders. We therefore only need to modify
the de…nition of  to include the deadweight losses at time by replacing 1 by 1 ¬ m in
equation (8). Conditional on , the equilibrium at time 2 is unchanged and equation (9)
gives the same solution (). At time 1 we now have:
ZZ
( ) = 1 +
( ¬ ) ( )  ¬ m:

(12)

(;)

The cuto¤ ^ is de…ned implicitly by  ( ^) ( ¬ ) = ( ¬ ). The system is therefore
described by the increasing and concave function () in (9) which implies  =  
and the function ( ) in (12) which implies  =   +  .8
At this point, we need to discuss brie‡y the issue of multiple equilibria. Without debt
overhang,  would not depend on  and there would be only one equilibrium. With
debt overhang, however, there is a positive feedback between investment, the net worth of
households, and the performance of outstanding assets. We can rule out multiple equilibria
when    1. A simple way to ensure unicity is to have enough heterogeneity in the
economy (either in labor income, or in asset quality). When the density  is small, the slope
of  is also small, and the condition    1 is satis…ed.9 Since multiple equilibria are

We are using the standard notations  = 
and  = 
.

In any case, multiple equilibria simply correspond to the limiting case when   goes to one, and, as
will be seen shortly, they only reinforce the e¢ ciency of government interventions.
8

9

15

not crucial for the insights of this paper, we proceed under the assumption that the debt
overhang equilibrium is unique.
The impact of cash injection  on average repayment  is

 
=


1 ¬  
and from (4), we see that consumption at time 2 satis…es
 = ( ) =
From the de…nition of the cuto¤ we get
have:

=


Z



^
 
 



1 ¬  

(¬)
= ¬ (¬)
2 . Di¤erentiating (12) we therefore

( ¬ )2  ( ^)
 ¬ :
( ¬ )2 

(13)

The sensitivity of  to  increases in the NPV gap  ¬  and the density evaluated at the
boundary of marginal banks and decreases in deadweight loss of taxation . Importantly,
the equilibrium always improves when

= 0, which shows that the decentralized equilibrium

is not e¢ cient.

Proposition 1 The decentralized equilibrium under debt overhang is ine¢ cient. Non distorting transfers from households to banks at time 1 lead to a Pareto superior outcome.

Figure 5 illustrates investment in the debt overhang equilibrium with cash transfers. If tax
revenues can be raised without costs – i.e., if taxes do not create distortions and if tax
collection does not require any labor or capital – then these revenues should be used to
provide cash to the banks until debt overhang is eliminated. In such a world the issue of
e¢ cient recapitalization does not arise, since the government has in e¤ect access to in…nite
resources.
If government interventions are costly, however, we see from (13) that the bene…ts of
cash transfers are reduced. The overall impact of the cash transfers can even be negative
if deadweight losses are large. In such a world, it become critical for the government to
minimize the costs of its interventions. This is the issue we address now.

16

3

Macroeconomic rents

We consider …rst interventions at time 0 when the government and …rms have the same
information about uncertain asset values and investment opportunities. This allow us to
focus on macroeconomic rents and abstract from informational rents. For interventions at
time 0, we show that the critical feature is to allow the government to design programs
conditional on aggregate participation. However, the form of the intervention does not
matter.

3.1

Government and shareholders

The objective of the government is to maximize the expected utility of the representative
agent. All consumers are risk neutral and identical as of  = 0 and  = 1. Hence, the
government simply maximizes
max  [ (¬)]
¬

where ¬ describes the speci…c intervention. Let

(14)

(¬) be the expected net transfer from

the government to …nancial …rms. We assume that raising taxes is ine¢ cient and leads
to a deadweight loss at time 1 equal to

(¬). The government takes into account this

deadweight loss in its maximization program.
We assume the government can make a take-it-or-leave-it o¤er to bank equity holders.
Equity holders then decide whether they want to participate in the intervention. The
government faces the same debt overhang problem as the private sector, that means the
government cannot renegotiate the claims of long term debt holders. Moreover, we assume
the government can restrict dividend payments to shareholders at time 1. This is necessary
because under debt overhang the optimal action for equity holders is to return cash injections
to equity holders.
At time 0, banks do not yet know their idiosyncratic asset value  and investment
opportunities  Hence, all banks are identical and when participation is decided at time
0, we can without loss of generality consider programs where all banks participate. To be
concrete, we …rst consider three empirically relevant interventions: equity injections, asset
purchases, and debt guarantees.
In an asset purchase program, the government purchases an amount  of risky assets

17

at a per unit price of . If a bank decides to participate, its cash balance increases by
 =  and the face value of its assets becomes  ¬ . In an equity injection program,
the government o¤ers cash  against a fraction

of equity returns. In a debt guarantee

program the government insures an amount  of debt newly issued at time 0 for a per unit
fee of . The rate on the insured debt is one and the cash balance of the banks becomes
 =  ¬ S.
To study e¢ cient interventions it is critical to understand the participation decisions
of equity holders. The following value function will prove useful throughout our analysis.
Conditional on a cash injection , the time 0 value of equity value is:
ZZ
0 [  j ] =  () ( ¬  + ) +
( ( )  ¬  + (1 ¬  ( )) )  ( )

(15)

()

In this equation, one must of course also recognize that in equilibrium  depends on ,
as explained earlier. The …rst term is the expected equity value of long term assets plus
the cash injection using the unconditional probability of solvency  (). The second term is
the time 0 expected value of new investment opportunities. This value is positive when the
bank’s type belongs to the investment set  de…ned in Equation (11). Note that cash adds
an extra term to the expected value of investment opportunities because the cash spent on
investment is not given to debt holders at time 2. For bank equity holders, the opportunity
cost of using cash for investment is therefore less than the opportunity cost of raising funds
from lenders at time 1.

3.2

Free participation

In this section we study interventions in which the implementation of an intervention is
independent of a bank’s decision. We refer to this setup as interventions with free participation:

De…nition 1 An intervention satis…es free participation if the program o¤ ered to a bank
only depends on that bank’s participation decision.

We …rst study an asset purchase program. Banks sell assets with face value  and receive
cash  = . It is easy to see that the government does not want to buy assets to the point
18

that default occurs in both states. We can therefore restrict our attention to the case where
 ¬   . After the intervention, the equilibrium takes place as in the decentralized debt
overhang equilibrium. We know that the investment domain in the equilibrium where all the
banks participate is (() ) de…ned in (11). From the perspective of the government,
we can de…ne the equilibrium investment set as:
^
()

(() )

which recognizes that the cash injection determines the macro state  Let T = [min  max ]
[0  ] be the state space. We then have the following Lemma:

Lemma 2 Consider an asset purchase program ( ) with free participation at time 0. Let
^
 = . This program implements the investment set ()
at the strictly positive cost:
ZZ
ZZ
 
()

(1
¬
(()
))
(
)
¬
( (() )  ¬ )  ( ) (16)
0
^
T n()

^
()n(()0)

Proof. The cost to the government is  ¬ (). The participation constraint of banks

is 0 [  j ] ¬ ()

0 [  j 0]. Using (15), we can write a binding constraint as
ZZ
ZZ
() ( ¬ ) = 
(1 ¬  ( )) ( ) +
( ( )  ¬ ) ( )
^
()

^
()n(0)

From the de…nition of () we then get the cost function

 
().
0

Finally, both terms

on the RHS of (16) are positive. The …rst is obvious. The second is also positive because
^
 ( )  ¬  is negative over the domain ()
n ( 0).
We can interpret this result both from the perspective of time 0 and time 1.
At time 0, all banks are identical. The government pays per-asset price  for assets
with market price () such that each bank receives a per-asset subsidy of ( ¬ ()). We
note that the participation constraint for equity holders is binding such that they are indi¤erent between participating and not participating (assuming that asset payo¤s  remain
unchanged). Put di¤erently, the total subsidy of 
debt holders.

19

( ¬ ()) is an implicit transfer to

At time 1, banks learn about their asset quality  and investment opportunity  The
cost of the program can then be interpreted in terms of the right-hand side of equation
(16). The …rst term re‡ects the transfer of wealth from the government to the debt holders
of banks that do not invest: debt value simply increases by (1 ¬ )  over the set of banks

^
that do not invest T n ().
The second term measures the subsidy needed to induce equity

^
holders to investment over the expanded domain ()
compared to the investment domain
 ( 0). This domain is the set of banks that invest only because of the program. The

expression is positive because  (() )    for all banks that only invest because of
the program. There is no cost for set of banks that would have invested even without the
program.
We note that the program is always implemented at positive costs. This result comes
from the fact that the government provides a positive subsidy to every bank ( ¬ ()) 
but does not capture the increase in bank asset values from ( (0)  0) to ( ()  ) under
free participation.
We can now examine the optimal form of the intervention. We compare asset purchases
with equity injections and debt guarantees.

Proposition 2 Under symmetric information, the type of …nancial security used in the
intervention is irrelevant.
Proof. See Appendix.
Proposition 2 says that an asset purchase program ( ) is equivalent to a debt guarantee
program with  =  and  = 1 ¬ . It is also equivalent to an equity injection program
( ), where  =  and  and

are chosen such that at time 0 all banks are indi¤erent

between participating and not participating in the program. All programs implement the
^
same investment set ()
and have the same expected cost

 
()
0

The key to this irrelevance theorem is that banks decide whether to participate before
they receive information about investment opportunities and asset values. The government
thus optimally chooses the program parameters such that bank equity holders are indi¤erent
between participating and not participating. The cost to the government is thus independent
of whether banks are charged through assets sales, debt guarantee fees, or equity injections.
20

3.3

Conditional participation

We now focus on the participation decision. So far we assumed that banks can decide
whether to participate independently of other banks’participation decisions. We now allow
the government to condition the program o¤ered to one bank on the participation of other
banks. We call this a program with conditional participation. In e¤ect, the o¤er by the
government holds only if all banks participate in the program. The key is that if a bank
that was supposed to participate decides to drop out, then the program is canceled for all
banks. It is straightforward to see that the equivalence result of Proposition 2 holds for
conditional programs, and we have the following proposition:
Proposition 3 A program with conditional participation implements the investment set
^
()
at cost

()
0

where M ()

=

 
()
0

0 [  j ()  0] ¬ 0 [  j (0)  0]

¬ M ()

0 measures macroeconomic rents.

Proof. The government o¤ers a program that is implemented only if all the banks
opt in. If they do, the equilibrium is (). If anyone drops out, the equilibrium is
(0). Let  [  ] be the expected payments to the government. The participation constraint is 0 [  j ()  ] ¬  [  ]

0 [  j (0)  0]. By de…nition, we have 0 [  j (0)  0] =

0 [  j ()  0] ¬ M (). The cost to the government is  [  ]. Using a binding participation constraint, we therefore obtain

 ()
0

=

 
()
0

¬ M ().

The key point is that free riding occurs because banks do not internalize the impact of their
participation on the health of other banks. The program with conditional participation is
less costly because the government makes each bank pivotal for the implementation for the
program and therefore appropriates the macroeconomic rents created by its intervention
The comparison of a program with free participation relative to a program with conditional participation allows to precisely study the sources of macroeconomic rents M () 
Let

 ()

=  ( ()  ) ¬  ( (0)  ). Using equation (15), we can rewrite macroeconomic

rents such that
M () =

 (

¬ ) +

ZZ

 () 

( ) +

^
(0)

ZZ

^
(()0)n(0)

21

( ( )  ¬ )  ( ) 

This expression decomposes the macroeconomic rents to shareholders into three components. The …rst term is higher repayment rate on assets in place, the second term is the
higher expected value of investments that would have been made even without intervention, and the third term is the expected bene…t of expanding the equilibrium investment
set. Finally, the costs of the conditional participation program can be negative when the
macroeconomic rents are large. In this case, the government can recapitalize banks and end
up with a pro…t. We can therefore summarize our results in the following theorem.

Theorem 1 The government must use a conditional participation program in order to capture the macroeconomic value of its intervention. Under symmetric information, the type
of security used in the intervention is irrelevant.

We note that this mechanism may be di¢ cult to implement in practice. In particular,
when there is a large number of banks and if some bank equity holders decide against
participation for reasons outside of our model. Also, there exists an equilibrium in which
no bank participates because each bank expects other banks not to participate. We discuss
the implementation of this mechanism in the extension section.

4

Informational rents

In this section we consider interventions at time 1, when banks know their types but the
government does not. The macroeconomic rents that we have studied in the previous section
still exist but we do not need to repeat our analysis. For brevity, we study only programs
with free participation and we focus on the consequences of information asymmetry.

4.1

Complete information benchmark

We …rst discuss participation and investment under perfect information and derive the minimum cost of an intervention. We note that this setting is di¤erent from the time 0 setting
where banks and the government have the same information but they still face uncertainty
about asset values and investment opportunities. Instead we assume that the government is
perfectly informed about each bank’s asset values and investment opportunities. For example, this would be the case if banks can credibly reveal their information to the government.
22

Under perfect information, the government simply decides which banks should participate and provides enough capital such that bank equity’s participation constraint is binding.
We can thus provide a general characterization of the minimum cost of any intervention
with free participation:

Lemma 3 Consider a program with free participation that implements the investment set
I. Let

min

= In ( 0). The cost of the program cannot be lower than:
min
1

=¬

Z Z

( ( )  ¬ )  ( ) 

min

Proof. Note that  ( 0) is the set of banks that can invest alone, and

min

is the set

of types that invest only thanks to the program. The best the government can do with
 ( 0) is to make sure they do not participate. Voluntary participation means that equity
holders in

min

must get at least  ( ¬ ). The government and old equity holders must

share the residual surplus whose value is
 ( ¬ ) +  ( )  ¬ 
Hence the expected net payments to the government must be at least

Z Z

( ( )  ¬ )  ( ).

min

These payments are negative by de…nition of

min ,

and therefore the lower bound

min
1

is

strictly positive.
A simple way to understand this result is to imagine what would happen if the government
could write contracts contingent on investment. For the shareholders of type ( ), the
value of investment is  ( )  ¬ , which is negative outside the private investment region
 ( 0). If the government has perfect information, it can o¤er a contract with a typespeci…c payment contingent on investment. The minimum the government would have to
o¤er type ( ) would be ¬ ( ( )  ¬ ). We de…ne an intervention’s informational rents
as the subsidy provided to bank equity holders in excess of this amount.
We note that the government cannot simply use observed assets prices to implement
the intervention because the expectation of an intervention may in turn a¤ect prices (see
Bond, Goldstein, and Prescott (2010) and Bond and Goldstein (2010)). Credit default
23

swap prices of US banks during the …nancial crisis of 2007 to 2009 provide clear evidence of
this issue. Most market participants expected some form of intervention if a crisis became
su¢ ciently severe and indeed the government intervened several times after credit default
swaps reached critical levels. Hence, it is unlikely that credit default swaps re‡ected the
probability of default in the absence of government interventions.

4.2

Participation and investment under asymmetric information

We now examine participation and investment under asymmetric information at time 1. We
…rst compare asset purchases, debt guarantees, and equity injections. The objective function
of the government is the same as in the previous section. The participation decisions are
based on equity value which is now conditional on each bank’s type ( ). The structure of
the programs is the same as at time 0, but the government must now take into account the
endogenous participation decisions of banks. Under free participation, banks opt in if and
only if 1 [  j   ¬] is greater than 1 [  j   0].
There are several cases to consider: opportunistic participation, ine¢ cient participation,
and e¢ cient participation. Consider opportunistic participation …rst. It happens when a
bank takes advantage of a program even though it would have invested without it. We
de…ne the net value of opportunistic participation as:
 (  ; ¬)

1 [  j   ¬  = 1] ¬ 1 [  j   0  = 1]

(17)

Consider now ine¢ cient participation. It happens when a bank participates but fails to
invest. We de…ne the net value of ine¢ cient participation as:
  (  ; ¬)

1 [  j   ¬  = 0] ¬ 1 [  j   0  = 0]

(18)

It is straightforward to show that the government should always prevent ine¢ cient participation, and that it can do so by charging a small fee. We always make sure that out
program satisfy    0 for all types. Finally, e¢ cient participation occurs when a bank
that would not invest alone opts in the program. We de…ne the net value of opportunistic
participation as:
 (  ; ¬)

1 [  j   ¬  = 1] ¬ 1 [  j   0  = 0]
24

(19)

We will see that  = 0 de…nes an upper participation schedule and that  = 0 de…nes a
lower participation schedule (hence our choice of notations).
The participation set of any program ¬ is therefore
( ¬) = f( ) j  (  ; ¬)  0 ^  (  ; ¬)  0g 

(20)

Note that   0 and    0 implies that there is always investment conditional on participation. The investment domain under the program is the combination of the investment
set  ( 0) (banks that would invest without government intervention) and the participation
set

( ¬). With a slight abuse of notation, we de…ne:
 ( ¬) =  ( 0) [

( ¬)

Note that the overlap between the two sets,  ( 0) \

1 ( ¬),

(21)
represents opportunistic

participation. Opportunistic participation is participation by banks that would invest even
without the program.

4.3

Comparison of standard interventions

We now compare the relative e¢ ciency of the three standard interventions (described earlier)
under asymmetric information. We study …rst the asset purchase program. The upper
participation curve (17) is de…ned by   (  ;  ) = ( ¬  ( )) . Banks participate
only if the price  o¤ered by the government exceeds the true asset value  ( ). This
is the adverse selection problem between the government and the …nancial sector. The
NIP-constraint (18) only requires   1, which is always satis…ed by e¢ cient interventions.
The lower bound schedule (19) is given by  (  ;  ) =  ( )  ¬  + ( ¬  ( )) .
The lower- and the upper-schedules de…ne the participation set

 (  )
1

expected cost of the asset purchase program is:
ZZ

( ¬  ( ))  ( ) 
1 (  ) = 

from (20). The

(22)

 ()

Figure 6 shows the investment and participation sets for asset purchases under asymmetric information. The …gure distinguishes three regions of interest: e¢ cient participation,
opportunistic participation, and independent investment. The e¢ cient participation region

25

comprises the banks that participate in the intervention and that invest because of the intervention. The opportunistic region comprises the banks that participate in the intervention
but would have invested even in the absence of the intervention. The independent investment region comprises the banks that invest without government intervention. As is clear
from the …gure, the government’s trade-o¤ is between expanding the e¢ cient participation
region and reducing the opportunistic participation region.
From cost equation (22) we see that an asset purchase  is less costly than an equivalent
a cash transfer  for three reasons. First, the independent investment region reduces
opportunistic participation without reducing investment. Second, the pricing   1 excludes
banks that would not invest. Third, the government receives  in the high-payo¤ state
which lowers the government’s cost without a¤ecting investment. Let us now compare asset
purchases to debt guarantees:

Proposition 4 Equivalence of asset purchases and debt guarantees. An asset purchase program ( ) with participation at time 1 is equivalent to a debt guarantee program
with  =  and  = 1 ¬ .
Proof. See Appendix.
The equivalence of asset purchases and debt guarantees comes from the fact that both
programs make participation contingent on asset quality  ( ) but not investment opportunity . To see this result, consider the upper-bound schedule. If  = 1 ¬ ; banks with
asset quality  2 [1 ¬ ; 1] choose not to participate. Hence, asset purchase program and
debt guarantees have the same upper-bound schedule. Next, note that the net bene…t of
asset purchases is ( ¬ )  whereas the net bene…t of debt guarantees is (1 ¬

¬ ). Hence,

asset purchases and debt guarantees have the same lower bound schedule. The NIP constraint for asset purchases is   1, which is equivalent to

 0 The last step is to show

that both asset purchases and debt guarantees have the same cost to the government, which
is true since they yield the same net bene…t to participants. We can …nally compare debt
guarantees and asset purchases to equity injections:

26

Proposition 5 Dominance of equity injection. For any asset purchase program ( )
with participation at time 1, there is an equity program that achieves the same allocation at
a lower cost for the government.
Proof. See Appendix.
The dominance of equity injection over debt guarantees and asset purchases comes from the
fact the equity injections are dependent both on asset quality  and investment opportunity
. To understand this result, it is helpful to de…ne the function  ( ;  ) as the part of
the net bene…t from participation that is tied to existing assets:
 ( ;  )

(1 ¬ )  ¬  ( ) ( ¬ ) 

In words, a participating bank receives net cash injection (1 ¬ )  and gives up share

(23)
of

the bank’s expected equity value  ( ) ( ¬ ). To compare equity injections with other
programs, start by choosing an arbitrary asset purchase program. Then choose  ( ;  )
such that the lower-bound schedule of the asset purchase program coincides with the lowerbound schedule of the equity injection program. Under both programs, equity holders at the
lower-bound schedule receive no surplus and are indi¤erent between participating and not
participating. For given level of asset quality , the cost of participation for banks with a
good investment opportunity  is higher under the equity injection program than under the
asset purchase program because the government receives a share in both existing assets and
new investments. As a result, there is less opportunistic participation with equity injections
than with asset purchases.
Figure 7 shows the participation and investment regions under the equity injection
program. The increase in cost of participation relative to the asset purchase program
has two e¤ects. First, conditional on participation, the cost to the government is smaller
because the government receives a share in the investment opportunity . Second, there
is less opportunistic participation because participation is more costly. As a result, equity
injections and asset purchases implement the same level of investment but equity injections
are less costly to the government relative to asset purchases.10 The macroeconomic feedback
10

The …nal step in the proof is to show that the NIP constraint is the same under both programs. This
is true because the equity injection provides lower rents to participating banks than the asset purchase

27

from equation (12) only reinforces the dominance of equity injection. Finally, we note
that participating banks receive informational rents in an equity injection program. It is
therefore straightforward to show that equity injections do not achieve the minimum cost
under perfect information.

4.4

E¢ cient interventions

We now analyze the e¢ cient intervention in our setting. In particular, we examine whether
an intervention with warrants and preferred stock can eliminate informational rents and
achieve the minimum cost under perfect information Under the e¢ cient intervention, the
government injects cash  at time 1 in exchange for state contingent payo¤s at time 2. New
lenders at time 1 must break even and we can without loss of generality restrict our attention
to the case where the government payo¤s depend on the residual payo¤s  ¬   ¬   . As in
previous sections, we analyze cost minimization for a given investment set.11

It is far from obvious whether the government can reach the minimum cost under perfect
information. The surprising result is that it can do so with warrants and preferred stock.

Theorem 2 Consider the family of programs ¬ = f  g where the government provides
cash  at time 1 in exchange for preferred stock with face value (1 + )  and a portfolio
of (1 ¬ ) =

warrants at the strike price  ¬ . These programs implement the same

set of investment domains as equity injections, but at a lower cost. In the limit

! 0,

opportunistic participation disappears and the program achieves the minimum cost:
lim

!0

1 ( ¬) =

min
1 

Proof. See Appendix.
Figure 8 shows the investment and participation region under the optimal intervention. The
e¢ cient intervention completely eliminates informational rents. The intuition for this result
programs. Hence, if the no-e¢ cient participation holds under the asset purchase program, it also holds
under the equity injection program. We can also show that equity programs at time 1 cannot be improved
by mixing them with a debt guarantee or asset purchase program. Pure equity programs always dominate.
The proof is available upon request.
11
In general, the government can o¤er a menu of contracts to the banks in order to obtain various investment sets. The actual choice depends on the distribution of types  ( ) and the welfare function  but
we do not need to characterize it. We simply show how to minimize the cost of implementing any particular
set.

28

is that the initial shareholders receive the following payment in the high-payo¤ state:
 (  ) = min (    ¬ ) + max (  ¬  ¬  0)

(24)

Shareholders are full residual claimants up to the face value of old assets  ¬  and
residual claimants beyond. When

goes to zero, the entire increase in equity value due

to investment is extracted by the government via warrants. As a result, the opportunistic
participation region disappears and only the banks that really need the capital injection to
invest participate in the program.12
Four properties of this optimal program are worth mentioning. First, we use preferred
stock because it is junior to new lenders at time 1 and senior to common equity, but the
program could also be implemented with a subordinated loan. Second, it is important that
the government also takes a position that is junior to equity holders. The warrants give
the upside to the government, which limits opportunistic participation. Third, the use of
warrants limits risk shifting incentives since the government owns the upside, not the old
equity holders (see, for instance, Green (1984)). Fourth, the use of warrants may allow the
government to credibly commit to protecting new equity holders. This may be important
for reasons outside the model if investors worry about outright nationalization of the banks.
We also note that our results describe the optimal intervention for a given investment
set. The optimal investment set is the solution to the government objection function (14)
and depends on the distribution of asset values and investment opportunities  ( ) and
the deadweight losses of taxation . We note that implementing the optimal investment set
may require a menu of programs.
Our results on the e¢ cient intervention can be extended to alternative payo¤ structures.
It is straightforward to allow for uncertainty in asset values in the low payo¤ state. We think
this type of uncertainty is the most relevant for banks because banks usually hold loans and
debt securities with a …xed face value  and thus primarily face downside risk. It is clear
from the discussion above that such downside risk in the low payo¤ state does not a¤ect
banks’participation and investment choices in the high-payo¤ state and therefore does not
12

In practice, there might be a lower bound on  because the government might not want to own the
banks. An approximate optimal program could then be implemented at this lower bound . Similarly, the
rate  is chosen to rule out ine¢ cient participation (the NIP constraint). In theory, any   0 would work,
but in practice, parameter uncertainty could prevent  from being too close to zero.

29

a¤ect our results. We also examine more general asset distributions in the extensions of our
model.

5

Extensions

In this section we present …ve extensions to our baseline model. We consider the consequences of heterogenous assets within banks, continuous assets distributions, deposit insurance, constrains on cash outlays, and the implementation of conditional participation.13

5.1

Continuous asset distribution

Our benchmark model assumes a binary payo¤ structure for assets in place. We can generalize our model to a continuous asset distribution  (j) over [0 1). As before, we assume
that  parameterizes the quality of assets in place. We now discuss how our main results
change in this more general setup.
It is clear that our results on conditional participation still hold (Theorem 1). It is
relatively straightforward to show that equity injections continue to dominate debt guarantees and asset purchases (Proposition 5). The main challenge is to solve for the e¢ cient
mechanism. As we show in the Internet Appendix, a modi…ed version of the preferred
stock-warrant combination continues to eliminate all informational rents. The modi…cation
is that the strike price of warrants must be set after asset prices are realized. The key point
of the implementation is that banks whose assets perform well ex-post are rewarded by a
lower dilution of their equity.14
We note that such warrants are non-standard and may be di¢ cult to implement in
practice. Hence, this raises the question about the e¢ ciency loss of using more common
interventions such as pure equity injections or preferred stock with standard warrants.
To address this question, we calibrate the model using data from the …nancial crisis of
2007 to 2009. We model asset payo¤s using a beta distribution because this distribution
13

Other extension on the sale of safe assets is available upon request. This exentions does not generate
new insights that justify its inclusion in this section.
14
Technically, by adjusting the strike price based on the realized asset value , the government can provide
the same incentives as in the model with binary asset payo¤s. We note that this security design it is
perfectly consistent with the assumptions we have made regarding information and contracts. If assets
trade, the government only need to use ex-post market prices. Even if assets do not trade, the government
can implement the optimal intervention by buying a small random sample of assets, observe the ex-post
performance, and set the strike price accordingly.

30

is well-suited to match recovery rates on asset with a …xed upper bound payo¤s (such as
bank loans or …xed income securities). We choose the distribution parameters to match
…ve-year credit default swap prices of the six largest …nancial institutions as of December
2008. We choose these banks because they are representative of the U.S. …nancial system
at that time. We report the CDS prices and the implied price discount in Table 1. The
CDS prices vary from 160 to 660 basispoints and the implied price discounts vary from 8%
to 28%.
We normalize asset size to one and assume that senior debt represents 50 percent of assets
( = 1  = 05) We assume that the average cost of investment represent 30 percent of
assets ( = 03). We choose the distribution of investment opportunities  to match the
empirical distribution of market to book. Using data prior to the 2008 …nancial crisis, we
…nd that the median net investment opportunities are 11 percent of assets ( ¬  = 011).15
We consider three levels of interventions: none, intermediate, and complete. The no
intervention and complete intervention scenario yield total investment relative to e¢ cient
investment of 73% and 100%, respectively. We choose the size of the intermediate intervention to achieve an investment level of 87%. We consider the excess cost of two recapitalization policies: equity injections and preferred stock with standard warrants. The excess cost
is computed as a share of total cost under the symmetric information benchmark.16
We report the result in Table 2. We …nd that the excess cost of equity injections are
about three times larger than the excess cost of preferred stock with warrants. In the
intermediate intervention scenario, the excess costs of preferred stock plus warrants are
16% and the excess costs of pure equity injections are 40%. In the complete intervention
scenario, the excess costs are 40% and 110%, respectively. These results suggest that the
use of warrants signi…cantly reduces the excess cost of government interventions.

5.2

Implementation of conditional participation

The government can capture macroeconomic rents and reduce the cost its intervention
by making participation conditional on participation. The implementation of conditional
participation may be di¢ cult in practice because with a large number of banks, a single bank
15

All other details of the calibration are available in the Internet Appendix.
This benchmark is equivalent to the asymmetric information case and the implementation with nonstandard warrants.
16

31

could halt the program’s implementation for reasons outside of the model. This raises the
question of whether there is a robust mechanism to implement a conditional participation
requirement.
We argue that the government can increase the likelihood that a conditional participation requirement be successful by targeting a small number of large banks.
First, a small number of banks facilitates coordination among participants and reduces
the likelihood that any bank might deviate for idiosyncratic reasons. It is important to
understand that, from the perspective of the government, the free-riding problem is the
opposite of the anti-trust problem. The government wants to facilitate communication and
coordination among banks.
Second, the government should target the largest banks, for two reasons. First, large
banks internalize some of the positive impact of their participation on the macro state 
and therefore on their own credit risk and funding costs. All else equal, this increases
their willingness to participate. Second, the largest banks have (by de…nition) the greatest
impact on the macro state  for a given number of participating banks. If the banking
sector is relatively concentrated, this allows the government to capture a large share of the
macroeconomic rents. After the government captures most of the macroeconomic rents, it
can o¤er the program to smaller banks without conditional participation.

5.3

Constraint on cash outlays

The government objective function trades o¤ the e¢ ciency gains from recapitalization with
the deadweight losses from additional taxation. We have assumed that the government uses
the net present value of gains and losses in its calculations. However, political economy
considerations may impose additional constraints. Speci…cally, the government may be
constrained in terms of cash outlay  at time 0 because of the budgetary approval process.
Such constraints on cash outlays make guarantees (which do not require outlays at time
0) more appealing than fully funded programs. This does not change our fundamental
analysis, however, because it is always possible to transform a funded program into a guarantee program. For instance, in the context of the asset purchase program, the government
can o¤er to insure private investor against losses on their assets holdings, instead of directly
purchasing assets. Under this guarantee, private investors should be willing to purchase
32

bank assets at face value. The expected cost of this asset purchase insurance is the same as
the expected cost of the debt guarantee.
More generally, if cash outlays are a constraint, the government can lever up private
money. For instance the government can provide capital (or guarantees) to a funding vehicle
that borrows from private investors. The money raised can then be used to purchase equity
and other securities. The security design problem is then separated from the timing of cash
‡ows.

5.4

Heterogeneous assets within banks

We consider an extension of our model to allow for asset heterogeneity within banks. Suppose that the face value of assets at time 0 is  + 0 . All these assets are ex-ante identical.
At time 1, the bank learns which assets are 0 and which assets are . The  assets are just
like before, with probability  ( ) of  and 1 ¬  ( ) of 0. The 0 assets are worth zero
with certainty. The ex-ante problems are unchanged, so all programs are still equivalent at
time 0.
The equity and debt guarantee programs are unchanged at time 1. So equity still
dominates debt guarantee. But the asset purchase program at time 1 is changed. For any
price   0 the banks will always want to sell their 0 assets. This will be true in particular
of the banks without pro…table lending opportunities.
Proposition 6 With heterogeneous assets inside banks, there is a strict ranking of programs: equity injection is best, debt guarantee is intermediate, asset purchase program is
worse.
The main insight from this extension is that adverse selection across banks is di¤erent from
adverse selection across assets within banks. Adverse selection within banks increases the
cost of the asset purchase program but does not a¤ect the other programs.

5.5

Deposit insurance

Suppose long term debt consists of two types of debt: deposits
debt  such that
=

+ 
33

and unsecured long term

Suppose that the government provides insurance for deposit holders and that deposit holders
have priority over unsecured debt holders. Then the payo¤s are are:


¬
= min ( ) ;   = min  ¬   

Proposition 7 The costs of time 0 and time 1 programs decrease. The equivalence results
and ranking of both time 0 and time 1 programs remain unchanged.
Proof. See Internet Appendix.
The intuition is that the government has to pay out deposit insurance in the low-payo¤
state. Hence, every cash injection lowers the expected cost of deposit insurance in the lowpayo¤ state one-for-one. As a result, the government recoups the cash injection both in the
high- and low-payo¤ state. Put di¤erently, a cash injection represents a wealth transfer to
depositors and, because of deposit insurance, a wealth transfer to the government. Hence,
the equivalence results and the ranking of interventions remain unchanged.

6

Discussion of …nancial crisis of 2007/09

The …nancial crisis of 2007-2009 has underlined the importance of debt overhang. Recent
empirical work on the …nancial crisis documents the decline in bank lending (Ivashina
and Scharfstein (2008)) and the reduction in investment by …nancially constrained …rms
(Campello, Graham, and Harvey (2010)). There is broad agreement among many observers
that debt overhang is an important reason for this development (see Allen, Bhattacharya,
Rajan, and Schoar (2008), and Fama (2009), among others). There is also a broad agreement
that macroeconomic externalities are potentially large and can justify the direct provision
of capital by the government (see Diamond, Kaplan, Kashyap, Rajan, and Thaler (2008)
and Bernanke (2009)).
The crisis has also shown the di¢ culty of …nding e¤ective solutions to the debt overhang
problem. Several experts have expressed concerns that existing bankruptcy procedures for
…nancial institutions are insu¢ cient for reorganizing the capital structure. As an alternative, Zingales (2008) argues for a law change that allows for forced debt-for-equity swaps.
34

Coates and Scharfstein (2009) suggest to restructure bank holding companies instead of
bank subsidiaries. Ayotte and Skeel (2009) argue that Chapter 11 proceedings are adequate if managed properly by the government. Assuming that restructuring can be carried
e¤ectively, these approaches reduce debt overhang at low cost to the government. However,
Swagel (2009) argues that the government lacks the legal authority to force restructuring
and that changing bankruptcy procedures is politically infeasible once banks are in …nancial
distress. Moreover, concerns for systemic risk and contagion make it di¢ cult to restructure
…nancial balance sheets in the midst of a …nancial crisis. Aside from the costs of its own failure, the bankruptcy of a large …nancial institution may trigger further bankruptcies because
of runs by creditors and counterparty risks (Heider, Hoerova, and Holthausen (2008)).
Government may therefore decide to recapitalize banks as, for example, the U.S. government in October 2008. Surprisingly, while there was at least some agreement regarding the
diagnostic (debt overhang), there was considerable disagreement about the optimal form
of government intervention outside restructuring. The original bailout plan proposed by
former Treasury Secretary Paulson favors asset purchases over other forms of interventions.
Stiglitz (2008) argues that equity injections are preferable to asset purchases because the
government can participate in the upside if …nancial institutions recover. Soros (2009a)
also favors equity injections over asset purchases because otherwise banks sell their least
valuable assets to the government. Diamond, Kaplan, Kashyap, Rajan, and Thaler (2008)
argue that the optimal government policy should be a combination of both asset purchases
and equity injections because asset purchases establish prices in illiquid markets and equity
injections encourage new lending. Bernanke (2009) suggests that in addition to equity injections and debt guarantees the government should purchase hard-to-value assets to alleviate
uncertainty about bank solvency. Geithner (2009) argues that asset purchases are necessary
because they support price discovery of risky assets.17
17

Other observers have pointed out common elements among the di¤erent interventions without necessarily
endorsing a speci…c one. Ausubel and Cramton (2009) argue that both asset purchases and equity injections
require to put a price on hard-to-value assets. Bebchuk (2008) argues that both asset purchases and equity
injections have to be conducted at market values to avoid overpaying for bad assets. Soros (2009b) argues
that bank recapitalization has to be compulsory rather than voluntary. Kashyap and Hoshi (2008) compare
the …nancial crisis of 2007-2009 with the Japanese banking crisis and argue that in Japan both asset purchases
and capital injections failed because the programs were too small. Scharfstein and Stein (2008) argue that
government interventions should restrict banks from paying dividends because, if there is debt overhang,
equity holders favor immediate payouts over new investment. Acharya and Backus (2009) suggest that public
lender of last resort interventions would be less costly if they borrowed some of the standard tools used in

35

Our paper make threes contributions to this debate. First, we believe an analytical
approach to this question is helpful because it allows the government to implement an
interventions in which …nancial institutions are treated equally and government actions are
predictable. This approach is preferable to tailor-made interventions that are more likely to
be in‡uenced and distorted by powerful incumbents (see Hart and Zingales (2008), Johnson
(2009)). Second, we distinguish the economic forces that matter by providing a benchmark
at which the government can recapitalize at a pro…t and under which the form of government
interventions is irrelevant. Under symmetric information, all interventions implement the
same level of lending at the same expected costs. Under asymmetric information, our
analysis shows how the government can use equity and warrants to minimize the expected
cost to taxpayers. Third, our analysis clari…es why government interventions are costly.
Under symmetric information, debt holders receive an implicit transfer. Under asymmetric
information, participating banks receive informational rents because otherwise they would
choose not to participate.
We believe our analysis captures some important considerations made in practice. Regarding macroeconomic externalities, the International Monetary Fund and the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development coordinated an agreement ("Vienna Initiative")
among 15 banks to overcome the free-rider problem with regard to their lending in Eastern Europe. Speci…cally, the banks jointly agreed to roll over credit lines to their Eastern
European subsidiaries and the initiative is widely believed to have reduced the impact of
the …nancial crisis on Eastern Europe. This mechanism is strongly suggestive of lending
externalities among banks. Regarding the optimal mechanism, Swagel (2009) notes that
the terms of the Capital Purchase Program, the …rst round of U.S. recapitalization e¤orts
in October 2008, consisted of providing cash injections in exchange for preferred stock and
warrants. Similarly, the investor Warren Bu¤et provided $5 billion to Goldman Sachs in
September 2008 in exchange for preferred stock and warrants. This structure is qualitatively
consistent with the optimal intervention.
private contracts for lines of credit. , Kacperczyk and Schnabl (2009) describe a government intervention,
the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, to support non-…nancial …rms directly.

36

7

Conclusion

In this paper, we study the e¢ ciency and welfare implications of di¤erent government interventions in a standard model with debt overhang. We …nd that government interventions
generate informational and macroeconomic rents for banks. Informational rents accrue to
banks that participate in an intervention but do not change their level of investment as a
result. Macroeconomic rents accrue to banks that do not participate but bene…t from the
rise in asset values because of other banks’participation. We show that the e¢ cient intervention minimizes informational rents by using preferred stock with warrants and minimizes
macroeconomic rents by conditioning implementation on su¢ cient bank participation. The
…rst feature allows the government to extract the upside of new investments and the second
feature reduces banks’outside options. If macroeconomic rents are large, then the e¢ cient
intervention recapitalizes banks at a pro…t.

37

References
Acharya, V., and D. Backus (2009): “Private Lessons for Public Banking: The Case
for Conditionality in LOLR Facilities,” in Restoring Financial Stability: How to Repair
a Failed System, ed. by Acharya, and Richardson. Wiley.
Acharya, V., P. Schnabl, and G. Suarez (2010): “Securitization Without Risk Transfer,” Working Paper NYU.
Adrian, T., and H. S. Shin (2008): “Financial Intermediary Leverage and Value at Risk,”
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Sta¤ Reports, 338.
Aghion, P., P. Bolton, and S. Fries (1999): “Optimal Design of Bank Bailouts: The
Case of Transition Economies,”Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics, 155,
51–70.
Allen, F., S. Bhattacharya, R. Rajan, and A. Schoar (2008): “The Contributions
of Stewart Myers to the Theory and Practice of Corporate Finance,” Journal of Applied
Corporate Finance, 20, 8–19.
Allen, L., S. Chakraborty, and W. Watanabe (2009): “Regulatory Remedies for
Banking Crises: Lessons from Japan,” Working Paper Baruch College.
Asquith, P., R. Gertner, and D. Scharfstein (1994): “Anatomy of Financial Distress:
An Examination of Junk-Bond Issuers,”The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 625–
658.
Ausubel, L. M., and P. Cramton (2009): “No Substitute for the "P" Word in Financial
Rescue,” Economist’s Voice, 6(2).
Ayotte, K., and D. Skeel (2009): “Bankruptcy or Bailouts?,” Working Paper.
Bebchuk, L. (2008): “A Plan for Addressing the Financial Crisis,” Harvard Law and
Economics Discussion Paper No. 620.
Bebchuk, L., and I. Goldstein (2009): “Self-Ful…lling Credit Market Freezes,” mimeo
Wharton.
Bernanke, B. (2009): “The Crisis and the Policy Response,” Stamp Lecture, London
School of Economics.
Bhattacharya, S., and A. Faure-Grimaud (2001): “The Debt Hangover: Renegotiation
with Non-contractible Investment,” Economics Letters, 70, 413–419.
Bhattacharya, S., and K. G. Nyborg (2010): “Bank Bailout Menus,” Swiss Finance
Institute Research Paper No. 10-24.
Bond, P., and I. Goldstein (2010): “Government intervention and information aggregation by prices,” mimeo Wharton.
Bond, P., I. Goldstein, and E. S. Prescott (2010): “Market-Based Corrective Actions,” Review of Financial Studies, 23(2), 781–820.
Bulow, J., and J. Shoven (1978): “The bankruptcy decision,”Bell Journal of Economics,
9, 437–456.
38

Campello, M., J. R. Graham, and C. R. Harvey (2010): “The Real E¤ects of Financial
Constraints: Evidence from a Financial Crisis,” Journal of Financial Economics, 97,
470?487.
Chari, V. V., and P. J. Kehoe (2009): “Bailouts, Time Inconsistency and Optimal
Regulation,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Sta¤ Report.
Coates, J., and D. Scharfstein (2009): “Lowering the Cost of Bank Recapitalization,”
Working Paper, Harvard University.
Corbett, J., and J. Mitchell (2000): “Banking Crises and Bank Rescues: The E¤ect
of Reputation,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 32, 3(2), 474–512.
Diamond, D. (2001): “Should Japanese Banks Be Recapitalized?,” Monetary and Economic Studies, pp. 1–20.
Diamond, D., S. Kaplan, A. Kashyap, R. Rajan, and R. Thaler (2008): “Fixing
the Paulson Plan,” Wall Street Journal.
Diamond, D., and R. Rajan (2005): “Liquidity Shortages and Banking Crises,” Journal
of Finance, 60(2), 615–647.
Diamond, D. W., and R. G. Rajan (2009): “Fear of …re sales and the credit freeze,”
NBER WP 14925.
Fama,
E. (2009):
“Government
www.dimensional.com/famafrench.

Equity

Capital

for

Financial

Firms,”

Farhi, E., and J. Tirole (2009): “Collective Moral Hazard, Maturity Mismatch and
Systemic Bailouts,” Working Paper.
Geithner, T. (2009): “My Plan for Bad Bank Assets,” Wall Street Journal, March 23.
Gertner, R., and D. Scharfstein (1991): “A Theory of Workouts and the E¤ects of
Reorganization Law,” Journal of Finance, 46, 1189–1222.
Giannetti, M., and A. Simonov (2009): “On the Real E¤ects of Bank Bailouts: MicroEvidence from Japan,” ECGI Working Paper Series in Finance, N 260/2009.
Gilson, S., K. John, and L. Lang (1990): “Troubled debt restructuring: an empirical
study of private reorganization of …rms in default,” Journal of Financial Economics, 27,
315–353.
Glasserman, P., and Z. Wang (2009): “Valuing the Capital Assistance Program,”mimeo
Columbia Business School.
Gorton, G., and L. Huang (2004): “Liquidity, E¢ ciency and Bank Bailouts,”American
Economic Review, 94, 455–483, NBER WP9158.
Green, R. C. (1984): “Investment Incentives, Debt, and Warrants,”Journal of Financial
Economics, 13, 115–136.
Hart, O., and J. Moore (1995): “Debt and Seniority: An Analysis of the Role of Hard
Claims in Constraining Management,” American Economic Review, 85(3), 567–585.

39

Hart, O., and L. Zingales (2008): “Economists Have Abandoned Principle,”Wall Street
Journal.
Heider, F., M. Hoerova, and C. Holthausen (2008): “Liquidity Hoarding and Interbank Market Spreads: The Role of Counterparty Risk,” Working Paper, European
Central Bank.
Hennessy, C. A. (2004): “Tobin’s Q, Debt overhang, and Investment,”Journal of Finance,
59, 1717–1742.
Ivashina, V., and D. Scharfstein (2008): “Bank Lending During the Financial Crisis
of 2008,” Harvard Business School Working Paper.
Jensen, M., and W. Meckling (1976): “Theory of the …rm: managerial behavior, agency
costs and ownership structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 3, 305–360.
Johnson, S. (2009): “The quiet coup,” The Atlantic.
Kacperczyk, M., and P. Schnabl (2009): “When Safe Proved Risky: Commercial Paper
During the Financial Crisis of 2007-2009,” NYU Working Paper.
Kashyap, A., and T. Hoshi (2008): “Will the U.S. Bank Recapitalization Succeed?
Lessons from Japan,” NBER Working Paper No. 14401.
Keister, T. (2010): “Bailouts and Financial Fragility,”Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Sta¤ Reports.
Keys, B., T. Mukherjee, A. Seru, and V. Vig (2010): “Did Securitization Lead to
Lax Screening? Evidence From Subprime Loans,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125.
Kocherlakota, N. (2009): The New Dynamic Public Finance. Princeton University Press.
Lamont, O. (1995): “Corporate-Debt Overhang and Macroeconomic Expectations,”
American Economic Review, 85(5), 1106–1117.
Landier, A., and K. Ueda (2009): “The Economics of Bank Restructuring: Understanding the Options,” IMF Sta¤ Position Note.
Mian, A., and A. Sufi (2009): “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124,
1449–1496.
Mitchell, J. (2001): “Bad Debts and the Cleaning of Banks’Balance Sheets: An Application to Transition Economies,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 10, 1–27.
Myers, S. C. (1977): “Determinants of Corporate Borrowing,” Journal of Financial Economics, 5, 147–175.
Philippon, T., and V. Skreta (2009): “Optimal Bailouts under Adverse Selection,”work
in progress, NYU Stern.
Scharfstein, D., and J. Stein (2008): “This Bailout Doesn’t Pay Dividends,”The New
York Times, October 21.
Soros, G. (2009a): “The Game Changer,” Financial Times, January 28.

40

(2009b): “The right and wrong way to bail out the banks,” Financial Times,
January 22.
Stiglitz, J. (2008): “We Aren’t Done Yet: Comments on the Financial Crisis and Bailout,”
The Economists’ Voice, 5 (5).
Swagel, P. (2009): “The Financial Crisis: An Inside View,”Brookings Panel on Economic
Activity.
Zingales, L. (2008): “Plan B,” Economist’s Voice, 5 (6).

41

Proof of Proposition 2
Cash injection
The government o¤ers cash  against fraction of equity capital. The government recognizes that the equilibrium is  () which yields the investment domain   ()  At time 0,
equity holders participate in the voluntary intervention if
(1 ¬ ) 0 [  j ]

0 [  j 0] 

(25)

The cost of the program to the government is

0 (

) =  ¬ 0 [  j ] 

Because the investment domain does not depend on , the government chooses equity share
such that the participation constraint (25) binds. Using the participation constraint (25)
to eliminate from the cost function yields

0  (

) =  ¬ (0 [  j ] ¬ 0 [  j 0]) 

Using expected shareholder value at time 0
Z Z
0 [ j ]¬0 [ j 0] =  () +




  ()

Z
(1 ¬  ( ))  ( )+

Z

( ( )  ¬ )  ( ) 

Z

Z

( ( )  ¬ )  ( )

  ()n(0)

Therefore the cost of the government is

0  (

) =  ¬ 0 [  j ]
Z Z
= (1 ¬  ())  ¬ 

(1 ¬  ( ))  ( ) ¬

  ()

=

  ()n(0)

 
()
0

Debt guarantee
The government recognizes that the equilibrium conditional on intervention is given by the
function ((1 ¬ ) ). Using equation (15), we see that conditional on participation, the
equity value at time 0 is 0 [  j (1 ¬ ) ]¬ () If a bank opts out, equity value becomes
0 [  j 0]. Since participation only depends on  = (1 ¬ )  the government chooses the
program such that the participation constraint binds:
ZZ
ZZ
 ()  =  ()  + (1 ¬ ) 
(1 ¬  ( )) ( ) +
( ( )  ¬ )  ( )
  ()

  ()n(0)

The cost to the government is

0 

= (1 ¬  ())  ¬ S

Plugging the participation constraint into the cost function yields the expected cost 0  ()
de…ned in equation (16) The programs is equivalent to an asset purchase program when
 = (1 ¬ ) .
42

Proof of Proposition 4
We omit  to shorten the notations but all the calculations are conditional on the equilibrium
value of . We must show equivalence along four dimensions: (i) the NIP constraint, (ii)
the upper schedule, (iii) the lower schedule, and (iv) the cost function. Upon participation
and investment, equity value is
1 [  j = 1;  ] =  () ( ¬ ) +  ()  ¬  + (1 ¬

¬  ()) 

Participation without investment yields
1 [  j = 0;  ] =  () ( ¬  ¬ S) 
Now consider the three constraints:
NIP: 1 [  j = 0;  ]  1 [  j = 0; 0 0] or
 0
Upper schedule: 1 [  j = 1;  ]  1 [  j = 1; 0 0] or
 ( ;  ) = (1 ¬

¬  ()) 

Lower schedule: 1 [  j = 1;  ]  1 [  j = 0; 0 0] or
 ( ;  ) =  ()  ¬  + (1 ¬

¬  ()) 

Using the notations of the asset purchase program, the participation set is 1 ( 1 ¬ ),
the investment domain is 1 ( 1 ¬ ) and the expected cost of the program is
Z Z
(
1
¬
)
=
S
¬

(1 ¬  ())  ( )
1
 (1¬

)

Now if we set  =  and  = 1 ¬ , we see that the   constraint, the upper
and lower schedules, and the cost functions are the same as for the asset purchase
program. The two programs are therefore equivalent.

Proof of Proposition 5
Equity value at time 1 with cash injection  is:
1 [  j   ] = ( ) ( ¬  + ) + 1()2() ( ( )  ¬  + (1 ¬ ( )))
We omit  to shorten the notations but all the calculations are conditional on the equilibrium
value of . We …rst analyze the equity injection program at time 1. Upon participation and
investment, equity value (including the share going to the government) is
1 [  j = 1; ] =  () ( ¬ ) +  ()  ¬  + 
Participation without investment yields
1 [  j = 0; ] =  () ( ¬  + )
Now consider the three constraints
43

NIP: (1 ¬ ) 1 [  j = 0; ]  1 [  j = 0 0] or:
(1 ¬ )  

( ¬ ) 

Upper schedule: (1 ¬ ) 1 [  j = 1; ] ¬ 1 [  j = 1; 0] or:
  = (1 ¬ )  ¬

( () ( ¬ ) +  ()  ¬ ) 

Lower schedule: (1 ¬ ) 1 [  j = 1; ] ¬ 1 [  j = 0; 0] or:
 = (1 ¬ ) ( ()  ¬  + ) ¬  () ( ¬ ) 
If we de…ne the function  (;  )
we can rewrite the program as:

(1 ¬ )  ¬  () ( ¬ ) as in equation (23),

 = (1 ¬ ) ( ()  ¬ ) +  (;  )
 =
( ()  ¬ ) ¬  (;  )
The participation set is


( ) = f( ) j   0 ^    0g 

The cost function is therefore

1 (

)=

Z

Z

 (m;

( ¬ 1 [  j = 1; ])  ( ) 
)

We can rewrite the cost function such that
Z Z
Z

 ( ;  )  ( ) ¬
1 ( ) =
 (m;

)

Z

 (m;

( ()  ¬ )  ( ) 
)

The following table provides a comparison of the government interventions:

Asset purchase
Participation

 (  )

Investment

 () [

NIP-constraint

1

Cost function

Equity injection
 ( 

 (  )

 () [

)
 ( 

(1 ¬ )  

 (  )
1

 ( 
1

)

( ¬ )

)

Now let us prove that the equity injection program dominates the other two programs.
Take an asset purchase program ( ). We are going to construct an equity program that
44

has same investment at lower cost. To get equity with same lower bound graph we need to
ensure that:
 ( ;  ) =  ( ;  ) for all  

It is easy to see that this is indeed possible if we identify term by term: 1¬ = ¬
and


 = . In this case we also have  (  ) =  (  ). The NIP constraint are also
equivalent since (1 ¬ )   ( ¬ ) ,   1.
Now consider the upper bound. Consider the lowest point on the upper schedule of the
asset purchase program, i.e., the intersection of   = 0 with  ()  ¬  = 0. At that point
(e
 e), we have  (e
) =  and e = . Using the fact that lower bounds are equal to zero, we
can write  (;  ) = (1 ¬ ) (1 ¬  ())  for all  . This implies that  (~;  ) = 0,
and therefore   (e
 e;  ) = ( (~) ~ ¬ ) ¬  ( ~;  ) = 0. Therefore the upper
schedule   ( ;  ) = 0 also passes by this point. But the schedule   ( ;  ) = 0 is
downward slopping in ( ), so the domain of ine¢ cient participation is smaller (see Figure
7) than in the asset purchase case. Formally, we have just shown that:




( )

( ) 

As an aside, it is also easy to see that the schedule   ( ;  ) = 0 is above the schedule
 ¬  = 0 so it does not get rid completely of opportunistic participation, but it helps.
The …nal step is to compare the cost functions 1 ( ) and 1 ( ). By de…nition of the
participation domain, we know that lower bound  (  ;  )  0. Therefore:
Z Z
 (;  )
¬
( ()  ¬ )  ( ) 
for all ( ) 2  ( )
1¬
 (m;

)

Therefore

1 (

1
)
1¬

Z

Z

 (m;

 (;  )  ( ) = 
)

Since  ¬  ()  0 for all ( ) 2

 (


), and since

( ) 



Z

Z

 (m;

 (

)

( ¬  ())  ( )
)
 ( ),

we have

( ) 

Finally, note that the the comparison is conditional on equilibrium  However, the equity injection requires lower taxes and therefore lead to higher equilibrium level , only
reinforcing our proposition.

Proof of Theorem 2
Consider the equity payo¤s for a bank in the program:
  = max  ¬  + 

¬

¬
¬  ¬  0 


In the good state, as soon as     ¬ , the warrants are in the money and the number
of shares jumps to 1 + 1¬ = 1 . So the old shareholders get only a fraction of the value
beyond  ¬ . The payo¤ function for old shareholders is therefore:
 (  ) = min (    ¬ ) + max (  ¬  ¬  0) 
45

Old shareholders are full residual claimants up to the face value of old assets  ¬  and
residual claimants beyond. Now let us think about their decisions at time 1.
The NIP-constraint is simply   0. The value for old shareholders conditional on
participation and investment is
1 [ (  ) j  ¬  = 1] =   ¬  +

¬

¬
¬ (1 + ) 


The lower schedule (e¢ cient participation) is therefore
 ( ; ¬) = (  ¬  +  (1 ¬ (1 + )  )) 
For any  0, we can see that the lower schedule is equivalent to that of an equity injection
1
with 1¬ = (1+)
¬ , and that of an asset purchase with  =  and  = 1¬ . If we take
 ! 0 we get the lower bound of a simple cash injection program, with an investment set
simply equal to  ( ). In general, we have an investment set I.
The upper schedule (opportunistic participation) is:
 (  ; ¬) =  (1 ¬ (1 + )  ) ¬ (1 ¬ ) (  ¬ )
When ! 0, the upper bound schedule f = 0g converges to the schedule f  ¬  = 0g.
In this limit, there is no opportunistic participation and
lim

!0

(¬) = In ( 0) =

min

Finally, the expected payments to the old shareholders converge to  ( ¬ ). So the
government receives expected value   ¬  +  by paying  at time 1. The total cost
therefore converges to:
lim

!0

1 ( ¬) =

¬

Z Z

(  ¬ )  ( ) =

min

QED.

46

min
1 

Table 1
Empirical Distribution of Credit Default Swap Prices
This table provides information on the empirical distribution of credit default swap (CDS)
prices. The CDS prices are used for the model calibration. "Spread" is the average …veyear CDS on senior debt in basispoints (bp) as of December 2008. "Five-year discount"
is the implied value of senior debt computed from CDS prices. "Citi" denotes Citibank,
"BoA" denotes Bank of America, "JPM" denotes J.P. Morgan, "AIG" denotes American
International Group, "GS" denotes Goldman Sachs, and "MS" denotes Morgan Stanley.
Financial Institution
Spread (bp)
5-year discount

Citibank
250
0.88

BoA
200
0.91

JPM
160
0.92

AIG
660
0.72

GS
310
0.86

MS
430
0.81

Table 2
Calibration Results
This table reports the results of the model calibration. "Intervention" denotes the level of
intervention. "Actual/E¢ cient Investment" denotes actual investment as a share of e¢ cient
investement. "Equity Excess Cost" denotes the excess cost of equity injections as a share
of total cost under symmetric information. "Warrant Excess Cost" denotes the excess cost
of preferred stock with standard warrents (…xed strike price) as a share of total cost under
symmetric information.
Intervention
None
Intermediate
Complete

Actual/E¢ cient Investment
73%
87%
100%

47

Equity Excess Cost
0
41%
110%

Warrant Excess Cost
0
16%
40%

Fig 1: Information & Technology
This figure plots the information structure and technology of our model. Existing banks assets pay off A with probability p or 0
with probability (1-p) at time 2 . At time 1, banks receive a new investment opportunity that requires an investment of x at time 1
and yields a payoff of v at time 2. The blue-shaded circle indicates that banks know the distribution of future asset values and
investment opportunities at time 1 but the government does not.

t=0

t=1

t=2

p

A

Existing
Assets
1-p

New
Opportunity

-x

0

v

Fig 2: Payoffs
This figure shows the payoffs to bank equity and debt holders at time 2 as a function of the bank’s investment decision and the
realization of bank asset values. D denotes the face value of senior debt, l denotes the face value of junior debt, r denotes the
interest rate on junior debt, and ε denotes asset quality. The other variables are defined in Figure 1.

t=1

t=2
Senior
Debt

Learn ε and v
p
Do not invest

Junior
Debt

Equity

D

.

A-D

0

.

0

l=0
1-p

A-D+v-rl
Invest

p

D

rl

1-p

v

0

l=x
0

Fig 3: First Best
This figure shows first-best investment as a function of asset quality and the quality of investment opportunities. The blue-shaded
area indicates the set of banks that invest under the first best solution (“Efficient Investment”).

v

Quality of
Investment V
Opportunity

Efficient Investment

v=x

x

0

1

p(ε)

Asset quality

Fig 4: Debt Overhang
This figure shows investment under debt overhang. The blue-shaded area indicates the set of banks that invest (“Efficient
Investment”). The red-shaded area indicates the set of banks that have a profitable investment opportunity but do not invest
because of debt overhang (“Debt Overhang”).

v

Lo=0

Quality of
V
Investment
Opportunity

Efficient
Investment
Debt Overhang

x

0

1 p(ε)
Asset quality

Fig 5: Cash at time 0
This figure shows investment after a cash injection at time 0. The grey-shaded area indicates the set of banks that invest even
without the cash injection (“Efficient Investment”). The blue-shaded area indicates the set of banks that invest only because of the
cash injection (“Efficient Additional Investment”). The red-shaded area indicates the set of banks that have a profitable investment
opportunity but do not invest (“Debt Overhang”).

v

Lo+(1-p)m=0

Quality of
Investment V
Opportunity

Lo=0

Efficient
Additional
Investment

Efficient
Investment
Debt
Overhang
Investment

Debt Overhang

x

0

p(ε)
1
Asset quality

Fig 6: Asset Purchase at time 1
This figure shows investment and participation after a time 1 asset purchase program. The set of banks that invest is the same as in
Figure 5. The grey-shaded area indicates the set of banks that do not participate but invest (“Efficient No-Participation”).
The yellow-shaded area indicates the set of banks that participate but would invest even in the absence of the program
(“Opportunistic Participation”). The blue-shaded area indicates the set of banks that participate and invest only because of the
program (“Efficient Participation”).

Quality of
Investment
Opportunity

v

La(Z,q)=0

Lo=0

Ua(Z,q)=0

V
Efficient
Participation

Efficient
No-Participation

Opportunistic
Participation

Debt Overhang

x

0

q

p(ε)
1
Asset quality

Figure 7: Equity injection at time 1
This figure shows investment and participation after a time 1 equity injection. The investment region is the same as in Figure 5. The
participation regions are defined in Figure 6. We note that the “Opportunistic Participation” region shrinks and the “Efficient NoParticipation” region expands relative to Figure 6.

Le(m,α)=0

v
Quality of
Investment
Opportunity

Lo=0

V
Efficient
Participation

Ue(m,α)=0
Opportu
nistic
Participa
tion

Efficient
No-Participation

Debt Overhang

Lo
x

0

1

p(ε)

Asset quality

Figure 8: Efficient Mechanism
This figure shows investment and participation under the efficient mechanism. The investment region is the same as in Figure 5.
The participation regions are defined in Figure 6. We note that the “Opportunistic Participation” region disappears and the
“Efficient No-Participation” region expands relative to Figure 7.

Quality of v
Investment V
Opportunity

L(Γ)=0

U(Γ)=0=Lo
Efficient
Participation

Efficient
No-Participation

Debt Overhang

x

0

1
Asset quality

p(ε)

