                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 INTERVIEWING IN TWO-SIDED MATCHING MARKETS

                                        Robin S. Lee
                                       Michael Schwarz

                                      Working Paper 14922
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w14922


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           April 2009, Revised March 2017




We thank Neil Thakral for exceptional research assistance, and Itay Fainmesser, Kyna Fong,
Rachel Kranton, David McAdams, Michael Ostrovsky, Al Roth, Lones Smith, two anonymous
referees and the editor for helpful comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2009 by Robin S. Lee and Michael Schwarz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Interviewing in Two-Sided Matching Markets
Robin S. Lee and Michael Schwarz
NBER Working Paper No. 14922
April 2009, Revised March 2017
JEL No. C78,D85,J01

                                         ABSTRACT

We introduce the interview assignment problem, which generalizes the one-to-one matching
model of Gale and Shapley (1962) by introducing a stage of costly information acquisition. Firms
learn preferences over workers via costly interviews. Even if all firms and workers conduct the
same number of interviews, realized unemployment depends also on the extent to which agents
share common interviewing partners. We introduce the concept of overlap that captures this
notion, and prove that unemployment is minimized with perfect overlap: i.e., if two firms
interview any common worker, they interview the exact same set of workers.


Robin S. Lee
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 120
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
robinlee@fas.harvard.edu

Michael Schwarz
Googe
schwarz.m@gmail.com
1        Introduction
The theory of two-sided matching generally assumes that agents know their true preferences over
potential partners prior to engaging in a match.1 However, in many matching markets, information
acquisition plays an important role: in labor markets, firms interview workers; in marriage markets,
men and women date; and in real estate markets, buyers attend open-houses. Such interviews,
dates, and meetings are often costly and scarce—e.g., firms pay up to a third of an employee’s
annual salary as commission to headhunters just to narrow down the potential field of candidates to
interview (cf. Coles et al., 2008)— and because these interviews affect the formation of preferences,
their assignment can crucially affect the outcome of the eventual matching process.
        Our article generalizes the one-to-one matching model of Gale and Shapley (1962) to allow for a
stage of costly information acquisition. To our knowledge, this article is one of the first to analyze
the interview assignment problem in the context of two-sided matching. Throughout this article
we will refer to agents as “firms” and “workers,” but this label can be changed to men and women,
colleges and students, hospitals and doctors, and so forth. Firms and workers do not ex ante know
their idiosyncratic preferences over potential matching partners and must discover them through a
costly interviewing process.
        We analyze a two-stage game: in the first stage, firms simultaneously choose a subset of work-
ers to interview, and in the second stage firms and workers are matched one-to-one using a firm-
proposing deferred acceptance algorithm in which firms make “job offers” to workers. We primarily
focus on the first stage interviewing decisions, and use standard results from the one-to-one match-
ing literature to analyze the second stage assignment. Even so, the interview assignment problem
is generally difficult and possibly intractable. To allow for analysis while still maintaining a model
rich enough to yield meaningful results, we make the following assumptions: firms bear the full
cost of interviewing; a firm and worker must interview in order to be matched; workers prefer being
matched to any firm than to being unemployed; firms may find some workers unacceptable and
choose to remain unmatched; and workers and firms are ex ante homogeneous, with preferences
over partners independent and idiosyncratic to each agent.2
        Even if all firms and workers are ex ante identical (prior to the realization of their idiosyncratic
preferences), our model emphasizes that agents are not indifferent over whom they interview with.
As interviews are costly, firms care about how many interviews a potential interviewee has: as
the number of interviews a worker has increases, the probability of a job offer being accepted
declines as the worker might obtain and accept an offer from another firm. All else being equal,
workers who have few interviews are more attractive to interview because they are more likely
    1
     For a survey, see Roth and Sotomayor (1990).
    2
     Although homogeneity is a strong assumption to apply for an entire market, it is potentially plausible if a market
is partitioned into subsets of workers and firms of similar quality. For example, although workers in general may
have a greater likelihood of preferring a “top-tier” firm in the entire market over a “bottom-tier” firm, within a tier
worker preferences may be fairly evenly distributed; this also may be true with firm preferences over workers within
a tier. Thus, in the sense that workers and firms of similar quality are the only ones that interview and match with
each other, and—conditional on all available information—worker and firm preferences are generally uniform and
i.i.d. among a particular subset of agents, our model is less restrictive than it might appear.


                                                          2
to accept if an offer is made. As a result, even though there are equilibria in which firms all
conduct the same number of interviews, firms would prefer not to randomize over workers but
instead coordinate so that all workers receive the same number of interviews. We prove that for
any number of interviews conducted by all firms, there are values of interviewing costs where firms
randomly choosing workers to interview comprise an equilibrium of our game; additionally, there
are (potentially different) values of interviewing costs so that all firms and workers conducting the
same number of interviews is also an equilibrium.
   We then investigate a more subtle form of coordination which also proves to have significant
effects on equilibrium employment. For our analysis, we focus on symmetric interview assignments,
which we define to be interview assignments in which each firm and worker has the same number
of interviews, and even if two firms or two workers swap their interview assignments, the original
interview assignment can be obtained via a renaming of other agents. Although there may exist
many equilibria in which all agents conduct the same number of interviews, the number of expected
hires in the match can be very different depending on whether or not the interview assignment
exhibits greater overlap—a partial ordering that we define formally which captures the number of
common interview partners among agents.
   To illustrate why overlap matters, consider two firms, f and f 0 , who are the only firms that
interview workers w and w0 : if f has an offer rejected by w, it must be that the worker accepted an
offer from f 0 ; consequently, f will then face no “competition” for w0 and obtain him for certain if
it makes him an offer. If f and f 0 did not interview the same set of workers, then f could possibly
be rejected by both w and w0 and not be matched despite making offers to both workers (because
being rejected by w no longer implies obtaining w0 for certain). Thus, a firm’s expected payoff
depends not only on the number of interviews its workers receive, but also the identities of the
firms interviewing those workers.
   The main result of this article is that if the ex ante probability that a worker is found to be
unacceptable to a firm is sufficiently small, then among all symmetric interview assignments in
which every firm and worker conducts the same number of interviews, any assignment with perfect
overlap—i.e., if any two firms interview the same worker, they interview exactly the same set of
workers—minimizes unemployment for any firm or worker. We note that this result is also not
fragile to the i.i.d. assumption over preferences: e.g., an interview assignment with perfect overlap
also minimizes unemployment when firm preferences over workers are perfectly correlated.
   We also use simulation results to quantify the impact on unemployment from two forms of
coordination if all firms interview the same number of workers: (i) allowing firms to ensure that
all workers receive the same number of interviews (as opposed to randomly assigning interviews),
and (ii) conditional on all workers receiving the same number of interviews, increasing the amount
of overlap in the interview assignment. We find that unemployment reductions from both forms of
coordination can be substantial.
   Our analysis suggests that institutions which, conditional on the total number of interviews that
are conducted, limit the number of interviews that candidates receive or segment the market such


                                                 3
that firms only interview workers within well defined categories can improve coordination, reduce
interviewing costs, and increase the number of successful matches. For example, with on-campus
recruiting at colleges, interviews are conducted on only a limited number of days, thereby making
time considerations a limiting factor on the number of interviews any given candidate can feasibly
conduct; in academic job markets, placement officers aid in identifying candidates who have not
received many interviews; and the “rush” system by which sororities on college campuses recruit
new members limits and equalizes interviews: “[a] rushee who receives more invitations than the
number of parties permitted in a given round must decline, or ‘regret,’ the excess invitations”
(Mongell and Roth, 1991). Our model’s reliance on a single simultaneous round of interviewing can
also be motivated by time constraints in these and other examples. With the possibility of delay,
firms may benefit from engaging in sequential rounds of interviews; this is outside of the scope of
the current analysis.
   Examples of improving overlap include segmentation via geography (e.g., firms interviewing
only local candidates) and other (potentially arbitrary) dimensions. Note that if the number of
interviews each firm conducts in equilibrium is close to the total number of workers or if the
population could be partitioned such that agents in each group can only interview other agents
in that group, interviews would be more evenly dispersed and the assignment would be closer to
achieving perfect overlap. Thus, even if academic departments have no preference over the field in
which to hire, each may still benefit from restricting its candidate search to a particular field if all
departments did the same.
   Finally, we wish to emphasize that the use of the second stage “match” is only an approximation
for the dynamics of hiring processes in a variety of industries and settings. In some situations that
utilize a centralized match such as the National Residency Matching Program, the relationship
is quite exact; in others, a decentralized matching market may still be modeled as a centralized
mechanism such as a deferred acceptance procedure given certain assumptions (Niederle and Yariv,
2009; Schweinzer, 2008; Haeringer and Wooders, 2011). Whenever preferences are ex ante unknown
and need be revealed through a costly interview, due diligence, or dating process, our analysis
remains relevant.

Related Literature.      The interview assignment problem is a variant of the many-to-many match-
ing problem because firms may be assigned to many workers and workers to many firms in the
interview stage (Roth, 1984; Blair, 1988; Echenique and Oviedo, 2006; Konishi and Ünver, 2006).
In contrast to this literature, our model allows for externalities imposed on agents not directly
involved in a particular pairwise match as firms care about the identities of other firms who in-
terview its candidates. Additionally, although we assume our second-stage assignment satisfies
non-equilibrium concepts such as pairwise stability, if we interpret this assignment as being gener-
ated from a centralized mechanism employing the deferred-acceptance algorithm, we are also able
to utilize standard non-cooperative equilibrium conditions when analyzing interview assignments.
Indeed, the special structure of the interview assignment problem considered herein enables us to


                                                   4
solve for the equilibrium allocations.
      The matching literature also generally assumes agents know their preferences before entering a
match. There are notable exceptions: Das and Kamenica (2005) consider sequential learning in the
context of dating markets where men and women repeatedly go on dates to learn their preferences;
Chade (2006) explores marriage markets where participants observe a noisy signal about the quality
of their potential mates; Chakraborty, Citanna and Ostrovsky (2010) investigate the stability of
matching mechanisms with interdependent values over partners; Josephson and Shapiro (2016)
study the role of adverse selection when firms sequentially interview workers in a decentralized
matching process; and Hoppe, Moldovanu and Sela (2009) examine the effectiveness of signaling
in an assortative matching environment. Furthermore, the literature on college admissions such as
Nagypal (2004) and Chade, Lewis and Smith (2014) can be reinterpreted as matching with costly
information acquisition, where the applicants bear the cost of providing colleges with a noisy signal
of their own quality.
      A related issue not addressed in this article but examined in a companion piece (Lee and
Schwarz, 2007) is the communication or signaling of preferences between agents once they are
known, but prior to making offers. Coles, Kushnir and Niederle (2013) consider settings where
workers initially know their preferences over firms, and examine mechanisms which allow them to
signal to firms prior to the assignment of interviews in decentralized labor markets; they find that
allowing for signaling can improve employment and worker welfare.
      Although the literature on search seems related because it also explores the role of frictions in
matching markets, it is quite dissimilar: the sequential and directed search literature (e.g., Shimer
and Smith (2000); Atakan (2006); Eeckhout and Kircher (2010)) primarily investigates frictions
due to delay and the impact on assortative matching; the model of simultaneous search in Chade
and Smith (2006) focuses on the actions of a single decision maker who must choose a portfolio
of ranked stochastic options, where the probability of obtaining a particular option is assumed to
be exogenous.3 In contrast, we abstract away from notions of assortative matching and explicitly
explore the miscoordination aspects of information acquisition by focusing on the externalities that
firms impose on other firms via their interview decisions, thereby endogenizing the probability
that a firm hires a worker. As a result, the interview assignment problem instead exhibits strong
parallels to the literature on information acquisition in mechanism design: here firms (bidders)
must interview (invest) to learn their private values over workers (objects), and firms’ incentives
to learn valuations over workers are reduced the more other firms choose to do so (cf. Bergemann
and Välimäki (2005)).
      In a sense, our interview stage is also similar to the bipartite network formation models of
Kranton and Minehart (2000, 2001), which explore the formation of trading links between buyers
and sellers and where prices are influenced by these connections to potential trading partners.
Although the economic environment appears to be very different from a matching market, there
is a close mathematical connection. Indeed, their papers can be reinterpreted as an interviewing
  3
      Lien (2013) provides an example in which the assignment of interviews may be non-assortative.



                                                         5
problem in a market with transferable utility: a seller (firm) may only trade with (hire) a buyer
(worker) with whom it has formed a link (interviewed). A key mathematical difference, however, is
that Kranton and Minehart (2000, 2001) consider models with transferable utility (prices) whereas
our article considers a traditional matching market model without transferable utility; furthermore,
they do not allow for buyers to vary in their valuations over sellers, whereas idiosyncratic preferences
are central to our analysis.


2        Model
2.1        Setup and Definitions
There are N workers and N firms, represented by the sets W = {w1 , . . . , wN } and F = {f1 , . . . , fN }.
A worker can only work for one firm and a firm can only hire one worker; we refer to this hiring
decision as a match between a firm and a worker.4 The main innovation of our model is that firm
preferences for workers are unknown prior to a match, and can only be revealed through a costly
interview process. Firms and workers are allowed to conduct multiple interviews, but each interview
costs a fixed amount c ∈ R+ . Interviewing costs are borne by firms, and firms are assumed to be
risk-neutral profit maximizers.
        When a firm f interviews a worker w, it learns the value of δw,f ∈ R which represents the
firm-specific profits it realizes if it hires w. If a firm does not hire a worker, it receives a reservation
surplus which we will assume to be 0. We assume {δw,f }w∈W,f ∈F comprises private i.i.d. draws
from the continuous distribution H, where H has density h, finite first moments so that all order
                                                                     R
statistics have finite expectations (David and Nagaraja, 2003), and xdH(x) < 0 which ensures
that a firm would not hire a worker it has not interviewed.5 We impose the following condition:

                            (EH [δ|δ ≥ y] − y) is weakly decreasing in y ∀ y ≥ 0.                            (2.1)

This assumption is used in later proofs to guarantee that a firm’s expected gain from interviewing an
additional worker does not increase as it interviews more candidates.6 A sufficient condition for this
is that the density h is weakly log-concave, which is satisfied by the normal, exponential, uniform,
and Weibull (for γ > 1) densities (cf. Burdett (1996)). As H is continuous, the values of {δw,f }w∈W
for firm f can be used to generate strict preferences Pf over workers that are interviewed, as ties
occur with zero probability.
        If a worker w is hired by firm f , he realizes surplus ζw,f , where {ζw,f }w∈W,f ∈F comprise i.i.d.
draws from the continuous distribution G with finite support [ζ, ζ]. If a worker is not matched to
    4
     We abstract away from wage negotiations and assume that there are no wages (as in dating markets), or that
wages are fixed or already embedded in user preferences across firms (as may be the case in markets for some entry
level jobs).
   5
     The National Residency Matching Program is a prominent example of a market between hospitals and medical
school graduates which utilizes a centralized match (Roth (1984)); hospitals rarely if ever rank students whom they
do not interview.
   6
     See Lemma A.2 in the appendix.



                                                        6
a firm, he receives ζ0 < ζ, and thus a worker always prefers being employed to being unemployed.
Worker preferences are bounded to ensure workers report preferences truthfully in the second stage
match of our game. For each worker w, {ζw,f }f can be used to generate strict preferences Pw over
firms. In our model, workers cannot communicate preferences to firms, and thus whether they
know their preferences prior to being interviewed or learn them afterwards does not matter in this
model.7 For expositional purposes, we assume workers know their preferences over all firms prior
to interviewing; as a firm will never make a job offer to a worker whom it never interviewed, how
a worker ranks firms that do not interview him is irrelevant.

2.2      Timing and Description of Game
The timing of the interview and matching game is as follows:

  (1) In the first stage, each firm f chooses a set of workers Wf ⊂ W to interview and bears an
         interview cost c × |Wf |, where |Wf | is the number of interviews f conducts. We assume
         that workers do not decline interviews.8 These choices define an interview assignment η, a
         correspondence from the set F ∪ W into itself such that f ∈ η(w) if and only if w ∈ η(f ).
         Thus η(f ) ≡ Wf ⊂ W represents the workers interviewed by firm f under η, and η(w) ⊂ F
         represents the set of firms that interview w. Each firm privately realizes {δw,f }w∈Wf and
         forms ordinal preferences Pf over workers.9

  (2) In the second stage, we assume that firms and workers match according to the firm optimal
         stable matching (FOSM; cf. Gale and Shapley (1962); Roth and Sotomayor (1990)) given
         preferences {Pf , Pw }f ∈F,w∈W learned in stage 1.10 The realized matching is represented by
         µ, where we say w is hired by f if µ(w) = f , and w is unemployed if µ(w) = w. Similarly, we
         say f hires w if µ(f ) = w and firm f does not hire anyone if µ(f ) = f .

       We note that the FOSM used in the second stage of our game is the equilibrium outcome when
firms and workers engage in a firm-proposing deferred acceptance algorithm (DAA) for employment
(Gale and Shapley, 1962), and we utilize this particular procedure as an approximation for the
outcome of the hiring process. In Appendix A.1, we describe the algorithm (required for the
construction of later proofs), and we also prove that—as long as workers sufficiently dislike being
   7
     Coles, Kushnir and Niederle (2013) and Lee and Schwarz (2007) consider settings where workers initially know
their preferences over firms, and examine mechanisms which allow them to signal to firms prior to the assignment of
interviews.
   8
     Interviewing is costless from a worker’s perspective and a worker can elect to rank a firm as unacceptable in the
second stage deferred acceptance algorithm. If we assume that workers’ dis-utility from unemployment is sufficiently
large (which, as discussed below, is sufficient to ensure that workers report their true preferences in a firm-proposing
deferred acceptance algorithm), it can be shown that a worker will not wish to decline any interview.
   9
     Although a firm f only learns {δw,f } for those workers it interviews, as the expected value of hiring any w ∈    /
η(f ) < 0, how each firm ranks workers it does not interview is irrelevant.
  10
     A stable match is a matching in which there is no firm and worker pair who are not matched that would prefer
to be matched to each other than to their existing partners. Firm optimal means that no firm can do better (match
with a more preferred worker) in another stable matching than in the FOSM, according to the preferences used.



                                                           7
              f1        f2                  f3        f4                         f1        f2          f3        f4


              w1        w2                  w3        w4                         w1        w2          w3        w4
                                             (a)                                                (b)

         f1        f2         f3                 f4        f5               f1        f2         f3         f4        f5


        w1         w2        w3                  w4        w5               w1        w2         w3         w4        w5
                                      (c)                                                        (d)


Figure 1: Examples of Interview Assignments between firms {f1 , f2 , f3 , . . .} and workers
{w1 , w2 , w3 , . . .}.


unemployed—the only equilibrium of the DAA is for both firms and workers to utilize their true
preferences learned from the first-stage interviewing process.


3      The Interview Assignment Problem
Having specified the outcome of the second stage given any realization of preferences, we now focus
on the equilibrium first stage assignment of interviews.

3.1     Interview Assignments
Note any interview assignment η can be represented by a bi-partite network or graph g(η) on nodes
{F, W }, where we say f w ∈ g(η) if f interviews w under interview assignment η (i.e., w ∈ η(f )).
It will occasionally be convenient to represent interview assignments as networks; we provide some
examples of interview assignments in network form in Figure 1.

3.2     Equilibrium Analysis
We now turn to the equilibrium determination of an interview assignment. Formally, each firm’s
strategy during the interview assignment stage is a probability measure νf over the powerset of
all workers P(W ); i.e., for a set of workers Wf , νf assigns a probability that f interviews those
and only those workers. We say that firm f (always) interviews K workers if for any Wf ⊂ W ,
νf (Wf ) > 0 implies |Wf | = K; and we say that firm f interviews K workers “(uniformly) at
random” if νf (Wf ) > 0 if and only if |Wf | = K, and |Wf | = |Wf0 | implies νf (Wf ) = νf (Wf0 ).
      A strategy profile ν ≡ {νf }f ∈F is a subgame perfect Nash Equilibrium of this game if and only
if:                     Z         Z                             Z       Z
                                            πf (Wf , W−f ) ≥                  πf (Wf , W−f ) ∀ νf0 , f
                             νf    ν−f                          νf0     ν−f




                                                                    8
where πf (Wf , W−f ) is the expected profit for firm f given it interviews the set of workers Wf ,
and all other firms interview the workers W−f ≡ {Wf 0 }∀f 0 ∈F,f 0 6=f . We will explicitly define each
firm’s expected profit in the next subsection, but for now it is sufficient to note that it includes the
expected value of δ for the worker that a firm expects to hire, minus the costs of interviewing |Wf |
workers. Imposing subgame perfection implies firms anticipate the outcome of the equilibrium play
in the second stage match when conducting interviews in the first stage.
       We are first interested in examining equilibria in which all firms interview the same number
of workers. We show that even among this set of equilibria, the expected number of unemployed
workers or the costs expended on interviewing can vary significantly.
       First, consider an assignment where every firm randomly selects y workers to interview. For
certain values of c, this assignment is an equilibrium:

Proposition 3.1. For any x ∈ {0, ..., N }, there exists c > 0 such that there is an equilibrium in
which each firm interviews x workers at random.

(All proofs are located in the appendix.) Such a mixed-strategy equilibrium may be a reasonable
outcome if firms are unable to monitor how many interviews a worker receives, and if they are
unable to coordinate with other firms on which workers to interview; however, this may lead some
workers to receive more interviews than others.
       Next, consider an assignment in which every firm selects a single subset of workers so that every
firm and every worker receives the same number of interviews. This is equivalent to firms employing
a strategy in which each firm f assigns probability 1 to one particular element Wf ∈ P(W ); if these
strategies constitute an equilibrium, we say the correspondence η : η(f ) = Wf ∀ f is an pure-
strategy equilibrium interview assignment. Such an equilibrium may also exist:

Proposition 3.2. For any x such that N is divisible by x, there exists c > 0 such that there exists
a pure-strategy equilibrium interview assignment η in which each worker and each firm conducts
exactly x interviews.

       Both existence proofs in this section rely on a result established in in the Appendix (Lemma A.2)
that conditional on other firms utilizing a particular strategy, a given firm’s utility from interviewing
an additional worker is decreasing in the number of workers it is already interviewing. That is, a
firm gains more from the kth interview it conducts (holding everyone else’s actions fixed) than it
gains from the k + 1th. Thus, if the cost of interviewing is less than the gain from interviewing the
kth worker but greater than the gain from interviewing the k + 1th worker for a firm, every firm
interviewing k workers will be an equilibrium as it will not wish to add, remove, or replace any
workers in its set of interviewees.11
  11
    Due to integer constraints, there may exist values of c for which no equilibrium where all firms interview the same
number of workers exists. To see why, consider the mixed-strategy case. Assume that no firm interviews any worker,
and let G denote the gain from a firm deviating and randomly interviewing one worker. Let G0 represent the gain
from interviewing one worker when every other firm also interviews one worker at random. Clearly G0 < G as the
gain to interviewing a worker falls when other firms may also interview that worker. Thus as long as c ∈ (G0 , G), no
symmetric mixed-strategy equilibrium where all firms interview the same number of workers exists—neither everyone


                                                          9
    Unlike in the mixed-strategy case, implicit in the construction of a pure-strategy equilibrium is
a means for firms to somehow distinguish subsets of workers when they are of the same size—i.e.,
a firm must be able to differentiate Wf from Wf0 whenever |Wf | = |Wf0 |. Furthermore, it also
requires a great deal of coordination among firms in terms of exactly how to partition the space of
workers or which particular equilibrium to play; there are a large number of different symmetric
pure-strategy equilibria in which k interviews are conducted by each firm and each worker. As a
consequence, firms need not only to be able to identify which workers to interview in a particular
pure-strategy equilibrium, but also need to coordinate with all other firms which particular pure-
strategy equilibrium to play.
    If firms are able to coordinate, however, the following example shows they can achieve a better
outcome in a pure-strategy equilibrium than mixed:

Example 3.1. Consider N = 3 and the following symmetric interview assignment in which each
firm interviews two workers and each worker obtains two interviews:

   f1         f2        f3         η(f1 ) = {w1 , w2 },        η(f2 ) = {w2 , w3 },     η(f3 ) = {w3 , w1 } (3.1)


   w1        w2         w3

Assume δ = 1 +  with probability .9 and δ = −10 +  with probability 0.1, where  is drawn iid
                                                                        , ¯].12 This corresponds
from a continuous distribution with arbitrarily small bounded support [−¯
to the case where a worker is likely to generate positive surplus to a firm, but may be very costly
if the worker does not.
    In the next subsection, we show how one can explicitly compute each firm’s expected profit from
an interview assignment. For now, we note that each firm’s expected profit is π ≈ 0.88 − 2c and
the probability of being unmatched is approximately 0.12. Such an assignment is an equilibrium
for c ∈ (0.10, 0.24).
    However, consider the case where each firm now randomly selects 2 workers to interview. From
a given firm’s perspective, there are now several possible interview assignments—some workers may
receive 3 interviews and others 1 or 0; or, each worker gets exactly 2 interviews; and so on. In this
case it is also possible to compute the expected profits (π ≈ 0.85 − 2c) and probabilities of being
unmatched (0.15), indicating firms (and workers) are strictly worse off ex ante by mixing. These
are equilibrium strategies for c ∈ (0.11, 0.27).                                                                 
interviewing no workers nor everyone interviewing one worker is an equilibrium (and as arguments in the proof of the
previous proposition can show, everyone interviewing more than one worker in not an equilibrium either). However,
there may exist equilibria in which firms interview different numbers of workers (as in a symmetric mixed strategy
equilibrium where firms randomize over the number of interviews that they conduct).
  12
     The use of  is to ensure the distribution of δ is continuous with no point masses.




                                                          10
3.3       Firms’ Expected Profits
We now describe some of the details required to solve example 3.1 and provide insights into the
results of this article.
       In section 2, we noted that the second stage FOSM between firms and workers can be generated
from a firm-proposing DAA in which firms and workers use their true preferences. As a result, each
firm’s expected profit from interviewing any subset of workers Wf given the actions of other firms
W−f can be computed using the logic of the DAA. For illustrative purposes, consider the expected
profit of a firm f from interviewing only w:

             πf ({w}, W−f ) = Pr(δw,f ≥ 0) E [δw,f |δw,f ≥ 0] Pr(f w f 0 ∀ f 0 ⊂ F w |f ∈ F w ) −c
                              |    {z    }|        {z       }|               {z               }
                                        (1)                   (2)                           (3)


where F w denotes the set of firms that make a job offer to w given all other firms interview the
subsets of workers W−f . When we say a firm f makes a job offer to w, we are referring to the event
that during any stage of the DAA, firm f finds itself proposing to w; this definition is independent
of whether w rejects the offer, holds onto it, or ultimately accepts it. The expected profit can be
separated into three parts: (1) the probability that a job offer is made to the worker at some stage
of the job matching process (which here, due to only interviewing one worker, is equivalent to the
probability that the firm receives a positive draw on δw,f ), (2) the expected surplus this worker
will provide contingent on being hired, and (3) the probability the worker accepts this offer from
the firm given that the firm makes an offer (equivalent to the probability the worker prefers the
firm to all other firms who make him an offer). Notice conditional on receiving a job offer from
firm f , a worker’s δw,f is independent of his probability of actually accepting the offer—the latter
is a function of his other δw· draws with other firms and his own preferences, both of which are
independent of δw,f . Thus, the expected value of δw,f conditional on being hired is simply the
expected value of δw,f conditional on being made an offer, which corresponds to (2).
       If a firm decides to interview k > 0 workers, it is equivalent to taking k “draws” on δ. The
realization of the jth smallest δ draw is itself a random variable, known as the jth order statistic
which we denote by δj:k .13 By the logic of the DAA, we can then construct the expected profit from
interviewing k workers as the expected surplus from hiring the top worker of k interviews times
the probability of hiring him, plus the expected profit from hiring the 2nd highest worker times the
probability of losing the highest worker times the probability of hiring the 2nd highest worker, and
so forth. Formally then, a firm’s expected profit from interviewing the subset Wf (where |Wf | = k):
                                                                 
                                    η              η           η
            πf (Wf , W−f ) = Λk,k P (k) + Λk−1,k P (k−1) 1 − P (k) +                                                 (3.2)
                                                              k                               k           
                                                       η      Y                η            η Y           η
                                         · · · + Λ2,k P (2)              1 − P (i) + Λ1,k P (1)     1 − P (i) − ck
                                                              i=3                             i=2
  13
       Thus δ1:k is the smallest and δk:k is the highest draw.




                                                                    11
where Λj,k = P r(δj:k ≥ 0)E[δj:k |δj:k ≥ 0] is the expected value of the jth lowest worker interviewed
conditional on him being acceptable times the probability he is acceptable (equivalent to (1) and
                                                η
(2) in the single worker example), and P (j) represents the probability that firm f “wins” its jth
lowest worker conditional on making him an offer as a function of the entire interview assignment
η—i.e., firm f was rejected by all workers which would yield higher surplus, and the worker prefers
f over any other firm that makes him an offer (equivalent to (3) in the single worker example).
Finally, the probability a firm eventually is matched to any worker is simply equation (3.2) with
Pr(δj:k ≥ 0) replacing Λj,k :
                                                                                                      
                                                     k                            k
                                                           Pr(δj:k ≥ 0)P η(j)                     η
                                                     X                            Y
                  Pr(µ(f ) 6= f |Wf , W−f ) =                                            (1 − P (i) )     (3.3)
                                                     j=1                         i=j+1

                                  η
   As the probabilities P (j) are a function of the entire interview assignment, they may be difficult
to compute. However, one observation that aids analysis is that from a firm’s perspective, any
worker’s preferences are randomly generated uniformly over all the firms that interview him; conse-
quently, if n firms make a job offer to a worker at any round of the DAA, each firm considers itself
to have a 1/n probability of being the firm that the worker accepts (i.e., of being the highest ranked
                                                                           η
firm for that worker). Thus, sufficient for determining P (j) is simply the probability distribution
over the number of firms that “compete” by making an offer to the jth ranked worker.
        η
   Let P(j),i indicate the probability, conditioned on the event that a firm makes an offer to its jth
lowest worker, that i other firms also make that worker a job offer. Then it follows:

                                                         N
                                               η                 1
                                                                    Pη
                                                         X
                                             P (j)   =
                                                               i + 1 (j),i
                                                         i=0

The following example illustrates how this symmetry can be used to compute expected utilities for
firms:

Example 3.2. Let N = 4, and consider the interview assignment η depicted in Figure 1(a). As in
example 3.1, let δ = 1 +  with probability .9 and δ = −10 +  with probability 0.1.
   As all firms have symmetric interview assignments, any firm’s profits can be expressed using
                                     η
(3.2) with the same values for each P(j),i :
                                                                                  
                          η         1 η               η      1 η         η       1 η
          π = Λ2,2       P(2),0   + P(2),1 +Λ1,2 1 − P(2),0 − P(2),1    P(1),0 + P(1),1 −2c                (3.4)
                                    2                        2                   2
                     |            {z      }     |         {z         }|        {z      }
                                      η                              η                         η
                                  P (2)                          1−P (2)                     P (1)


where the first term is the expected gain times the probability of hiring the most preferred worker,
and the second term is the expected gain times the probability of hiring the second most preferred
worker (given it lost the first choice worker).
   Consider f1 . Without loss of generality, assume f1 prefers w1 to w2 . Assume now that f1


                                                            12
was rejected by w1 , and now makes an offer to w2 . The probability f1 faces competition for w2
conditional on having been rejected by w1 is given by:
                                                                          
                                            η         1       1     1 0.99
                                           P(1),1   = 0.99 + 0.81
                                                     |2 {z } |2   {z
                                                                    2 2
                                                                           }
                                                          (1)               (2)


where (1) represents the probability that f2 ’s most preferred acceptable worker is w2 , and (2)
represents the probability that w2 is f2 ’s second most preferred worker, is also acceptable, and f2
is rejected by w3 . As f1 could only have been rejected by w1 if f4 hired w1 , f3 faces no competition
for w4 , and thus f2 can only be rejected by w3 if w3 is f3 ’s top acceptable choice.
    Next, examine the probability f1 faces competition for w1 conditional on making him an offer;
this is given by:                                                 " η #
                                            η         1      1     P̃(2),1
                                           P(2),1   = 0.99 + 0.81
                                                     |2 {z } 2        2
                                                        (1)
                                                             |    {z       }
                                                                            (2)

where (1) is the probability that f4 ’s top acceptable worker is also w1 , and (2) is the probability
that f4 ’s top acceptable worker is w4 , is rejected by w4 , and then subsequently makes an offer to
w1 . Firm f4 can only lose to w4 if f3 competes for the same worker, which occurs with probability
  η                                                                                           η
P̃(2),1 . This will be different than the probability f1 faces competition for w1 , because P̃(2),1 is
conditional on f1 making an offer to w1 .
                   η
    To determine P̃(2),1 , note if w4 is f4 ’s top acceptable choice, f4 will face competition only if f3 ’s
top acceptable choice is also w4 , or if f3 is rejected by w3 first and then offers to w4 . However,
because w3 will only reject f3 if f2 makes w3 an offer, and f2 will do so only if w3 is its top acceptable
choice (otherwise, f2 would have hired w2 as f1 is not competing for w2 given it made an offer to
                    η        η
w1 first), we see P̃(2),1 = P(1),1 .
                                                                  η            η
    As E[δ|δ ≥ 0] = 1, Λ2,2 = 0.99 and Λ1,2 = 0.81; also, noting P(j),0 = 1 − P(j),1 for j = 1, 2 allows
us to solve for a firm’s expected profit π ≈ 0.86 − 2c from (3.4). Thus, if a worker can generate 100
thousand surplus for a firm with 90% probability or lose 1 million with 10% probability, a firm will
obtain in expectation approximately 86 thousand minus the cost of two interviews.
    Furthermore, the probability that a firm remains unmatched is
                                       "      η       !      η       !#                               "    η       #
                                             P(2),1         P(1),1                                        P(2),1
     Pr(δ2:2 < 0) + Pr(δ1:2 > 0)                                          + Pr (δ2:2 > 0, δ1:2 < 0)                    ≈ 0.14
                                               2                2                                           2

                                                                                                                                


4    Overlap
It is not surprising that coordinating on a pure-strategy equilibrium as opposed to playing a mixed-
strategy equilibrium can increase the probability of employment, as demonstrated by example 3.1

                                                                13
and supported by simulation results in the next section. However, this is not the only form of
coordination that can be achieved by firms in order to improve outcomes. It turns out that a
firm cares not only about the number of interviews its interviewees are already receiving, but the
identities of those firms that its interviewees are interviewing with.14
    Why does the identity of other firms matter? Consider the decision of f choosing to interview
an additional candidate when it is already interviewing w. Firm f can choose between w0 and w00
who each already have the same number of interviews, except w0 also happens to be interviewing
with the same firms interviewing w, whereas w00 is not. It turns out, the distinction between w0
and w00 is not trivial—f will strictly prefer to interview w0 . This is due to the fact that if f loses
its first choice worker (be it w or w0 ) to f 0 , then f will face less “competition” among firms for
its second choice worker because f 0 no longer needs to match. This generalizes naturally as well:
if firm f ’s candidates all overlap with the same other firms, then it means that for every worker
who rejects f ’s job offer, effectively one fewer firm is then “competing” for its next highest ranked
worker.
    We discuss our main results by focusing on a a particular set of interview assignments that we
call symmetric:

Definition 4.1. An interview assignment η is symmetric if and only if for any f 0 , f 00 ∈ F , there
exist bijections γ F : F → F and γ W : W → W where γ F (f 0 ) = f 00 such that for all f ∈ F , w ∈ W ,
f w ∈ g(η) if and only if γ F (f )γ W (w) ∈ g(η).

    In other words, in a symmetric interview assignment, any firm can switch its position in a
network with any other firm and an “identical” or isomorphic network can be obtained via a
relabeling of all other nodes. Not only does a symmetric network imply that each firm and worker
receives the same number of interviews (given there are the same number of firms and workers),
but also (because agents are ex ante symmetric) every agent will be indifferent between keeping
and swapping all their interviews with any other agent.
    Consider the interview assignments depicted in Figure 1. Both (a) and (b) are symmetric
assignments where each firm and worker has exactly 2 interviews. However, although (c) and (d)
are assignments where each firm and worker has exactly 3 interviews, (c) is symmetric and (d) is
not. To see why, note that in (d), f1 and f2 interview the exact same candidates, but, neither
firms f3 , f4 , or f5 share the exact same set of candidates with any other firm. Thus, if f1 switched
positions with f3 in the network, there exists no relabeling of all other nodes such that f1 interviews
the same three candidates with any other firm.
    Finally, we note that a symmetric interview assignment implies not only that each component
of the network contains the same number of firms and workers, but within each component the
interview assignment is also symmetric.15,16 In Figure 1, all assignments have 1 component except
   14
      In addition, a firm cares about the identities of the firms who interview the workers who are interviewed by the
firms who interview the same set of workers, and so on and so forth.
   15
      A component of a network is a distinct subgraph in which all nodes are connected via some path in the network
(cf. Jackson, 2008).
   16
      It is straightforward to show that there must be the same number of firms as workers within any component


                                                         14
for (b) which has 2.
    We introduce a partial ordering over different symmetric interview assignments to capture this
idea:

Definition 4.2. Consider two symmetric interview assignments η and η 0 in which both firms and
workers receive k interviews. We say η exhibits greater overlap than η 0 if and only if C(g(η)) <
C(g(η 0 )), where C(g(·)) is the number of firms (or workers) in any component of g(·). We define
the degree of non-overlap of assignment η to be d(η, k) ≡ (C(g(η)) − k). We say that η exhibits
perfect overlap if d(η, k) = 0 and minimal overlap if d(η, k) = N − k.

    Recall for any symmetric interview assignment where each firm and worker receives k interviews,
the associated graph will have the same number of agents across each component. The smaller the
size of each component across different assignments, the greater the sense in which firms “share”
the same set of interviewees with other firms. Indeed, the smallest number of firms a component
can contain is k, which occurs under perfect overlap; this implies if any two firms interview the
same worker, those two firms interview the same exact set of workers: i.e., η(f ) ∩ η(f 0 ) 6= ∅ implies
η(f ) = η(f 0 ) ∀ f, f 0 .
    Although perhaps subtle, the concept of greater overlap can have significant effects as demon-
strated by the following example.

Example 4.1. Recall in example 3.2 that a firm’s expected profits was approximately 0.86 − 2c,
and the probability a firm is unmatched was approximately 0.14. Note this interview assignment,
given by Figure 1(a), exhibited minimal overlap.
    Now take the same setup of example 3.2 except now consider the interview assignment η depicted
in Figure 1(b) which exhibits perfect overlap. In this case, if both w1 and w2 are acceptable for f1 ,
then f1 is guaranteed to hire at least one of them with certainty: if f1 loses its top choice worker,
                                                                                       η
it means f2 hired w1 and there no longer is competition for w2 . It then follows that P(1),0 = 1
(the probability of facing no competition for the second best worker, given the first best worker
rejected the firm). Additionally, the probability f1 ’s top worker receives another job offer is simply
 η         1
P(2),1 =   2   Pr(δ2:2 > 0), which is the probability that f2 ’s top choice worker coincides with f1 ’s top
choice. We thus find a firm’s expected profit is:
                                                                            
                              η        1 η                       η      1 η
            πf = Λ2,2        P(2),0   + P(2),1       + Λ1,2 1 − P(2),0 − P(2),1 − 2c ≈ 0.95 − 2c                   ,
                                       2                                2
of a symmetric interview assignment (as there are N firms and N workers). To see why there must be the same
number of firms (and workers) across components, consider an assignment η with two components, the first with
exactly K firms and the other with exactly K 0 firms, K > K 0 . Let f be in the larger component and f 0 in the
other. If the first component contains K firms, this means there exists an alternating sequence of unique firms
and workers {f(1) , w(1) , f(2) , w(2) , . . . , w(K−1) , f(K) } which contains f such that f(i) w(i) ∈ g(η) ∀ i ∈ {1, . . . , K}
and w(i) f(i+1) ∈ g(η) ∀ i ∈ {1, . . . , K − 1}. If η is symmetric, then there must exist a bijection γ F : F → F
such that γ F (f ) = f 0 and a bijection γ W : W → W such that γ F (f(i) )γ W (w(i) ) ∈ g(η) ∀ i ∈ {1, . . . , K} and
γ W (w(i) )γ W (f(i+1) ) ∈ g(η) ∀ i ∈ {1, . . . , K − 1}. But this implies f 0 is in a component with at least K firms, which
is a contradiction.




                                                              15
and the probability of remaining unmatched is
                                                                          
                                                                 1 η
                    Pr (δ2:2 < 0) + Pr (δ2:2 > 0&δ1:2 < 0)        P            ≈ 0.05   .
                                                                 2 (2),1

   Hence, we see that with perfect overlap, the probability that any worker or firm is unmatched is
drastically reduced, and that a firm generates in expectation greater surplus from the same number
of interviews—an increase of over 10%.
   Indeed, an interview assignment with minimal overlap given by Figure 1(a) is an equilibrium
for firms to follow for c ∈ (0.09, 0.23). On the other hand, as long as c ∈ (0.05, 0.26), the interview
assignment depicted in 1(b) with perfect overlap is an equilibrium. Consequently, for any value of
c ∈ (0.09, 0.23), both interview assignments shown in Figure 1(a) and (b) are equilibria, but the
latter equilibrium dominates.                                                                        

   Thus, there may be many different pure-strategy equilibria that still assign each firm and each
worker the same number interviews, but exhibit different degrees to which workers coincide among
firms.
   We prove that if the probability that a worker is found to be undesirable is sufficiently small,
then among the set of symmetric interview assignments in which firms and workers receive the
same number of interviews, the assignments that are characterized by perfect overlap minimize the
(ex ante) probability that any firm or worker will remain unemployed:

Theorem 4.1. For any x such that N is divisible by x, there exists  > 0 such that if Pr(δ < 0) < ,
an interview assignment with perfect overlap with x interviews per firm and worker minimizes
expected unemployment over any other symmetric interview assignment in which each firm and
worker receives x interviews.

   The intuition for the proof is as follows. Note first that the probability that any firm is un-
matched (and hence a worker is unemployed) under perfect overlap is bounded above by the prob-
ability that a firm finds at least one worker to be undesirable. Second, note that without perfect
overlap, the probability that any firm is unmatched is bounded below by the probability that a
set of preferences are realized in which all of a firm’s interviewees are matched to other firms;
by an application of Hall’s marriage theorem, we can show that a set of preferences resulting in
such a match will always exist in a symmetric interview assignment without perfect overlap. If
the probability that a worker is found to be undesirable is sufficiently small, the upper bound on
the probability of unemployment under perfect overlap is smaller than the lower bound on the
probability of unemployment under “non-perfect” overlap, and the result follows.

Remarks.     It is worth nothing that this result is not necessarily sensitive to the assumption that
firm preferences over workers are i.i.d.: e.g., consider the modification that firm preferences over
workers are perfectly correlated such that all firms share the same common value for each worker
(but would have to still interview to learn these values, and could not share information). In this


                                                  16
                                       Table 1: Comparison Between Pure and Mixed-Strategy Equilibria


                                   Pure-Strategy (Perfect Overlap)     Mixed-Strategy   (N=10)          Mixed-Strategy   (N=100)
                                    Prob.     Exp.       Equil.       Prob.   Exp.        Equil.       Prob.    Exp.        Equil.
                                   Unemp. Profit          Costs      Unemp. Profit         Costs      Unemp. Profit          Costs
                               1    0.10      0.45     (0.10,0.45)    0.39    0.30      (0.18,0.30)    0.40     0.30      (0.18,0.30)
    # Interviews Per Agent




                               2    0.05      0.54     (0.06,0.20)    0.23    0.43      (0.11,0.17)    0.25     0.42      (0.12,0.17)
                               3    0.03      0.60     (0.04,0.12)    0.15    0.50      (0.09,0.12)    0.18     0.49      (0.09,0.11)
                               4    0.02      0.64     (0.03,0.09)    0.10    0.56      (0.06,0.09)    0.13     0.54      (0.06,0.08)
                               5    0.02      0.67     (0.03,0.06)    0.07    0.60      (0.05,0.06)    0.10     0.58      (0.05,0.06)
                               6    0.01      0.69     (0.02,0.05)    0.05    0.64      (0.04,0.05)    0.08     0.61      (0.04,0.05)
                               7    0.01      0.71     (0.02,0.04)    0.03    0.68      (0.03,0.04)    0.06     0.63      (0.04,0.04)
                               8    0.01      0.73     (0.02,0.03)    0.02    0.71      (0.03,0.03)    0.05     0.65      (0.03,0.04)
                               9    0.01      0.74     (0.01,0.03)    0.01    0.73      (0.02,0.03)    0.05     0.67      (0.03,0.03)
                              10    0.00      0.76     (0.01,0.02)    0.00    0.76      (0.00,0.02)    0.04     0.69      (0.02,0.03)

Notes: 10,000 simulation runs. δw,f is distributed iid uniformly on [0, 1] with 90% probability, and δw,f ≤ −10 with
10% probability. “Prob. Unemp.” is the probability that a firm or worker remains unemployed, “Exp. Profit”
does not include interviewing costs, and “Equil. Costs” is the range of c such that the assignment in question is an
equilibrium.


setting, an equilibrium with perfect overlap would also maximize expected employment among all
other symmetric equilibria, including those in mixed-strategies. To see this, note that with perfect
overlap, any worker that generates positive surplus will be employed as long as every firm conducts
at least 1 interview; thus the expected probability of unemployment will simply be Pr(δ < 0). On
the other hand, either non-perfect overlap or random interviewing introduces matching frictions
and strictly increases unemployment.
       Also note that due to integer constraints, for a given c and N a symmetric pure-strategy
equilibrium with perfect overlap may not exist: the construction of equilibria is sensitive to the
relationship of N versus x, where x is the number of interviews per firm in equilibrium. However,
as we show in Appendix A.3, if there exists an equilibrium with perfect overlap for N = x for a
given value of c, then as N grows large there exists a correlated equilibrium in which each firm
interviews x workers and achieves perfect overlap with probability close to 1.


5                            Simulation Results
This article has examined two forms of coordination in the assignment of interviews: (i) pure vs.
mixed-strategy (i.e., even though firms all conduct the same number of interviews, some workers
may receive different numbers); and (ii) the degree of non-overlap across assignments. In this
section, we simulate interview markets to evaluate the impact of these forms of coordination on
employment.




                                                                           17
5.1      Pure vs. Mixed-Strategy Equilibria
To compare outcomes under pure and mixed-strategy equilibria (i.e., when firms conduct the same
number of interviews, but may not be able to coordinate on the set of workers that they interview),
we simulate markets where δw,f is distributed iid uniformly on [0, 1] with 90% probability, and
δ ≤ −10 with 10% probability; this also ensures the expected value of hiring a random worker
without interviewing him is negative. We allow number of interviews each firm conducts to vary
from 1 to 10, where firms coordinate on a perfect overlap equilibrium, or play a mixed-strategy
equilibrium in which the number of total agents in the market varies from 10 to 100.17
       Table 1 reports the probability that any given firm is unemployed, its expected profit not in-
cluding interviewing costs, and the range of interviewing costs such that the given assignment is an
equilibrium. When firms can coordinate on a pure-strategy equilibrium, the probability of unem-
ployment is bounded above by 10% (the probability a worker is unacceptable); however, under a
mixed-strategy equilibrium it is much higher, particularly when firms interview a small number of
workers. Furthermore, as the number of agents in the market grows larger, a mixed-strategy equi-
librium performs worse; a pure-strategy equilibrium (because the size of each component remains
fixed) is not affected.
       What is also evident from this exercise is that a pure-strategy equilibrium can result in either
more or fewer interviews being conducted than a mixed-strategy equilibrium.18 Although we do
not prove this result generally, in this example, for any c under which both a symmetric pure- and
mixed-strategy equilibria exist, firms receive strictly higher expected profit (and higher probability
of being matched) under the pure-strategy equilibrium.

5.2      Comparing Overlap
We now focus on pure-strategy equilibria with symmetric interviewing assignments, and vary the
degree of non-overlap across assignments and the probability a worker is determined to be unac-
ceptable (but firms still do not hire workers they do not interview).19
       Table 2 reports the probability that a firm is unmatched across different specifications. Sim-
ulations suggest that as the degree of non-overlap increases for a given number of interviews or
probability that a worker is found undesirable, the probability of unemployment increases. Fur-
thermore, the increase is the largest when moving from perfect overlap to an assignment with degree
of non-overlap of 1; as the degree of non-overlap grows, the rate at which unemployment increases
  17
     For all simulations involving pure-strategy equilibria, we assume that N is equal to the number of firms in each
component (i.e., the number of interviews per worker plus the degree of non-overlap of the interview assignment);
the number of components in the market does not affect results.
  18
     For example, if c ∈ (0.30, 0.45), a pure-strategy equilibrium exists where every firm exactly interviews 1 worker;
however, no mixed-strategy equilibrium exists where all firms randomly interview at least 1 worker. However, if
c = 0.06, a pure-strategy exists where firms interview 4 workers; a mixed-strategy equilibrium exists where firms
randomly select 5 workers.
  19
     There may be many symmetric interview assignments with the same degree of non-overlap that differ in expected
profits and unemployment. For our simulations, we construct the symmetric interview assignments according the
procedure used in the proof of Proposition 3.2.



                                                          18
                                                Table 2: Probability of Being Unemployed


                                                              Degree of   non-overlap (|C(g(η))| − k)
                                          0       1       2         3          4         5       10      25       50     100
                                  1    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%     0.0%     0.0%
        # Interviews Per Agent


                                  2    0.0%    6.3%    9.5%     10.5%      10.9% 11.1% 11.1% 11.1%            11.1%    11.1%
        (P r(δw,f ) < 0) = 0%




                                  3    0.0%    2.2%    3.9%      4.8%       5.3%     5.5%    5.7%     5.7%     5.7%     5.7%
                                  4    0.0%    1.4%    2.5%      3.4%       4.1%     4.5%    5.3%     5.5%     5.4%     5.4%
                                  5    0.0%    0.9%    1.6%      2.2%       2.7%     3.1%    3.9%     4.2%     4.2%     4.1%
                                  6    0.0%    0.6%    1.0%      1.5%       1.9%     2.2%    3.2%     3.7%     3.7%     3.7%
                                  7    0.0%    0.4%    0.7%      1.0%       1.3%     1.6%    2.5%     3.1%     3.1%     3.1%
                                  8    0.0%    0.3%    0.5%      0.7%       0.9%     1.2%    1.9%     2.7%     2.7%     2.7%
                                  9    0.0%    0.2%    0.4%      0.5%       0.7%     0.9%    1.5%     2.3%     2.4%     2.4%
                                 10    0.0%    0.1%    0.3%      0.4%       0.5%     0.6%    1.2%     1.9%     2.1%     2.1%
                                  1   10.0%   10.0%   10.0%     10.0%      10.0% 10.0% 10.0% 10.0%            10.0%    10.0%
        # Interviews Per Agent




                                  2    5.5%   11.4%   13.6%     14.1%      14.4% 14.4% 14.4% 14.4%            14.4%    14.4%
        (P r(δw,f ) < 0) = 10%




                                  3    3.4%    5.7%    7.3%      8.0%       8.3%     8.4%    8.5%     8.5%     8.5%     8.5%
                                  4    2.3%    3.9%    4.9%      5.7%       6.3%     6.6%    7.1%     7.2%     7.2%     7.2%
                                  5    1.6%    2.6%    3.4%      4.0%       4.5%     4.8%    5.4%     5.6%     5.6%     5.6%
                                  6    1.2%    1.8%    2.4%      2.9%       3.3%     3.6%    4.4%     4.7%     4.7%     4.7%
                                  7    0.9%    1.4%    1.8%      2.1%       2.4%     2.7%    3.5%     3.9%     4.0%     3.9%
                                  8    0.7%    1.0%    1.3%      1.6%       1.8%     2.1%    2.8%     3.4%     3.4%     3.4%
                                  9    0.5%    0.8%    1.0%      1.2%       1.4%     1.6%    2.3%     2.9%     3.0%     3.0%
                                 10    0.4%    0.6%    0.8%      0.9%       1.1%     1.3%    1.8%     2.5%     2.6%     2.6%
                                  1   25.0%   25.0%   25.0%     25.0%      25.0% 25.0% 25.0% 25.0%            25.0%    25.0%
        # Interviews Per Agent




                                  2   15.1%   19.4%   20.4%     20.6%      20.6% 20.7% 20.7% 20.7%            20.7%    20.7%
        (P r(δw,f ) < 0) = 25%




                                  3   10.1%   12.0%   13.2%     13.6%      13.7% 13.8% 13.9% 13.9%            13.9%    13.9%
                                  4    7.2%    8.7%    9.6%     10.2%      10.5% 10.6% 10.9% 10.9%            10.9%    10.9%
                                  5    5.4%    6.4%    7.2%      7.6%       8.0%     8.2%    8.5%     8.6%     8.6%     8.6%
                                  6    4.2%    4.9%    5.5%      5.9%       6.2%     6.5%    7.0%     7.1%     7.1%     7.1%
                                  7    3.3%    3.8%    4.3%      4.6%       4.9%     5.1%    5.7%     5.9%     5.9%     5.9%
                                  8    2.6%    3.1%    3.4%      3.7%       4.0%     4.2%    4.7%     5.1%     5.1%     5.1%
                                  9    2.1%    2.5%    2.8%      3.0%       3.2%     3.4%    4.0%     4.4%     4.4%     4.4%
                                 10    1.7%    2.0%    2.2%      2.4%       2.6%     2.7%    3.3%     3.8%     3.8%     3.9%

Notes: 10,000 simulation runs. Each cell indicates the probability a firm is unmatched or a worker is unemployed
given every firm and worker receives 1-10 interviews, and the degree of non-overlap increases. Each panel of the table
varies the probability of any worker being unacceptable from 0% to 10% to 25%.


falls, and once the degree of non-overlap reaches 10, incremental reductions are marginal.
    Some intuition for this result can be gleaned from Figure 2: in panels (a)-(c), the first compo-
nents of three different symmetric interview assignments {η 0 , η 1 , η 2 } are depicted in which each firm
and worker receives 2 interviews; η 0 has perfect overlap, whereas the other two have less overlap.
If all workers are acceptable to f1 , then under η 0 there is no possible stable match which results in
firm f1 being unmatched. However, there is one potential stable match under η 1 and two under η 2
in which f1 is unmatched; as overlap decreases further, even more stable matches (supportable by
some set of preferences) can be constructed.
    Overall, the gains to overlap can be substantial: focusing on settings where firms interview more
than one worker and where the probability of a worker being unacceptable is 10%, the chance that a
firm or worker is unmatched is approximately 3-4 times smaller under a perfect overlap assignment



                                                                          19
          f1               f2         f1        f2            f3         f1          f2                    f3         f4


         w1                w2         w1       w2             w3         w1          w2                    w3         w4
                       0                                1                                              2
               (a) η                          (b) η                                            (c) η

                                    f1       f2              f3         f1         f2                 f3             f4


                                    w1       w2              w3         w1         w2                 w3             w4
                                                    1
                                            (d) µ                                        (e)    µ21

                                                                   f1         f2                f3              f4


                                                                   w1         w2               w3               w4
                                                                                   (f)   µ22


Figure 2: (a)-(c) Symmetric interview assignments where each firm and worker receive 2 interviews,
each with different levels of overlap. (d)-(f) Given interview assignments η 1 and η 2 , only µ1 , µ21 ,
and µ22 are stable matches in which no worker is unacceptable and firm f1 is unmatched.


than under an assignment with a degree of non-overlap larger than 10.


6    Concluding Remarks
The cost of interviewing and the importance of how interviews are allocated has remained outside
of the scope of the matching literature. This article takes a step towards incorporating interviewing
into matching models. We have studied the interview assignment problem and provided a model
for analysis when information acquisition is costly. We identified two distinct forms of potential
miscoordination in the assignment of interviews: (i) workers may receive varying numbers of inter-
views; (ii) more subtly, firms may not optimally overlap their interviews. Consequently, conditional
on a certain number of interviews being conducted, institutions that limit the number of interviews
workers can receive or artificially create labor market segmentation to encourage overlap may lead
to better coordination in information acquisition activities.
    As a first attempt to study interviewing in matching markets, our model is deliberately simple
and hence relatively tractable. Within this model, there are several open questions, including: char-
acterizing equilibrium existence when firms may interview different numbers of workers; whether
for fixed costs of interviewing, pure-strategy equilibria always outperform mixed-strategy equilib-
ria; and whether for certain types of symmetric interview assignments, greater overlap guarantees
lower expected unemployment.
    It also is worth mentioning several aspects of interviewing markets that are beyond the scope


                                                        20
of this article but are interesting for future work. For example, our article assumes that firms bear
the full cost of interviewing; this may be a reasonable approximation in some markets, but less so
in others (e.g., economic PhDs do not pay for travel and accommodations for academic interviews
whereas medical residents do). Can this division—or even the interviewing costs themselves—be
endogenized? There is also a normative question of what division of interviewing costs reduces
unemployment and how it differs from market equilibrium.
   Other potentially important extensions include allowing for (ex-ante) heterogeneous agents or
correlated preferences, and determining the socially efficient allocation of interviews in this envi-
ronment; this analysis becomes even more complex when interviews can be assigned dynamically
(i.e., sequentially) based on information revealed in earlier interviews. Finally, although the present
model considered a matching market without transfers (or rigid wages that cannot be tailored to an
individual candidate), generalizing the model to environments with endogenous transfers is another
challenging and important problem.




                                                  21
A      Appendix
A.1     Second Stage Matching
The firm optimal stable matching (FOSM) used in the second stage of our game is the outcome of a firm-proposing
deferred acceptance algorithm (DAA) for employment when firms and workers utilize their true preferences (Gale
and Shapley, 1962). We first describe the algorithm (whose features are leveraged in proving this article’s main
results), and then prove that—as long as workers place sufficient disutility on being unemployed—firms and workers
will utilize their true preferences in equilibrium when the firm-proposing DAA is used.
     Before proceeding, note that in the main text, we have assumed that workers have only ordinal preferences over
firms; this was sufficient as long as we assumed the outcome of the second stage was the FOSM. However, if we
wish to interpret the FOSM as arising from a firm-proposing DAA, we will need to make assumptions on the relative
utility of being employed versus unemployed (see Lemma A.1 to follow); this is the only instance in which we assume
workers have cardinal preferences.

The Deferred Acceptance Algorithm (DAA). In the firm-proposing DAA, each firm f utilizes pref-
erences Pf over acceptable workers and each worker w utilizes preferences Pw . The algorithm proceeds as follows:
    • Step 1: Each firm makes a job offer to its highest-ranked worker (or, if all workers are unacceptable, does not
      make any offers). Each worker who receives an offer “holds” onto its most preferred offer and rejects the rest.
    • In general, at step t: Each firm who was rejected in step t − 1 makes a job offer to the most preferred and
      acceptable worker who has not yet rejected it. Each worker who receives an offer compares all offers received
      (including an offer he may be holding from a previous round), holds onto his most preferred offer, and rejects
      the rest.
    The algorithm stops after any step in which no firm’s offer is rejected; at this point all firms have either a worker
holding its job offer, or has no workers it wishes to make an offer to that has not already rejected it. At this point, any
worker who is holding a job offer from a firm is hired by that firm (an event we also refer to as the worker accepting
an offer), and any worker who does not have a job offer remains unemployed.

Truthful Revelation of Preferences. A matching mechanism such as the DAA can be susceptible to
“gaming” in that participants may find it preferable to misrepresent their true preferences; indeed, there are several
negative results in the two-sided matching literature on the existence of mechanisms that elicit truth-telling from
participants. Nonetheless in this section, we prove that as long as workers place a high enough disutility of being
unemployed, firms and workers will utilize their true preferences realized during the interview stage under the firm-
proposing DAA. This is formally stated and proven in the following lemma:

Lemma A.1. There exists a finite β > 0 such that if ζ − ζ0 > β(ζ − ζ), the only equilibrium of the firm-proposing
deferred acceptance algorithm is for both workers and firms to report their true preferences.

Proof of Lemma A.1. As this is equivalent to the marriage problem that yields the M-optimal stable matching (with
firms as men), firms have a dominant strategy to report their preferences truthfully (Dubins and Freedman (1981),
Roth (1982)). For workers, it is sufficient to rule out two types of deviations: (i) a worker may rank some firm as
“unacceptable” and reject any offer from that firm; (ii) a worker may rank firm j 0 higher than j in his reported
preferences despite preferring j to j 0 in his true preferences.
     To see why deviation (i) may be effective, note that declaring a firm as unacceptable can lead to the following
“chain” of events: some worker w rejects some firm f ’s offer (instead of holding onto it or accepting it); f then makes
an offer to another worker w0 who accepts and rejects some other firm f 0 ; this f 0 in turn proposes to another worker,
who then may reject another firm; and so on, until a firm f 00 , who was rejected by another worker, makes an offer
to the original worker w, and w prefers f 00 to f . As long as the gain to such a deviation is never greater than the
potential loss from employing it, a worker will never choose to reject any firm.
     Let L ≤ N be the maximum number of interviews any worker receives in any equilibrium. Assume w is considering
rejecting a firm’s offer that it finds preferable to the one w is already holding. In order for this to be profitable, f
upon being rejected (conditional on making w an offer) must propose to another worker that already has an existing
offer from another firm f 0 , and that worker must prefer f to f 0 . The probability that f is preferred to any f 0 by
another worker is at most 1/2, which is an upper bound on the probability that rejecting a firm leads to a profitable
manipulation. Thus the gain to rejecting a firm’s offer is bounded by (ζ − ζ)/2, where the term in parenthesis is
the maximum gain possible to w by obtaining a more preferred firm. However, if a worker receives L interviews and
rejects an offer, the probability that he receives no other offer is at least (λ)L−1 , where λ = Pr(δw,f < 0) > 0 is
the probability that a worker is unacceptable to a firm. Consequently, by rejecting firm j, he risks losing at least


                                                            22
(λ)L−1 (ζ − ζ0 ). Clearly as long as β > (λ)L−1 /2, the inequality holds and no worker will find it profitable to reject
any firm’s offer (unless it is holding an offer from a more preferred firm).
     To rule out deviation (ii), we first establish the following claim: prior to engaging in the match, the expected
probability of being hired by a firm is strictly decreasing in the rank a worker orders that firm in his reported
preferences. First recall preferences are independently drawn and privately realized for all agents, and workers do not
observe the complete interview assignment. Thus, a worker perceives the probability of receiving a job offer as the
same for any firm. If this probability is denoted by p, then the expected probability of being hired by a firm ranked
in the nth position is (1 − p)n−1 × p (as in order to be hired by the nth ranked firm, all firms that were ranked higher
must not have made a job offer). This expression is decreasing in n.
     Having established the claim, it is straightforward to show that if any worker ranked f 0 higher than f despite
preferring f to f 0 , he would be better off reporting truthfully.

A.2     Proofs
Proof of Proposition 3.1. Assume each firm selects x ≤ N workers to interview uniformly at random: i.e., each firm
plays a strategy νf which assigns equal positive probability to all distinct subsets of workers of size x. We show that
there exists a c such that this is an equilibrium.
    Consider firm f . If every other firm is randomizing uniformly, firm f is indifferent over interviewing any particular
worker, so for any given number of interviews k that f conducts, any set of workers is optimal. Let

              gf (k, ν−f ; x) = Eν−f [πf (Wf , W−f ) − πf (Wf0 , W−f ) | |Wf | = k, |Wf0 | = k − 1, |W−f | = x]        (A.1)

denote f ’s expected gain to interviewing an additional kth worker (not including costs) given all other firms are
interviewing x workers uniformly at random, and πf (·) is defined in (3.2).
     We first prove the following lemma:
Lemma A.2. gf (k, ν−f ; x) is strictly decreasing in k.

Proof. Let w0 = µk−1 (f ) be the worker f would have matched to if it only conducted k − 1 interviews. Note f only
benefits from interviewing the kth worker (denoted wk ) if µk (f ) = wk , as otherwise f would still be matched to w0 .
We decompose gf (k, ν−f ) as follows:


                gf (k, ν−f ; x) = Pr(µk (f ) = wk ) × (E[δwk ,f − δw0 ,f |µk (f ) = wk & µk−1 (f ) = w0 ])             (A.2)
                                  |      {z      } |                             {z                      }
                                        (1)                                   (2)


  (1) Probability that interviewing wk results in being matched to wk : As f is indifferent between interviewing any two
      workers, it must be that Pr(µk (f ) = wk ) = Pr(µk (f ) = w) for any w that f is already interviewing. Intuitively,
      it is clear that interviewing an additional worker strictly reduces the probability that f is eventually matched
      to a given worker it already is interviewing. Formally, consider any w, and assume that µk−1 (f ) = w. The
      probability that f is still matched to w after k interviews is:

                 Pr(µk (f ) = w|µk−1 (f ) = w) = Pr(δw,f ≥ δwk ,f ) + Pr(δw,f < δwk ,f ) × Pr(µk−1 (wk )Pwk f )

       where the first term is the probability that f does not make an offer to wk after interviewing him, and the second
       term is that f makes an offer to wk but is rejected. This is strictly less than 1 because Pr(µk−1 (wk )Pwk f ) < 1.
       Thus (1) is strictly decreasing in k.
  (2) Expected gain from being matched to wk given f was matched to w0 : Note (2) is equivalent to E[δwk ,f −
      δw0 ,f |δwk ,f > δw0 ,f ]: i.e., f would only make an offer to wk after interviewing him if δwk ,f > δw0 ,f . As δw0 ,f
      is weakly increasing in k (i.e., the value of f ’s existing match cannot fall by conducting more interviews), and
      because Assumption 2.1 implies that [E[δwk ,f − y|δwk ,f ≥ y] weakly falls as y increases, if follows that (2) is
      at least weakly decreasing in k.

    As (1) is strictly and (2) is at least weakly decreasing in k, the lemma is proved.

     By the previous lemma, we can find c ∈ (gf (x, ν−f ; x), gf (x − 1, ν−f ; x)). For such c, given every other firm
is interviewing a subset of x workers uniformly at random, no individual firm will wish to interview more than x
candidates (because doing so earns an expected gain of less than c per additional candidate) or fewer than x candidates
(because doing so gives up an expected gain greater than c per candidate). Furthermore, every firm is indifferent
over all subsets of x workers, so the set of mixed-strategies {νf }∀f is an equilibrium.



                                                              23
Proof of Proposition 3.2. Assume N is divisible by x. Construct a symmetric perfect-overlap interview assign-
ment η as follows: divide firms and workers into M ≡ N/x components, where component m ∈ {1, . . . , M }
contains firm and worker indexed by {(m − 1)x + 1, . . . , (m − 1)x + x}. In the first component (m = 1), let
η(fi ) = {wi , w[i+1]x , . . . , w[i+x−1]x } for each i ∈ {1, . . . , x}, where we define [a]b ≡ mod(a − 1, b) + 1;20 repeat the
same assignment within each component for each m ≥ 2.
     W.l.o.g, consider f ≡ f1 , and let

               gf (k, η−f ) = [πf ({w1 , . . . , wk }, W−f ) − πf ({w1 , . . . , wk−1 }, W−f ) | W−f = {η(f 0 )}∀f 0 ∈F,f 0 6=f ]

be f ’s expected gain to interviewing wk when it is already interviewing {w1 , . . . , wk−1 } and all other firms are
interviewing according to η.
Lemma A.3. gf (k, η−f ) is strictly decreasing in k.

Proof. The proof is similar to Lemma A.2: decompose gf (k, η−f ) as follows:

                     gf (k, η−f ) = Pr(µk (f ) = wk ) × (E[δwk ,f − δw0 ,f |µk (f ) = wk & µk−1 (f ) = w0 ])                        (A.3)
                                    |      {z      } |                             {z                      }
                                             (1)                                      (2)


     For k ∈ {1, . . . , x}: Within the first component, (1) is strictly decreasing in k by the same logic as in Lemma A.2:
as {w1 , . . . , wx } are identical from the perspective of f (they are all receiving x − 1 interviews from {f2 , . . . , fx }),
the probability of being matched to the kth worker (given the first k workers are interviewed) is the same as being
matched to any w ∈ {wj }j<k . As before, because interviewing an additional worker must reduce the probability f is
matched to a given worker, (1) is strictly decreasing in k. Also, as before, (2) is weakly decreasing in k.
     For k = x + 1: For the k + 1 interview, f must interview a worker who already has x interviews, and is in a
different component of the graph associated with η. To see that the gain to interviewing wx+1 is less than the gain
to interviewing the wx , note that (1) can be further decomposed as:

                         Pr(µk (f ) = wk ) = Pr(δwk ,f > δw0 ,f ) × Pr(f Pwk µk−1 (wk )|δwk ,f > δw0 ,f )                           (A.4)
                                             |       {z         } |                 {z                  }
                                                        (1a)                                (1b)


where (1a) is the probability that f makes an offer to the kth worker, and (1b) is the probability that wk accepts an
offer from f given f proposes to wk (where µk−1 (wk ) is the firm that wk would match to if f had conducted k − 1
interviews). (1a) is decreasing with k because the the value of δw0 ,f is weakly increasing as more interviews are made.
Note that (1b) is strictly increasing for k ∈ {1, . . . , x} (i.e., within a component). To see why, consider the probability
w1 accepts f ’s offer conditional on f having made an offer, and examine the difference if f interviews the first k − 1
versus k workers within the first component. If f interviews k candidates and wk Pf w1 , then f will propose to w1 if
and only if wk rejected f ; however, if f only interviewed k − 1 candidates, it would have proposed to w1 regardless of
where it ranked wk (because it didn’t interview wk ). As wk rejecting f raises the probability w1 accepts f ’s offer (as
there are now fewer firms that w1 can match to), the probability of w1 accepting an offer conditional on one being
made strictly increases in k. Furthermore, as (1b) is higher for k = 1 than k = x + 1 (as w1 receives fewer interviews
than wk+1 ), we see that (1b) is higher for k = x compared to k = x + 1. Thus, given (2) is still decreasing, the gain
to interviewing wk+1 is less than the gain to interviewing wk .
     For k = {x + 2, . . . , N }: As f is indifferent between interviewing any set of workers within the same component,
the same logic as with k ∈ {1, . . . , x} can be used to show that gf (k, η−f ) is strictly decreasing in k for k ∈
{mx + 2, . . . , mx + x}, m = {1, . . . , M − 1}. Finally, the same logic for k = x + 1 can be applied to show that
gf (k, η−f ) is strictly decreasing between components (i.e., k = (m + 1)x + 1, m ∈ {1, . . . , M − 2}).

     Note that Lemma A.3 implies that if f were to interview k workers where k ≤ x, it is optimal for f to interview
only workers contained within {w1 , . . . , wx }; otherwise, f would have a profitable deviation by swapping any worker
that it is interviewing not in that set with one within it (as doing so would strictly increase its profits). Furthermore,
by Lemma A.3, we can find c ∈ (gf (x, η−f ), gf (x − 1, η−f )) such that η is an equilibrium interview assignment: i.e.,
no individual firm will wish to interview more or fewer than x candidates or change the set of workers that it is
interviewing.

Proof of Theorem 4.1. Consider a perfect overlap interview assignment η where every firm and worker receives k = x
interviews. Under this assignment, the ex ante probability that any firm is unmatched is bounded above by Pr(δ1:k <
0): i.e., the probability that the first order statistic out of k draws is negative. To see this, note that if every worker
that a firm interviews yields non-negative surplus (which occurs with probability Pr(δ1:k ≥ 0)), then that firm is
  20
       mod(a, b) = a − b ab cb, where bxc represents the greatest integer less than or equal to x.


                                                                      24
guaranteed to be matched during the second stage deferred acceptance algorithm: if a firm is not matched by the
kth round, it must have been because the previous k − 1 workers have rejected that firm and accepted an offer from
another firm; thus, by the kth round, no other firms are “competing” for the kth worker and the firm will be able
to hire him. Consequently, a firm can only remain unmatched under a perfect overlap interview assignment if at
least one worker is found by that firm to be unacceptable; the probability of this occurrence can be no greater than
1 − Pr(δ1:k ≥ 0).
       Consider now any symmetric interview assignment η 0 where every firm and worker receives k interviews and
d(η , k) > 0 (i.e., η 0 does not have perfect overlap). As all firms and workers are ex ante identical, consider any
     0

particular firm f . Let the set of workers interviewed by f be given by Wf ≡ η 0 (f ), where |Wf | = k (by construction).
If η 0 (Wf ) \ f represents the set of all firms excluding f that interview workers in Wf , note that |η 0 (Wf ) \ f | ≥ k:
i.e., there must be at least k other firms that share at least one worker with f under the interviewing assignment η 0
(otherwise, if |η 0 (Wf ) \ f | = k − 1, η 0 would have perfect overlap). Furthermore, note that for any subset of workers
W 0 ⊂ Wf , |η 0 (W 0 ) \ f | ≥ k − 1 ≥ |W 0 |: i.e., there are at least k − 1 other firms than f that interview the workers in
W 0 . Thus, by Hall’s marriage theorem, there exists a one-to-one matching µ such that every worker in Wf is matched
to a firm that interviews that worker under η 0 and is not f . In such a matching, f1 is unmatched (as all of the workers
it interviews are matched with another firm). Consequently, the probability that f is unmatched given η 0 can be no
less than the probability that preferences for all agents are such that each worker in Wf prefers its matched partner
under µ to f , and each firm other than f matched to a worker in Wf finds that worker to be desirable and its most
preferable.
       The upper bound on the probability that any firm is unmatched under perfect overlap assignment η is Pr(δ1:k < 0),
which is decreasing as Pr(δ < 0) decreases, and limPr(δ<0)→0 Pr(δ1:k < 0) = 0. The lower bound on the probability
that any firm is unmatched under η 0 is strictly positive (the realization of a non-empty set of preferences). Thus,
there exists an  > 0 such that if Pr(δ < 0) < , this upper bound is below the lower bound, and η has a lower
probability of unemployment than η 0 .

A.3      Existence of Correlated Equilibrium with Almost Perfect Overlap
In small markets, a given c might require an x such that the integer constraints N precludes perfect overlap. Nonethe-
less, with a large enough market, this issue is not a problem: with a correlated device or an intermediary, there still
will exist an equilibrium where each firm and worker receives x interviews, and the probability each firm is located
in a component with exactly x workers and x firms approaches 1; i.e., even though N may not be a multiple of x,
as long as N is sufficiently large, the perfect overlap quantity of interviews can still be achieved for almost every
firm. Note the induced interview assignment may not be symmetric, as exactly one component may have more than
x firms or workers.

Proposition A.4. If there exist N, c such that a symmetric pure-strategy equilibrium where each firm and each
worker conducts x interviews with perfect overlap exists, then for any  > 0, there exists an N such that ∀Ñ > N
a correlated equilibrium exists in which each firm interviews x workers, each worker receives x interviews, and with
probability 1 −  each firm obtains the same expected profit as under a perfect overlap equilibrium.

Proof of Proposition A.4. For any Ñ , we can partition the population into b Ñ x
                                                                                   c − 1 groups of exactly x workers and x
firms, and 1 group of x + (Ñ − b Ñ
                                  x
                                     cx) workers and  firms. For  any such partition π, associate an interview assignment
η(π) whereby in each of the groups with exactly x workers and firms, every firm interviews every worker in that
group, and in the group with slightly more than x workers and firms, the interview assignment among workers and
firms assigns each agent x interviews as in the proof of proposition 3.2. Thus, η(π) gives each firm and each worker
x interviews, and for but only x + (Ñ − b Ñ x
                                                cx) workers and firms, firms and workers are located components with
only 2x total agents (i.e., perfect overlap).
     Consider the space of all possible π and associated η(π). For any ε > 0, there exists an N such that for any
Ñ > N , if a π is chosen at random, the probability that a given firm achieves perfect overlap in the interview
assignment η(π) is at least 1 − ε. Thus, for sufficiently large Ñ and small ε, we can construct a correlated equilibrium
in which firms “coordinate” on a given η(π) at random, and achieves the utility of a perfect overlap equilibrium with
probability 1 − ε.




                                                             25
References
Atakan, Alp E. 2006. “Assortative Matching with Explicit Search Costs.” Econometrica, 74: 667–
 680.

Bergemann, Dirk, and Jusso Välimäki. 2005. “Information in Mechanism Design.” In Ad-
 vances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Ninth World Congress.
 Vol. 1, , ed. Richard Blundell, Whitney K. Newey and Torsten Persson, Chapter 5. Cambridge,
 U.K.:Cambridge University Press.

Blair, Charles. 1988. “The Lattice Structure of the Set of Stable Matchings with Multiple Part-
  ners.” Mathematics of Operations Research, 13(4): 619–628.

Burdett, Kenneth. 1996. “Truncated Means and Variances.” Economics Letters, 52: 263–267.

Chade, Hector. 2006. “Matching with noise and the acceptance curse.” Journal of Economic
 Theory.

Chade, Hector, and Lones Smith. 2006. “Simultaneous Search.” Econometrica, 74(5): 1293–
 1307.

Chade, Hector, Gregory Lewis, and Lones Smith. 2014. “Student Portfolios and the College
 Admissions Problem.” Review of Economic Studies, 81(3): 971–1002.

Chakraborty, Archishman, Alessandro Citanna, and Michael Ostrovsky. 2010. “Two-
 Sided Matching with Interdependent Values.” Journal of Economic Theory, 145(1): 85–105.

Coles, Peter, Alexey Kushnir, and Muriel Niederle. 2013. “Preference Signaling in Matching
 Markets.” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 5(2): 99–134.

Coles, Peter, Benjamin Edelman, Brian Hall, and Nicole Bennett. 2008. “TheLadders.”
 Harvard Business School Case 9-908-061.

Das, Sanmay, and Emir Kamenica. 2005. “Two-Sided Bandits and the Dating Market.” Pro-
 ceedings of the Nineteenth International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence, 947–952.

David, Herbert Aron, and Hakidy Navada Nagaraja. 2003. Order Statistics. . 3 ed., Wiley.

Dubins, Lester E., and David A. Freedman. 1981. “Machiavelli and the Gale-Shapley Algo-
 rithm.” American Mathematical Monthly, 88: 485–494.

Echenique, Federico, and Jorge Oviedo. 2006. “A Theory of Stability in Many-to-Many Match-
  ing Markets.” Theoretical Economics, 1(2): 233–273.

Eeckhout, Jan, and Philipp Kircher. 2010. “Sorting and Decentralized Price Competition.”
 Econometrica, 78(2): 539–574.

Gale, David, and Lloyd Shapley. 1962. “College admissions and the stability of marriage.”
 American Mathematical Monthly, 69: 9–15.

Haeringer, Guillaume, and Myrna Wooders. 2011. “Decentralized Job Matching.” Interna-
 tional Journal of Game Theory, 40(1): 1–28.



                                              26
Hoppe, Heidrun C., Benny Moldovanu, and Aner Sela. 2009. “The Theory of Assortative
 Matching Based on Costly Signals.” Review of Economic Studies, 76(1): 253–281.

Jackson, Matthew O. 2008. Social and Economic Networks. Princeton University Press.

Josephson, Jens, and Joel Shapiro. 2016. “Costly Interviews.” International Journal of Indus-
  trial Organization, 45: 10–15.

Konishi, Hideo, and M. Utku Ünver. 2006. “Credible Group Stability in Many-to-Many
 Matching Problems.” Journal of Economic Theory, 129(1): 57–80.

Kranton, Rachel E., and Deborah F. Minehart. 2000. “Networks Versus Vertical Integra-
 tion.” RAND Journal of Economics, 31(3): 570–601.

Kranton, Rachel E., and Deborah F. Minehart. 2001. “A Theory of Buyer-Seller Networks.”
 American Economic Review, 91(3): 485–508.

Lee, Robin S., and Michael Schwarz. 2007. “Signalling Preferences in Interviewing Markets.”
  Dagstuhl Seminar Proceedings. Dagstuhl, Germany.

Lien, Yuan-Chuan. 2013. “Costly Interviews and Non-Assortative Matchings.” mimeo, Hong
  Kong University.

Mongell, Susan, and Alvin E. Roth. 1991. “Sorority Rush as a Two-Sided Matching Mecha-
 nism.” American Economic Review, 81(3): 441–464.

Nagypal, Eva. 2004. “Optimal Application Behavior with Incomplete Information.” mimeo.

Niederle, Muriel, and Leeat Yariv. 2009. “Decentralized Matching with Aligned Preferences.”
 mimeo, Stanford University.

Roth, Alvin E. 1982. “The Economics of Matching: Stability and Incentives.” Mathematics of
 Operations Research, 7: 617–628.

Roth, Alvin E. 1984. “The Evolution of the Labor Market for Medical Interns and Residents: A
 Case Study in Game Theory.” Journal of Political Economy, 92: 991–1016.

Roth, Alvin E., and Marilda A. Oliveira Sotomayor. 1990. Two-Sided Matching: A study
 in game-theoretic modeling and analysis. Cambridge, MA:Econometric Society Monographs.

Schweinzer, Paul. 2008. “Labour Market Recruiting with Intermediaries.” Review of Economic
  Design, 12(2): 119–127.

Shimer, Robert, and Lones Smith. 2000. “Assortative Matching and Search.” Econometrica,
  68: 343–369.




                                             27
