                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               LOOKING FOR THE NFMS IN THE NOISE —
                ADDITIONAL STOCHASTIC IMPLICATIONS
                  OF OPTIMAL CONSUMPTION CHOICE


                      Laurence J. Kotlikoff

                           Ariel Pakes



                      Working   Paper No. 1*92




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November   19814




We thank John Bound, Linus Yamane, and Tom Abbott for excellent
research assistance. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                        NBER Working Paper #1492
                                                        November 1984




                        Looking for the News in the Noise —
                        Additional Stochastic Implications
                           of Optimal Consumption Choice
                                      ABSTRACT


        In neoclassical models of consumption choice under earnings uncertainty

changes in consumption programs from one period to the next are determined by

new information received about future earnings over the period. This proposi-

tion suggests testing the neoclassical rrodel by ascertaining whether new earn-

ings information explains consumption choice through time. It also suggests

that   actual consumption choices imbed extractable information about the extent
and time   resolution   of earnings uncertainty. This paper derives a fairly
general   theoretical relationship between properly defined innnovations in con-

sumption (noise) and revisions in expectations of lifetime earnings (news). It

also clarifies the relationship between testing for the theoretical determinants

of consumption and standard Euler tests that focus on theoretical nondeter—

minants of consumption. The chief prediction of the paper's theoretical

results, that noise exactly equals news, is tested using aggregate time series

data on consumption and earnings. We find that new earnings information

explains only a very small fraction of the variance of aggregate consumption

innovations. On the other hand, the extent of suboptimal consumption choice

appears to be of little economic significance.



Laurencej. Kotlikoff                           Ariel Pakes
Department of Economics                        Department of Economics
Boston University                              The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Boston, MA 02115                               Mount Scopus Campus
                                               91905 Jerusalem, Israel
                       LOOKING FOR THE NEWS IN ThE NOISE —

          ADDITIONAL STOCHASTIC IMPLICATIONS OF ThE LIFECYCLE MODEL

                                        by

                             Laurence J. Kotlikoff

                                       and

                                  Aril Fakes


       In neoclassical models of consumption under uncertainty optimizing agents

utilize only current information about present and future prices and endowments

in making current consumption decisions. This proposition has two

implications. First, what was learned in the past is relevant to current

behavior only in so far as past experience is incorporated in current knowledge

of distributions of present and future prices and endowments. Second, given

current information, new information about distributions of prices and

endowments completely governs changes in the consumption program over time. The

theory is thus complete, describing both what does and what does not influence

consumption choices.

       Recently, considerable attention has been given to testing for optimal

intertemporal consumption choice in stochastic environments. In principle both

implications noted above provide a basis for testing the theory. A test of the

first implication is that theoretically irrelevant information is in fact irre-

levant to current consumption choices. A test of the second implication is

that, given current information, new information about prices and endowments

fully determines the precise time path of consumption. While the two implica-

tions are closely related, one can easily construct examples of non optimizing

consumption choice that satisfy tests of one implication but not of the other.
                                      —2—


       Recent empirical analysis has focused on tests of the non determinants of

consumption, in particular the irrelevance of past information to current con-

sumption choices. Hall (1978) is the first and most influential article in this

literature. Hall considered consumption behavior under earnings uncertainty and

demonstrated that when expected utility is maximized the marginal utility of

consumption evolves as a (super or sub) martingale. Given a specification of

the utility function, Hall's observation permits tests of the irrelevance of

past information to contemporaneous innovations in marginal utility.1

Contributions by Sargent (1918), Hall and Mishkin (1982), Flavin (1981), Hansen

and Singleton (1983), and Mankiw, et. al. (1982) consider generalizations of

Hall's tests to additional types of past information, alternative utility func-

tions, heterogeneity in household consumption behavior, and uncertainty in

interest rates as well as labor earnings.2

       This paper departs from such of the prior literature by focusing on the

second proposition of optimizing intertemporal behavior, namely that new

information (news) fully explains innovations (noise) in consumption. Following

Hall (1978) the paper considers the case of earnings uncertainty. Section II

shows that under fairly general assumptions concerning the stochastic process

governing earnings one can directly relate appropriately defined innovations in

consumption to innovations (unexpected changes) in the expected discounted value

of lifetime earnings. This relationship permits tests that the variance of

noise equals the variance of news. Although some previous work in this area,

particularly, that of Flavin (1981), imbeds, in more restrictive models, tests

of this relationship in an omnibus test statistic, the test presented here is
                                            —3—


valid for arbitrary (twice continuously differentiable) concave utility

functions and fairly general assumptions on the stochastic process generating

earnings. The test statistic also has a transparent interpretation and can also

be used to examine the fraction of the variance in consumption innovations that

can be accounted for by new information on lifetime earnings. In addition, the

relationship   provides a measure of the uncertainty in lifetime earnings and the
time   resolution of   that uncertainty; these measures provide a basis for
assessing   the welfare   affects of   earnings   uncertainty.
        Section   II also clarifies: (i) The conditions under which current

consumption is the only variable of value for predicting future consumption, and

(2) The conditions under which the relationship between expected future

consumption and current consumption is linear. Section III provides an

illustration of the test that the variance of the noise in consumption is equal

to the variance of the news in lifetime earnings. The example uses quarterly

post war aggregate U.S. time series data on consumption and earnings, and so is

comparable to most previous empirical work in this area. Our major finding is

that new information about earnings explains only a small fraction of the

variance of appropriately defined innovations in consumption. While the second

proposition of' intertemporal optimization is rejected by the data, the

apparently suboptimal consumption choice appears to be of surprisingly little

economic importance. One is left with the impression of very limited earnings

uncertainty at the macro level, and what uncertainty exists appears of little

importance to the time path of aggregate consumption. In addition, at least at

the level of aggregate data, the assumptions underlying a linear relationship

between expected future consumption and current consumption appear false.
II. Relating Consumption Innovations to New Information on Lifetime Earnings

        In the life cycle model with earnings uncertainty considered here

current consumption and plans about future consumption depend on preferences,

the level of current assets, and probability distributions governing the stream

of lifetime labor earnings. Eevisions in consumption plans between two

different periods are determined by revisions in the probability distribution of

lifetime earnings associated with new information gathered between the periods.

TJsing this fact, and assuming that distributions of revisions in the expected

present value of lifetime earnings do not depend on past information, the life

cycle model implies the existence of two functions, one depending on only on

       and the other only on Ct, where 0t denotes period t consumption. The dif-

ference between these two functions is exactly equal to the revision in the

expected discounted value of lifetime earnings between periods t and t+l.

        This proposition and some of its corollaries are presented in this sec-

tion. The first two corollaries consider implications of the proposition for

the stochastic process generating consumption. In contrast to other results in

the literature, these corollaries deal with consumption per se, which is obser-

vable, rather than the marginal utility of consumption. The third corollary

concerns the relationship between the stochastic process generating consumption

and   that generating earnings. This corollary states that the covariance of
realized lifetime earnings and the revision in consumption (defined in the

proposition) equals the variance of the revision in consumption. Since the

revision in consumption equals the revision in the expected discounted value of

lifetime earnings, the potentially observable covariance of lifetime earnings
                                                         —5—


and the revision in consumption equals the unobservable variance in revisions in

expected lifetime earnings. This result is empirically useful for at least two

reasons. First, one can test the life cycle model with earnings uncertainty by

determining whether the variance in the revision in consumption is accounted for

by the covariance of consumption revisions with realized earnings. Second, the

corollary provides a method of determining the extent of household uncertainty

about earnings as well as the timing of the resolution of that uncertainty.

       Assumption 1 (Al) provides the model of consumption behavior that

underlies our results.

                                                                             T—t
Al: The consumer chooses a consumption program to max Et {

                              RT+l(c            —
subject    to At =                                  wt÷T), where u() is a notonically increasing
strictly concave utility function possessing a continuous second derivative,

is a subjective discount factor, T is the known length of economic life, t is

the age of the agent, c is consumption in period t, w is labor income in

period t+T, At is nonhuman wealth at age t, P , where r is the known real

interest rate, and E denotes the expectation operator conditional on the

information set at time t (where required we explicitly denote this information

set by It).


          Proposition 1 (Pi) underlies the results presented in Hall (i98).3


osition 1 (P1): (See Hall, 1918). Given Al,

          I.J'(c         )   XU'('t   )   +
                   t+l                          t+l

where Et+i 0 and A =                      /R.
                                             -6-

         Proposition       1 is the first order condition arising from expected utility

maximization. It states that the expected marginal utility of consumption in

period t+1 conditional on the information set in period t is a function of only

consumption in period t; that is, it does not depend on any other variable in

        is   the discrepancy between the expected and realized marginal utility of

consumption in period t+l. It is unpredictable in the sense that it does not

depend on any information known at period t. Formally, given any set of

variables           that are known at period t, and any function f(), then Fl implies

that Et+i f(X)] = 0,              where E, without a subscript, denotes the

unconditional expectation operator. For a given specification of the utility

function the irrelevance of past information in determining               can be tested


by verifying that              and X, are uncorrelated. This method of testing

intertemporal optimization is used in most         recent   empirical analyses.

             Note that Fl has implications only for the stochastic process generating

the rrrginal utility of consumption. In particular, the expectation of future

consumption could depend on any or all variables in the current information set

without violating P1. Each of the following two assumptions is sufficient to

restrict the elements of the current information set which determine the expec-

tation of future consumption. Al is an assumption about preferences, while A2

is an assumption about the stochastic earnings process. As indicated in

corollary 2, under either assumption expected future consumption is fully deter—

mined by current consumption.

                                                                              =
 Assumption 2 (A2): The utility function is quadratic, i.e., U(c)
                      2
                +
 a0 +   a1c         a2C.
                                             —1—




Assution      3 (A3): Let t+T = (Et+T —
                                              Et+Tl)         Rj_(T_W             and
                                                       jl                    ,




F÷(nt+ lIt+T_l) be the distribution of t+T             conditional   on   the information
set in period t+T—l. Then {dFt+T(nt+ It+T1) =

        In   A3       is the revision in the expected discounted value of lifetime

earnings arising from information that accumulates between t+T—l and t+T.

Clearly, since revisions in expectations cannot be predicted, EInt+ It+TlI = 0.

A3 states that not only the expectation, but also the entire distribution of
nt÷T is independent of I
                         t+t—l
        Proposition 2 is central to the remainder of this paper.


Proposition 2 (P2): If Al and either A2 or A3 are satisfied, then there exist monoton—
                                                                 (t+i)
ically increasing continuously differentiable functions, cS                        and 5 (t)
                                                                           (c+1)               (ct),
such that


         (t+l)             —1 (t)
                  (c÷) =   H        (ct) ÷


where        is defined in A3 and, hence,               0.



        The proof of P2 presented in the appendix shows that              t+(ct÷i) is
equal to the expected discounted sum of consumption expenditures between t+l and

the end of the planning horizon conditional on the information set in period

t+l; t)(c) is the expectation of this same variable conditional on the

information set in period t.14 The proposition states that these expectations can

be written as functions of only c+1 and c, respectively. It follows from the

budget constraint that the revision in the expectation of the discounted value
                                           —8--



of   consumption expenditures must be equal to the revision in the expectation

of the discounted value of lifetime earnings (i.e.,

        It    is worth comparing P1 and P2. Both propositions establish the

existence of two functions, one dependent only on ct+i and one only on ct,

such that the difference between them is "unexpected"; that is, both

differences have an expectation, conditional on the information set in period

t, of zero. In P2, however, this difference is precisely the revision in the

expected discounted value of lifetime earnings. P1, in itself, does not

provide information on the source of              =             —              nor does it
                                                      U'(c+1)       XTJt(c),
indicate anything about the properties of +l except that Ett+i = 0.                    It should

be clear, however, that t+l is determined by                    In fact, given A3, there

is a one to one relationship between the realizations of the two random

variables .5

        We first    use proposition 2   to clarify two properties of the stochastic

process    generating   consumption, and then discuss how it can be used to

investigate the stochastic relationship between consumption and earnings.

Corollary 1 is an immediate consequence of P2 and provides sufficient conditions

for Hall's (19T8) statement that "no variable apart from current consumption

should be of any value in predicting future consumption."


Corollary 1: If Al, and either A2 or A3 are satisfied, then there exists a

(monotonically increasing and continuously differentiable) function

such that6


          c
           t+l     t t       t+1
                                             —9—




where

        Eu   =0.
         t t+l


        The assumptions underlying P2 and Corollary 1 are quite general,

requiring no explicit specification of the utility function or stochastic

process generating earnings. As a consequence, the function g() could be

quite complicated. Corollary 2 notes, however, that if the utility function

either displays constant absolute risk aversion, as specified in A4, or is

quadratic, then () is       linear,


A4: The utility function exhibits constant absolute risk aversion, i.e,

Ut(c) =   Bet    (B, y >   o).

Corollary   2 (proved in the Appendix): Provided Al and either A2, or A3 and A,

are satisfied, then c       =    a    + a   c +    a   r
                      t+l        Ot     lt         2tt+l

        Many of the tests of proposition 1 presented in the literature assume

        is linear in c (e.g., Hall (l978), Hall and Mishkiri (1982), and Flavin

(1981)). Corollary 2 indicates that those results are somewhat more general

than noted by Hall (l9T8), who justified linearity by quadratic utility, since

g(c) will also be linear if A3 and A4 are satisfied. Note also that if the

assumptions underlying this corollary are valid, the revision in expected

discounted value of lifetime earnings is simply proportional to the difference

between c    and a linear function of c .
                                       t
                                                       Hence, under the assumptions of the
         t+l
corollary, the        revisions defined in P2, can be identified in a

straightforward manner, and this identification does not require any additional
                                                       —10-


information on the sequence of distribution functions {F+1(n+1)}. Our final

corollary concerns the relationship between fl1 and the revisions in the

expected discounted value of the consumption program. This corollary reqaires

only the more general assumptions underlying proposition 2.



Corollary 3: Let L                                     and r+1 =   6(t±l)()      R_1t)(c)
and assume Al and either A2 or A3. Then


                                            =
                                                E(.)[r÷1
for j   ' t.
        L is the realized discounted value of labor earnings between t and

the end of the planning horizon. It can be partitioned into the revision

between t+l and the end of the planning horizon in the expected discounted value

of lifetime earnings, (L —
                                           E1L),       the period t+1 revision in that

expectation that occurred because of information accumulated between t and

t+l,           (recall that Et+iLt —                   =        and the period t expected discounted
                                                EtLt
value of lifetime earnings (EtLt); that is


                    L =Lt -Et+lL+nt+l + EL.
                     -I:                 tt

Provided the assumptions underlying proposition 2 are correct, the revision in

the expected discounted value of the consumption program, i.e.,

         6
             t+1                  —it                               Corollary 3 follows from
r÷i =              (ct+i) —              (ct), just equals

noting that L —                         cannot be correlated with any variable in
                               Et+iLt
including                  ,   while        cannot be correlated with any variable in
                                           —11—



including EtLt.
        Eden and Pakes (1981) appear to be the first to utilize the fact that the

revision in consumption expenditures should contain information on changes

through time in the expected discounted value of lifetime earnings. They note

that the total variance in the individual's expected discounted value of
                                         T—t 2( 1)Ent+.,
                                                    2       and that the sequence
lifetime earnings at time t is just           F
                                          j=1
    2
{       }   provides   a measure of the age profile of the realizations

of the variance in lifetime earnings. The article by Eden and Fakes (1981)

assumes a quadratic utility function, and uses only information on consumption

expenditures to estimate En. Corollary 3 provides the analogue of the Eden and

Fakes result for an arbitrary concave utility function and indicates that

there are, in principal, two unbiased estimates of En+1. The latter fact can

be quite useful in estimating these variances from flawed data.T

            The fact that there are two unbiased estimators of E1+1 provides

a way of testing whether the lifecycle model with earnings uncertainty does

indeed account for the variance in the revision in consumption expenditures; for

if it does, the value of r+iLt should be very close to that of

To be more precise we shall allow for an additional disturbance process to

affect r+1.         Specifically, we introduce a sequence of independent random

variables {vt}, whose joint distribution is assumed to be independent of

the joint distribution of earnings (and whose realizations cannot, therefore, be

accounted for by the lifecycle model with earnings uncertainty) and write,


            r
             t+l
                 =fl
                     t+1
                           +vt+l                                                    (1)



Then the ratio
                                           —12—



          2   Er+1L    =        En1                                            (2)
                  2         2         2
                Er+1       Ent+i + Evt+1



provides the fraction of the variance in r+i explained by   the   model. If p2

is large, then the revision in the expected discounted value of lifetime

earnings accounts for a large fraction of the variance in r+1, and if p is

close   to one then one cannot reject the hypothesis that the lifecyle model with
earnings uncertainty accounts for all the observed variance in r+1 (note that
the realization of p2 could lie outside the unit interval). The next section
uses aggregate U.S. time series data to illustrate this test of the determinants
of   consumption innovations.

III.    Testing the Relationship Between Earnings News and Consumption Noise

        The method of implementing the test of whether the revision in

consumption   expenditures can be accounted for by the lifecycle model with
earnings uncertainty depends on the type of data available, particularly whether
the data is micro panel or aggregate time series. Most previous tests that the
revision in marginal utility is unpredictable (Propostion 1) have used aggregate

time series data. For comparability we also use aggregate time series data.

The use of aggregate time series data does, however, require us to make some

additional simplifying assumptions. In particular, we ignore issues of aggrega-

tion over individuals, assume T (the planning horizon) approaches infinity, and

assume the stochastic process generating earnings is (strictly) stationary and

normal.S These assumptions simplify the testing procedure considerably.
                                                    —13--



          The assumption of stationarity allows us to write the earnings process as

an infinite autoregression with an independent and identically distributed

disturbance. This disturbance is proportional to                      the revision in expected

lifetime earnings between t and t+1 (see Anderson (1911)) and the definition of

        in A3); that is,



         w      =          w   I
                     T0     t—T T         t+l
and

                =
                    ect+i      '




where               is a sequence of independently and identically distributed random

variables .9



         Given stationarity of the earnings process, it is assumed that as T +

the   function t+1(.) converges (pointwise) to the function o*(.), a function

that can be expressed as the 0th order polynomial


                    =
                        cO
                               m.c .                                                         ()

Note that if m = 0, for i                  2, the assumption of a ciuadratic or constant abso-

lute risk aversion utility function (Corollary 2), and the corresponding linear

predictor function for c1 used in previous analyses (e.g., Flavin (1981),

Hall and Mishkin (1982)), is valid.
         To obtain the system of equations to be estimated, we use the fact that
 t
     (ct) = R
             —it               —         (see the appendix). Equation (5a) is derived from
              [o
                        (ct)       c.)
                                              -Th-


this fact and (ii), (3), (4) and the definition of r+i presented in Corollary 3,

while equation (5b) comes directly from (3).                This produces the system

                         n              n
              =                 1    —l '          1         —l           —l
                  k0
                       + L k.c —    R    L k.c+1 + Sm1                 + rn1         (5a)
                        i=l             i=2

                                                                                             (5)


                                                                                     (Sb)
       wt+l       T0 1Tt—T + t+l

where k0 =                                    —             and    =
                  (R—l)/m1, k1 = R1(m1            1)/rn1,


Note that, if the model is correct, the coefficient of c in equation (5a) should
be opposite in sign, and a bit smaller (in absolute value) than the coefficient

of c.÷1(i2,...,n) with the difference determined by R. Thus, for i ) 2 we can

obtain an estimate of R, and for i > 2 we can test the model's implications by

testing if the coefficient of c equals                 times the coefficient of c1.

       Since both             and v1 are determinants of c1 they will, in general,

be correlated with powers of that variable. Therefore, consistent estimates of the

coefficients in equation (5a) require the use of instruments for c÷1(i=2,...,n).

                                                                                         =
Clearly, the assumptions of the nDdel iniply that E(cv+1) =                    E(cc+i)
              =                 = 0 for i, T ) 0. Equation (5a) is therefore estimated
E(wvt+i)          E(wtTet+l)
by two—stage least squares using current and lagged earnings and powers of

current consumption as instruments. Equation (5b) is estimated by ordinary least

squares. Let e+1 and e+1 be the estimated residuals from the consumption

and earnings equations, respectively, that is
                                                  -15-


                                    n    -'       n
       e
          C
          t+1
                  c
                      t+l
                            —k 0 — VL k.c1
                                       1 t
                                              —   L R—1 kc
                                                  V        1
                                                         1 t+1'
                                                                   and
                                   i=l
                                                                                            (6)


                = w1 —
       e÷1                    T0

where a circumflex over a variable indicates its estimated value. Then, letting
S(x,y) represent the sample covariance of x and y,

                               w,ec2
                             S(e   )
                                              P          2 2
                                                        8 Ec   —    2                       (7)
       r2        =                            —
            cw
           e e
                         w w2 c c2
                      S(e ,e ) S(e ,e )
                                                      2 2
                                                  8 EC + Ev

      p
where —> reads converges in probability, and the last equality follows from the

fact that       = 8c (equation 3) and the definition of p2 (equation 2). That is,

the r2 from the residuals of the two equation system in (5) provides us with a

consistent estimate of p2, the fraction of the variance in the revision in the

expected discounted value of consumption expenditures that is accounted for by

the lifecyle model with earnings uncertainty.
The Data

          The data used in this study are National Income Accounts (NIA) quarterly

observations of consumption of nondurables and services and quarterly NIA obser-

vations of wages and salaries.10 There are l7 observations corresponding to the

first quarter of 19)47 through the third quarter of 1983. All observations were

expressed in percapita terms and converted to 1972 dollars using a weighted

average of the NIA nondurables deflator and the NIA                services   deflator, with the

fixed weight determined by the average share of nondurables consumption in total
                                       -16-

consumption of nondurables plus services. Since our empirical approach assumes
stationarity in earnings, we detrended wages and salaries with the trend path

estimated by regressing the logarithm of wages and salaries against a constant

and time.


Empirical Results

       Table 1 presents the coefficients from estimating equation (5a) assuming

first through fourth order polynomial functions for *(.)   (equation   ())).

Estimation   of the linear model is by OLS, while the second, third, and fourth

order models are estimated by two stage least squares.

       The higher order terms in each of the regressions are highly significant

suggesting that the linear model posited by Flavin (1981) and Hall and Mishkin

(1982) is inappropriate. The appropriateness of a higher order model is also

suggested by a test of the linearity of the function ()     of   Corollary 1.

Specifically, we regressed c1 on successive higher order polynomials of c.

In the regression of c1 on c and c the coefficient of c has a t ratio of

—2.30 which is significant at the 5 percent level. The F statistics for the

inclusion of two higher order terms is 2.65; it is l.T2 for the inclusion of

three higher order terms. These values are marginally below their respective 5

percent critical F values of 3.00 and 2.60.

       Note that acceptance of the higher order model has implications for one's

views about the extent of earnings uncertainty at the macro level. As indicated

in Table 1 the ratio of the standard error of the regression to the mean value

of real percapita consumption declines rapidly as the number of higher order
                                         —iT—


terms   is   increased. For the fourth order model the ratio is .00003, suggesting

a triviably small degree of uncertainty influencing aggregate per capita consump-

tion.
        Recall that if the model is appropriate the coefficient of cequals

minus R1 times the coefficient of          for i   2 (see equation (5a)). Looking

at the unconstrained parameters estimates in Table 1 it is clear that they are

close to satisfying these constraints. However, a formal test of these

constraints clearly rejects them; the observed value of the F(2, 131) test sta-

tistic is 21.36. This occurs because the fourth order model has a near perfect

fit, making even those alternatives that are close to the null hypothesis very

powerful. The estimate of W1, that is of one plus the annual real interest

rate, obtained from the constrained 4th order model has the reasonable value of

1.032 with a standard error of .018.

        While the innovation to consumption may be economically insignificant, at

least at the macro level of aggregation, a separate issue examined in Table 2 is

the extent to which consumption innovations are explained by new information

about earnings. Table 2 provides the estimated fractions of the variance in

consumption innovations (noise) explained by earnings information (news) (See

equation (2)). As indicated by equation (T) this ratio is equal to the squared

correlation coefficient between the residual in the consumption regression

(equation (5a)) and the residual in the earnings autoregression (equation (5b)).

Equation (5b) was estimated using eight lagged values of quarterly earnings. We

also conducted the analysis using four rather than eight lags of earnings in the

autoregression and obtained results essentially identical to those reported in

Table 2.
                                      -i8-


       All of the ratios reported in Table 2 are quite small. In the first

order, linear model the innovation in earnings explains less than a fifth

of the innovation in consumption. For the higher order models "news" is two

percent or less of "noise". Only in the first order model is the estimated

ratio of news to noise statistically significantly different from zero.


Summary and Conclusion

       This paper's chief contribution is to suggest a method of examining the

determinants of consumption when consumption decisions are based on expected

utility maximization and lifetime earnings is uncertain. Our analysis also

clarifies the relationships between innovations in marginal utility (the error

in the standard Euler equation approach) and fundamental unexpected changes in

perceptions of future lifetime earnings. We believe our results can be used not

only to test the optimality of consumption choice under earnings uncertainty,

but also to identify the extent and structure of this uncertainty. Applying

these results to micro panel data should be particularly fruitful since they

permit comparison across demographic and occupational groups in the magnitude

and time resolution of earnings uncertainty. Much of the uncertainty in ear-

nings in the cross section is, of course, averaged out in macro data. Indeed

the application, presented here, of our theoretical results to time series data

suggests strikingly little earnings uncertainty at the macro level. In addi-

tion, new information about earnings has little or no bearing on consumption

innovations in contradiction to the standard neoclassical model of consumption

choice under earnings uncertainty.
                                          —19—


                                       Footnotes


1. King (1982) stresses the explicit specification of a utility function

required for this test, and points out that statistical analysis of the mar—

tingale    properties of marginal utility involves joint tests of particular pre-

ference structures as well as interteniporal optimization given those

preferences.


2.   One difficulty in evaluating these studies as a group is that they involve
repeated use of much the same data for consumption and leisure choices while
using   a variety of different time series that incorporate past information; in a

finite sample innovations in marginal utility will be significantly correlated

with a multitude of time series that represent past information, and one will

surely find many such series in repeated searches.


3. This and the following proposition assume that all consumption paths

having positive probability are feasible, i.e., they satisfy the budget

constraint; and that consumption is strictly positive. These assumptions

pernüt borrowing over the lifecyle, but require repayment of all debts by the

end of period T.


4.   The   proof of   the proposition is constructive in that it   provides a method of
calculating these functions      from the utility function and probability distribu-

tions of revisions in the expected discounted values of lifetime earnings.


5.   Inverting   Fl to solve for c1 and substituting the resulting expression into


P2 yields: (t+l)U,_1(xU!(c) +          +'     —   F(t)(c)     t+l' and
                                                   —20—




          :flt+l =   l/((t+1)'[Ut_1'(.)l)      <    o, since (t+l)' > 0, and Ut < 0.
            t+l


6. P2 and the implicit function theorem imply the existence of a monotonically
                                                                (t+i)
increaslng continuously differentiable function Q                       () such that

      —   Q(t+l){ l(t)() + 0t+l}.            The function (c) is constcted by

integrating Qt+l(.) over the probability measure, dFt+i(Tt+i).

7'.   In particular we could add quite general error processes to both consumption,

and to earnings, and still derive consistent estimates of the average of

       ong individuals in different groups. We are currently pursuing this

line of research in related work on micro data.

8. Strictly speaking the assumption of stationarity is not necessary since, under

mild regularity conditions on the boundedness of the variance of the earnings

process, the fact that IR <        1,
      't
                                        implies that, as T grows, the difference,
  T             00

               —
                                  converges, in mean square, to zero. That is, if we
 T0                TO
formed LcT) =              RTW, then, by choosing T large enough, we can insure that
                   T0
the difference rL( —
                                rjL(    is smaller than any positive c with probability

one. On the other hand the larger is T, the less data is available from the means

(J        r L(T)
                            _      L
                     and
                                  r. ) and, the larger will be the standard error
           '
    j=O               j=O
of our estimate of p2 [equation 21. We actually tried to form these means

empirically for the special case of quadratic or constant absolute risk aversion

utility functions (see Corollary 2), but it became clear that sufficiently

large T results in the loss of too many degrees of freedom.

9. If the process generating earnings has                 a convergent   autoregressive

representation, then 0 can be expressed as a function of the autoregressive
                                         —21—


coefficients (the      and one could impose, or test, this constraint. In the

empirical work the value of 0   varied   with the order of the autoregression we

assumed, though the estimated variance of the disturbance from the wage

equation, and its covariance with the residual in the consumption equation (see

below) did not vary significantly. This is another example of the familiar

result that the residuals formed after estimating a stationary process do not

vary much with the precise form of the process estimated, though other properties

of the estimated process iy vary substantially. Since our theoretical results
are independent of the precise form of the earnings process, we thought it best
to leave 0 unconstrained.
10. We also used NIA observations on compensation of employees as the earnings
variable. None of the empirical results were materially affected by using
employee compensation rather than wages and salaries.
                                           —22—


                                        References


Anderson, T.W., The Statistical Analysis of Time Series, John Wiley and Sons

          Inc., 1911.

Eden, Benjamin and Ariel Pakes,, "On Measuring the Variance—Age Profile of

          Lifetime Earnings," Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 48,        1981,   pp. 385_9L.

Flavin,    Marjorie A., "The Adjustment of'   Consumption to Changing Expectations
          about Future Income," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 89, No. 5, 1981,

          pp. 914—lOO9.

Hall, Robert E., "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle—Permanent Income

          Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 86,

          No. 6, December 1918, pp. 911—81.

Hansen, Lars P. and Kenneth J.      Singleton,    "Stochastic Consumption, Risk Aversion,

          and   the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns," Journal of Political Econorrr,
        Vol. 91, No. 2, April 1983, pp. 249—65.
King,   Mervin, "The Economics of Saving," Nat. Bur. Econ. Rsrch. Working

          Paper No. l241, Oct. 1983.

Mankiw, Gregory, Julio J. Rotenberg, and Lawrence H. Summers, "International

          Substitution in Macroeconomics," Nat. Bur. Econ. Rsrch. Working Paper

          No. 898, June 1982.

Sargent, Thomas J., "Rational Expectations, Econometric Exogeneity, and

          Consumption,"    Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 86,   No.   4,   August 1918,

          pp.   613—100.
                                                         —23—


                                                    Appendix



Proof of P2: Let {c} be the optimal consumption program for period j.

Since this program must satisfy the budget constraint in year j,

         T-j                     -l          T-j     T
    E.         R c.3 = A.R            + E.          H w
         T0       3+T        J                            J+T



Using this condition for period t and t+l, and the fact that At÷i AtR1 + w —
                                                                                                        ct,
one can show that

           =          +                                                                          (Al)
                            t+l'


                        T—(t+l)
where t+l = Et+i                      Rc1 and                   =   — ct. The term    +1 equals the

expected discounted value of current and future consumption conditional on the

information set in period t+l and is, therefore, a function of                           i.e.,
          (t+i)
     =
                  (It+i);    and        =    (t)
                                                   (i.). To prove the proposition, it     suffices
to prove the following lemma.


Lemma: If a       either     A2 or A3 is satisfied then for tl,.:.,T1, t)(1) =

Ô   (ct); with 6          (ct) monotonically increasing and continuously differen-

tiable in c.


Proof: If the utility function is quadratic (A2), then the lemma follows

directly from Proposition 1 and the definition of ,                      for   quadratic utility

implies that Et[c?1 = (XT               —    i)    + XTct for t       0; where X     s/H, and      is

determined by the parameters of the utility function. If P2 is not satisfied
                                               214



but A3 is, the lemma is proved by induction. Thus assume I.+l) =

6(3+1)(C)           the latter function being monotonically increasing continuously

differentiable in c.1. Then equation (Al) and the implicit function theorem

imply the existence of a continuously differentiable monotonically increasing
           1+1
function Q () such that


                =
                    Q(R1          +                                                                   (A2)



Also from Proposition 1,

                    ) =   XU'(c.) + .   with               =   0.                                     (A3)
        U'(c.
                                                j    j+l

Substituting (2) into (3) and taking expectations we have


                          = J[U? {Q( 1)(oR_l + n.1)}1dF+1(n+1) -                   AU'(c.)   =   0,     (Au)




with            =   R15 Ut{Q +1)'(6. +                                      which is negative and

continuous in &            virtue of the continuity of Ut(.) and Q1(); and

Hi = —XU''(c.),        which is positive and continuous in c,. The implicit function
           J                                                            J
  j
theorem therefore implies the existence of a monotonically increasing

continuously differentiable function                           such that . =                     Since

       6. + c, it follows that                  =                   +        =            is also
                                                     R[6(c)
monotonically increasing and continuously differentiable in c•. To complete

the inductive arment one need only observe that ôT)(IT) =                              and constnict
                                                                                  CT
6T_l(c) from equations (A2), (A3), and (A1) substituting T—l for .

        Two points are worthy of note here. First the proof clarifies the roles

of assumptions 2 and 3 in the text in deriving proposition 2. If the utility
                                              —25—


function is quadratic (assumption 2)     the     both Q1(•) and Ut(.) are linear. In

that case equation (Au) involves integrating over a linear function of ri., so

that H(.) depends on the distribution of fl1, only through E.n.1, which

is zero by construction. For quadratic utility then the proposition is true

regardless of whether the distribution of                   depends on any variables in I..

If the utility function is not quadratic, then equation (A-) involves

integrating over a convex function of                     The integral will then depend on

higher order moments of T1., and though
                                   -    En1O, the conditional variance,
                                                 J .J.--
say, of fl1 y depend on variables in I• Thus, without either quadratic
utility or assumption 3,       H3()   will   be a function of more variables in I

then c, and neither proposition 2 nor the statement that Ec1 is only a
function of
            C alone are true. The second point is that the proof is
constructive in the sense that given any u(), and any sequence
the proof explains exactly how to construct {ô1(c.1)} and {J(c)}.


Proof of Corollary 2:

       If A2 is satisfied then Corollary 2 follows directly from the proof of

Proposition 2. To prove the corollary when A3 and A4 are satisfied we first
                                                 (t+l)                                    T—t
use an inductive argument to show that {6                  (ct÷i) =
                                                                      ,t+i   + l,t÷l0t÷l}t=l

and then derive the implied relationship between c1 arnd c. Assuming

                 =
                     Qt+l    + 1+1c+1, equation (2)           in   the proof of Proposition 2

becomes,


       c
           t+l
                 =   ____(R
                       1   —l
                                 +r _
                                   t+l       O,t+l
                                                     ).
                     l,t+l
                                                    -26-


Substituting this equation into (3) and solving (4)                  for      yields:



           = R11 C             +
                                   Rit÷i          kt+i
                                                            +
                                           log(     x



                           I
                                   H t+l
where       =   fe                         dF÷1(n1). Noting that                 ( + c)    =

and that T(c) =
                      c,   completes the inductive arment. Clearly this argument
implies that the sequences                   and {iP1} are determined by the recursions
     =            +                =
         l,t+15                        I     log        A
                                                            +
                                                                O,t+l'   with initial conditions

l,T = ; and POT        0. This solution and equation (1) in the proof of

Proposition 2, imply the corollary.
                                     Table 1

                Regression Results: First Order Through Fourth Order
                                 Consumption Models*


                       First         Second        Third          Fourth
                       Order         Order         Order          Order
                       Model         Model         Model          Model
Variable

                       —3.l7        —2.9l          l1.986         —22.22
Constant
                       (5.973)       (8.818)      (12.825)        (lo.85)

C                       i.oo6         1.006          .988          l.O4O
    t                   (.002)        (.007)        (.oi)           (.017)

                                      _.l8LE_3      —.IO5E—3       —.583E—3
                                      (.805E—5)    (—.l5SE-)4)      (.1l5E.L)

                                       .183E—3        .)407E—3          .557E—3
    t+l                               (.8]3E—5)      (.18OE—)       (.9o8E—5)

                                                    —.5215—9            .l4OE—8
    t                                                (.3805—10)     (.159E—1O)

                                                      .521E—9       —.133E—l2
c3
    t+l                                              (.o6E—1O)      (.)475E—1O)

                                                                    —   .123E—l2
    t                                                               (.6315—1)4)

                                                                       ll6E—12
    t+1                                                             (.6775—1)4)

Ratio of
Standard Error
of Regression to
Mean Value of
                         .005)42       .00116         .0002)4           .00003
Consuiription




*T'Jo stage least squares estimates of equation (5a). W and c.t(10, 1,
                          are used as instruments. There are 12 observations.
..., 7 and i = 1, ..., N)
Numbers in parentheses below coefficient estimates are estimated assymptotic
standard errors. El is 10.
                                 Table 2

Estimated Ratios of News to Noise and Estimated Assymptotic Standard Errors




                                                               Standard
   Model                  Ratio of News to Noise            Error of Ratio

First Order                       .181                           .017

Second Order                      .511E—3                        .O84

Third   Order                     .7143E—2                       .08L

Fourth Order                      .020                           .050
