NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ELECTORAL ACCOUNTABILITY AND CORRUPTION:
EVIDENCE FROM THE AUDITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
Claudio Ferraz
Frederico Finan
Working Paper 14937
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14937

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2009

We are grateful to Sandra Black, Allan Drazen, Alain de Janvry, Seema Jayachandran, Joe Hotz, Philip
Keefer, Maurizio Mazzocco, Ted Miguel, Enrico Moretti, Sarah Reber, James Robinson, Gerard Roland,
Elisabeth Sadoulet, Helena Svaleryd, Duncan Thomas and to conference and seminar participants
at CERGE-EI, Dartmouth College, EPGE-FGV, IADB, IPEA-Rio, LACEA-Political Economy Network,
MIT, NBER, NEUDCBrown, Penn State University, PUC-Rio, Stanford GSB, UC-Berkeley, UCLA,
University of Maryland, Wharton Business School, World Bank, and Yale University. We also thank
the staff at the Controladoria Geral da União (CGU) for information about the details of the anti-corruption
program and Paula Aniceto, Leonardo Costa and Tássia Cruz for excellent research assistance. Ferraz
gratefully acknowledges financial support from CAPES-Brazil. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Claudio Ferraz and Frederico Finan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Electoral Accountability and Corruption: Evidence from the Audits of Local Governments
Claudio Ferraz and Frederico Finan
NBER Working Paper No. 14937
April 2009
JEL No. D72,D78,H41,O17
ABSTRACT
Political institutions can affect corruption. We use audit reports from an anti-corruption program in
Brazil to construct new measures of political corruption in local governments and test whether electoral
accountability affects the corruption practices of incumbent politicians. We find significantly less corruption
in municipalities where mayors can get reelected. Mayors with re-election incentives misappropriate
27 percent fewer resources than mayors without re-election incentives. These effects are more pronounced
among municipalities with less access to information and where the likelihood of judicial punishment
is lower. Overall our findings suggest that electoral rules that enhance political accountability play
a crucial role in constraining politician’s corrupt behavior.

Claudio Ferraz
Department of Economics
PUC-Rio
Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 22453-900
Brazil
cferraz@econ.puc-rio.br
Frederico Finan
Department of Economics
UCLA
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
ffinan@econ.ucla.edu

1

Introduction

The abuse of entrusted power by politicians through rent-seeking and corruption is a threat
to many modern democracies. Developing countries, in particular, provide seemingly endless
examples of political elites diverting funds intended for basic public services such as health,
schools, and roads for private gains.1 While the pervasive effects of corruption on economic
development have been well documented, the root causes are poorly understood.2
Variation in electoral systems is believed to explain a significant portion of the differences
in corruption practices across countries. Because voters can oust corrupt politicians from office,
electoral rules that enhance political accountability should constrain the behavior of corrupt
politicians.3 However, while there are convincing theoretical arguments for why political institutions affect corruption (see for example Myerson (1993) and Persson, Roland, and Tabellini
(1997)), the empirical evidence identifying the specific electoral structures that discipline politicians’ behavior suffers from at least two important shortcomings. First, most of these studies are
based on indices that measure perceptions rather than actual political corruption. Second, many
have relied primarily on cross-country analysis, where the inability to account for the full set of
institutional arrangements that determine corruption has made results difficult to interpret.
In this paper, we use audit reports from an anti-corruption program in Brazil to construct
new measures of corruption in local governments. We estimate the share of total federal resources transferred to municipalities that is associated with fraud in procurements, diversion of
funds, and over-invoicing for goods and services. By measuring corruption using detailed audit
reports, we are able to separate funds diverted from simple irregularities in bureaucratic procedures. Moreover, local governments in Brazil provide an ideal institutional setting to examine
how local electoral accountability affects corruption. Municipal governments are responsible for
the provision of important public services receiving large sums of resources from the federal
government. Thus, it is not surprising that corruption at the municipal level, as in many other
countries, has become an overarching concern (Rose-Ackerman 1999). Based on our estimates,
corruption is responsible for losses of approximately R$1.5 Billion (US $554 Million) for local
governments.4
With estimates for corruption at the municipal level, we compare mayors serving in a first
term to mayors in their second term (who face a term-limit) to identify the effects of re-election
1

See for example Di Tella and Schargrodsky (2003), Olken (2007), Reinikka and Svensson (2004)
See Knack and Keefer (1995), Mauro (1995), Bertrand et al. (2007) for studies examining the impacts of
corruption.
3
Adsera, Boix, and Payne (2003), Kunicová and Rose-Ackerman (2005), Lederman, Loayza, and Soares (2005),
Persson, Tabellini, and Trebbi (2003) provide cross-country evidence of the association between electoral rules
and perceptions of corruption.
4
We compute this number by using our estimate of misappropriation of 6 percent and applying it to R$24.8
Billion transferred to 5118 municipalities with population less than 450,000 persons in 2002. See Veja (2004) for
examples of widespread local corruption.
2

1

incentives. Our identification uses variation only from municipalities audited at the same time
and in the same state, while controlling for a full set of mayor and municipal characteristics.
Also, by estimating the effects of re-election incentives on political corruption at a sub-national
level, we keep constant the macro-level institutions, both formal and informal, whose differences
plague most cross-country analysis.
Consistent with a simple political agency model, we find that mayors with re-election incentives are significantly less corrupt than mayors without re-election incentives. In municipalities
where mayors are in their first term, the share of resources misappropriated is, on average, 27
percent lower than in municipalities with second-term mayors. The results are robust to not
only various specifications and estimation strategies, but also to alternative measures of corruption. Considering that municipalities receive, on average, R$5,459,209 (US$2,017,259) of federal
transfers, lame-duck mayors misappropriate approximately R$148,000 (US$54,688) more than
first-term mayors. Assuming that in the absence of re-election incentives, first-term mayors
would behave as second-term mayors, re-election incentives are responsible for inducing a reduction in resources misappropriated in the order of R$433 million (US$160 million). This is almost
half of what the federal government spent on the Bolsa Escola conditional cash transfer program
for all municipalities in Brazil during 2002. We also find that the effects of re-election incentives
vary considerably according to differences in the local institutional settings that govern either
the provision of information or the potential punishment corrupt politicians might suffer. For
instance, among municipalities with the presence of local media or local public prosecutors, we
find little differential effect between first and second-term mayors. Conversely, for the municipalities without local media, re-election incentives reduce political corruption by 9 percentage
points. The effects of re-election incentives are also more pronounced in municipalities where
the elections were competitive suggesting that first term mayors with an electoral advantage can
afford to be more corrupt.
We also provide several robustness tests that suggest that our findings are not driven by
unobserved differences in municipal characteristics, political ability or learning between first and
second term mayors. First, using a regression discontinuity analysis, we compare municipalities
where incumbent mayors barely won reelection in 2000 (and thus served as a second-term mayor
from 2001-2004) to municipalities where the incumbent barely lost the election and thus was
replaced by a new mayor (who then served as a first term between 2001-2004). This allow us to
control for many unobserved characteristics of the municipality that determine both re-election
and corruption levels. Second, we also compare second-term mayors with the set of first-term
mayors who are re-elected in the subsequent election, and are thus potentially as politically able
as second-term mayors. Third, we exploit the fact that some second-term mayors still have career
concerns and seek higher level political offices. Although in their final term, these mayors should
behave similarly to mayors who still have re-election incentives. Finally, we compare mayors

2

with similar political experience to account for any potential differences in corruption between
first and second-term mayors that might reflect learning-by-doing from political office.
The importance of elections as a disciplining device is well recognized in the literature. This
paper, by using objective measure of corruption and exploiting within country variation in reelection incentives, overcomes many of the literature’s previous limitations to provide, to the best
of our knowledge, the first test of how electoral accountability affects political corruption. More
broadly, our findings contribute to a growing literature that test the traditional political economy
agency models of Barro (1970), Ferejohn (1986) and Banks and Sundaram (1993).5 These
models predict that incumbent politicians will refrain from maximum rent-extraction in their first
electoral term in order to get re-elected and enjoy future rents.6 Our findings also complement
Ferraz and Finan (2008) who show that voters punish corrupt politicians when information about
corruption practices are publicized. Together, these results suggest that electoral accountability
act as a powerful mechanism to align politicians’ actions with voters’ preferences.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a theoretical framework
that links corruption to re-election incentives. It is within this context that we interpret our
empirical results. Section 3 provides some basic background information on corruption in Brazil,
and section 4 describes the data and how we construct our measures of corruption. Our empirical
strategy is discussed in section 5. The results are presented in section 6, followed by a discussion
of the findings in section 7. Section 8 concludes the paper.

2

Theoretical Framework

In this section, we present a simple model to help interpret our empirical findings. We utilize
the political agency framework of Besley (2006), whereby voters decide whether to re-elect an
incumbent, but are unable to observe either his type or actions.7 In a world of corrupt and
non-corrupt politicians, a corrupt mayor who faces the possibility of re-election can exploit
this information asymmetry to increase re-election chances by refraining from rent-seeking and
behaving as a non-corrupt mayor. Given these re-election incentives, the model predicts that
mayors who face re-election incentives will on average be less corrupt than mayors who do not.8
5

Besley and Case (1995) show that re-election incentives affect the fiscal policy of U.S. governors, and List and
Sturm (2006) provide evidence that term limits even influence secondary policies, such as environmental policy.
6
See Persson and Tabellini (2000) and Besley (2006) for excellent reviews of political agency models.
7
Besley (2006) is an adaptation the political agency model of Besley and Smart (2007) and Banks and Sundaram (1993), which extended the earlier work of Barro (1970), Ferejohn (1986), Persson, Roland, and Tabellini
(1997).
8
Campante, Chor, and Do (2006) presents an alternative model where corruption depends on politician’s
stability. Politicians facing more uncertainty about re-election (a shorter horizon) will extract more rents from
power.

3

Basic Model
Consider a two-period model with two types of politicians: a non-corrupt politician nc and
a corrupt politician c. Let π denote the proportion of non-corrupt politicians in the pool of
potential candidates. In each period, the elected politician sets a state-dependent policy et (st , i),
where i ∈ {c, nc} is the type of politician and st ∈ {0, 1} is the state of the world at time t. Each
state occurs with equal probability and is only observed by the incumbent politician.
Given the choice of policy, voters receive a payoff of V if et = st and zero otherwise.9 Noncorrupt politicians set policy to maximize voters’ objectives, whereas corrupt politicians receive
a private benefit rt for setting et 6= st . The private benefit is randomly drawn each period from a
distribution G(r) with mean µ and finite support [0, R]. The model assumes that R > δ(µ + E)
where δ is a common discount factor less than one and E denotes ego-rents that politicians enjoy
from holding office.
The timing of this game is as follows. A politician is elected at the beginning of each period,
after which nature reveals to the incumbent the state of the world. If newly elected, nature also
reveals his type. Corrupt incumbents then receive a random draw from the distribution G(r)
of private benefits. After policy is set, voters observe their payoffs and then decide whether or
not to re-elect the incumbent or select a challenger who has been drawn at random from the
pool of potential politicians. After elections are held, the corrupt politicians receive another
independent draw r2 from the distribution G(r). Period 2 actions then follow and payoffs are
realized.
The perfect Bayesian Nash equilibrium of this game requires that each politician behaves
optimally in each period, given the decision rule of the voters. Because the game ends in period
2, absent re-election incentives, each politician sets his preferred policy. Non-corrupt incumbents
will set e2 (s, nc) = s2 , and corrupt incumbents will set e2 (s, c) = 1−s2 to receive r2 . Since voters
are better off with non-corrupt incumbents in period 2, they maximize the likelihood that a noncorrupt politician is elected to the second period.
The equilibrium in period 1 is much more intriguing. While non-corrupt incumbents will
still behave in accordance with voters’ objectives, corrupt politicians face a tradeoff. A corrupt
politician can extract rents r1 in period 1 and forgo re-election, or alternatively behave as a
non-corrupt politician to guarantee re-election and reap the benefits of a second term.10 Given
this tradeoff, the probability that a corrupt politician provide voters with a positive payoff in
period 1 is simply P r(r1 ≤ δ(µ + E)): the probability that r1 is less than the present value of
expected future benefits from holding office in period 2. Based on the distributional assumptions
of r1 , this probability, which we denote as λ, is equal to G(δ(µ + E)).
Besley (2006) shows that in equilibrium non-corrupt politicians always set et = st . Corrupt
9
10

The payoffs could be related instead to the levels of public good provision.
Voters observing V will re-elect the incumbent politicians. To see this, note that the probability that a

4

politicians choose e2 = (1−s2 ) in period 2, and e1 = s1 in period 1, provided they earn sufficiently
small rents. All politicians who choose e1 = s1 will get re-elected. In equilibrium, if the ratio of
disciplined politicians to non-disciplined politicians is larger than the share of non-corrupt types,
λ
i.e. 1−λ
≥ π, then rent extraction will on average be higher in the second period than in the
first period, that is,11
Z

R

Z

Z
rdG(r) + (1 − π)(1 − λ)(1 − π)

rdG(r) ≤ (1 − π)λ

(1 − π)(1 − λ)

R

r1 ≥δ(µ+E)

0

R

rdG(r).
0

The intuition for this result is simple. When faced with the possibility of re-election, corrupt
politicians have the incentive to reduce rent extraction and provide more public goods. Assuming
the disciplining effect λ is large enough, rents will on average be higher in the second period,
relative to the first period. This is the main testable prediction that we take to the data.

3

Institutional Background

Several institutional features of Brazil facilitate the test of whether political incentives affect
corruption levels. First, re-election incentives were introduced in 1997 through a constitutional
amendment that enabled mayors to run for a second consecutive term. This amendment allows
us to compare the corruption levels between municipalities where mayors are in their first term
to those where mayors are in their second term. Second, in 2003 the Controladoria Geral da
União (CGU) introduced an ambitious anti-corruption program that audits municipalities for
their use of federal funds. These audit reports provide objective measures of corruption at the
municipal level.
Moreover, municipal corruption has become an overarching concern for Brazil.12 After the
constitution of 1988, municipal governments became responsible for a substantial share of the
provision of public goods and services, particularly in the areas of education and health. With
the devolution of public service delivery to local governments, the federal government transferred
politician is non-corrupt conditional on observing V is:
P r(i = N C|V )

=
=
=

11

P r(V |i = N C)P r(i = N C)
P r(V )
P r(V |i = N C)P r(i = N C)
P r(i = N C) + P r(i = C)P r(r1 ≤ δ(µ + E))
π
≥π
π + (1 − π)P r(r1 ≤ δ(µ + E))

λ
1−λ

≥ π is sufficient but not necessary for rents to be higher in the second period. Rents
RR
RR
λ
are higher in the second period if the following inequality holds: π r1 ≥δ(µ+E) rdG(r) < 1−λ
rdG(r) +
r1 ≥δ(µ+E)
R r1 ≤δ(µ+E)
(λ + (1 − λ)(1 − π)) 0
rdG(r).
12
For a detailed article on municipal corruption see VEJA (2004).
The condition that

5

large amounts of resources to municipalities. Currently, the 5,560 Brazilian municipalities receive
on average $35 billion per year from the federal government, which represents approximately 15
percent of federal government’s revenue.13 This influx of federal funds has substantially increased
the potential for local capture.

3.1

Corruption Schemes in Brazil’s Municipalities

Municipal-level corruption takes on a variety of other forms. Frauds in procurement processes,
diversion of funds, and over-invoicing for goods and services are among the most common ways
local politicians find to appropriate resources.14 Other common irregularities include incomplete
public works (paid for but unfinished); the use of fake receipts (“notas frias”) and phantom firms
(a firm that only exists on paper).
Some examples are useful to illustrate these corruption technologies. A common scheme used
to deviate public resources in the municipalities of El Dorado dos Carajés and Porto Seguro, for
example, include the creation of phantom firms, simulation of the call for bids, and kickbacks to
government officials.15 In other contracts, although existing firms did win the bid, none of them
were even aware that they had participated in the bidding process. The local administration
used the names of these firms in fake receipts to appropriate resources for public goods that were
never provided.
Another irregular practice, common in several municipalities, is a non-competitive procurement process. While the Brazilian law requires a competitive bidding process with at least three
participants for any project in excess of $30,000 per year, the municipality of Itapetinga in the
state of Bahia, for example, highlights one of the many ways local politicians have manipulated the public procurement process. In 2002 and 2003, the federal government transferred to
Itapetinga $110,000 for the purchase of school lunches. In 12 out of the 16 calls for bids, only
one bid was ever supplied. It was later discovered that each call for bids was posted only one
hour prior to its deadline, and not surprisingly only a firm owned by the mayor’s brother posted
within the time limit. This same scheme was uncovered for other social programs in the areas
of education and health.
Another common form of corruption is for mayors to divert funds intended for education
and health projects towards the purchase of cars, fuel, apartments, or payment of their friends’
salaries. In some cases, the mayor himself is a direct beneficiary. For example, in Paranhos,
Mato Grosso do Sul, $69,838 was paid to implement a rural electrification project. As it turns
out, one of the farms benefitted by the project was owned by the mayor.
13
For comparison, fiscal decentralization in the world is on average 6 percent, while in other similar developing
countries it is only 3 percent.
14
For a description of municipal corruption schemes in Brazil see Trevisan et al. (2004).
15
These descriptions are based on several CGU reports and press releases available at:
www.presidencia.gov.br/cgu.

6

3.2

Brazil’s Anti-Corruption Program: an Overview

In May 2003 the government of Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva started an unprecedented anticorruption program based on the random auditing of municipal government’s expenditures.
The program, which is implemented through the Controladoria Geral da União (CGU), aims
to discourage misuse of public funds among public administrators and fostering civil society
participation in the control of public expenditures.
The program started with the audit of 26 randomly selected municipalities, one in each state
of Brazil. It has since expanded to auditing 50 and later 60 municipalities per lottery, from a
sample of all Brazilian municipalities with less than 450,000 inhabitants.16 The lotteries, which
are held on a monthly basis at the Caixa Econômica Federal in Brasilia, are drawn in conjunction
with the national lotteries. To assure a fair and transparent process, representatives of the press,
political parties, and members of the civil society are all invited witness the lottery.
Once a municipality is chosen, the CGU gathers information on all federal funds transfers to
the municipal government from 2001 onwards. Approximately 10 to 15 CGU auditors are then
sent to the municipality to examine accounts and documents, to inspect for the existence and
quality of public work construction, and delivery of public services. Auditors also meet members
of the local community, as well as municipal councils in order to get direct complaints about any
malfeasance.17 After approximately one week of inspections, a detailed report describing all the
irregularities found is submitted to the central CGU office in Brasilia. The reports are then sent
to the Tribunal de Contas da União (TCU), to public prosecutors and to the legislative branch
of the municipality. For each municipality audited, a summary of the main findings is posted
on the internet and disclosed to media sources. It is from these reports that we construct an
objective measure of corruption.

4

Measuring Corruption

In this section, we describe how our measures of corruption are computed and present summary
statistics of the corruption measures and municipal characteristics.

4.1

Measuring Corruption using Audit Reports

As with any illegal activity, obtaining data on corruption is a difficult task. Several empirical
studies that focus on illegal behavior have used indirect evidence to analyze its determinants
and consequences (see for example Duggan and Levitt (2002); Fisman (2002); Fisman and Wei
16

This excludes approximately 8 percent of Brazil’s 5500 municipalities, comprising mostly of the state capitals
and coastal cities.
17
These auditors are hired based on a public examination, and prior to visiting the municipality receive extensive
training on the specificities of the sampled municipality. Also, there is a supervisor for each team of auditors.

7

(2004), Bandiera, Prat, and Valletti (2007)). However, a small, but growing body of literature
has tried to assess corruption more directly focusing on two forms: bribery of public officials and
the theft of public resources (Svensson (2003); Di Tella and Schargrodsky (2003); Reinikka and
Svensson (2004); Olken (2007)).
Our approach, although related to the studies cited above, uses a new methodology made
possible by the availability of audit reports from Brazil’s anti-corruption program. Contained in
each report is the total amount of federal funds audited for the current administration, as well
as, an itemized list describing each irregularity and in most cases the amount of funds involved.
Audit reports were available in the beginning of 2004 for the 496 municipalities randomly selected
across the first 11 lotteries of the anti-corruption program.18 We read each report classifying
the irregularities found by auditors into corruption indicators and estimate the amount of public
resources misappropriated for each irregularity.
Based on our readings of the reports, we codified the irregularities listed into several categories
of corruption.19 For the purpose of coding, we define political corruption to be any irregularity
associated with fraud in procurements, diversion of public funds, and over-invoicing. Specifically,
we define a procurement to be irregular if: i) a required procurement was not executed; ii) the
minimum number of bids was not attained; iii) there was evidence of fraud in the procurement
process (e.g. use of bids from non-existing firms). We categorize diversion of public funds as any
expenditure without proof of purchase or provision and/or direct evidence of diversion provided
by the CGU. Finally, we define over-invoicing as any evidence that public goods and services
were bought for a value above the market price.
These practices have not only been shown to be the most common ways in which local politicians appropriate resources, but in many instances they are not necessarily mutually exclusive
(see Trevisan et al. (2004)). In effect, over-invoicing and illegal procurement practices often serve
as complementary vehicles for funds diversion. To give a better sense of the irregularities found
and the procedure used to code corruption, we present in the appendix some specific examples
from the audit reports.
Based on the coding of the reports, we define as our principal measure of corruption the
total amount of resources related to corrupt activities, expressed as a share of the total amount
of resources audited. While this is our preferred measure, we also report two additional indicators of corruption: the number of irregularities related to corruption and the share of service
items associated with corruption, which simply divides the number of irregularities related to
corruption by the number of service items audited.
18

Only 26 municipalities were selected in the first lottery. From lottery two to lottery nine, 50 municipalities
were chosen in each. Starting on the tenth lottery in May of 2004, the CGU increased the number of municipalities
sampled to 60.
19
We also used two independent research assistants to code the reports in order to provide a check on our
coding.

8

There are at least two reasons why we calculate these additional measures. First, although
highly correlated with our main measure, these other indicators help to distinguish whether
second-term mayors also engage in more corrupt transactions. Second, in coding the amount
of resource deviated or involved in an illegal procurement, a dollar amount was not available
in all of the irregularities reported.20 While coding these cases as zero underestimates the
amount of corruption, this could create a bias for testing re-election incentives if the cases
occurred disproportionately for first-term mayors.21 By using additional measures we include
these irregularities and thus avoid the potential bias.

4.2

Summary Statistics on Corruption and Government Irregularities

Summary statistics for each one of the three corruption categories and the overall corruption
indicator are displayed in Table 1. As seen in row 1, 57 percent of the municipalities have
performed an illegal procurement practice, and 54 percent of the municipalities have diverted
some type of funds. Over-invoicing is found much less frequently, occurring in only 7 percent
of our sample. After combining these indicators, we see that 78 percent of the municipalities
have had at least one incidence of corruption. Moreover, those administrations that commit an
act of corruption average around 2.47 corrupt violations, which is 7 percent of the service items
audited. The average amount of resources diverted is R$125,000 (US$46,297) per violation which
represents 8.7 percent of the total amount audited.22
To get a sense for how re-election incentive may affect these various irregularities, Table 2
compares these indicators between municipalities with mayors in their first-term to those with
mayors in their second-term. In the first set of columns, the share of audited resources found
to be associated with corruption is 1.9 percentage points higher for second-term mayor, and
significant at 95 percent level of confidence. Second-term mayors are also more corrupt in each
of the 3 categories of corruption (diversion of funds, illegal procurement practices, and overinvoicing), but it is the difference in illegal procurement that accounts for much of the difference
in the aggregate measure. On average, the share of resources that are diverted illegally in the
procurement of public works is 1.7 percentage points higher among second-term mayors than
first-term mayors (standard error is 0.7).
When corruption is measured as either the incidence of irregularities or the share of service
20

Approximately 89 percent of the incidences of illegal procurement practices and funds diversion have a value.
If anything we are underestimating the effect of re-election incentives on the share of total resources associated
with corruption, because the proportion of these irregularities is 4 percentage points higher for second-term
mayors, although not statistically significant.
22
In general, we see that a large number of irregularities occur in the areas of education and health, sectors
that were decentralized during of the late 1980s. See Ferraz and Finan (2007) for a more detailed account of the
distribution of corruption practices across types and sectors.
21

9

items, columns 4-9 of Table 2 provide further evidence in support of the theoretical predictions.
Compared to first-term mayors, second-term mayors commit 0.11 and 0.23 more irregularities
in the diversion of funds and illegal procurement practices respectively, which represent 0.4 and
0.7 percentage points differences in the share of services items audited.

4.3

Data on Municipal Characteristics

The other data sources used in the analysis were obtained from the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatı́stica (IBGE)), Tribunal Superior
Eleitoral (TSE), and Tesouro Nacional. The richness of these data allows us to control for a large
number of municipal characteristics that are likely to be correlated with corruption practices and
whose absence might otherwise confound our estimates. See the data appendix for a detailed
description of data sources.
Table 3 compares differences in mean characteristics of municipalities with a first-term to
municipalities with a second-term mayor. Because of our lack of experimental design and the need
to assume selection on observable characteristics, it is useful to understand if the determinants of
corruption are significantly different across the municipalities. As the table demonstrates, there
are few differences in observable characteristics between these municipalities. Out of 43 variables,
only 5 are significantly different at a 95 percent level of confidence.23 There is a significant
difference between first and second-term mayors in our measures of electoral performance for
the 2000 municipal elections. This is not too surprising given that incumbents tend to have an
advantage in elections. The other significant differences are the proportion of the population
with at least a secondary school education and the share of the population that lives in urban
areas; characteristics that are fairly correlated. In fact, the differences in the share of the urban
population loses statistical significant once we account for the differences in secondary school
attainment.

5

Empirical Strategy

Our main objective is to test whether re-election incentives affect the level of political corruption
in a municipality. As the theory presented in section 2 predicts, mayors who face re-election
incentives should, on average, be less corrupt than those who are no longer eligible for reelection. To estimate the effects of re-election incentives, the ideal experiment would have been
to randomly assign the possibility of re-election across municipalities and then measure the
differences in corruption levels across these two groups of municipalities among mayors in their
first term of office. Unfortunately, this experiment design does not exist and given the cross23

We report the 19 most important variables that are later used in our specifications.

10

sectional nature of our data, we instead compare mayors in their first term, who still face reelection incentives, to second-term mayors using the following regression:
ri = βIi + Xi ϕ + Zi γ + εi ,

(1)

where ri is the level of corruption for municipality i, and Ii indicates whether the mayor is in
his first term. The vector Xi is a set of municipal characteristics and the vector Zi is a set of
mayor characteristics that determine the municipality’s level of corruption. The term εi denotes
unobserved (to the econometrician) municipal and mayor characteristics thought to determine
corruption.
In estimating equation 1, we face two main empirical challenges. First, without random
assignment of re-election incentives, unobserved characteristics of the municipality and the mayor
that affect both re-election and local corruption (e.g. political ability and campaigning effort)
will bias a simple OLS regression. Second, even if first and second-term mayor were randomly
assigned, the finding that second-term mayors are more corrupt could be due to the fact that
they have more experience.
To illustrate these potential biases, consider a simple model that expresses the difference in
corruption level between first and second-term mayors in terms of potential outcomes. Let rtDT
be the level of rents extracted by a politician at term t in a municipality where mayors can be
re-elected to a second term, i.e. a double-term regime, DT . The simple comparison between
mayors in their first and second term is:
∆ = E[r2DT |τ = 2] − E[r1DT |τ = 1]
where τ denotes a first or second term mayor. Let rtST denote the levels of rents at term t in
a municipality where there are no possibilities of re-election, i.e. a single-term regime, ST . We
can rewrite this simple difference as:
∆ = E[r2DT |τ = 2] − E[r1ST |τ = 1] + (E[r1ST |τ = 1] − E[r1DT |τ = 1])

(2)

= E[r2DT |τ = 2] − E[r1ST |τ = 1] + β
where E[r1ST |τ = 1] is the expected level of rent extraction in the first period among first-term
mayors who do not face re-election incentives and β measures the causal effects of re-election
incentives on corruption.
To see the different sources of biases, Equation 2 can be decomposed further as follows:
∆ = β + E[r2DT |τ = 2] − E[r1ST |τ = 2] + E[r1ST |τ = 2] − E[r1ST |τ = 1]
{z
} |
{z
}
|
experience

ability

11

(3)

The first difference represents the potential bias associate with the effects of political experience
on corruption. It compares the corruption level of a second-term mayor in his second-term
(i.e. t = 2) of a double-term regime to the amount of corruption the same mayor would have
committed in the first period (i.e. t = 1) of a single-term regime. The second difference captures
any bias associated with differences in either political ability or unobserved municipal level
determinants of corruption. It measures the difference in the amount of corruption between
what a second-term mayor would have committed in his first term of a single-term regime and
what a first-term mayor commits in the first term of a single-term regime. Thus, assuming that
these differences are not zero then the simple OLS estimation of equation 1 will yield biased
estimates.

5.1

Controlling for Political Ability and Other Potential Confounds

To account for any unobserved differences in either political ability or municipal level characteristics between first and second term mayor, we employ two different identification strategies.
First, using a regression discontinuity analysis, we compare municipalities where incumbent mayors barely won reelection in 2000 (and thus served as a second-term mayor from 2001-2004) to
municipalities where the incumbent barely lost the election and thus was replaced by a new
mayor (who then served as a first term between 2001-2004). As discussed in Lee (2008), close
elections provide a quasi-random assignment of municipalities with a first versus second-term
mayor. Thus, by comparing elections where the incumbents won or lost by a narrow margin,
we control for many of the unobserved characteristics of the municipality that determine both
re-election and corruption levels, such as the quality of pool of candidates or the amount of
campaign resources.24
To exploit the discontinuity in margin of victory which re-elects the incumbent mayor, we
modify equation 1 to estimate the following model:
ri = βIi + f (Wi ) + Xi ϕ + Zi γ + εi
Ii = 1[Wi ≥ 0]
where Wi denotes the difference in vote shares between the incumbent and the second place
candidate, and f (Wi ) is a smooth continuous function of margin of victory. As is typically
the case in a regression discontinuity framework, there is a tradeoff between precision and bias,
particularly as one moves away from the discontinuity. In section 6, we present estimates that
are robust to various functional form assumptions for f (Wi ).
Our second approach addresses differences in unobserved political ability by comparing
24

Dal Bó, Dal Bó, and Snyder (2008), Ferreira and Gyourko (2007), Lee, Moretti, and Butler (2004), Linden
(2004) also apply regression discontinuity techniques in the context of elections.

12

second-term mayors with a subset of first-term mayors that were able to get re-elected in 2004
elections. If the bias from the OLS regression comes from unobserved political ability that positively selects more able politicians into a second-term, this approach controls for a significant
portion of this bias by comparing mayors that are as politically able as second-term mayors.

5.2

Controlling for Experience

If there is a learning process associated with corruption or if it simply takes time to establish
the networks that enable corruption, then the difference in corruption levels between first and
second-term mayors may not only reflect re-election incentives but also political experience.25
We test for this possibility using two different approaches. First, to account for the fact that
second-term mayors are more experienced, we collect data on all mayors who held a political
position as either mayor or local legislator during the 1989-1992, 1993-1996, and 1997-2000
administrations and match them to those in power during 2001-2004. We can then compare the
corruption of mayors facing a second-term with those mayors serving on a first-term, but who
have had previous political experience. Second, we compare first-term mayors to second-term
mayors that became candidates in either the governor or legislative elections in 2006. According
to theory, second-term mayors who still have career concerns and run for higher offices should
behave similarly to first-term mayors. Moreover, such a prediction would be inconsistent with a
learning-by-doing hypothesis, where even those second-term mayors with re-election incentives
would still be more corrupt than first-term mayors.

6

Empirical Results

This section provides evidence that municipalities where mayors face re-election incentives are
associated with significantly lower levels of corruption, as measured by the share of resources
appropriated. These findings are robust to alternative definitions of corruption, as well as various
specifications and estimation techniques. We also explore how re-election incentives vary with
local characteristics and find that the effects are stronger among municipalities where the cost
of rent extraction are lower and political competition is higher. All these results are consistent
with the basic predictions of a standard political agency model. We conclude this section with
additional results that address several potential threats to our identification assumptions.
25

As long as reducing corruption increases one chances of getting re-elected then theoretically it is unlikely that
any difference between first and second-term mayors is strictly due to a ’learning-by-doing’ process.

13

Basic Results on Corruption
Table 4 presents regression results from estimating several variants to Equation 1, where the
dependent variable is the share of resources that were indicated as corruption. Column 1 reports
the unadjusted relationship between whether the mayor is in his first term and the share of
funds appropriated. The remaining columns correspond to specifications that include additional
sets of controls. The specifications presented in columns 2-4 account for variation in mayors,
demographic and institutional characteristics of the municipality, whereas the specifications in
columns 5 and 6 include, in addition to the other controls, indicators for when the municipality
was selected for audit (lottery intercepts) and state intercepts. The specification presented in
column 6, where re-election incentives are identified from only within state and lottery variation,
accounts for any state-specific or lottery-specific unobservable that might have affected political
corruption. It also controls for any differences across states (and in effect across time) for how
the municipalities may have been audited.
From the bivariate relationship in column 1, we see that first-term mayors are associated
with a 2.0 percentage point decrease in corruption. At an average corruption level of 0.074
among second-term mayors, this estimate represents a 27 percent decline. As seen in the other
columns, the inclusion of additional controls has a minimal effect on the point estimate. For
example in column 6, which controls for state and lottery intercepts and various mayor and
municipal characteristics, including the amount of resources transferred to the municipality, the
estimated effect is slightly larger in magnitude (point estimate =-0.027; and standard error
0.011), but statistically indistinguishable from the estimate of the unadjusted regression (F( 1,
409) = 0.44; P-value = 0.5076). If we consider that on average R$5,459,054 was transferred to
these municipalities, lame-duck mayors misappropriate approximately R$148,000 (US $60,000)
more than first-term mayors.
Columns 7 and 8 of Table 4 present the estimated effect of re-election incentives based
on different functional form assumptions. In column 7, we display the estimated effects for
our corruption measure using a bias-adjusted matching estimator (Abadie and Imbens 2006).
Although compared to the regression analysis the identification assumptions are similar, the
matching estimator has the advantage that it neither assumes a functional form nor extrapolates
over areas of uncommon support in the observable characteristics. In addition, to the matching
estimator, we also estimate a Tobit model to account for the left censoring of municipalities with
zero share of corruption (displayed in the column 8). For each alternative specification, the point
estimates are consistent to the OLS estimates presented in the other columns. Using the Tobit
model, the marginal effects for the entire sample increase in magnitude to -0.042 (standard error
= 0.012) compared to -0.027 (standard error = 0.011) in the OLS regression.
Table 5 reports the estimated effect of re-election incentives using our two alternative measures of corruption. Columns 1-4 compares the number of irregularities associated with cor14

ruption between first and second-term mayors, whereas columns 5-8 estimate the relationship
for the share of service items related to corruption (number of corrupt irregularities divided by
the number of audited items). For each measure, we report the unadjusted relationship, the
most complete model, and alternative functional forms. Under our full specification, first-term
mayors are associated with 0.467 fewer acts of corruption (column 2). When compared to average corruption among second-term mayors, this effect represents a 22 percent decline. We also
find that first-term mayors are significantly less corrupt when measured by the share of service
items found to be corrupt.26 By this measure, first-term mayors are 23 percent less corrupt
than second-term mayors. As the remaining columns demonstrate, these estimates are robust
to alternative specifications and estimation procedures. Together these findings suggest that
mayors who still face the possibility of re-election engage in less corrupt activities than mayors
who may have a shorter political horizon.

Accounting for Political Ability and Other Potential Confounds
Thus far, our results show that there is less corruption in municipalities governed by firstterm mayors. Although this is consistent with the effects of re-election incentives, there are
alternative interpretations for these findings. One possibility is that our estimates are capturing
some unobserved characteristics of the municipality or the mayor that increases both re-election
rates and corruption levels. For instance, first and second-term mayors might differ in political
ability. If a mayor’s ability increases his re-election probability and enables him to be more
corrupt, then our estimates are potentially biased upwards.
In this section, we address these concerns using two approaches. First, we identify the
effects of re-election incentives using elections where the incumbents won or lost by a narrow
margin. As we discussed in Section 5, this regression discontinuity approach provides quasirandom assignment of first-term mayors (municipalities where incumbents barely lost re-election)
and second-term mayors (municipalities where incumbents barely won re-election) for the subset
of municipalities where the incumbent ran for re-election.27 In addition to the RDD approach,
we also present estimates where we compare second-term mayors to a subset of first-term mayors
that were able to get reelected at the end of their terms. If the bias from the OLS regression
comes from unobserved political ability that positively selects more able politicians into a secondterm, this approach controls for a significant portion of this bias by comparing mayors that are
as politically able as second-term mayors.
26

This measure addresses the concern that municipalities with second-term mayors may have had more items
audited. Alternatively, when we control for the number of service items audited in the specifications presented
in columns 1-4, the estimate remain almost identical.
27
Note that this identification strategy still does not allow us to disentangle the effects of re-election incentives
from a simple model of learning by doing. It also does not control for underlying differences in the individual
politicians. We account for these possibilities in the next set of robustness checks.

15

Results from these two approaches are shown in Table 6. In columns 1-3 we present results
from a Regression Discontinuity Design specification where the running variable is the difference
in vote share between the incumbent and the runner-up (or the winner if the incumbent lost the
election).28 In column 2 we control linearly for the difference in vote shares while in columns 3 and
4 we include a quadratic and a cubic term respectively. The results are robust to these various
functional form assumptions with the coefficient on the first-term indicator varying between 0.029 and -0.037 (standard errors varying from 0.017 to 0.020). For instance, allowing for a cubic
polynomial in the incumbent’s margin of victory, we see that compared to second-term mayors,
first-term mayors are 3.7 percentage points less corrupt.29
The results from comparing the corruption levels of second-term mayors to the set of firstterm mayors that get re-elected are presented in columns 4 and 5 of Table 6. The coefficient
on the first-term indicator increases in magnitude to -0.040 (standard error=0.013), suggesting
that second-term mayors extract a higher level of rents from office even compared to first-term
mayors of similar political ability. It is important to note however that the larger coefficient on
the first-term dummy was expected because the dissemination of the audit program decreased
the probability that corrupt mayors were re-elected (see Ferraz and Finan (2008)). To control
for the effects of the audits, we use an alternative strategy where we estimate the probability of
re-election using the sample of mayors that were audited only after the 2004 elections (and hence
voters did not have this information) and compute the predicted probability of a first-term mayor
getting re-elected.30 After controlling for the effects of the audits, the point estimate reduces to
-0.034 (standard error 0.017) and is still significant at 90 percent confidence.

Controlling for Experience and Learning-by-Doing
Politicians in power for a longer period of time may learn corruption practices and establish
networks that enable them to be more corrupt. If this was the case, the estimated differences
28

The sample size drops to 328 because some incumbents in 2000 do not run for reelection. Although this is
a select sample, column 1 in Appendix Table 1 replicates our main specification that compares first and secondterms excluding municipalities where the incumbent did not run in the 2000 election. The estimated effect (point
estimate = -0.02; standard error =0.011) is similar both statistically and in magnitude to the effect for the overall
sample.
29
We also estimate alternative specifications where we allow the slope to vary across each side of the zero vote
margin discontinuity with a linear, quadratic and cubic splines. The results are shown in table 1 in the Appendix
and provide similar coefficients, although we lose some precision in the point estimates due to the small sample.
Results for the other measures of corruption display similar patterns and are available upon request.
30
We constructed a propensity score for whether the mayor was re-elected in the 2004 elections using various
mayor and municipal characteristics. These characteristics included: the mayor’s gender, education, marriage
status, age, and party affiliation dummies; the municipality’s log population, population with secondary school
education, age of municipality, log GDP per capita, income equality, share of the legislative branch that supports
the mayor, effective number of parties in 2000 election, an indicator for whether there is a judge in the municipality,
state fixed effects. The predicted indicator is equal to one if the propensity score was greater than or equal to
0.5. The estimation predicted 64 percent of the cases correctly.

16

in corruption between first and second-term mayors might just reflect the corruption know-how
accumulated over time rather than the effects of re-election incentives. In this section we provide
evidence that although second-term mayors have more political experience, these additional years
in office cannot fully explain the differential corruption of first and second-term mayors.31
We start by identifying the 2001-2004 mayors who were either in power during the 1989-1992,
1993-1996 administrations or served as local legislators during the 1997-2000 administration.32
If the difference in corruption levels between first and second-term mayors is largely due to
experience then we would expect first-term mayors who had previously been in power to have
similar corruption levels to second-term mayors. In column 1, Table 7, we re-estimate our basic
specification, but control for an indicator for whether the first-term mayor was in power in one
of the three previous terms (12 years). The point estimate of -0.031 (standard error=0.012) is
almost identical to the original point estimate of -0.027 in column 6, Table 4.33
An alternative way to account for previous experience is to compare second-term mayors with
only first-term mayors who have previously been in power. Hence, we re-estimate the baseline
regression using all second-term mayors, but restrict first-term mayors to only those that have
been mayors before (either from 1988-1992 or 1993-1996). The coefficient on first-term, shown in
Table 7, column 2, is -0.039 (standard error= 0.014) further suggesting that political experience
does not entirely drive the difference in corruption levels between first and second-term mayors.
One potential criticism to this approach is that the political networks built by a mayor during
1992-1996 might be lost when he spends time away from office before returning in 2001. Hence,
we compute an alternative measure of political experience where we also take into account firstterm mayors that served as local legislators during the previous administration (1996-2000).34
In column 3, Table 7, we re-estimate the basic model comparing second-term mayors to firstterm mayors that have had previous political experience, including experience as local legislators
during the previous term. The estimated difference in corruption between first and second-term
mayors decreases slightly to 2.9 percentage points (standard error=0.016). Finally, in column
4 of Table 7, we compare the corruption level of second-term mayors to first-term mayors that
have previously been in power and are high ability mayors (were re-elected in the 2004 election).
The coefficient estimated on the first-term dummy is again -0.056 (standard-error=0.018).35
31

In fact, the possibility of re-election was only introduced in 1997, but mayors could be re-elected after a
one-term hiatus. One concern is that in effect mayors do not face term limits because they can run again after
being out for one-term. For our purposes, this mis-measurement of the politician’s political horizon implies that
we would be underestimating the effects of re-election incentives.
32
Since these data are not available on electronic format, we called each one of the 26 state level electoral courts
(TRE) and obtained the names of elected mayors in the 1988 and 1992 elections. We could not obtain records
before 1988 since they are not systematically recorded across states.
33
Although not reported, all of the results presented in this section, as well as the others, are similar when
using the other corruption measures.
34
There are 27 (11 percent) first-term mayors that served as local legislators from 1996-2000.
35
If we use the predicted indicator for re-election our point estimate falls to -0.043 (standard error =0.028),
which although measured with less precision, is again consistent with the other estimates.

17

Corruption and Future Career Concerns
We have interpreted the coefficient on the first-term indicator as evidence that mayors who face
re-election incentives engage, on average, in less corrupt activities. Second-term mayors however
may have other political aspirations and it is often the case that some mayors in Brazil continue
their political careers as state level legislators or federal deputies.36 The theory would therefore
suggest that second-term mayors who still have career concerns and run for higher offices should
behave similarly to first-term mayors. To test this, we gather data from the 2006 governor and
legislative elections and match the names of candidates to those mayors that were in power from
2001-2004. Out of the 485 mayors in power during the 2001-2004 term nine percent ran for office
in 2006.
In column 5 of table 7, we restrict the sample to only second-term mayors and run a regression
of corruption on an indicator for whether the second-term mayor ran for a higher level office in
2006. Again as the theory suggests, we find that second-term mayors with career concerns are
4.9 percentage points less corrupt than second-term mayors without career concerns.
While these estimates support a model of re-election incentives, one potential problem with
this test is that the decision to run for a higher-level office might be endogenous to the level of
corruption uncovered in the audits. While we acknowledge that this result should be interpreted
with caution, accusations of corruption and crimes in Brazil seem to have greater impacts on local
elections compared to national elections and it is unlikely that accusations of local corruption
will affect nominations for high level offices37 – for instance, approximately 35 percent of federal
congressmen and 30 percent of senators are accused of crimes that were committed before taking
office.38

Local Context and Re-election Incentives
In this section we explore the extent to which the effects of re-election incentives on corruption
might vary according to local characteristics that affect electoral accountability. In order to shed
light on the empirical results, we start by discussing some natural extensions to the simple model
presented in Section 2. The asymmetry of information between voters and politicians lies at the
heart of political agency models. Hence, factors that influence access to information may affect
how re-election incentives affect corruption.39 Suppose for instance that with some probability
voters observe their politician’s type after he has chosen his action and before the election is held.
As the likelihood that a corrupt politician is detected in the first period increases (i.e. voters have
36

In the 2006 election, for example, out of the 246 newly elected deputies, 13 percent were ex-mayors (BBC
Brazil).
37
Even though Ferraz and Finan (2008) find that the audit reports reduced the likelihood of reelection on
among mayors, they do not find evidence that the audits reduced the likelihood of running for re-election.
38
See the report from Transparencia Brasil at: http://www.excelencias.org.br/excelencias.pdf .
39
The framework used for discussing the effects of information on corruption is based on Besley (2006).

18

more information), a corrupt politician will be less likely to pool with non-corrupt politicians,
and hence discipline will be reduced. But as corrupt politicians become less disciplined, they are
less likely to survive into a second-period and the quality of the average politician that survives
into a second-mandate improves. Hence, the overall effect of an increase of information that
allows voters to identify politicians’ type is ambiguous– corruption will decrease in the second
period and potentially increase in the first because those corrupt mayors will now extract as
much rent as they can in the first period. Empirically, with a cross-section of mayors, one would
expect that the difference in corruption between first and second-term mayors to be smaller
in municipalities where there is more access to information that allows voters to uncover the
politician’s type (e.g. presence of local radio).
An additional source of heterogeneity stems from differences across municipalities in the potential punishment of engaging in corruption. For instance, the probability of being prosecuted
and punished for corruption charges is likely to be higher in municipalities where the judiciary
has a public prosecutor, thus increasing the cost of engaging in corrupt activities. As corruption
costs increase, thus reducing the future benefits of rent extraction, politicians will become less
disciplined and the selection effect will increase. Therefore, we would expect that in municipalities where the costs of engaging in corruption are higher, the difference in corruption between
first and second-term mayors will also be lower.
Political competition may also determine how re-election incentives affect corruption. An
increase in electoral advantage will reduce the disciplining effect, as the probability of being
re-elected increases, even if the corrupt mayor does not pretend to be non-corrupt. Thus, the
difference between first and second-term mayors is less in municipalities where the elections are
less competitive.
Finally, a mayor’s political support might affect corruption choices. If the mayor has a
majority in the local legislature, he will be able to pass legislations, increase public employment
and adopt other strategies that increase his re-election chances. Everything else constant, he
can be less disciplined and still get reelected into a second-term. Thus, we expect the difference
in corruption between first and second term mayors to decrease as the support in the local
legislature increase.
In Table 8 we show the results using as proxies for these local characteristics: the presence
of a judge, the existence of local radio, political competition, and the share of local legislators
that belong to the same party as the mayor.40
The presence of public prosecutors or a local media reduces the corruption differential between
first-term and second-term mayors. Among municipalities with public prosecutors, there is only
40

In Brazil, the presence of a judge depends on whether the unicipality is a judiciary district (comarca), which
in turn depends on local characteristics such as population, local revenues and the number of judiciary processes.
The presence of local radios have an important effect in revealing the type of politician, see Ferraz and Finan
(2008).

19

a small difference in corruption levels between first and second-term mayors (column 1), and in
municipalities with local media - in the form of either radio or newspaper - the difference is only
1.4 percentage points (column 2). In contrast, among municipalities where there does not exist
any local media, second-term mayors are almost 10 percentage points (standard error=0.03)
more corrupt than first-term mayors, which represents an average R$523,000 (US$237,592).
Columns 3 and 4 report how the second-term effect varies with the degree of political competition, as measured by the proportion of the local council that is from the same party as the
mayor (column 3) and a political Herfindahl index in the previous election (column 4).41 As
reported in column 3, political competition increases the difference in corruption levels between
first and second-term mayors. When only 9 percent of the legislative council is from the same
political party as the mayor (5th percentile of the distribution), there an 8.8 percentage point
difference between first and second-term mayors. Whereas, when the political support of the
incumbent mayor represents 55 percent of the legislative branch, then there is no difference in
corruption levels between first and second-term mayors. The results reported in Column 4 tell
a similar story. For instance, among municipalities where the Hefindahl index was 0.08 (the
1st percentile of the distribution), first-term mayors are 3.9 percentage points less corrupt that
second-term mayors. In contrast, when elections are less competitive at 0.528 (the 99 percentile
of the distribution), the difference in corruption levels between first and second-term mayors is
-0.007. In effect, the results presented in columns (3) and (4) suggest that municipalities characterized by low competition exhibit no differential effect in rent-extraction between first and
second-term mayors. First-term mayors with an extreme electoral advantage can afford to be as
corrupt as a lame-duck mayor since his re-election is practically guaranteed.

7

Discussion

Our analysis shows that mayors who can be held accountable at the polls will engage in less
corruption. First-term mayors misappropriate 27 percent less resources than second-term mayors
even when accounting for potential biases in political ability and experience. Our findings support
a political agency model where mayors with re-election incentives refrain from rent extraction in
order to increase their likelihood of re-election.
An obvious concern in interpreting the relationship between re-election incentives and corruption is that it may simply reflect corruption on the part of the auditors. Because first-term
mayors have more incentive to bribe the auditors for a more favorable report, we could be capturing the effects of re-election incentives on bribing rather than the effects of career concerns
on actual corruption. While it is difficult to test this hypothesis directly, we provide suggestive
evidence that this is not the case. For instance, if first-term mayors are more likely to bribe au41

The Herfindahl index is computed by dividing one by the effective number of political parties.

20

ditors, we might expect first-term mayors who were audited during the election year or affiliated
with either the federal government or state government to receive more favorable reports.
We explore these possibilities in Table 9. In columns 1-3 we regress our measure of corruption
on the first-term indicator and interaction terms with variables that would suggest larger incentives for bribing the auditors. In column 1 we test for differential auditing according to whether
the municipality was drawn to be audited during the 2004 election year. We show that there is
no difference in corruption levels between first and second-term mayors depending on whether
they were audited during the electoral year or not (coefficient= 0.001, standard error=0.017).
We also do not find any differential effects by whether the mayor belongs to the same party of
the president – the PT (Worker’s Party) – (column 2) or the state governor (column 3).42 An
alternative way in which auditors may have favored first-term mayors could have been to audit
less valued projects. Although this is unlikely to explain the patterns that we find in the main
regressions, we regress the value of projects audited, expressed in logarithms, on an indicator
for whether the mayor is in a first-term. As reported in column 4, we again do not any find
statistically significant differences in the amount of resources audited between first and second
term-mayors and do not find a differential effect if the municipality was audit during the 2004
electoral year (column 5).
In addition to the previous analysis, there are several reasons why it is unlikely that differences
in corruption between first and second-term mayors reflect corrupt auditors. First, they are
federal public employees hired based on a highly competitive public examination and high salary.
Moreover, each team of auditors reports to a regional supervisor. Therefore, not only is it hard
to cheat individually, but also the cost of getting caught is large. According to program officials,
there has never been an incidence in which auditors have even been caught receiving bribes.43
Another explanation for the difference in reported corruption levels is that lame duck mayors,
who are no longer accountable to voters, simply have less incentive to hide or are less careful in
their attempt to hide corruption. Although this hypothesis is in many respects observationally
equivalent to what we find, it is unlikely that this could explain the estimated effects since this
program was unexpected and the audits were based on past behavior. Moreover, although second
term mayors may not face electoral retribution, they also have an incentive to hide corruption
due to potential judiciary prosecution.
Finally, given our findings, it is natural to ask whether a two-term limit system is optimal to
reduce the incentives for rent-extraction. Although Smart and Sturm (2006) provide theoretical
justification for why a two-term limit regime might be optimal under some conditions, we are
unfortunately unable to test this. Unlike the variation that exists in term-limits across the U.S.,
42

Ferraz and Finan (2008) compare corruption levels using the count measure between first-term mayors that
were audited before the election versus after the election. It does not find any evidence that corruption levels
differed between these two groups along various dimensions.
43
Based on the interviews conducted by the authors with program officials in Brasilia.

21

our research design can only identify the effects of re-election incentives on corruption under a
two-term regime relative to a one-term regime. We cannot estimate for instance how politicians
would behave if they were elected for a third term or even re-elected indefinitely.

8

Conclusions

Voters have imperfect information about politicians’ actions. Thus, the incentives provided by
elections act as a disciplining device to constrain politicians’ malfeasance. In this paper we test
whether political institutions that provide electoral accountability through the possibility of reelection reduces corruption. We build a new dataset of corruption practices by local politicians in
Brazil using reports from an ambitious anti-corruption program designed to audit a municipality’s
use of federal funds. We exploit the variation in electoral incentives provided by term limits and
show that first-term mayors are associated with significantly less corruption than second-term
mayors, as measured by either the share of resources misappropriated, the share of service items
related to corruption, or the number of corrupt irregularities. The reduction in corruption
practices induced by electoral accountability is not only statistical significant, but economically
important. Assuming that, in the absence of re-election incentives, first-term mayors would
behave as second-term mayors, we estimate that re-election incentives are responsible for inducing
a reduction in resources misappropriated in the order of R$433 million (US$160 million). This
is more than half of what the federal government spent in the Bolsa Escola conditional cash
transfer program for all municipalities in Brazil during 2002.
The difference in corruption between first and second-term mayors is remarkably robust to
various specifications and alternative interpretations. We show that there is more corruption in
municipalities governed by second-term mayors even when compared to first-term mayors that
have been in power in a previous mandate (experienced politicians). Our findings also suggest
that the effects of re-election incentives on corruption depend on local characteristics. The
estimated differential effect between first and second-term mayors is more pronounced among
municipalities where the cost of corruption is higher - as measured by the presence of a judge and also where access to information and political support is lower. We also find that secondterm mayors facing term-limits who later pursue further a political career behave as first-term
mayors and engage in less corrupt activities.
These results can be explained by a simple political agency model similar to Besley (2006) and
Smart and Sturm (2006) where the possibility of re-election creates both discipline and selection
effects. Although second-term mayors face a shorter political horizon and thus have less incentive
to accommodate voters’ preferences, rational voters will elect into a lame-duck term politicians
that are less corrupt than average. Hence, such a positive selection may counteract any adverse
incentive effect induced by term-limits. Our analysis tries to account for the importance of
22

this selection effect by comparing second-term mayors with first-term mayors that later got reelected into a second term and shows that second-term mayors are significantly more corrupt.
We interpret this as evidence that, in the context of Brazil’s local governments, the discipline
effect dominates the selection effect inducing first-term mayors with re-election incentives to
extract fewer rents from power.44
Overall, the findings suggest that electoral rules that enhance political accountability play a
crucial role in constraining politician’s corrupt behavior even in an institutional context where
corruption is pervasive and elites dominate local politics. Despite this positive effect of re-election
incentives on constraining corruption, further research is needed in order to assess whether electoral accountability affects other aspects of governance and ultimately improves voters’ welfare.

44

Our results also complement Alt, de Mesquita, and Rose (2007) who examines the accountability and selection
effects for the case of fiscal policy in the U.S. using variation in term-limits across governors.

23

Appendix A: Coding the Audit Reports
This appendix explains how we used the audit reports to construct indicators of corruption.
We provide the definition used for each type of irregularity and include an illustrative example
drawn from the reports.45

Examples of Political Corruption
Health related purchases without procurement using false receipts: The ministry of Health
transferred to the municipality R$ 321,700 for the Programa de Atenção Bsica. The municipal government used fake receipts valued at R$ 166,000 to provide proof of purchase.
Furthermore, there is no proof that the goods were purchased since there were no registered
entries of the merchandize in the stock. Also, in 2003 the municipality bought medicines
valued at R$253,300 without procurement. In 2004, the value was R$113,700, also without
procurement. We classified this violation as an incidence of irregular procurement and
diversion of public funds in the area of health. We valued this irregularity as a diversion
of R$166,000. This irregularity occurred in Capelinha, Minas Gerais, drawn by lottery
number 9.
Evidence of irregularities in well construction: The Ministry of National Integration transferred R$117,037 to the municipality for the maintenance of water infra-structure. The
working plan specified the maintenance of ten wells and four dams. None of these repairs
were made. Instead, the dam Henrique Dantas, located inside a private farm was repaired.
We classified this violation as an incidence of diversion of public funds in the area of water
and sanitation. We valued this irregularity as a diversion of R$117,037. This irregularity
occurred in Santa Cruz, Rio Grande do Norte, drawn by lottery number 9.
Over-invoice of more than R$3 million in road construction: The firm Mazda was hired,
without procurement, to build approximatly nine kilometers of a road. The cost of the
construction was estimated at R$ 1 million based on similar constructions. The receipts
presented by Mazda and paid by the government totalled R$ 5 million. No further documentation was shown by the municipal government proving the need for the additional
amount of resources. The auditors found that the firm Mazda, did not have any experience with construction and had sub-contracted the firm CTE for R$ 1.8 million to do the
construction. Hence, the project was over paid by more than R$ 3 million. As evidence
of corruption, it was late found that the firm Mazda gave an apartment for the mayor
and his family valued at R$600,000 suggesting a kickback. We classified this violation as
an incidence of over-invoice in the area of infrastructure. We valued this irregularity as a
45

For access to the summary of the audit reports, see www.cgu.gov.br

24

diversion of R$3.2 million. This irregularity occurred in São Francisco do Conde, Bahia,
drawn by lottery number 6.

Appendix B: Data Sources
The data used in the paper comes from a variety of sources. The data is at the level of the
municipality, the lowest government unit below a state in Brazil.
Municipal demographic characteristics: The 2000 population census provides socio-economic
and demographic characteristics of municipalities. The variables we include in our analysis
are: population size, percentage of urban households, Gini coefficient and the percentage
of adults with secondary education. In addition, we also include the level of income measured by municipal GDP per capita estimated by the IBGE. These variables are important
determinants of corruption as shown by Glaeser and Saks (2006) and Treisman (2000).
Municipal institutional and public management characteristics: Our second complementary data source from IBGE is a municipality survey, Perfil dos Municı́pios Brasileiros:
Gestão Pública, conducted in 1999 and 2001. The survey provides structural features of
the municipality such as the existence of local daily newspaper, radio, local public prosecutors and the age of the municipality. These data also characterize various aspects of
the public administration, including the existence of laws which govern its budgetary and
planning procedures.
Election data: Results from 2000 and 2004 mayor elections are available from the Tribunal
Superior Eleitoral (TSE). These data contain vote totals for each candidate by municipality, along with various individual characteristics such as the candidate’s gender, education,
occupation, and party affiliation. We use this information to construct measures of electoral performance, and to control for individual mayor characteristics that might affect
corruption. We also use the TSE data to build measures of mayor’s political support in
the local legislature as well as the size of the legislature.
Public finance data: Finally, we use public finance data, FINBRA, from the Tesouro Nacional
(National Treasury) to construct a measure of intergovernmental transfers received by
municipalities. These data control for potential differences in the amount of resources
received from the state and federal governments across municipalities.

25

References
Abadie, Alberto, and Guido Imbens. 2006. “Large Sample Properties of Matching Estimators
for Average Treatment Effects.” Econometrica 74 (1): 235–267.
Adsera, Alicia, Carles Boix, and Mark Payne. 2003. “Are You Being Served? Political Accountability and the Quality of Government.” The Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization
19, no. 2 (445-490).
Alt, James, Ethan Bueno de Mesquita, and Shanna Rose. 2007. “Accountability, Selection,
and Term Limits: Theory and Evidence from US State Elections.” Working paper.
Bandiera, Oriana, Andrea Prat, and Tommaso Valletti. 2007. “Active and Passive Waste in
Government Spending: Evidence from a Policy Experiment.” Forthcoming in American
Economic Review.
Banks, Jeffrey, and R. Sundaram. 1993. “Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard in a Repeated
Elections Model.” In Political Economy: Institutions, Information, Competition, and Representation, edited by et al W. Barnett. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Barro, Robert. 1970. “The Control of Politicians: An Economic Model.” Public Choice 14:19–
42.
Bertrand, Marianne, Simeon Djankov, Rema Hanna, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2007. “Does
Corruption Produce Unsafe Drivers?” Quarterly Journal of Economics CXXII (4): 1639–
1676 (November).
Besley, Timothy. 2006. Principled Agents? The Political Economy of Good Government.
Oxford, UK: The Lindahl Lectures, Oxford University Press.
Besley, Timothy, and Anne Case. 1995. “Does Electoral Accountability Affect Economic Policy
Choices? Evidence from Gubernatorial Term Limits.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
110 (3): 769–798 (August).
Besley, Timothy, and Michael Smart. 2007. “Fiscal Restraints and Voter Welfare.” Journal of
Public Economics 91 (3-4): 755–773 (April).
Campante, Filipe R., Davin Chor, and Quoc-Anh Do. 2006. “Instability and the Incentives for
Corruption.” Mimeo, Harvard University.
Dal Bó, Ernesto, Pedro Dal Bó, and Jason Snyder. 2008. “Political Dynasties.” forthcoming
Review of Economic Studies.
Di Tella, Rafael, and Ernesto Schargrodsky. 2003. “The Role of Wages and Auditing During a
Crackdown on Corruption in the City of Buenos Aires.” Journal of Law and Economics 46
(1): 269.
26

Duggan, Mark, and Steven D. Levitt. 2002. “Winning Isnt Everything: Corruption in Sumo
Wrestling.” American Economic Review 92 (5): 1594 605.
Ferejohn, J. 1986. “Incumbent Performance and Electoral Control.” Public Choice 50:5–25.
Ferraz, Claudio, and Frederico Finan. 2007. “Corruption in Local Governments: Evidence from
Audit Reports.” Mimeo, UCLA.
. 2008. “Exposing Corrupt Politicians:The Effects Of Brazils Publicly-released Audits
on Electoral Outcomes.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (3): 703–745 (May).
Ferreira, Fernando, and Joseph Gyourko. 2007. “Do Political Parties Matter? Evidence from
U.S. Cities.” Forthcoming in Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Fisman, Raymond. 2002. “Estimating the Value of Political Connections.” American Economic
Review 91 (4): 10951102.
Fisman, Raymond, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2004. “Tax Rates and Tax Evasion: Evidence from
Missing Imports in China.” Journal of Political Economy 112:471–496.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Raven E. Saks. 2006. “Corruption in America.” Journal of Public
Economics 90:1053–1072.
Knack, Stephen, and Philip Keefer. 1995. “Institutions and Economic Performance: CrossCountry Tests Using Alternative Institutional Measures.” Economics and Politics 7 (3):
207–227.
Kunicová, Jana, and Susan Rose-Ackerman. 2005. “Electoral Rules and Constitutional Structures as Constraints on Corruption.” British Journal of Political Science 35, no. 4 (October).
Lederman, Daniel, Norman Loayza, and Rodrigo Reis Soares. 2005. “Accountability and
Corruption: Political Institutions Matter.” Economics and Politics 17 (1): 1–35 (March).
Lee, David S. 2008. “Randomized Experiments from Non-random Selection in U.S. House
Elections.” Journal of Econometrics 142 (2): 675–697.
Lee, D.S., E. Moretti, and M. Butler. 2004. “Do Voters Aect or Elect Policies? Evidence from
the U.S. House.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119:807–859.
Linden, Leigh L. 2004. “Are Incumbents Always Advantaged? The Preference for NonIncumbents in India.” Working paper.
List, John A., and Daniel M. Sturm. 2006. “How Elections Matter: Theory and Evidence from
Environmental Policy.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (4): 1249–1281 (November).
Mauro, Paolo. 1995. “Corruption and Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, no. 110:681–
712.

27

Myerson, Roger. 1993. “Effectiveness of Electoral Systems for Reducing Government Corruption: A Game Theoretical Analysis.” Games and Economic Behavior 5:118–132.
Olken, Benjamin A. 2007. “Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in
Indonesia.” Journal of Political Economy 115, no. 2 (April).
Persson, Torsten, Gerard Roland, and Guido Tabellini. 1997. “Separation of Powers and Political Accountability.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (4): 1163–1202 (November).
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. 2000. Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy.
Cambridge, Massachussets: MIT Press.
Persson, Torsten, Guido Tabellini, and Francesco Trebbi. 2003. “Electoral Rules and Corruption.” Journal of the European Economic Association 1, no. 4 (June).
Reinikka, Ritva, and Jakob Svensson. 2004. “Local Capture: Evidence from a Central Government Transfer Program in Uganda.” Quaterly Journal of Economics 119 (2): 679–705
(May).
Rose-Ackerman, Susan. 1999. Corruption and Government: Causes, Consequences, and Reform. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Smart, Michael, and Daniel M. Sturm. 2006. “Term Limits and Electoral Accountability.”
CEPR Discussion Paper 4272, July.
Svensson, Jakob. 2003. “Who Must Pay Bribes and How Much? Evidence from a Cross-Section
of Firms.” Quarterly Journal of Economics CXVIII (February): 207–230.
Treisman, Daniel. 2000. “The causes of corruption.” Journal of Public Economics, vol. 76.
Trevisan, Antoninho M., Antonio Chizzotti, Joao Alberto Ianhez, Jose Chizzotti, and Josmar
Verillo. 2004. O Combate à Corrupção nas Prefeituras do Brasil. São Paulo, Brasil: Ateliê
Editorial.
VEJA. 2004. “Pragas Urbanas: Desperdı́cio, Desvio e Corrupção.”

28

Table 1: Summary Statistics of Corruption by Type

Diversion of
funds
Proportion of municipalities with at least one irregularity
Conditional on at least one irregularity
Average number of irregularities
Average value of irregularity (R$1000)
Share of audited resources related to corruption
Share of audited items related to corruption

Type of irregularity
Illegal
Over
procurement
invoicing

Corruption
indicator

0.535
(0.500)

0.571
(0.490)

0.069
(0.253)

0.780
(0.414)

1.688
(1.008)
106.28
(263.9)
0.043
(0.073)
0.046
(0.034)

1.673
(0.952)
175.85
(274.2)
0.083
(0.099)
0.046
(0.028)

1.029
(0.174)
100.18
(209.2)
0.026
(0.044)
0.029
(0.012)

2.471
(1.556)
124.91
(180.5)
0.087
(0.111)
0.068
(0.048)

Notes: This table reports descriptive statistics on the various measures of corruption. These statistics were only computed for the 492 municipalities. Standard deviations are reported in parentheses.

Table 2: Summary Statistics of Corruption by First and Second-term Mayors
Share of audited resources
Incidence of irregularities
First-term Second-term Difference First-term Second-term Difference
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Diversion of funds 0.021
0.022
0.001
0.853
0.967
0.114
[0.005]
[0.102]
Illegal procurement 0.034
0.051
0.017
0.853
1.089
0.236
[0.007]
[0.099]
Over invoicing
0.001
0.002
0.001
0.072
0.07
-0.001
[0.001]
[0.024]
Corruption
0.055
0.074
0.019
1.778
2.127
0.349
[0.009]
[0.155]

Share of audited items
First-term Second-term Difference
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.023
0.027
0.004
[0.003]
0.024
0.03
0.007
[0.003]
0.002
0.002
0
[0.001]
0.049
0.059
0.01
[0.005]

Notes: This table compares the various measures of corruption between first and second-term mayors. These statistics were only computed for the 492 municipalities. Column 1 reports the means for the
279 municipalities with a first term mayor. Column 2 reports the mean for the 213 municipalities with second-term mayors. Column 3 reports the difference in means and robust standard error of the
difference are presented in brackets.

Table 3: Summary Statistics of Mayors and Municipalities
First-term
mayors

Second-term
mayors

Male

0.95

0.96

Schooling

6.10

6.07

47.86

46.67

25828.74

24878.19

% urban population

0.62

0.58

% adults with secondary school

0.25

0.22

New municipality

0.21

0.27

5309.95

6189.44

Gini coefficient

0.57

0.57

Intergovernmental transfers (R$ million)

12.50

11.90

Participatory budgeting

0.03

0.03

% legislators in mayor's party

0.27

0.36

Legislators per voter (×100)

0.14

0.15

Effective number parties legislature

4.55

3.91

Margin of victory in 2000 elections

0.15

0.23

Judiciary district

0.57

0.52

Media

0.79

0.77

41.50

42.72

5.86

5.18

Difference

Mayor characteristics:

Age

-0.01
[0.020]
0.03
[0.176]
1.19
[0.848]

Municipal Characteristics

Population

GDP per capita (R$ 1000)

950.54
[3877.32]
0.046
[0.021]**
0.028
[0.010]***
-0.055
[0.039]
-879.490
[1226.10]
0.007
[0.005]
0.56
[1.943]
0.008
[0.028]

Political Characteristics

Number of audited items
Total Resources Audited (R$ million)

-0.087
[0.014]***
-0.01
[0.01]
0.643
[0.145]***
-0.083
[0.018]***
0.046
[0.046]
0.018
[0.038]
-1.221
[1.894]
0.68
[0.75]

Notes: This table presents a comparison of the mean political, mayor, and socio-economic characteristics of the municipalities
between first and second-term mayors. These statistics were only computed for the 476 municipalities that contained the full set of
non-missing characteristics. Column 1 reports the means for the 270 municipalities with a first term mayor. Column 2 reports the
mean for the 206 municipalities with second-term mayors. Column 3 reports the difference in means and robust standard error of the
difference are presented in brackets significantly different than zero at 99 (***), 95 (**), 90 (*) percent confidence.

Table 4: The Effects of Re-election Incentives on Corruption
Dependent variable:
(1)
Mayor in first-term

(2)

Share of audited resources related to corruption
Matching
OLS
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

-0.019
-0.020
-0.020
-0.024
-0.026
-0.027
[0.009]** [0.010]** [0.010]** [0.011]** [0.011]** [0.011]**

R-squared

0.01

0.08

0.10

0.12

0.14

0.20

Mayor characteristics
Municipal characteristics
Political and judicial institution
Lottery intercepts
State intercepts

No
No
No
No
No

Yes
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.028
[0.010]**

Tobit
(8)
-0.042
[0.012]**
0.20

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table reports the effects of re-election incentives on share of resources found to corrupt. Columns 1-6 present the results of an OLS regression of the dependent
variables listed in that column on an indicator variable for whether the mayor is in his first term. Column 7 estimates the relationship using Abadie and Imbens (2004) matching
estimator and Column 8 use a Tobit specification. Mayor characteristics include the age, gender, education and party affiliation of the mayor. Municipal characteristics: population
expressed in logarithms, percentage of the population that has at least a secondary education, percentage of the population that lives in the urban sector, new municipality, log GDP
per capita per in 2002, Gini coefficient. Political and judicial institutions include: effective number of political parties in the legislature, the number of legislator per voter, the
share of the legislature that is of the same party as the mayor, and whether the municipality is judiciary district, and the amount of resources sent to the municipal expressed in
logarithms. Robust standard errors are displayed in brackets. Significantly different than zero at 99 (***), 95 (**), 90 (*) percent confidence.

Table 5: The Effects of Re-election Incentives on Alternative Measures of Corruption
Dependent variables:

Numbers of irregularities related to corruption
OLS
(1)

Mayor in first-term

(2)

-0.388
-0.467
[0.158]** [0.148]***

R-squared

0.01

0.43

Mayor characteristics
Municipal characteristics
Political and judicial institution
Lottery intercepts
State intercepts

No
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Matching
(3)

Poisson
(4)

OLS
(5)

(6)

-0.008
[0.005]

-0.010
[0.004]**

0.17

0.01

0.45

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

No
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.339
-0.500
[0.146]** [0.127]**

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Share of audited items related to corruption
Matching
(7)

Tobit
(8)

-0.010
-0.009
[0.005]* [0.005]*
-0.44
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table reports the effects of re-election incentives on number of irregularities associated with corruption and the share of service items found to corrupt. Columns 1-2
and columns 5-6 present the results of an OLS regression of the dependent variables listed in that column on an indicator variable for whether the mayor is in his first term.
Columns 3 and 7 estimate the relationship using Abadie and Imbens (2004) matching estimator; Column 4 uses a Poisson specification and Column 8 uses a Tobit specification.
Mayor characteristics include the age, gender, education and party affiliation of the mayor. Municipal characteristics: population expressed in logarithms, percentage of the
population that has at least a secondary education, percentage of the population that lives in the urban sector, new municipality, log GDP per capita per in 2002, Gini coefficient.
Political and judicial institutions include: effective number of political parties in the legislature, the number of legislator per voter, the share of the legislature that is of the same
party as the mayor, and whether the municipality is judiciary district, and the amount of resources sent to the municipal expressed in logarithms. Robust standard errors are
displayed in brackets. Significantly different than zero at 99 (***), 95 (**), 90 (*) percent confidence.

Table 6: The Effect of Re-Election Incentives on Corruption Controlling for Ability
Dependent variable:

Mayor in first-term

Share of audited resources related to corruption
Second-term and Second-term and firstterm later re-elected
RDD linear RDD quadratic RDD cubic first-term later
re-elected
predicted
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
-0.029
-0.032
-0.037
-0.040
-0.034
[0.017]*
[0.018]*
[0.020]*
[0.013]***
[0.0177]*

Observations
R-squared

328
0.17

328
0.17

328
0.17

313
0.27

313
0.29

Mayor characteristics
Municipal characteristics
Political and judicial institutions
Lottery intercepts

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table reports the effects of re-election incentives on the share of resources found to corrupt. Columns 1 – 3 include only municipalities where the incumbent ran for reelection. Column 4-5 includes second-term mayors and first-mayors that get re-elected in the subsequent election. Column 5 includes second-term mayors and first-term mayor
predicted to be re-elected in the 2004 elections. Mayor characteristics include the age, gender, education and party affiliation of the mayor. Municipal characteristics: population
expressed in logarithms, percentage of the population that has at least a secondary education, percentage of the population that lives in the urban sector, new municipality, log GDP
per capita per in 2002, Gini coefficient. Political and judicial institutions include: effective number of political parties in the legislature, the number of legislator per voter, the
share of the legislature that is of the same party as the mayor, and whether the municipality is judiciary district, and the amount of resources sent to the municipal expressed in
logarithms. Robust standard errors are displayed in brackets. Significantly different than zero at 99 (***), 95 (**), 90 (*) percent confidence.

Table 7: The Effect of Re-Election Incentives on Corruption Controlling for Experience and Career Concerns
Share of audited resources related to corruption

Dependent variable:

Full sample

Mayor in first-term
Mayor with political experience

(1)
-0.031
[0.012]**
0.005
[0.013]

Second-term and Second-term and Second-term and first-term
first-term that
first-term that
that served as mayor or
Secondserved as previous served as mayor or legislator in past and were terms only
mayors
legislator in past
later reelected
(2)
-0.039
[0.014]***

(3)
-0.029
[0.016]*

(4)
-0.056
[0.018]***

Future candidate for higher level offices

(5)

-0.049
[0.021]**

R-squared
Observations

0.21
467

0.31
280

0.29
304

0.33
240

0.33
200

Mayor and municipal characteristics
Political and judiciary institutions
Lottery intercepts
State intercepts

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table reports the effects of re-election incentives on the share of resources found to corrupt. Column 1 uses the full sample. Column 2 includes only municipalities with
a second-term mayor and first-term mayor who had been mayor in a previous term. Column 3 includes only municipalities with a second-term mayor and first-term mayors who
had been either a mayor or legislator in a previous term. Column 4 includes second-term mayors and first-mayors that get re-elected in the subsequent election and served as either
a mayor or legislator in the past. Column 5 includes only second-term mayors. Mayor characteristics include the age, gender, education and party affiliation of the mayor.
Municipal characteristics: population expressed in logarithms, percentage of the population that has at least a secondary education, percentage of the population that lives in the
urban sector, new municipality, log GDP per capita per in 2002, Gini coefficient. Political and judicial institutions include: effective number of political parties in the legislature,
the number of legislator per voter, the share of the legislature that is of the same party as the mayor, and whether the municipality is judiciary district, and the amount of resources
sent to the municipal expressed in logarithms. Robust standard errors are displayed in brackets. Significantly different than zero at 99 (***), 95 (**), 90 (*) percent confidence.

Table 8: Local Characteristics and the Effect of Re-Election Incentives on Corruption
Dependent variable:
Mayor in first-term
Judiciary district
First-term × Judiciary district
Media
First-term × Media
Legislative support
First-term × Legislative support
Political competition
First-term × Political competition

F-test joint hypothesis
P-value
R-squared

Share of audited resources related to corruption
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
-0.049
-0.098
-0.066
-0.045
[0.017]***
[0.029]***
[0.025]***
[0.022]***
-0.029
[0.018]
0.037
[0.020]*
-0.051
[0.026]**
0.084
[0.029]**
-0.138
[0.053]***
0.120
[0.060]**
-0.149
[0.097]
0.071
[0.078]
4.05
0.02
0.21

5.87
0.00
0.23

3.83
0.02
0.21

3.33
0.04
0.21

Notes: This table reports the effects of re-election incentives on share of resources found to corrupt. The sample includes all 476 municipalities. All regressions include mayor
characteristics, municipal characteristics, political and judiciary characteristics, state and lottery intercepts. Political competition is defined as 1 divided by the effective number of
political parties. Mayor characteristics include the age, gender, education and party affiliation of the mayor. Municipal characteristics: population expressed in logarithms,
percentage of the population that has at least a secondary education, percentage of the population that lives in the urban sector, new municipality, log GDP per capita per in 2002,
Gini coefficient. Political and judicial institutions include: effective number of political parties in the legislature, the number of legislator per voter, the share of the legislature that
is of the same party as the mayor, and whether the municipality is judiciary district, and the amount of resources sent to the municipal expressed in logarithms. Robust standard
errors are displayed in brackets. Significantly different than zero at 99 (***), 95 (**), 90 (*) percent confidence.

Table 9: Testing for the Political Manipulation of Audit Reports
Dependent variable:

Share of audited resources
indicated as corruption
(1)
(2)
(3)
Mayor in first-term
-0.025
-0.028
-0.03
[0.014]* [0.011]** [0.013]**
Audited in election year
-0.006
[0.014]
First-term × audited in election year 0.001
[0.017]
Mayor in PT
-0.045
[0.047]
First-term × mayor in PT
0.023
[0.050]
Mayor same party governor
-0.01
[0.017]
First-term × same party governor
0.012
[0.020]
R-squared

0.18

0.21

0.21

Log(value projects
audited)
(3)
(4)
0.05
0.084
[0.124]
[0.169]
0.082
[0.136]
-0.087
[0.172]

0.59

0.59

Notes: This table reports the effects of re-election incentives on share of resources found to corrupt. Columns 1-4 present the results of an OLS regression of the dependent
variables listed in that column on an indicator variable for whether the mayor is in his first term in addition to the other variables listed. The sample includes all 476 municipalities.
All regressions include mayor characteristics, municipal characteristics, political and judiciary characteristics, state and lottery intercepts. Mayor characteristics include the age,
gender, education and party affiliation of the mayor. Municipal characteristics: population expressed in logarithms, percentage of the population that has at least a secondary
education, percentage of the population that lives in the urban sector, new municipality, log GDP per capita per in 2002, Gini coefficient. Political and judicial institutions include:
effective number of political parties in the legislature, the number of legislator per voter, the share of the legislature that is of the same party as the mayor, and whether the
municipality is judiciary district, and the amount of resources sent to the municipal expressed in logarithms. Robust standard errors are displayed in brackets. Significantly
different than zero at 99 (***), 95 (**), 90 (*) percent confidence.

Appendix Table 1: The Effect of Re-Election Incentives on Corruption Controlling for Ability: Alternative Functional Forms
Incumbents who run
for reelection in 2000
Mayor in first-term

(1)
-0.020
[0.011]*

Win margin

RDD linear
spline

RDD quadratic
spline

RDD cubic
spline

(3)
-0.032
[0.017]*
-0.016
[0.041]

(4)
-0.043
[0.023]*
-0.034
[0.111]

(5)
-0.020
[0.027]
0.085
[0.221]

0.026
[0.144]

-0.413
[0.669]

-0.184
[0.219]

0.391
[0.540]
0.135
[0.423]

-0.362
[0.377]

2.196
[1.590]

Win Margin 2
Win Margin 3
First-term × Win Margin

-0.050
[0.087]

First-term × Win Margin 2
First-term × Win Margin 3

2.084
[1.617]

Observations
R-squared

328
0.17

328
0.17

328
0.17

328
0.18

Mayor characteristics
Municipal characteristics
Political and judicial institut
Lottery intercepts

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table reports the effects of re-election incentives on share of resources found to corrupt. The sample includes all 328 municipalities, where the incumbent ran for reelection. Mayor characteristics include the age, gender, education and party affiliation of the mayor. Municipal characteristics: population expressed in logarithms, percentage of
the population that has at least a secondary education, percentage of the population that lives in the urban sector, new municipality, log GDP per capita per in 2002, Gini
coefficient. Political and judicial institutions include: effective number of political parties in the legislature, the number of legislator per voter, the share of the legislature that is of
the same party as the mayor, and whether the municipality is judiciary district, and the amount of resources sent to the municipal expressed in logarithms. Robust standard errors
are displayed in brackets. Significantly different than zero at 99 (***), 95 (**), 90 (*) percent confidence.

