                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      ON THE SELF-INTERESTED USE OF EQUITY IN INTERNATIONAL CLIMATE
                              NEGOTIATIONS

                                              Andreas Lange
                                              Andreas Löschel
                                               Carsten Vogt
                                              Andreas Ziegler

                                           Working Paper 14930
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w14930


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        April 2009




We thank two anonymous referees for their extremely helpful comments. Ulrich Oberndorfer, Michael
Price, Glenn Sheriff, and seminar participants at several universities, conferences, and meetings also
provided excellent insights that markedly improved the study. Funding of the research group “Institutionalization
of International Negotiation Systems” by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Andreas Lange, Andreas Löschel, Carsten Vogt, and Andreas Ziegler. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
On the Self-interested Use of Equity in International Climate Negotiations
Andreas Lange, Andreas Löschel, Carsten Vogt, and Andreas Ziegler
NBER Working Paper No. 14930
April 2009
JEL No. D63,H41,Q54

                                             ABSTRACT

We discuss self-interested uses of equity arguments in international climate negotiations. Using unique
data from a world-wide survey of agents involved in international climate policy, we show that the
perceived support of different equity rules by countries or groups of countries may be explained by
their economic costs. Despite being self-interested, equity arguments may be perceived as being used
for different reasons, for example, out of fairness considerations or in order to facilitate negotiations.
Consistent with experimental and behavioral studies on fairness perceptions, we find that individuals
are more likely to state reasons with positive attributes if they evaluate their own region or regions
that support the individual’s personally preferred equity rule. Negotiators perceive the use of equity
by regions as less influenced by pressure from interest groups.


Andreas Lange                                       Carsten Vogt
University of Maryland                              University of Applied Sciences
Department of Agricultural                          Department of Economics and Management
 and Resource Economics                             Lennershofstrasse 140
2200 Symons Hall                                    44801 Bochum
College Park, MD 20742                              Germany
and NBER                                            carsten.vogt@hs-bochum.de
alange@arec.umd.edu
                                                    Andreas Ziegler
Andreas Löschel                                     Swiss Federal Institute
Centre for European                                  of Technology (ETH) Zurich
 Economic Research (ZEW)                            Center of Economic Research
P.O. Box 103443                                     Zurichbergstrasse 18
D-68034 Mannheim                                    8032 Zurich
Germany                                             Switzerland
loeschel@zew.de                                     andziegler@ethz.ch
“We talk on principle but we act on interest’’

                                                           — William Savage Landor (1775-1864)


1       Introduction

Bargaining situations and negotiations frequently resemble a striving for fairness. While
bargainers argue to receive their “fair share” when they feel disadvantaged, the meaning of “fair”
is often heavily debated. Negotiations thus become more complicated when there is more than
one justifiable fairness norm (Raiffa 1982). Here, negotiators could potentially choose those
fairness principles which justify additional demands from their side. Equity criteria are also
ubiquitously used in the international arena when it comes to negotiating multilateral agreements.
However, their actual role in shaping negotiation processes has received only limited attention in
the literature.

This paper attempts to fill this gap by studying the importance of equity criteria in the
formulation of negotiating positions of major parties in the UNFCCC (UN Framework
Convention on Climate Change) process. Based on data from a world-wide survey of agents
involved in international climate policy, we provide evidence that the use of equity arguments is
driven by material self-interest. As this may suggest that equity arguments are purely rhetoric, we
additionally analyze the perceived reasons for the use of equity arguments. Our paper is thus the
first empirical study on perceptions of equity in actual negotiating positions in international
climate talks.

Equity criteria are discussed in the (primarily theoretical) literature in different ways. They are
sometimes seen as guiding negotiations (“focal points”, Schelling 1960) and thereby as a means
to reduce negotiation costs. Bosello et al. (2001) study the stability of international agreements if
they are based on a single equity rule but do not find major improvements upon the relatively
pessimistic predictions from traditional economic models of coalition formation (Barrett 1994,
Carraro and Siniscalco 1993, Hoel 1993). Böhringer and Helm (2008) consider an axiomatic
approach of fair division and calculate the burden resulting from such an allocation mechanism.
Lange and Vogt (2003) and Lange (2006) take a different approach and model preferences which
trade-off payoffs with equity concerns. Such equity preferences may potentially increase
cooperation rates but are based on the assumption that countries evaluate their position based on a
single given equity criterion.

                                              -1-
In international negotiations on the mitigation of climate change, however, different criteria of
equity have been proposed. The UNFCCC recognizes the principle of “common but
differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities”. Principles such as “equal per capita
emissions”, “polluter-pays”, or “sovereignty” all show different interpretations of fairness.
Referring to this variety of equity criteria, Ringius et al. (2002, p. 3) state that “notions of fairness
can provide a basis for an international regime only if there is a certain minimum of consensus
among its members about what is fair and what is unfair”.

The perception of fairness may, however, differ across parties. Several strands of economic as
well as psychological literature indicate that the understanding of what is fair is – at least to a
certain extent – driven by the economic costs of the respective equity rules: Babcock et al. (1995)
consider a “self-serving bias in judgments of fairness” in an experimental bargaining situation.
This notion of self-serving biases usually refers to unconscious distortions in perceptions of
fairness. In contrast, our paper establishes a self-interested use of equity which includes
potentially intentional distortions of equity beliefs. Babcock and Loewenstein (1997) review
psychological and experimental evidence for this interaction between material payoffs and
fairness perceptions. Self-serving social comparisons from teacher contract negotiations are
discussed by Babcock et al. (1996). In a different approach, Hennig-Schmidt (2002) shows the
self-interested use of equity arguments in a video-bargaining experiment. If conflicting principles
of fairness are part of the negotiation process, a potential agreement requires weighing and
reconciliation of the different proposed equity bases.

In this paper we start with the hypothesis that the use of equity criteria by the respective parties in
order to influence the negotiation process is in their own (material) self-interest, i.e. purely
tactical. We assume that due to the consensus-driven nature of international cooperation, parties
back their proposals with some notion of equity in order to increase their acceptability in the
negotiation process. Statements about fairness may thereby legitimate further demands in the
bargaining process and permit “the pursuit of self-interest with minimal condemnation or other
costs” (Albin 2001, p.19).

To provide empirical evidence for this self-interested use of equity criteria, we study international
climate negotiations as an example. 1 We concentrate on four major parties involved in climate


1
 In a companion paper (Lange et al. 2007), we study the personal equity preferences of individuals while the current
paper analyzes how negotiating positions of the different countries are perceived.

                                                     -2-
negotiations: the European Union (EU), 2 the Group of 77 including China (G77/China), 3 Russia,
and the United States of America (USA). We first use the POLES model (Criqui 2001) to project
the costs for the respective countries or groups of countries when abatement burdens are allocated
using different equity criteria. The implied cost rankings of the equity criteria inform our
predictions for a self-interested use of equity.

We then perform an econometric analysis based on data from a world-wide survey of agents
involved in international climate policy to assess the views of the negotiating positions of the
respective countries or groups of countries. We find that the perceived incorporation of equity
principles is in general consistent with material self-interest. Our study also sheds an interesting
light on different perceptions of reasons for using equity arguments: for example, agents have a
more positive view on regions that support an equity criterion which reflects the personal
preference of the individual. Furthermore, negotiators state that the use of equity by regions is
less due to pressure from interest groups. Together, these findings lend support to the hypothesis
of self-interested use of equity in international negotiations as well as to the perception that views
on fairness systematically differ.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: in section 2 we describe different equity
principles in international climate policy. In section 3 we provide predictions on the use of equity
arguments in negotiations based on behavioral findings. In section 4 we report economic costs
implied by different equity criteria. Section 5 discusses our empirical findings based on the
survey data. The final section concludes.

2       Equity principles in international climate policy

The nature of the climate change problem allows subdividing policy decisions into those on the
climate target (i.e., the aggregate greenhouse gas emission reductions) and those on the
distribution of cost burdens which is crucial in evaluating the equity consequences of any given
proposal. While the strength of the climate target is certainly a major criterion for the
acceptability of any future international climate agreement, negotiations in the past centered to a


2
  At the time of our survey, the EU included 25 member states.
3
  The Group of 77 was established in 1964 and today comprises 130 developing including China (www.g77.org).
Even though this group clearly shows large heterogeneities in terms of economic development and potential
differences in their views on climate policies, it built one negotiation group within the climate negotiations.
Therefore, and as we could only include a limited number of regions in our survey, we consider G77/China as a
single player in our study.

                                                  -3-
large extent around the question of how the burdens of some global abatement efforts were to be
distributed. In this paper, we concentrate on the issue of distributing a given burden or –
equivalently – of distributing an exogenously given surplus from concluding the agreement.

While the economic literature usually assumes that agents are concerned exclusively with
economic costs and benefits, equity arguments are frequently used in international environmental
negotiations. They may become part of negotiating positions for various reasons (Ringius et al.
2002, Albin 2001): actors might dislike being treated or treating others unfairly, equity might
serve as a constraint on the substantiation of bargaining positions, or equity criteria might serve
as focal points. Consistent with payoff-maximizing behavior, in this paper we assume that the use
of equity arguments by agents is driven by self-interest in order to influence the bargaining
outcome to their own advantage.

For example, developing countries as well as environmental interest groups in industrialized
countries claim that developed countries with high per capita greenhouse gas emissions are
responsible for global warming and must take the lead in combating climate change. As a
consequence, weaker obligations for developing countries may be based on equity arguments.
Another dimension of equity issues is concerned with a fair distribution of burdens among
countries with comparable per capita GDP and industry structure. Here, often similar emission
reduction targets are seen as fair: some proposals during the international climate negotiations
allocated reduction targets based on present or recent emission levels (Cazorla and Toman 2001,
Raymond 2003).

Several studies identify different typologies of equity principles. We follow Ringius et al. (2002)
and concentrate on the following equity principles which dominate the political and academic
debate on international climate policy: 4

•   The egalitarian rule (EGA): this rule incorporates the principle of equal per capita emissions.
    It implies that a country whose population amounts to x% of the global population should
    receive x% of global entitlements for greenhouse gas emissions.



4
  We concentrate on equity criteria which do not consider the benefits from abatement. Including the benefits from
abatement would add new possible equity criteria. The share of costs could, for instance, be equalized with the share
of benefits. However, for a fixed climate goal as assumed in this paper, the cost ranking of our considered equity
criteria does not depend on the benefits from abatement. We are therefore comfortable with establishing the link
between material self-interest and the use of equity arguments based on these criteria.

                                                     -4-
•   The sovereignty rule (SOV): this rule incorporates the principle of equal percentage reduction
    of current emissions. It implies that a country whose greenhouse gas emissions amount to x%
    of global emissions should receive x% of global emissions entitlements.

•   The polluter-pays rule (POL): this rule incorporates the principle of equal ratio between
    abatement costs and emissions. It implies that a country whose greenhouse gas emissions
    amount to x% of global emissions should bear x% of global abatement costs.

•   The ability-to-pay rule (ABI): this rule incorporates the principle of equal ratio between
    abatement costs and GDP. It implies that a country whose GDP amounts to x% of gross world
    product should bear x% of global abatement costs.

3       On bargaining power and the self-interested use of equity rules

In Nash’s (1950) seminal work on bargaining, all differences between the players were
supposedly captured in the disagreement point and the shape of the bargaining set. Many other
explanations for bargaining power have been suggested since then – not least differences in time
or risk preference (Roth 1979). However, if one follows many negotiation processes, parties often
refer to “fairness” arguments or natural entitlements in order to convince the other party to agree
to their demands.

Chun and Thomson (1992) and Herrero (1998) extend the Nash bargaining framework to
incorporate individual claims. 5 Consistent with these approaches, most of the previous literature
considers entitlements as “legal property rights” (e.g., Konow 1996, 2000, 2001). The payoff to a
player in these (axiomatic) solutions increases in their legal claim. Recently, Gächter and Riedl
(2005) studied the effects of “moral property rights” on bargaining. Here, individual views on
fairness inform the bargaining situation and thereby influence the bargaining outcome. That is,
the entitlements or individual claims are not given by some (incompatible) legal property rights
but by what bargainers perceive as a fair agreement.

Similar to these approaches, the frequency of equity arguments in negotiations indicates that
there is an interaction between bargaining power, i.e. the ability to influence the negotiation
outcome favorably, and the availability of equity arguments: for example, if all equity criteria

5
 A bargaining with claims environment adds to the bargaining set and the disagreement point, which form the Nash
bargaining environment, a claims point. Chun and Thomson (1992) as well as Herrero (1998) provide axioms in
which the bargaining solution is basically given by a linear combination of the claims and the disagreement point (or
undisputed claims point).

                                                     -5-
required that a negotiating party receives a larger share of the surplus, this party would be likely
to be able to influence the bargaining outcome in its favor. Conversely, the lack of an equity or
fairness argument for one’s position would, in our view, result in a reduction of bargaining
power. The end result of negotiations may thus hardly be understood without analyzing the
underlying equity principles and their use by the respective parties.

There is substantial evidence that individual perceptions of “what is fair” are correlated with the
economic costs and benefits implied by the respective equity criteria (for instance, Babcock and
Loewenstein 1997, Dahl and Ransom 1999). These differing perceptions are also apparent in the
use of equity principles as arguments in bargaining processes (Hennig-Schmidt 2001). 6 This
could be the case for two reasons: (i) a self-serving bias, i.e. individuals might subconsciously
interpret fairness in a way that benefits their interests, or (ii) a conscious decision on self-
interested use of equity, i.e. individuals might use specific fairness notions to consciously pursue
their own interest while exploiting the others’ sense of justice (e.g., Dahl and Ransom 1999,
Konow 2001). Evidence for the subconscious self-serving bias has been found by Messick and
Sentis (1979), Thompson and Loewenstein (1979), and others while, for example, Dahl and
Ransom (1999) and Gächter and Riedl (2005) find relatively little evidence. In either way, a self-
interested perception and/or use of equity is essential in explaining bargaining outcomes if a party
successfully influences the bargaining process in its favor by referring to equity arguments.

In this paper, we empirically examine parallels of these findings on individual behavior in a
context of international negotiations. Using the example of international climate policy, we
consider the four equity criteria egalitarian, sovereignty, polluter-pays, and ability-to-pay. Based
on the arguments and empirical findings outlined above, each negotiating party may be predicted
to use equity arguments which lead to lower costs compared to other equity criteria. Furthermore,
the perceptions of reasons for using equity arguments (for instance, fairness vs. material self-
interest) are predicted to be influenced by the personal background of individuals, for example,
whether they evaluate their own or a different country or group of countries.



6
  In general, equity rules require the equality of subjects with respect to a measure (see section 2 for the application
to climate policy). The following example illustrates this idea: assume that $30 have to be split between two subjects
with initial endowment ($0, $0) and without any other observable differences. Then, ($15, $15) appears to be the
only fair solution. If, however, the initial endowment is ($10, $0), then two “fair” solutions of splitting $30 could be
suggested: ($15, $15) as before, or ($10, $20). The former would equalize the share of the $30, the latter would
equalize the end allocation ($20,$20). The self-interested use of equity would suggest player 1 to argue with the
former and player 2 to use the latter equity argument in the bargaining process.

                                                       -6-
4        The economic costs of different equity principles

As a first step, we generate predictions on which equity criteria the respective parties would
prefer in their own material self-interest by comparing the costs implied by distributing the
burdens of abating carbon emissions according to the respective equity rules. We assume that the
aggregate emissions target is exogenous and an emissions trading system equalizes marginal
abatement costs across all countries or groups of countries. For any given overall target (or
equivalently, any given marginal abatement costs), the different equity criteria therefore imply a
specific distribution of surplus. In order to assess the distributions implied by the egalitarian,
sovereignty, polluter-pays, and ability-to-pay rules, we use information on abatement costs in the
respective countries or groups of countries, population data, baseline carbon emissions, and
GDP. 7

Our projections for GDP, emissions and populations for 2020 are based on DOE (2005). The
mapping of the International Energy Outlook regions is described in Table A.1. The GDP,
population, and carbon emissions in the reference case for 1990 and 2002 as well as the
projections for 2020 are summarized in Table A.2. Table A.2 also states an accumulated measure
of emissions between 1860 and 2002, which are taken from the Climate Analysis Indicators Tool
(WRI 2005) and updated to 2020 using DOE (2005). Marginal abatement cost curves for 2020
are generated based on data from the POLES model, which embodies a detailed bottom-up
description of regional energy markets and world-energy trade (Criqui 2001). 8 Table A.3
summarizes the abatement cost information for 2020 from POLES. Tables A.2 and A.3 contain
all relevant data which we use to calculate allowance allocations, total costs and costs per capita
for the different global abatement scenarios (permit prices) in 2020.




7
  Note again that we concentrate on the analysis of abatement costs and do not consider benefits from abatement. By
fixing the total abatement level and only considering different burden allocations, benefits from abatement are kept
constant. The cost ranking of the equity criteria we study is therefore meaningful.
8
  A potential drawback of this partial equilibrium marginal abatement cost approach is the neglect of market
interaction and spillover effects. The crucial question regarding the robustness of partial equilibrium results based on
marginal abatement cost curves is whether terms-of-trade effects are sufficiently small. On the one hand, several
articles illustrate the importance of such indirect effects (Böhringer and Rutherford 2002, Klepper and Peterson
2006). On the other hand, Eyckmans et al. (2005) showed, using the computable general equilibrium (CGE) model
GEM-E3, that terms-of-trade effects might be rather small. The allocation of abatement efforts across countries does
not significantly alter the marginal abatement cost functions. These curves might come either from computable
general equilibrium models (Eyckmans et al. 2005, Böhringer et al. 2004) or partial equilibrium models (Criqui et al.
1999).

                                                       -7-
The formulas for the allocation of allowances under the different equity rules are implemented as
follows: for each country or group of countries j ∈ {EU, G77/China, Russia, USA} , we denote

for 2020 the business as usual (BAU) emissions as e 2020
                                                    j    , the GDP as GDPj2020 , and the

population level as POPj2020 . As we assume that any abatement scenario is implemented at

minimal costs, i.e. with identical marginal abatement costs, the resulting permit price p defines
the optimal allocation of abatement a j ( p ) for each j with resulting abatement costs AC j ( p ) .

The aggregate levels of all variables are denoted as E 2020 , GDP 2020 , POP 2020 , A( p) , and
AC ( p ) , respectively. With this we calculate the permit allocation e j ( p ) which is induced by the

respective equity criteria. This allocation solves for all j ∈ {EU, G77/China, Russia, USA} : 9

                                              e j ( p)            E 2020 − A( p)
                   EGA:                                2020
                                                              =
                                            POPj                    POP 2020
                                            e j ( p)       E 2020 − A( p)
                   SOV:                                =
                                            e 2020
                                              j                 E 2020
                                                                                                                     (1)
                                           AC j ( p ) + p ⎡⎣e 2020   − a j ( p) − e j ( p) ⎤⎦ AC ( p)
                                                                                             = 2020
                                                              j
                   POL:
                                                                e 2020
                                                                  j                            E
                                           AC j ( p ) + p ⎡⎣ e 2020 − a j ( p ) − e j ( p) ⎤⎦    AC ( p)
                                                                                              =
                                                               j
                   ABI:                                             2020
                                                            GDPj                                GDP 2020

Furthermore, we discuss a version of the polluter-pays principle based on the accumulated
(historical and future) carbon emissions between 1860 and 2020. The corresponding formula for
POL(1860− 2020) may be obtained from (1) by replacing the denominators of the POL equation by
cumulated emissions. 10

The resulting economic costs of strictly applying the equity criteria for the respective countries or
groups of countries may be seen in Table A.4. We report the projected costs for 2020 in percent
of GDP for an assumed emission reduction goal which corresponds to equalized marginal
9
    Note that the total burden to a country or group of countries is given by its abatement costs plus the payments for
emission permit in excess off its allocation: AC j ( p ) + p[e j             − a j ( p ) − e j ( p )] .
                                                                      2020

10
  Burden sharing based on the polluter-pays principle depends crucially on the assumed growth of emissions in the
respective regions as well as on the considered time horizon. Rive et al. (2006) provide a detailed discussion and
simulations on burden sharing based on historical responsibility (HR) in a dynamic setting. In particular, they show
how sensitive HR burden sharing is to the choice of the start and the end year for considering emissions as well as to
the selection of the indicator used to attribute responsibility to the respective countries or groups of countries (e.g.,
contributions to temperature change vs. cumulative emissions).

                                                              -8-
abatement costs at 80 USD2000/tC, corresponding to a worldwide reduction from BAU
emissions by 15%. The ranking is stable for changes in the overall reduction target.

Hypotheses on the EU

Table A.4 shows clearly that a strict application of the egalitarian principle would be most cost-
intensive for the EU. Given the large amount of emissions between 1860 and 2020 in the EU, the
polluter-pays principle based on the cumulated carbon emissions would be also very costly for
the EU. The EU would therefore prefer the polluter-pays based on current emissions since it has a
relatively low share in global emissions or, secondly, the ability-to-pay principle. The total
ranking of equity principles – according to the projected economic costs – for the EU is given as
follows:

                                 POL     ABI    SOV       POL(1860-2020)   EGA


Hypotheses on G77/China

We now discuss the costs which are implied by the different equity rules for G77/China. The
ranking of equity criteria – given by the cost projections as reported in Table A.4 – is as follows:

                                 EGA     POL(1860-2020)   SOV      ABI ≈ POL

It is evident that G77/China with its large share in global population would profit most from a
strict application of the egalitarian principle. In contrast, G77/China would oppose a support of
the polluter-pays and ability-to-pay principles on the basis of the respective costs. The latter
principle refers to the predicted high economic growth of G77/China until 2020 which would
raise the costs associated with the ability-to-pay rule. The polluter-pays principle is based on the
predicted large increase in emissions from G77/China over the next decades so that the costs of
the polluter-pays rule would be increased. Developing countries might, however, support
POL(1860-2020).

Hypotheses on Russia

Table A.4 indicates that Russia would, similar to the EU, oppose the application of the egalitarian
principle based on the underlying costs. Russia has lowest costs if the sovereignty or, secondly,
the ability-to-pay criterion is applied. The complete ranking of equity rules – given by the cost
projections – is as follows:

                                               -9-
                                      SOV       ABI     POL      POL(1860-2020)    EGA

When using equity rules according to their implied costs, Russia is therefore predicted to prefer
the sovereignty or ability-to-pay principle and to oppose the egalitarian principle.

Hypotheses on the USA

Table A.4 shows that the USA is predicted to oppose the egalitarian principle on the basis of the
respective costs. The total ranking of equity rules – according to the projected economic costs – is
given as follows:

                                      ABI      POL      SOV      POL(1860-2020)    EGA

It should be noted that the preference for the ability-to-pay principle clearly depends on the
assumed economic growth of the specific countries in the world. If this criterion were applied
based on today’s comparisons in GDP, the burden implied for the USA would be substantially
larger.

5         Empirical analysis

In this section, we provide empirical evidence on self-interested uses of equity criteria. Our
analysis is based on data from an international survey on the perceptions of the negotiating
positions of the EU, G77/China, Russia, and the USA. 11

Description of survey

Our data stem from a world-wide survey carried out by means of a standardized questionnaire,
which was sent via e-mail to about 1500 agents involved in climate policy in 2004. 12 The e-mail
addresses were taken from official UN documents available on the internet (for instance, from
IPCC workshops). Participants received an individual login and password for the internet
questionnaire. This procedure of sending out passwords allowed us to control access to the survey
and, in particular, ensured that each respondent could fill out the questionnaire only once.


11
   For the success and the acceptance of international agreements, it is important how negotiating positions are
perceived by agents in negotiations. This includes perceptions on which equity criteria are supported by the
respective parties and the perceived motivations for this support. We therefore chose to survey the perceptions of the
positions of countries or groups of countries regarding equity instead of directly assessing proposals made by the
respective parties (see Reiner and Jacoby 1997).
12
   The number of 1694 participants stated in Lange et al. (2007) included some individuals with multiple e-mail
addresses.

                                                      - 10 -
Alternatively, participants could fill out a word- or PDF-document and send it back via e-mail or
postal mail.

After explaining the equity rules (see section 2), the questionnaire consisted of three parts: while
the first part addressed individual views on equity (see Lange et al. 2007), the second part elicited
the individuals’ perceptions of the negotiating positions of each of the four major players in
international climate negotiations as discussed above: the EU, G77/China, Russia, and the USA.
That is, the position of each country or group of countries was assessed by all participants.

For each of the equity rules egalitarian, sovereignty, polluter-pays, and ability-to-pay, we first
asked to which degree the respective countries or groups of countries are expected to support
incorporating the specified equity rule in international climate agreements. We concentrated on a
time horizon of no more than 20 years. We differentiated between “a very high degree”, “a high
degree”, “a moderate degree”, “a low degree”, and “no degree”. Second, we asked which of the
equity rules is expected to be most important for the respective regions. Third, we asked whether
the following five reasons are expected to play an important role for the respective countries or
groups of countries in determining their position on the incorporation of this most important
equity rule in international climate agreements: material self-interest, fairness considerations of
the public, facilitation of international climate negotiations, pressure from industry, pressure from
environmental NGOs. Finally, the third part of the questionnaire comprised some questions about
the participants' individual background such as gender, nationality, or participation and role in a
Conference of Parties (COP).

Out of approximately 1500 persons contacted, 230 participated in the survey. 13 Table B.1 reports
corresponding relative frequencies regarding the personal background of the respondents as well
as the mean and standard deviation of their age. Our participation rate is fairly typical of surveys
with individuals who are not interviewed face-to-face. While we naturally cannot rule out the
issue of self-selection completely, we have no evidence that our sample is not representative of
the group of individuals contacted: a non-response analysis on the basis of living addresses 14
shows that relative frequencies for the 230 respondents are almost identical to those for all
contacted persons. While 36.1% of the survey participants live in the EU, 34.3% in G77/China,

13
   Several of these 230 participants did not answer all questions and some only completed the first part of the
questionnaire. As a consequence, the numbers of individuals in the empirical analysis are smaller.
14
   These addresses are the only available information on both the participants in the survey and those who did not
participate.

                                                   - 11 -
0.9% in Russia, and 4.3% in the USA, the respective frequencies for all contacted persons are
36.1%, 32.4%, 0.7%, and 4.9%. Therefore, self-selection problems are unlikely to affect the
robustness of our estimation results.

We use our data in order to first establish that the countries or groups of countries are seen as
pushing for different equity criteria in international climate negotiations and that the perceived
negotiating positions are highly affected by the induced costs. We then turn to the perceived
reasons for regions to support the most important equity rule. The differences in perceptions
across the agents involved in international climate policy will establish support for versions of
self-interested biases.

5.1    Support of equity rules: evidence for self-interest

Descriptive statistics

For the assessment of each country or group of countries, Table B.2 reports the relative
frequencies that the respective equity principles should be reflected in the distribution of
entitlements for greenhouse gas emissions to “a very high degree” or “a high degree”. Even at
first glance, noticeable differences in the perceived support of the equity criteria by the respective
countries or groups of countries are revealed.

The position of the EU is largely perceived as being driven by the polluter-pays principle (78.2%
of all respondents). This coincides with the prominent position this criterion was predicted to
have according to the cost projections in the previous section. The relative frequencies for the
sovereignty and the ability-to-pay rule are rather similar (50.9% vs. 55.7%), while the support of
the egalitarian rule is smaller (40.1%). Thus, the ranking of perceived support of the equity rules
is fully consistent with the ranking according to the implied economic costs in the previous
section.

G77/China is seen as supporting the incorporation of the egalitarian, the polluter-pays, and the
ability-to-pay rules to a similar extent (59.5%, 61.0%, 65.5%). The sovereignty notion receives
clearly less support (29.1%). This ranking deviates from the predictions based on our cost
projections since both the polluter-pays as well as the ability-to-pay rules are seen as receiving
large support although they imply relatively large costs compared to the egalitarian principle.
This result could only be consistent with economic self-interest of G77/China if the polluter-pays


                                              - 12 -
principle is based on a cumulated emissions measure (POL(1860-2020)) and/or if agents do not take
into account the economic changes over the next decades.

We now turn to the views on the position of Russia. The expected strong support for the ability-
to-pay criterion (52.8% of the respondents) and the sovereignty rule (54.3% of the respondents)
reported in Table B.2 is consistent with the hypothesis of self-interest driven use of equity
criteria. Overall, the ranking regarding the perceived support of the respective equity rules by
Russia is in line with the prediction given by our cost projections.

The USA is primarily seen as supporting the incorporation of the sovereignty principle (60.8% of
the respondents). It is thus perceived as pushing for similar emission reduction efforts from all
regions. In fact, this is consistent with a major official reason for not ratifying the Kyoto protocol
as the USA demanded meaningful participation of key developing countries. The polluter-pays
principle is seen as receiving much less support (41.0%) than the sovereignty criterion, also when
compared to the EU. This cannot be sufficiently explained by self-interested equity principles
unless agents interpreted POL as being based on emissions accumulated over time. The
egalitarian criterion is to a lesser extent seen as being supported by the USA (35.7%) which is in
line with the cost estimates in the previous section. In contrast, the weak perceived support of the
ability-to-pay principle (29.8%) is surprising since in the long run this criterion would potentially
benefit the USA if the predicted economic growth of developing countries materializes. We
summarize these findings as follows:

Result 1: The importance of incorporating the specific equity rules in international climate
negotiations is perceived to strongly differ between the countries or groups of countries.

Support of different equity rules by the respective parties is a prerequisite for finding a self-
interested use of equity: since countries differ in their cost rankings of equity criteria, a self-
interested use requires that countries support the respective equity rules to a different degree.

Table B.2 also reports the decomposed relative frequencies separately for individuals from the
EU and from G77/China which differ with respect to some equity criteria.15 For example, the
position of G77/China on all equity criteria is assessed differently by agents involved in climate



15
  The small numbers of respondents from Russia and the USA in line with the corresponding small ratios in the
population do not allow a meaningful decomposition.

                                                 - 13 -
policy that come from G77/China compared with those from other regions. 16 This indicates that
individual characteristics are important in the assessment of the use of equity by the respective
countries or groups of countries. Hence, instead of relying on the descriptive statistics quoted, we
perform a systematic econometric analysis to study whether the underlying economic costs have
significant effects on the perceived incorporation of the specific equity rules or whether the effect
of the costs is covered by other personal factors.

Description of econometric analysis and variables

The dependent variables in our econometric analysis are dummies which take the value one if the
respective country or group of countries j ∈ {EU, G77/China, Russia, USA} is seen by agent

i = 1,… , n as supporting the incorporation of equity rules to “a very high degree” or “a high
degree”. In order to examine the effect of the specifically assessed equity criteria, we stack the
data over all equity rules k ∈ {EGA, SOV, POL, ABI} . The unobservable latent variable for each

region j is therefore:

                                                      U ijk = β j'xijk + ε ijk                                   (2)

The vectors xijk comprise a series of explanatory variables (described below) with corresponding

unknown parameter vectors β j . We consider binary probit models, i.e. the stochastic components

ε ijk are normally distributed. Based on this, the aforementioned dummy variables Yijk take the

value one if Uijk>0. P (Yijk = 1) denotes the probability that the respective country or group of

countries j is seen by individual i as supporting the incorporation of equity rule k to “a very high
degree” or “a high degree”. In order to account for unobserved heterogeneity over the different
equity rules, we estimate random effects (binary) probit models (separately for each country or
group of countries). 17 Unobserved heterogeneity is incorporated by decomposing the stochastic
components (e.g., Hajivassiliou 1994, Mühleisen and Zimmermann 1994)



16
   The chi-squared tests in Table B.2 examine whether the distribution of the expected degree of incorporation of the
respective equity rules (with parameter values “a very high degree”, “a high degree”, “a moderate degree”, “a low
degree”, and “no degree”) differs between the agents involved in climate policy coming from the EU (G77/China)
and the corresponding agents from outside the EU (outside G77/China).
17
   The corresponding maximum likelihood estimations (in the same way as all further estimations and also the
descriptive statistics discussed above) have been performed with STATA. We always consider robust estimations of
the standard deviation of the parameter estimates (White 1982).

                                                     - 14 -
                                                       ε ijk = αij +ηijk                                           (3)

where α ij represent individual-specific random effects with α ij ∼ N (0, σ α j 2 ) . The correlation

coefficients σ α j are estimated besides the parameters in β j .

The described stacking of individuals’ answers over equity criteria allows us to use the assessed
equity criterion as an explanatory variable. The corresponding dummy variables “Assessment
EGA”, “Assessment SOV”, “Assessment POL”, and “Assessment ABI” take the value one if the
respective equity rule is assessed and allow us to examine the differences in the support of the
respective equity criteria. 18

We include the following control variables in the vectors xijk : first, a personal preference for

specific equity rules as well as personal views on the general importance of equity in
international climate negotiations may influence assessments of equity principles for regions. We
thus include a dummy variable “Personal consistency equity rules” which takes the value one if
the respective assessed equity rule coincides with the individual‘s personal definition of equity in
international climate negotiations. In addition, we consider a dummy variable “Equity
importance” which takes the value one if the agent stated that equity issues in general are of
“very high importance” or “high importance”. Both variables are derived from the first part of the
questionnaire as discussed above (see also Lange et al. 2007).

Second, the role of participants in international climate negotiations could potentially influence
their perceptions of the use of equity principles by regions. We include an explanatory dummy
variable “COP negotiator” which takes the value one if an individual participated in a COP as a
negotiator (and not only as an observer of a COP, a member of a delegation, a participating
expert, or advising delegations) in the past.

Third, we consider additional individual control variables: the dummy “NGO” takes the value
one if the agent works for an environmental or non-environmental NGO and the dummy “Social
science” takes the value one if the agent’s highest degree or training is in political sciences,
economic/business administration, or law. The variable “Age” denotes the natural logarithm of
the individual’s age (in years) and the dummy variable “Gender” takes the value one if the agent

18
  The omitted dummy always refers to the equity rule with the smallest relative frequency according to Table B.2 for
the respective country or group of countries. Therefore, the estimation results support the descriptive analysis if all
parameters are positively estimated (or at least not significantly negative).

                                                     - 15 -
is female. Furthermore, we control for the economic performance of the individual’s country:
“GDP per capita” denotes the per capita GDP (in ten thousand $) of the respective country of
origin from the Penn World Table (Heston et al., 2002). 19 Reflecting the findings of Table B.2,
we incorporate interaction variables between the assessment of each of the four equity rules and
provenience EU or G77/China: for example, the dummy variable “EU*EGA” takes the value one
if an individual from the EU assesses the egalitarian rule.

Econometric results

Table B.3 reports the estimation results for the parameters of the explanatory variables in the four
separate random effects probit models for each country or group of countries. 20 The results
support the descriptive statistics in Table B.2 and therefore Result 1: the EU is seen as supporting
the incorporation of the polluter-pays rule to a higher degree than the egalitarian criterion (1%
significance level). G77/China is perceived as supporting the ability-to-pay principle more than
the sovereignty criterion (1% significance level). Furthermore, the estimated parameters of
“Assessment SOV” for Russia and the USA are larger than those of the other assessment
dummies.

Table B.3 further shows that personal characteristics of individuals matter. In particular, the
variable “GDP per capita” is important: the economic performance of the individual’s country
has a negative effect on the perceived incorporation of the equity rules in the EU and Russia (1%
significance level) as well as the USA (5% significance level), but no significant effect for
G77/China. Furthermore, the coefficient of “Personal consistency equity rules” is positive (1%
significance level) for the EU, G77/China, and Russia. Hence, a personal equity rule preference
of the agents involved in climate policy also shifts the perception of support of the equity rule by
the assessed countries or groups of countries. Finally, compared with other individuals,
negotiators in a COP perceive the incorporation of equity rules to be less important for
G77/China and more important for the USA (5% and 10% significance levels, respectively). 21

19
   For each country, we use the last available data point since 1995. Most data stem from 2000.
20
   The random effects correlation coefficients are different from zero at the 5% significance level for the EU and the
USA, and at the 10% significance level for G77/China. However, traditional binary probit models without taking into
account unobserved heterogeneity generate qualitatively nearly identical estimation results. The main results are
furthermore robust in different model specifications regarding the inclusion of control variables.
21
   In order to test the robustness of the estimation results, we additionally analyzed multivariate (binary) probit
models (Greene 2003) which connect the four single equations for each country or group of countries according to
(2) and (3). The estimation of these models required the inclusion of simulators in the maximum likelihood method.
We applied the simulated maximum likelihood estimation incorporating the so-called GHK simulator (Geweke et al.

                                                     - 16 -
Result 2: The views on how important the incorporation of the specific equity rules are for the
respective countries or groups of countries depend on personal characteristics such as personal
equity views and the economic performance of the agent’s country.

While Result 1 indicated that different countries or groups of countries are seen as supporting the
equity criteria to a different degree, Result 2 shows that personal characteristics matter for
forming these perceptions.

The econometric analysis so far does not explicitly account for the economic costs associated
with the four different equity rules. In order to provide deeper insights into the hypothesis that
countries or groups of countries support equity criteria to serve material self-interest, we
introduce the variables “Costs equity rules EU”, “Costs equity rules G77/China”, “Costs equity
rules Russia”, and “Costs equity rules USA”. They measure the costs (in % of the GDP) which
would be implied by the respective equity criterion for the assessed country or group of countries
when the marginal abatement costs in 2020 are equalized at 80 USD2000/tC, i.e. approximately
22 USD2000/tCO2, which is in the range of current estimates for carbon prices (see Table A.4).
These variables are incorporated as main explanatory factors and substitute the assessment
variables as discussed above according to Table B.3.

Table B.4 reports the estimation results for the parameters of the explanatory variables in the
random effects probit models. It shows that the costs implied by the respective equity criterion
have a strong negative effect on the perceived support of the equity rules by the EU, Russia, and
the USA (1% significance level). For the assessment of G77/China, the impact is not significant
(even when the corresponding parameter estimate is negative). 22 These findings therefore
strongly support the hypothesis that economic costs are a major determinant of the (relative) use
of equity criteria by the respective countries or groups of countries.

Result 3: Consistent with a self-interested use of equity criteria, the economic costs implied by
the respective equity rules explain their perceived support by the EU, Russia, and the USA. In


1994, Börsch-Supan and Hajivassiliou 1993, Keane 1994). The corresponding estimation results are qualitatively
nearly identical to the discussed results and not reported for brevity, but are available upon request.
22
   The corresponding results in the multivariate probit models are qualitatively almost identical and therefore again
not reported for brevity, but are available upon request. The findings are also robust across various specifications
regarding the inclusion of control variables and the estimation in traditional univariate probit models without taking
into account unobserved heterogeneity or also ordered probit models (including ordinal dependent variables
regarding the degree of supporting the incorporation of the equity rules instead of including dummies which take the
value one for “a very high degree” or “a high degree” as discussed above).

                                                     - 17 -
contrast, a link between the perceived position of G77/China and the underlying costs cannot be
established.

The missing link between economic costs of equity criteria and their support for G77/China
might (apart from a possible type II error) be influenced by our measures of cost projections for
ABI and POL. They crucially depend on the economic growth rates and emissions of this group
of countries (until 2020) and on the attribution of historical responsibility. 23 We can only
speculate that another reason might be the heterogeneity of G77/China. While China and India
are predicted to have sustained high economic growth, other developing countries in this group
face less positive prospects and might thus push largely for ABI and POL. As we had to restrict
our survey to a few large negotiation blocks, we cannot disentangle these effects.

5.2     Reasons for supporting equity rules: differences due to self-interest

Result 3 establishes that the perceived positions of the countries or groups of countries are largely
consistent with material self-interest: the larger the costs implied by the equity criterion, the
weaker the support of an equity rule by a region. As discussed in section 3, this finding is
consistent with both an unconscious self-serving bias or a conscious self-interested use of equity.
It is therefore interesting to see whether the equity position of the respective regions is identified
as self-interested by the agents involved in international climate policy and if this perception
varies across specific groups of agents. 24

Descriptive statistics

We study different reasons which might influence the position of a country or group of countries:
material self-interest, fairness considerations of the public, facilitation of international climate
negotiations, pressure from industry, and pressure from environmental NGOs. Table B.5 reports
the relative frequencies that the respective reasons are perceived as playing an important role in
determining the position of a country or group of countries on its most important equity rule.

The expected main driving force for using the most important equity rule for Russia, for the
USA, and for G77/China is material self-interest (88.9%, 93.5%, and 86.1% of all respondents).

23
   The interested reader is again referred to Rive et al. (2006) who demonstrate the sensitivity of burden sharing
based on historical responsibility.
24
   In individual decision-making, individuals may be expected to state that they acted fairly while others assess them
as acting driven by self-interest. Similarly, the assessment of the position of a country or group of countries in our
study might depend on whether it is assessed by agents from these regions or by foreigners.

                                                     - 18 -
Regarding G77/China, this result shows that even though we could not establish cost
considerations as a main driving force behind the use of equity arguments in the previous section,
G77/China is seen as using the criteria out of material self-interest. In contrast, the position of the
EU is to a lesser extent seen to be motivated by material self-interest (62.7%), although the
relative support of equity criteria by the EU fully corresponds to the cost ranking.

For the USA and Russia, pressure from industry is perceived as playing an important role for the
incorporation of the most important equity rule (83.9% and 69.7% of all respondents). For the
EU, 87.9% of all respondents expect that fairness considerations of the public play an important
role and 78.9% expect that pressure from environmental NGOs is important. Corresponding to
the perception of the EU as a primary driving force in international climate negotiations, the
reason for its use of the most important equity rule is seen as facilitation of international climate
negotiations to a high extent (83.1%). We summarize these findings as follows:

Result 4: The countries or groups of countries are perceived to strongly differ in the reasons
which determine their positions on the incorporation of the most important equity rule.
Importantly, G77/China, Russia, and the USA are seen as using this equity principle primarily
out of material self-interest.

First evidence that perceptions of motivations for using equity are self-interested is obtained from
decomposing the relative frequencies for agents from the EU and from G77/China. 25 According
to Table B.5, 75.3% of the respondents from G77/China state that material self-interest plays an
important role for the use of the most important equity criteria by G77/China, while 96.8% of the
respondents from the EU perceive material self-interest playing an important role in the position
of G77/China. 26 The corresponding EU position is seen as material self-interest driven by 51.9%
of the respondents from the EU while 70.8% of the respondents from G77/China see the EU as
using equity arguments out of self-interest. These results are preliminary since only descriptive
statistics are considered. Hence, we again perform an econometric analysis to consider the
determinants of agents’ stating that the reasons mentioned play an important role in supporting
the most important equity rule.


25
   As discussed above, the numbers of respondents from Russia and the USA (according to the corresponding small
ratios in the population) are too small for a meaningful decomposition for these two countries.
26
   The corresponding chi-squared tests also show that the relative frequencies for agents from the EU (G77/China)
significantly differ from the relative frequencies for agents from outside the EU (outside G77/China).

                                                   - 19 -
Description of econometric analysis and variables

In the same way as in section 5.1, the dependent variables are dummies which, however, now
take the value one if agent i = 1,… , n states that the respective reason plays an important role for
the position of the assessed country or group of countries. We therefore consider again binary
probit models. Each individual provided an assessment for all four countries or groups of
countries (i.e., EU, G77/China, Russia, USA) and for all five reasons (i.e., material self-interest,
fairness considerations of the public, facilitation of international climate negotiations, pressure
from industry, pressure from environmental NGOs) which might play an important role for the
support of the most important equity rule. In order to examine the effect of the assessed region on
the importance of a specific reason, we stack the data over the four countries and groups of
countries. According to this, j ∈ {material self-interest, fairness considerations of the public,
facilitation of international climate negotiations, pressure from industry, pressure from
environmental NGOs} now denote the different reasons and k ∈ {EU, G77/China, Russia, USA}

denote the different regions in the several probit models which are in line with (2) and (3).

Regarding the effect of the assessed country or group of country on the importance of a specific
reason, we include the corresponding dummy variables in the econometric analysis as control
factors: “Assessment EU”, “Assessment G77/China”, “Assessment Russia”, and “Assessment
USA” take the value one if the respective regions are assessed. 27

In assessing the importance of the respective reasons, it should be noted that the agents consider
the equity principle which they identified as being most important for the respective country or
group of countries. As a consequence, the assessment might be distorted: assume that regions are
seen as favoring different equity criteria and agents involved in climate policy perceive the use of
a specific equity rule as, for example, more self-interested than other equity rules. In order to
account for these assessed different equity criteria, we include the explanatory dummy variables
“EGA most important”, “SOV most important”, and “POL most important” which take the value
one if the respective equity rules are expected to be most important for the assessed country and
group of countries. 28


27
   In the different estimations, we define the omitted category as the dummy that refers to the region with the
smallest relative frequency according to Table B.5. As a consequence, the estimation results would support the
descriptive analysis if all corresponding parameters were positively estimated (or at least not significantly negative).
28
   The dummy for the ability-to-pay principle is used as omitted category.

                                                      - 20 -
We test different versions of self-interested biases in the perception of the use of equity
arguments: while experimental evidence indicates that agents might see their own position as less
self-interested, our study addresses the assessment of regions’ positions. We therefore
hypothesize that the view on the policy of an agent's own region might be more favorable than
the view on other countries or groups of countries. Similarly, individuals might be positively
biased in their assessment of a region which is supporting an equity criterion the individual
personally prefers. In order to test these versions of a self-interested bias hypothesis, we include
the variables “Own region” and “Personal consistency equity rules”. “Own region” takes the
value one if an agent involved in climate policy assesses their own country or group of countries.
“Personal consistency equity rules” takes the value one if a specific equity rule is expected to be
most important for a country or group of countries and – simultaneously – this equity rule
coincides with the individual’s personal definition of equity. For both explanatory variables we
can expect negative coefficients for reasons with negative attributes (material self-interest and
pressure from industry) and positive coefficients for reasons with positive attributes (fairness
considerations of the public, facilitation of international climate negotiations, and – to a smaller
extent – pressure from environmental NGOs). Finally, it may be possible that individuals who are
responsible for decisions are less likely to state that their decisions are influenced by lobby
groups (industry as well as environmental NGOs). To investigate this modified version of a self-
interested bias, we include the explanatory variable “COP negotiator” which is defined as in
section 5.1.

Additionally, we again include personal characteristics (“Equity importance”, “NGO”, “Social
science”, “Age”, “Gender”, and “GDP per capita”) as control variables.

Econometric results

Table B.6 reports the estimation results for the parameters of the explanatory variables in the
random effects probit models which address the respective reasons separately. 29 The results
support the descriptive statistics in Table B.5 and therefore Result 4: 30 compared to the EU, the


29
   The random effects correlation coefficients are always different from zero at the 1% significance level. However,
the corresponding estimations in binary probit models without unobserved heterogeneity lead to qualitatively nearly
identical results.
30
   While we concentrate the discussion on potential self-interested biases, personal characteristics again have
significant effects. For example, social scientists perceive material self-interest more than other agents as being the
reason to support the most important equity rule (5% significance level). Furthermore, the economic performance of
agent’s countries (measured by “GDP per capita”) influences their assessments.

                                                     - 21 -
other countries or groups of countries are to a greater extent seen as supporting the most
important equity rule out of material self-interest (1% significance level). Fairness considerations
of the public and facilitation of international climate negotiations are expected to play a more
important role for the EU (1% significance level). In the same way, the facilitation reason is
expected to play a more important role for Russia than for the USA (1% significance level).
Furthermore, the USA is to a greater extent assessed as supporting the most important equity rule
due to pressure from industry (1% significance level).

Table B.6 further shows that the perception of why a country or group of country chooses its
equity position depends on the identity of its most important equity rule: the parameter of “POL
most important” is negative for the material self-interest reason, but positive for pressure from
environmental NGOs (5% significance level). The coefficient of “SOV most important” is
positive for the importance of material self-interest and pressure from industry (10% and 1%
significance level, respectively). The coefficient of “EGA most important” is positive for the
importance of fairness considerations of the public and pressure from environmental NGOs (5%
and 10% significance level, respectively). 31 We summarize these findings as follows:

Result 5: Material self-interest is perceived as less important for determining the position of
countries or groups of countries on their most important equity rule if this coincides with the
polluter-pays principle. If a region is perceived as primarily supporting the sovereignty rule,
pressure from industry is seen as more important for forming this equity position.

Result 5 thus points to important differences in the perception of equity rules: supporting the
polluter-pays criterion is seen as less materially self-interested. This indicates that the polluter-
pays principle might potentially play a constructive role in future negotiations. In contrast, the
sovereignty rule is perceived as being pushed by industry groups. The latter corresponds to
31
   Perceptions of the reasons why regions support the most important equity criteria are highly correlated. For
example, the correlation coefficients between material self-interest, on the one hand, and fairness considerations of
the public, facilitation of international climate negotiations, pressure from industry, and pressure from environmental
NGOs, on the other hand, amount to -0.32, -0.39, 0.38, -0.25, respectively. This points to opposing views of reasons
with negative attributes (material self-interest, pressure from industry) vs. reasons with positive attributes (fairness
considerations of the public, facilitation of international climate negotiations, pressure from environmental NGOs).
In order to test the robustness of the estimation results, we therefore again analyzed multivariate probit models which
here connect the five single equations for each specific reason. While the estimations are mostly consistent with
those in the random effects probit models, the significance levels for several parameters differ. However, the
reliability of the estimation results in the multivariate probit models might be limited: while the number of
observations is lower than in the separate random effect probit models, their simulated maximum likelihood
estimation generally needs large numbers of observations to provide robust estimation results. These estimation
results are available upon request.

                                                      - 22 -
concerns that without similar reduction obligations across regions, countries or groups of
countries with stricter abatement targets might experience a loss in competiveness of their
industries.

We finally discuss the estimation results for the main variables which correspond to different
versions of the self-interested bias hypothesis: “Own region”, “Personal consistency equity
rules”, and “COP negotiator”. According to Table B.6, the parameters of “Own region” are
different from zero with signs consistent with this hypothesis for the reasons material self-
interest, fairness considerations of the public, and facilitation of international climate negotiations
(5% significance level). 32 Table B.6 also shows that the coefficients of “Personal consistency
equity rules” are positive for the importance of the facilitation of international climate
negotiations (1% significance level) and the pressure from environmental NGOs (10%
significance level). Furthermore, the parameters are negative for the importance of the pressure
from industry (5% significance level). Finally, negotiators in a COP are less likely to state
pressure from industry as an important reason since the corresponding coefficient is negative (1%
significance level). In combination, these findings provide evidence for different versions of the
self-interested bias in perceiving the motivations to employ equity arguments:

Result 6: Differences in expectations of agents involved in climate policy with respect to the
reasons for why different regions take different positions on equity criteria are consistent with
different versions of self-interested biases: there is evidence that agents are more (less) likely to
state that reasons with positive (negative) attributes are of importance if they assess a country or
group of countries which supports the equity rule they prefer themselves and if they assess their
own region. Negotiators in a COP are less likely to see the negotiating position of regions as
driven by industry.

Result 6 puts an interesting twist to ideas of self-serving biases which have been stated in the
literature (see section 3). While we cannot infer that the biases are unconscious, we find evidence
that self-interest shapes fairness perceptions. The literature usually considers biased views on the
fairness of one’s own individual decisions. This most closely corresponds to a more favorable
view on the own region for which we find weak evidence. In addition, however, agents are also
more likely to state favorable reasons for other countries or groups of countries that support the


32
     We should note that these coefficients become insignificant in the (less reliable) multivariate probit models.

                                                         - 23 -
equity principle which the individual prefers. This is consistent with a modified interpretation of
a self-interested bias: if a person is more likely to label their own preferred action as fair or less
self-interested, the person should also be more likely to put these labels on other persons (here,
regions) who choose the same action. Similarly, negotiators might be less inclined to state that
negotiations are influenced by industry if they want to see their actions as being welfare-oriented
and impartial.

6      Conclusions

In this paper we put forward equity as an important element to understanding negotiating
positions, using the example of international climate negotiations. Taking a traditional economic
standpoint, we argued that the use of equity criteria might be driven by cost consideration of the
parties. Our econometric analysis based on data from an international survey of agents involved
in climate policy largely supported our predictions based on a cost-ranking of the respective
equity criteria for the different countries or groups of countries: the perceived support of equity
criteria is the stronger, the less costly this criterion is compared to alternatives.

Our study shed interesting light on differences in identifying this self-interested use of equity
arguments in international negotiations. While previous experimental studies have considered a
bias in the perception of fairness or equity criteria in individual decision-making environments,
our study lent support to a generalized notion of self-interested biases: even subjects that do not
negotiate themselves considered the use of their personally preferred equity criterion by
negotiating parties as less self-interested. Furthermore, negotiators themselves stated that the use
of equity arguments by regions is less due to pressure from industry. We are not aware of any
other empirical study which considers this self-interested use of equity in non-individualistic
bargaining situations.

While the findings in this study indicate that equity principles in international negotiations are
mostly correlated with the self-interest of the negotiating parties, the question remains how
exactly their use influences the negotiation process. We believe that this potentially strategic role
of using equity criteria will be essential in generating a better understanding of negotiation
processes – not only in international climate policy.




                                                - 24 -
References

Albin, C. (2001): Justice and Fairness in International Negotiations, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

Babcock, L., G. Loewenstein, S. Issacharoff, and C. Camerer (1995): Biased Judgement of
Fairness in Bargaining, The American Economic Review 85(5), 1337-1343.

Babcock, L. and G. Loewenstein (1997): Explaining Bargaining Impasse: The Role of Self-
Serving Biases, Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(1), 109-126.

Babcock, L., X. Wang, and G. Loewenstein (1996): Choosing the Wrong Pond: Social
Comparisons in Negotiations that Reflect a Self-serving Bias, Quarterly Journal of Economics
CXI(1), 1-19.

Barrett, S. (1994): Self Enforcing International Environmental Agreements. Oxford Economic
Papers 46, 878-894.

Böhringer, C. and C. Helm (2008), On the Fair Division of Greenhouse Gas Abatement Cost,
Resource and Energy Economics 30(2), 260-276.

Böhringer, C., T. Hoffmann, A. Lange, A. Löschel, and U. Moslener (2005), Assessing Emission
Allocation in Europe: An Interactive Simulation Approach, The Energy Journal 26(4), 1-22.

Börsch-Supan, A. and V.A. Hajivassiliou (1993): Smooth Unbiased Multivariate Probability
Simulators for Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Limited Dependent Variable Models, Journal
of Econometrics 58, 347-368.

Bosello, F., B. Buchner, C. Carraro, and D. Raggi (2001): Can Equity Enhance Efficiency?
Lessons from the Kyoto Protocol, Nota di Lavoro 49.2001, FEEM, Venice.

Carraro, C. and D. Siniscalco (1993): Strategies for the Protection of the Environment, Journal of
Public Economics 52, 309-328.

Cazorla, M.V. and M.A. Toman (2001): International Equity and Climate Change Policy, in:
Toman, M.A. (ed.), Climate Change Economics and Policy, Resources for the Future,
Washington, 235-247.

Chun, Y. and W. Thomson (1992): Bargaining Problems with Claims, Mathematical Social
Sciences 24, 19-33.


                                            - 25 -
Criqui, P., Mima, S., and Viguier, L. (1999): Marginal Abatement Costs of CO2 Emission
Reductions, Geographical Flexibility and Concrete Ceilings: An Assessment Using the POLES
Model, Energy Policy 27, 585-602.

Criqui, P. (2001): POLES Prospective Outlook on Long-term Energy Systems, Institute of
Energy      Policy     and      Economics,         Grenoble,    France    (http://webu2.upmf-
grenoble.fr/iepe/textes/POLES8p_01.pdf, accessed 18/01/2007).

Dahl, G.B. and M.R. Ransom (1999): Does Where You Stand Depend on Where You Sit?
Tithing Donations and Self-Serving Beliefs, The American Economic Review 89, 703-727.

DOE (Department of Energy) (2005): International Energy Outlook, Washington D.C., Energy
Information Administration.

Eyckmans, J., D. Van Regemorter, and V. van Steenberghe (2005): Kyoto-PermitPprices and
Compliance Costs: An Analysis with MacGEM, Environmental Economics and Management
Memorandum # 34, Leuven.

Gächter, S. and A. Riedl (2005): Moral Property Rights in Bargaining with Infeasible Claims,
Management Science, 51(2), 249-263.

Geweke, J., M. Keane, and D. Runkle (1994): Alternative Computational Approaches to
Inference in the Multinomial Model, The Review of Economics and Statistics 76, 609-632.

Greene, W.H. (2003): Econometric Analysis, Prentice Hall: New Jersey.

Hajivassiliou, V.A. (1994): A Simulation Estimation Analysis of the External Debt Crisis of
Developing Countries, Journal of Applied Econometrics 9, 109-131.

Hennig-Schmidt, H. (2002): The Impact of Fairness on Decision Making – An Analysis of
Different Video Experiments, in: Andersson, F. and H. Holm (eds.), Experimental Economics:
Financial Markets, Auctions, and Decision Making, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston,
Dordrecht, London, 185-210.

Herrero, C. (1998): Endogenous Reference Points and the Adjusted Proportional Solution for
Bargaining Problems with Claims, Social Choice and Welfare 15, 113-119.

Hoel, M. (1992): International Environmental Conventions: the Case of Uniform Reductions of
Emissions, Environmental and Resource Economics 2, 141-159.


                                          - 26 -
Keane, M. (1994): A Computationally Practical Simulation Estimator for Panel Data,
Econometrica 62, 95-116.

Klepper, G. and S. Peterson (2006): Marginal Abatement Cost Curves in General Equilibrium:
The Influence of World Energy Prices, Resource and Energy Economics, 28(1), 1-23.

Konow, J. (1996): A Positive Theory of Economic Fairness, Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization 31, 13-35.

Konow, J. (2000): Fair Shares: Accountability and Cognitive Dissonance in Allocation
Decisions, The American Economic Review 90, 1072-1091.

Konow, J. (2001): Fair and Square: The Four Sides of Distributive Justice, Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization 46, 137-164.

Lange, A. (2006): The Impact of Equity-preferences on the Stability of Heterogeneous
International Agreements, Environmental and Resource Economics 34, 247-267.

Lange, A. and C. Vogt (2003): Cooperation in International Environmental Negotiations due to a
Preference for Equity, Journal of Public Economics 87, 2049-2067.

Lange, A., C. Vogt, and A. Ziegler (2007): On the Importance of Equity in International Climate
Policy: An Empirical Analysis, Energy Economics 29, 545-562.

Messick, D. and K.P. Sentis (1979): Fairness and Preference, Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology 15, 418-434.

Mühleisen, M. and K.F. Zimmermann (1994): New Patterns of Labour Mobility: A Panel
Analysis of Job Changes and Unemployment, European Economic Review 38, 793-801.

Nash, J. (1950): The Bargaining Problem, Econometrica 28, 155-162.

Raiffa, H. (1982): The Art and Science of Negotiations, Harvard University Press, Cambridge
and London.

Raymond, L. (2003): Private Rights in Public Resources - Equity and Property Allocation in
Market-based Environmental Policy, Resources for the Future, Washington, DC.

Reiner, D.M. and H.D. Jacoby (1997): Annex I Differentiation Proposals: Implications for
Welfare, Equity and Policy, M.I.T. Global Change Report Series No. 27.



                                           - 27 -
Ringius, L., A. Torvanger, and A. Underdal (2002): Burden Sharing and Fairness Principles in
International Climate Policy, International Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and
Economics 2, 1-22.

Rive, N., A. Torvanger, and J.S. Fuglestvedt (2006): Climate Agreements Based on
Responsibility for Global Warming: Periodic Updating, Policy Choices, and Regional Costs,
Global Environmental Change 16, 182-194.

Roth, A. E. (1979): Axiomatic Models of Bargaining, Lecture Notes in Economics and
Mathematical Systems 170, Springer Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York.

Schelling, T. (1960): The Strategy of Conflict, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Thompson, L. and G. Loewenstein (1992): Egocentric Interpretations of Fairness and
Interpersonal Conflict, Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 51, 176-197.

White, H. (1982): Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Misspecified Models, Econometrica 50, 1-
25.

WRI (World Resources Institute) (2005): Climate Analysis Indicators Tool (CAIT), Version 3.0,
Washington, DC (http://cait.wri.org).




                                           - 28 -
Appendix A – Abatement costs and predictions

Table A.1: International Energy Outlook regions and mapping to survey countries or groups of
countries

 International Energy Outlook regions                      Survey countries or groups of countries
  United States of America                                 USA
  Other North America                                      Rest of world (ROW)
  Western Europe                                           EU
  Mature market Asia                                       ROW
  Russia                                                   Russia
  Other former Soviet Union                                ROW
  Eastern Europe                                           EU
  Emerging Asia                                            G77/China
  Middle East                                              G77/China
  Africa                                                   G77/China
  Central and south America                                G77/China
Source: DOE (2005)


Table A.2: GDP, population, and carbon emissions for survey countries or groups of countries

                                Year       EU      G77/China         Russia   USA     ROW     World
             GDP                1990      8160         9871            2241   7113    5688    33073
    (Billion USD2000)           2002     10484        18449            1657   10075 6562      47227
                                2020     15816        46555            3571   17634 11006     94582
           Population           1990       498         3965            148     253     396     5260
           (Million)            2002       513         4891            144     289     429     6266
                                2020       514         6092            129     337     460     7532
     Carbon Emissions           1990      1229         1664            640    1361     959     5853
             (MtC)              2002      1166         2566            415    1568     942     6658
                                2020      1299         4767            538    2035    1186     9825
   Accumulated Carbon           1860-      98              115          32     117     75       438
    Emissions (GtC)             2020
Source: Own calculations based on DOE (2005) and WRI (2005)



                                                  - 29 -
Table A.3: Summary of abatement cost assumptions in 2020

                                       Marginal Abatement Costs (USD2000/tC)
                       40      80      120     160      200   40      80     120     160      200
 Countries or
                               Abatement (MtC)                       Total abatement costs
 groups of
 countries                                                              (Bn USD2000)
 EU                    72     128      175     216      250   1.4     4.7    9.4    15.0      21.2
 G77/China            502     860     1137    1365 1558       9.5    30.7    58.2   89.9     124.7
 Russia                63     109      142     167      190   1.2     3.9    7.1    10.7      14.7
 USA                  155     270      362     437      502   2.9     9.8    18.9   29.4      41.0
 ROW                   64     112      151     181      209   1.2     4.0    7.9    12.1      17.0
 WORLD                856     1480    1967    2366 2709       16.2   53.1    101.5 157.2 218.7
Source: Own calculations based on POLES (Criqui 2001)



Table A.4: Projected costs for 2020 implied by the respective equity criteria for the respective
countries or groups of countries (in % of GDP) when marginal abatement costs are equalized at
80 USD2000/tC, corresponding to a worldwide reduction from BAU emissions by 15%

                              EU               G77/China             RUS              USA

EGA                          0.334               -0.423              0.749            0.687

SOV                          0.064                0.042              0.047            0.072

ABI                          0.056                0.056              0.056            0.056

POL                          0.044                0.055              0.081            0.062

POL(1860-2020)               0.075                0.030              0.110            0.081




                                                  - 30 -
Appendix B – Empirical results


Table B.1: Relative frequencies or mean and standard deviation regarding the personal
background of agents involved in international climate policy

                                                         Relative frequency           Number of survey
                                                                                        participants

 Nationality: EU                                                36.1%                         194


 Nationality: G77/China                                         45.9%                         194


 Nationality: Russia                                             1.0%                         194


 Nationality: USA                                                5.2%                         194


 Negotiator in a COP                                            18.0%                         178

 Working for environmental or non-
                                                                 6.9%                         189
 environmental NGO

 Highest degree or training: social sciences                    18.2%                         181


 Gender: female                                                 19.6%                         194


 Age (in years)                                            Mean: 45.70
                                                                                              183
                                                     Standard Deviation: 10.44

Note: The entries in the column “Number of survey participants” vary as some questions were not answered by all
respondents.




                                                    - 31 -
Table B.2: Relative frequencies that the respective equity rules should be reflected in the
distribution of entitlements for greenhouse gas emissions to “a very high degree” or “a high
degree”

                                   Assessment of Assessment of Assessment of Assessment of
                                       EGA           SOV           POL           ABI

                                        Expected position of the EU

 All respondents                         40.1%               50.9%               78.2%               55.7%
                                        (n=167)             (n=167)             (n=174)             (n=174)
 Respondents from the EU                36.5%***             42.9%               79.1%              54.5%**
                                         (n=63)              (n=63)              (n=67)              (n=66)
 Respondents from G77/China             46.0%**              50.7%               76.6%              60.3%**
                                         (n=74)              (n=73)              (n=77)              (n=78)

                                      Expected position of G77/China

 All respondents                         59.5%               29.1%               61.0%               65.5%
                                        (n=173)             (n=172)             (n=177)             (n=174)
 Respondents from the EU                 61.9%              17.2%***            61.2%**             75.4%**
                                         (n=63)              (n=64)              (n=67)              (n=65)
 Respondents from G77/China             50.6%**             34.6%***            62.0%***            55.1%***
                                         (n=79)              (n=78)              (n=79)              (n=78)

                                        Expected position of Russia

 All respondents                         31.4%               54.3%               42.7%               52.8%
                                        (n=159)             (n=162)             (n=164)             (n=163)
 Respondents from the EU                19.7%**              54.8%               29.5%*              57.4%
                                         (n=61)              (n=62)              (n=61)              (n=61)
 Respondents from G77/China             42.0%***             46.4%               54.2%*              47.9%
                                         (n=69)              (n=69)              (n=72)              (n=71)

                                       Expected position of the USA

 All respondents                         35.7%               60.8%               41.0%               29.8%
                                        (n=171)             (n=171)             (n=173)             (n=171)
 Respondents from the EU                 26.6%*              58.7%              29.2%**             17.5%**
                                         (n=64)              (n=63)              (n=65)              (n=63)
 Respondents from G77/China             49.3%**              60.5%               47.4%               39.5%*
                                         (n=75)              (n=76)              (n=76)              (n=76)
Note: *** (**, *) denotes that the distribution of the expected degree of incorporation of the respective equity rules
(with parameter values “a very high degree”, “a high degree”, “a moderate degree”, “a low degree”, and “no
degree”, irrespective of the relative frequencies) differs between the agents from the EU (G77/ China) and the
corresponding agents from outside the EU (outside G77/China) at the 1% (5%, 10%) significance level according to
the appropriate chi-squared test.

Corresponding ranking regarding the expected incorporation of the equity rules:
EU:                POL    ABI SOV EGA
G77/China:         ABI    POL EGA SOV
Russia:            SOV     ABI POL EGA
USA:               SOV     POL EGA ABI


                                                        - 32 -
Table B.3: Maximum likelihood estimates (z-statistics) in random effects probit models,
determinants of the expected position of countries and groups of countries that the equity rules
should be reflected in the distribution of entitlements for greenhouse gas emissions to “a very
high degree” or “a high degree” (analysis of assessed equity rules)
                                             (1)                    (2)           (3)            (4)
 Explanatory variables                    Expected               Expected      Expected       Expected
                                         position of            position of   position of    position of
                                           the EU               G77/China       Russia        the USA
                                                --                 1.05**           --            -0.54
 Assessment EGA
                                               (--)               (2.50)           (--)         (-1.20)
                                             1.28***                  --         1.77***         0.92**
 Assessment SOV
                                             (2.95)                  (--)        (3.67)         (2.25)
                                             1.49***                 0.44         0.83*            0.63
 Assessment POL
                                             (3.16)                (1.08)        (1.74)          (1.52)
                                              0.80*               1.26***        1.38***            --
 Assessment ABI
                                             (1.85)               (2.97)         (2.91)            (--)
                                             0.78***              0.81***        0.46***           0.15
 Personal consistency equity rules
                                             (4.61)                (5.00)        (2.91)          (0.98)
                                               0.10                -0.04          0.30*           0.30*
 Equity importance
                                             (0.55)               (-0.23)        (1.80)          (1.68)
                                               0.07               -0.39**         -0.08           0.38*
 COP negotiator
                                             (0.33)               (-2.06)       (-0.42)          (1.89)
                                              -0.07                  0.49         -0.14           -0.09
 NGO
                                            (-0.23)                (1.59)       (-0.51)         (-0.28)
                                              -0.12                  0.15         -0.08           -0.23
 Social science
                                            (-0.56)                (0.75)       (-0.43)         (-1.09)
                                              -0.18                  0.42         -0.27           -0.01
 Age
                                            (-0.50)                (1.32)       (-0.83)         (-0.04)
                                              -0.00               0.53***         0.31*          -0.03
 Gender
                                            (-0.01)                (2.89)        (1.75)         (-0.17)
                                               0.22                -0.40           0.39            0.57
 EU * assessment EGA
                                             (0.56)               (-1.06)        (0.91)          (1.37)
                                              -0.44                 -0.60         -0.36            0.05
 EU * assessment SOV
                                            (-1.20)               (-1.56)       (-1.01)          (0.14)
                                               0.08                  0.13         -0.31           -0.50
 EU* assessment POL
                                             (0.20)                (0.36)       (-0.84)         (-1.38)
                                               0.22                -0.30          -0.05           -0.49
 EU * assessment ABI
                                             (0.59)               (-0.80)       (-0.13)         (-1.23)
                                              -0.09                -0.68*          0.07            0.46
 G77/China * assessment EGA
                                            (-0.21)               (-1.66)        (0.15)          (1.04)
                                            -1.21***                -0.23       -1.60***          -0.57
 G77/China * assessment SOV
                                            (-2.82)               (-0.57)       (-3.73)         (-1.39)
                                              -0.51                 -0.12         -0.49           -0.66
 G77/China * assessment POL
                                            (-1.05)               (-0.31)       (-1.16)         (-1.59)
                                              -0.25               -0.83**       -1.11***          -0.25
 G77/China * assessment ABI
                                            (-0.60)               (-1.99)       (-2.69)         (-0.62)
                                            -0.32***                -0.05       -0.41***        -0.28**
 GDP per capita
                                            (-2.69)               (-0.46)       (-3.76)         (-2.51)
                                               0.38                -2.08           0.44           -0.20
 Constant
                                             (0.27)               (-1.61)        (0.34)         (-0.15)
Notes: *** (**, *) means that the appropriate parameter is different from zero at the 1% (5%, 10%) significance
level. Number of observations = 482 (n=127) in (1), number of observations = 495 (n=129) in (2), number of
observations = 460 (n=120) in (3), number of observations = 485 (n=125) in (4).

                                                       - 33 -
Table B.4: Maximum likelihood estimates (z-statistics) in random effects probit models,
determinants of the expected position of countries and groups of countries that the equity rules
should be reflected in the distribution of entitlements for greenhouse gas emissions to “a very
high degree” or “a high degree (analysis of economic costs associated with the equity rules)
                                              (1)                    (2)           (3)           (4)
 Explanatory variables                     Expected               Expected      Expected      Expected
                                          position of            position of   position of   position of
                                            the EU               G77/China       Russia       the USA
                                             -4.21***                  --            --             --
 Costs equity rules EU
                                             (-3.21)                  (--)          (--)           (--)
                                                --                   -0.99           --             --
 Costs equity rules G77/China
                                               (--)                (-1.37)          (--)           (--)
                                                --                     --        -1.98***           --
 Costs equity rules Russia
                                               (--)                   (--)       (-3.30)           (--)
                                                --                     --            --         -1.67***
 Costs equity rules USA
                                               (--)                   (--)          (--)        (-2.77)
                                              0.79***              0.78***        0.42***          0.16
 Personal consistency equity rules
                                              (4.73)                (4.95)        (2.74)         (1.07)
                                               0.10                  -0.03         0.29*          0.30*
 Equity importance
                                              (0.56)               (-0.19)        (1.79)         (1.66)
                                               0.07                -0.39**         -0.08          0.37*
 COP negotiator
                                              (0.35)               (-2.11)       (-0.42)         (1.88)
                                              -0.08                  0.47          -0.15          -0.10
 NGO
                                             (-0.24)                (1.58)       (-0.52)        (-0.31)
                                              -0.12                  0.16          -0.08          -0.22
 Social science
                                             (-0.54)                (0.83)       (-0.41)        (-1.07)
                                              -0.18                  0.43          -0.26          -0.01
 Age
                                             (-0.50)                (1.38)       (-0.83)        (-0.04)
                                              -0.01                0.53***         0.31*         -0.04
 Gender
                                             (-0.03)                (2.92)        (1.74)        (-0.19)
                                               0.23                  -0.38          0.42           0.54
 EU * assessment EGA
                                              (0.57)               (-1.03)        (0.96)         (1.32)
                                              -0.29                -1.16***         0.03          0.45*
 EU * assessment SOV
                                             (-1.03)               (-3.97)        (0.10)         (1.65)
                                               0.36                   0.01       -0.78***         -0.40
 EU* assessment POL
                                              (1.17)                (0.04)       (-2.86)        (-1.45)
                                              -0.15                  0.39          -0.02        -1.03***
 EU * assessment ABI
                                             (-0.51)                (1.43)       (-0.08)        (-3.29)
                                              -0.07                  -0.66          0.09           0.46
 G77/China * assessment EGA
                                             (-0.17)               (-1.62)        (0.21)         (1.05)
                                             -1.05***              -0.79**       -1.20***         -0.14
 G77/China * assessment SOV
                                             (-2.95)               (-2.44)       (-3.45)        (-0.42)
                                              -0.22                  -0.23       -0.94 ***        -0.54
 G77/China * assessment POL
                                             (-0.59)               (-0.70)       (-2.74)        (-1.59)
                                              -0.60*                 -0.12       -1.08***       -0.77**
 G77/China * assessment ABI
                                             (-1.70)               (-0.37)       (-3.15)        (-2.28)
                                             -0.31***                -0.04       -0.40***       -0.27**
 GDP per capita
                                             (-2.65)               (-0.43)       (-3.76)        (-2.46)
                                               1.76                  -1.51          1.89           0.41
 Constant
                                              (1.24)               (-1.22)        (1.49)         (0.31)
Notes: *** (**, *) means that the appropriate parameter is different from zero at the 1% (5%, 10%) significance
level. Number of observations = 482 (n=127) in (1), number of observations = 495 (n=129) in (2), number of
observations = 460 (n=120) in (3), number of observations = 485 (n=125) in (4).

                                                        - 34 -
Table B.5: Relative frequencies that some reasons play an important role for countries and
groups of countries for the incorporation of the most important equity rule in international
climate negotiations

                                     Assessment         Assessment        Assessment         Assessment
                                      of the EU        of G77/China        of Russia         of the USA

                                     Reason: Material self-interest

 All respondents                         62.7%                 86.1%          88.9%              93.5%
                                        (n=153)               (n=166)        (n=162)            (n=168)
 Respondents from the EU                51.9%**               96.8%***        93.5%              96.9%
                                         (n=54)                (n=63)         (n=62)             (n=64)
 Respondents from G77/China              70.8%*               75.3%***       81.7%***            90.8%
                                         (n=72)                (n=73)         (n=71)             (n=76)

                            Reason: Fairness considerations of the public

 All respondents                         87.9%                 58.9%          41.3%              44.4%
                                        (n=157)               (n=158)        (n=150)            (n=151)
 Respondents from the EU                 87.9%                44.8%***       20.0%***            35.1%*
                                         (n=58)                (n=58)         (n=55)             (n=57)
 Respondents from G77/China              88.9%                67.1%**        54.5%***            43.9%
                                         (n=72)                (n=73)         (n=66)             (n=66)

                      Reason: Facilitation of international climate negotiations

 All respondents                         83.1%                 46.9%          49.3%              30.8%
                                        (n=160)               (n=160)        (n=142)            (n=159)
 Respondents from the EU                 80.7%                28.1%***       32.7%***           18.3%***
                                         (n=57)                (n=57)         (n=52)             (n=60)
 Respondents from G77/China              83.3%                63.5%***       67.7%***            32.4%
                                         (n=72)                (n=74)         (n=62)             (n=68)

                                    Reason: Pressure from industry

 All respondents                         52.9%                 45.0%          69.7%              83.9%
                                        (n=153)               (n=151)        (n=145)            (n=168)
 Respondents from the EU                 49.1%                61.1%***        77.8%              85.7%
                                         (n=61)                (n=54)         (n=54)             (n=63)
 Respondents from G77/China              54.5%                32.9%***        61.9%*             80.8%
                                         (n=66)                (n=70)         (n=63)             (n=73)

                             Reason: Pressure from environmental NGOs

 All respondents                         78.9%                 31.3%          29.7%              47.4%
                                        (n=166)               (n=144)        (n=138)            (n=154)
 Respondents from the EU                 76.7%                19.2%**        13.5%***           33.9%**
                                         (n=60)                (n=52)         (n=52)             (n=56)
 Respondents from G77/China             85.7%**               43.5%***       46.7%***           60.6%***
                                         (n=77)                (n=69)         (n=60)             (n=66)
Note: *** (**, *) denotes that the relative frequency differs between the agents from the EU (G77/China) and the
agents from outside the EU (outside G77/China) at the 1% (5%, 10%) significance level according to the
appropriate chi-squared test.



                                                     - 35 -
Table B.6: Maximum likelihood estimates (z-statistics) in random effects probit models,
determinants of several reasons playing an important role for the countries or groups of
countries concerning the incorporation of the corresponding most important equity rule

                                        (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)
                                     Reason:       Reason:         Reason:       Reason:        Reason:
                                     Material      Fairness        Facilita-     Pressure      Pressure
                                       self-        consi-          tion of        from       from envi-
                                     interest      derations       climate       industry     ronmental
                                                    of the         negotia-                      NGOs
 Explanatory variables                              public           tions
                                       -0.66**        0.48**         0.54**          -0.36          0.07
 Own region
                                       (-2.57)       (2.05)          (2.25)        (-1.57)        (0.23)
                                        -0.18          0.03          0.54***       -0.46**         0.45*
 Personal consistency equity rules
                                       (-0.85)       (0.14)          (2.58)        (-2.38)        (1.70)
                                        -0.32          0.32           -0.12        -1.02***        -0.15
 COP negotiator
                                       (-1.08)       (0.97)         (-0.34)        (-2.76)       (-0.31)
                                         0.19          0.36            0.20          -0.04          0.30
 Equity importance
                                        (0.70)       (1.24)          (0.66)        (-0.12)        (0.71)
                                        -0.09          0.13            0.05          -0.20         -0.43
 NGO
                                       (-0.20)       (0.25)          (0.09)        (-0.36)       (-0.54)
                                        0.72**        -0.43          -0.69*           0.45          0.21
 Social science
                                       (1.98)        (-1.30)        (-1.83)         (1.19)        (0.43)
                                        -0.43         -0.19            0.28          -0.53          0.11
 Age
                                       (-0.80)       (-0.34)         (0.46)        (-0.89)        (0.13)
                                         0.20         -0.25           -0.20           0.17        1.06**
 Gender
                                        (0.64)       (-0.79)        (-0.58)         (0.48)        (2.18)
                                         0.19*        -0.11         -0.31***          0.02       -0.65***
 GDP per capita
                                        (1.79)       (-1.03)        (-2.62)         (0.16)       (-3.85)
                                           --        1.61***        2.03***          0.08        2.55***
 Assessment EU
                                          (--)       (5.76)          (6.78)         (0.32)        (6.41)
                                       1.32***         0.13            0.39            --          -0.08
 Assessment G77/China
                                       (4.58)        (0.50)          (1.41)           (--)       (-0.21)
                                       0.71***          --           0.76***          0.13           --
 Assessment Russia
                                       (2.66)          (--)          (3.10)         (0.47)          (--)
                                       1.15***         0.05             --         1.07***        1.26***
 Assessment USA
                                       (3.89)        (0.22)            (--)         (3.59)        (3.97)
                                         0.23         0.55**          -0.18           0.13         0.73*
 EGA most important
                                        (0.67)       (2.00)         (-0.64)         (0.48)        (1.92)
                                         0.58*        -0.21           -0.10        0.93***         -0.02
 SOV most important
                                        (1.71)       (-0.75)        (-0.36)         (3.07)       (-0.06)
                                       -0.60**         0.31            0.25          -0.31        0.95**
 POL most important
                                       (-2.26)       (1.16)          (0.90)        (-1.17)        (2.52)
                                         1.88          0.25           -1.74           2.39         -1.81
 Constant
                                        (0.91)       (0.12)         (-0.74)         (1.02)       (-0.56)
Notes: *** (**, *) means that the appropriate parameter is different from zero at the 1% (5%, 10%) significance
level. Number of observations = 448 (n=127) in (1), number of observations = 424 (n=126) in (2), number of
observations = 429 (n=125) in (3), number of observations = 428 (n=127) in (4), number of observations = 415
(n=128) in (5).




                                                    - 36 -
