                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               ALTRUISTIC DYNAMIC PRICING WITH CUSTOMER REGRET

                                           Julio J. Rotemberg

                                         Working Paper 14933
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14933


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2009




¸˛I wish to thank the Harvard Business School Division of Research for research support as well as
  Virgiliu Midrigan and seminar participants at the Kansas City Federal Reserve for comments. The
  views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Julio J. Rotemberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Altruistic Dynamic Pricing with Customer Regret
Julio J. Rotemberg
NBER Working Paper No. 14933
April 2009
JEL No. D11,E31,L11

                                             ABSTRACT

A model is considered where firms internalize the regret costs that consumers experience when they
see an unexpected price change. Regret costs are assumed to be increasing in the size of price changes
and this can explain why the size of price increases is less sensitive to inflation than in models with
fixed costs of changing prices. The latter predict unrealistically large responses of price changes to
inflation for firms that do not frequently reduce their prices. Adjustment costs that depend on the size
of price changes also raise the variability on the size of price increases. Lastly, it is argued that the
common practice of announcing price increases in advance is much easier to rationalize with regret
concerns by consumers than with more standard approaches to price rigidity.


Julio J. Rotemberg
Graduate School of Business
Harvard University, Morgan Hall
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jrotemberg@hbs.edu
   Price changes can trigger consumer regret. If a good is storable and people notice an
increase in its price, they are likely to regret not having purchased earlier, while they regret
not having waited if they see a price decline. Even for non-storable goods, a price increase
can trigger regret if individuals were savoring anticipatory utility before the purchase. These
anticipations might make it difficult for consumers not to buy, so they experience regret at
having indulged in these anticipations earlier. The purpose of this paper is to study how
firms should change their prices if they seek to act as if they empathized with these regret
costs of their consumers.
   While it does not directly absorb scarce physical resources, the regret experienced as a
result of a price change is a cost, and the analysis is thus conducted as a comparison of
regret costs with the fixed costs of price adjustment postulated in the influential papers of
Sheshinski and Weiss (1977) and Golosov and Lucas (2007). There are two ways in which
regret costs can be expected to differ from simple fixed costs. The first is that these costs
ought to depend on the size of price changes, with regret presumably being larger when prices
are changed by larger amounts. The second is that these costs can be reduced if people are
told about future price changes in advance.
   These two simple and intuitive properties of regret have several implications for the
pricing by firms that act as if they empathized with their consumers’ sentiments. The
dependence of regret costs on the size of price adjustment makes firms less willing to institute
large price changes. This matters in two contexts. The first is the effect of inflation on the
size of price changes. In the Sheshinki and Weiss (1977) model, an increase in inflation leads
firms to post substantially larger price increases whenever they do decide to raise their price.
In practice, however, several papers have shown that the actual size of price increases rises
only modestly when inflation rises. The lack of dependence of price changes on inflation is
visible already in the early work on magazine prices by Checchetti (1986). It is brought to
light even more clearly in Kashyap’s (1995) study of catalog prices, in Goette, Minsch and
Tyran (2005) analysis of Swiss restaurant data and in the Mexican and Norwegian price
index studies carried out by Gagnon (2007) and Wulfsberg (2008) respectively.


                                               1
   Gagnon (2007) argues that the lack of substantial changes in the size of price increases
when inflation rises does not constitute evidence against fixed costs of changing prices. He
shows, in particular, that a model with fixed costs of changing prices predicts a modest effect
of inflation on the size of price increases as long as individual firm productivity is random,
as in Golosov and Lucas (2007). A key condition for this result to be valid, however, is that
all firms have the same price adjustment parameters so that the probability that any given
firm will lower its price conditional on a price change is equal to the fraction of total price
changes that is made up of price reductions. In practice, however, the frequency of price
adjustment varies a great deal across firms and declines are much more common among firms
that change their prices frequently. This bears on the effect of inflation on the size of price
changes for two reasons. First, the size of price increases is more sensitive to inflation for
firms that adjust their prices less frequently. Second, and this is a somewhat subtler point,
the relationship between the the frequency of price adjustment and the response of the size
of price increases to inflation is convex. This occurs, in part, because a one percent change
in annual inflation has a negligible effect on the size of the price changes of firms that adjust
their prices continuously. As a result of this convexity, inflation raises the size of the average
price increase by more than it raises the price increases of firms whose prices are adjusted
at the average frequency.
   Relative to fixed costs, regret costs reduce the extent to which firms with infrequent
price changes let the size of their price increases respond to inflation. The reason is that an
increase in the delay between price adjustments requires a larger price increase (and hence
more regret) when inflation is higher. As a result, rises in inflation lead altruistic firms to
reduce these delays, and this dampens the size of their price increases. Interestingly, this
effect can be so large that increases in inflation lead firms to reduce the size of their price
increases. This result my be of empirical relevance because Wulfsberg (2008) shows that the
size of many Norwegian price increases rose when inflation fell after the 1980’s.
   When firms see larger price changes as more costly, their prices have another desirable
property. This is that, relative to a fixed costs of price adjustment model that induces the


                                                2
same average price increases, there is more dispersion in these increases. This result may
seem surprising since it might be felt that the desire to avoid regret leads all price changes
to be consistently smaller. This is true for any given stochastic environment faced by firms.
However, to be consistent both with the average magnitude of price increases and with the
proportion of prices changes that are price reductions, one must make the environment faced
by firms with regret costs more volatile. What happens, then, is that firms with regret costs
institute only small price changes when inflation erodes their price for a given level of their
real costs. On the other hand, they are forced to make larger price changes when they are hit
by the large changes in real costs that are necessary to account for their average behavior.
       A somewhat different advantage of interpreting the costs of price adjustment as customer
costs of regret is that one can then explain why firms warn customers in advance of price
changes. A preannouncement of this sort would seem to have the potential to ameliorate
two regret costs. First, it would urge customers who would be upset at paying a higher price
later to purchase immediately and thereby avoid some of the costs of the price increase.
Second, it could reduce the number of people who are surprised when they see the higher
price, and thereby reduce the number of people who obtained anticipatory utility on the
basis of imagining that they would obtain the good for less.
       Since this paper does not derive regret costs from first principles, it cannot address the
question of how much regret costs fall when firms announce their price changes in advance.
What the paper does show is that altruistic firms do sometimes (though not always) benefit
from preannouncements if these reduce regret costs. At the same time, the paper emphasizes
that preannouncements of price increases reduce firm profits in more traditional models of
price rigidity. What happens in these models is that firms make more profits at the “new”
prices than at the old, so they should not encourage their customers to stockpile goods at
the old price.1 Therefore, the existence of these preannouncements provides at least some
   1
    Encouraging customers to stockpile items in advance of price increases also seems inconsistent with
models where firms keep their prices rigid because they lack sufficient information to change them (see, for
example Mankiw and Reis (2002) and Woodford (2008)). Once the firm learns its price is no longer optimal,
there seems to be little reason to help customers buy more at a non-profit maximizing price.



                                                     3
evidence for the importance of psychic costs that are not incorporated in standard models
of price rigidity.
   This paper studies implications of a model whose assumptions are meant to be somewhat
appealing from an intuitive point of view, and does not discuss the psychological evidence
underlying the consumer attitudes that motivate the analysis. It also does not explain why
firms internalize the regret that consumers potentially experience so that they set their prices
treating this regret as a cost. Rotemberg (2008) provides a general discussion of the empirical
evidence of regret in purchase situations. Heidhues and Koszegi (2008) provide an elegant
model of disappointment where consumers are disappointed when the price is higher than
their anticipation of what this price will be. One important difference between their work
and what is discussed here is that they suppose that this disappointment is eliminated if
consumers do not purchase, and this can lead sales to fall sharply when prices are raised. I
suppose, by contrast, that regret (at either not having purchased before or at having formed
excessively optimistic forecasts of future prices) persists whether the consumer purchases
or not. As a result, the level of purchases is based on a standard consumer optimization
problem.
   A model of the transmission of customer emotions such as regret to firm actions is pre-
sented in Rotemberg (2004). While it motivates what is done here, the results in this paper
can also be seen as being based on a “reduced form” that may be derived in other ways.
In any event, the model of Rotemberg (2004) leads firms to follow consumer wishes for fear
of being found to be insufficiently altruistic towards them. One empirical advantage of this
interpretation is that consumers do sometimes lash out against firms, and firms do seem to
take actions to avoid this.
   The paper proceeds as follows. The next section considers deterministic models to show
that the dependence of adjustment costs on the size of price adjustment can explain why
inflation has modest effects on the size of price increases. Section 2 turns its attention to
a model with stochastic technology inspired by Golosov and Lucas (2007). It contains two
parts. The first discusses the extent to which such a model can explain the empirical link


                                               4
between inflation and the size of price increases. The second shows that the dependence
of costs of adjustment on the size of price changes can, for a given degree of price rigidity,
increase the variability of price increases. Section 3 studies price preannouncements and
Section 4 offers some concluding remarks.


1     The size of price increases with deterministic infla-
      tion and technology
1.1    Continuous time

Most of the results presented in this paper are derived from numerical exercises carried out
with discrete time models. Nonetheless, it is worth starting with a deterministic continuous
time model that is close to Sheshinski and Weiss (1977) because this model is analytically
more tractable and can therefore provide intuition for the numerical results that follow.
    Let pt be the nominal price charged by the firm at t and let pt− be the limit of the price
charged at time x when x approaches t from below. Consumers are assumed to incur the cost
`(pt , pt− ) whenever pt is not equal to pt− . Consistent with the discussion in the introduction,
these costs are assumed to depend on the size of price changes, with price reductions being
costly as well.
    Purchases are assumed to be made continuously with no possibility of storage (this is
relaxed below). Leaving aside the costs of regret, which are assumed not to affect purchase
decisions, consumers obtains the following utility by purchasing a sequence of qt units of a
particular good and of zt units of a numeraire good
                                  Z ∞
                                                  θ    θ−1
                                        e−rt (       qt θ + zt )dt,
                                   0             θ−1

where θ is a parameter. The presence of the numeraire good makes it easier to isolate
what occurs in a single market; a more complete model would treat all goods symmetrically
instead. The price of the numeraire good, pzt grows at the instantaneous rate µ while
consumers have access to an asset with an instantaneous nominal rate of interest of i. Letting


                                                    5
A denote the consumers’ assets and Ȧ their time derivative,

                                      Ȧ = iA − pt qt − pzt zt + It

where It represents non-asset income. It follows that, unless i = r + µ individuals will not
consume z smoothly over time. If this condition is satisfied, by contrast, individuals are
indifferent as to when they consume z. Individuals can then reach their maximum utility
by setting zt equal to z̄ − pt qt /pzt where z̄ is the annuity value of lifetime wealth in terms
                                   R ∞ −iτ
of good z, which equals r[A0 +      0 e    Iτ dτ ]/pz0 . Leaving aside regret, total utility is then
equal to                                    Ã                            !
                             Z ∞
                                      −rt        θ    θ−1  pt qt
                                   e                qt θ −       + z̄ dt.                       (1)
                               0                θ−1        pzt
Consumer optimization then implies that qt = (pt /pzt )−θ so that θ is the elasticity of demand.
With a mass N of consumers, total demand is given by Qt = N (pt /pzt )−θ . Given this level
of purchases, (1) implies that each individual’s instantaneous utility from consuming the
non-numeraire good is given by
                                                               Ã         !1−θ
                              θ    θ−1  pt qt    1                 pt
                                 qt θ −       =                                 .               (2)
                             θ−1        pzt     θ−1                pzt

   To ensure that firms do not change prices at every instant, the function ` is assumed to
have a positive limit as pt goes to pt− from above, even though `(x, x) = 0. The existence of
such fixed psychological costs allows one to interpret the rigidity of prices as due exclusively
to consumer psychology. If fixed psychological costs are regarded as implausible, the model
can be interpreted as one that has both administrative and psychological costs of price
changes, with the former being fixed and the latter being variable. Because administrative
costs of changing prices are unlikely to depend on the size of the price change, the aspects
of the model that hinge on this variability seem most easily interpreted as being due to the
psychological forces that I stress.
   The instantaneous cost of producing the good is cpzt so that this cost rises at the general
rate of inflation µ. Instantaneous profits at t in terms of the numeraire good thus equal
N (pt /pzt )−θ [(pt /pzt ) − c]. A firm that acts as if it had an altruism parameter of λ towards

                                                      6
its consumers maximizes the sum of the present value of its profits and λ times consumer
welfare (which includes the regret costs from price changes). Its objective is thus
                             Z ∞                                 X
                                   e−rt W (pt /pzt )dt + N λ           e−rt̂i `(pt̂i , pt̂i − )                   (3)
                              0                                   i
                                                        (                                 )
                                                            θ − 1 + λ 1−θ
                         where         W (y) ≡ N                     y    − cy −θ ,                               (4)
                                                              θ−1

and the t̂i represent the dates where the firm changes its prices.
   To ensure stationarity, let ` depend on (pt − pt− )/pt− . This implies that the time between
price changes, τ , remains constant over time. Each time the firm sets a new price, it chooses
the same real price S = pt /pzt so that its price rises by 100(eµτ − 1) percent. The variables
S and τ maximize
                                     Z τ
                               1
                                 −rτ
                                         e−rt W (Se−µt )dt + λe−rτ `(eµτ − 1).
                             1−e      0


   The first order condition of this maximization problem with respect to S is
                                          Z τ
                                                W 0 (Se−µt )e−(r+µ)t dt = 0,                                      (5)
                                           0


so that the present value of the benefit of raising the price slightly has to be equal to zero
over the period in which price is kept constant. The first order condition for τ is
                         (                          R τ −rt                                            )
                e−rτ                −µτ         r    0 e    W (Se−µt )dt + r`λ                0   µτ
                          W (Se           )−                                           − λ` µse            = 0.   (6)
              1 − e−rτ                                      1 − e−rτ
              R τ −rt
Integrating    0 e    W (Se−µt )dt by parts and using (5), (6) implies that

                          rλ` − λµseµτ (1 − e−rτ )`0 = W (S) − W (Se−µτ ).                                        (7)

   In the case where `0 = 0, this equation is identical to the equation in Sheshinski and
Weiss (1977). It then states that the difference between firm welfare at the reset price S
and firm welfare at the terminal price s = Se−µτ equals the interest rate times the cost of
price adjustment (which is λ` when `0 = 0). The intuition for this is that the product of
the interest rate and the cost of adjustment is the benefit of postponing the adjustment of

                                                             7
prices by a small amount of time, and that, at an optimum, this ought to equal the cost of
doing so.
   Sheshinski and Weiss (1977) prove a quite general result, namely that increases in inflation
raise the size of price adjustments eµτ . Intuition for this result can be readily obtained from
Figure 1, which depicts both the objective function W as a function of price as well and
the pattern of price adjustment. The reset price S is above the price p∗ that maximizes W .
After being set equal to S, the real price is allowed to decline with inflation until it reaches
Se−µτ , with the vertical distance between the initial and final W ’s being equal to rλ` when
costs are purely fixed. Now suppose that inflation rises to µ0 and imagine that the firm were
to keep the size of the price increase the same (so that it now keeps its price constant for a
period of length τ 0 with τ 0 µ0 = τ µ). Higher inflation would reduce the time it takes for prices
to reach p∗ after the price is set to S. This matters because, after this point, W 0 is positive,
and the fact that these points are reached faster implies that they receive a higher weight
in (5), the present value of W 0 that must be zero at an optimal price. Since the limits of
integration are unchanged if the interval between prices becomes τ 0 , it follows that the firm
now wants to start with a price higher than S. Given the required relation between profits
at the starting and ending price, the firm must end with a lower price so that the size of
price increases is higher.
   In the case where adjustment costs are psychological and `0 is positive, an increase in
inflation has the additional effect of lowering the left hand side of (7) for a given τ . The firm
thus acts as if its costs of price adjustment were lower when inflation is higher. This induces
more frequent adjustments and tends to reduce the size of price increases. The intuition for
this effect is simple. When inflation is higher, postponing a price increase by a given amount
of time raises regret costs ` by more (because a postponement by a given amount of time
dt requires a larger increase in price). Thus, an altruistic firms has an incentive to raise the
frequency of its price adjustments.




                                                8
1.2       Discrete time

This effect of inflation can be quantitatively important. To demonstrate this, I turn to a
version of the model where decisions are made once per time period and time periods have
discrete length. The variables pt , qt , i and pzt continue to represent, respectively, the price
and individual consumption of the good under study, the one period interest rate and the
price of the numeraire at t. Letting ρ be the rate at which consumers discount payoffs one
period into the future, each consumer’s lifetime utility at t is
                                        ∞
                                                      Ã                                              !
                                        X                  θ    θ−1
                                                  j
                                              ρ               qt+j
                                                                 θ
                                                                    + zt+j − `(pt+j /pt+j−1 ) ,
                                        j=0               θ−1

while each consumer’s assets at t, At equal

                                             At = (1 + i)At−1 − pt (q̃t + q̂t+1 ) − pzt zt ,

where q̃t are the purchases of the good at t for consumption at t and q̂t+1 are the purchases of
the good at t for use at t + 1. For the moment, I set qt = q̃t and q̂t = 0 so that purchases for
inventory are ignored. This is relaxed when I consider preannouncements below. To avoid a
strict preference for zero consumption of zt at certain points, it must be the case that

                                                              ρ(1 + i) = (1 + µ),                                     (8)

where µ is the one period rate of growth of pzt , and I assume this from now on. This condition
ensures that consumers are indifferent as to when they consume good z. Consumer demand
qt is then equal to (p/pz )−θ once again and single-period utility from having access to this
good at price p/pzt equals (p/pz )1−θ /(θ−1). With a constant real marginal cost of production
c, a firm which behaves as if it cared λ times as much about consumer utility as about its
own profits has the same one-period objective as before. I now write it as
                                                               (       Ã         !      Ã           !)
                                          θ+λ−1                            pt           pt − pt−1
                                        N       W                                    −L                  ,            (9)
                                           θ−1                             pzt             pt−1
where
          Ã         !       Ã         !1−θ                         Ã         !−θ                             Ã   !
              pt                pt             c(θ − 1)                pt                   θ−1     pt − pt−1
      W                 =                    −                                          L≡       λ`           .      (10)
              pzt               pzt            θ+λ−1                   pzt                 θ+λ−1       pt−1

                                                                              9
   I normalize N so that N (θ + λ − 1)/(θ − 1) equals one. If the firm keeps its price constant
for J periods starting in period 0, it incurs its next adjustment cost in period J. Supposing
it raises its real price to S whenever it changes it, the present value of its welfare is
              PJ−1 j             j
               j=0 ρ W (S/(1 + µ) )         ρJ L
    U =                                −
                      1 − ρJ               1 − ρJ
                                                                                 
              J−1
                X                          c(θ − 1) J−1
                                                    X                            .³      ´
         =       ρj (1 + µ)(θ−1)j S 1−θ −               ρj (1 + µ)θj S −θ − ρJ L    1 − ρJ . (11)
                                         θ + λ − 1 j=0                         
             j=0


   For any choice of J, the firm then sets S to maximize the sum of the first two terms,
which gives                                          P
                                                  J−1 j        θj
                                         θc       j=0 ρ (1 + µ)
                               S(J) =          PJ−1 j               .
                                      θ + λ − 1 j=0 ρ (1 + µ)(θ−1)j
   It is convenient at this point to normalize c by setting θc/(θ + λ − 1) equal to one. This
has the advantage that the optimal price equals one in the absence of inflation, and that
departures from one are a measure of the effect of inflation on S. Using this normalization
and substituting S(J) back into (11) implies that the firm’s objective function is
                         hP                 i1−θ hP                    iθ
                            J−1 j        θj        J−1 j        (θ−1)j
                     1      j=0 ρ (1 + µ)          j=0 ρ (1 + µ)          − ρJ L
                  U=                                                               .             (12)
                     θ                              1 − ρJ

   Using this equation, it is straightforward to find the numerical values of J that maximize
this objective for given parameter values. I conduct several such experiments for different
values of inflation and for different degrees of sensitivity of regret to the size of price increases.
The normalizations ensure that, for given θ, λ affects the firm’s price only through L so that
its main role here is to determine the extent to which the firm perceives the regret cost of its
customers. Notice also that in (9), L is in the same units as the one period revenues that the
firm derives from one customer (pt /pzt )1−θ . This facilitates the interpretation of this cost.
   The two remaining parameters of the model are ρ and θ. In the simulations, these are
set to the values used in Nakamura and Steinsson (2007) so that ρ equals .96 at annual rates
and θ equals 4. In this section, a period is taken to be a day (so that firms can in principle
change their prices daily). The results is that the ρ used in these simulations is .961/365 ,


                                                    10
and similarly single period inflation µ satisfies (1 + µ) = (1 + π)1/365 where π is the annual
inflation rate.
   Consistent with the idea that both price increases and decreases cause some distress, the
firm’s perceived cost of price adjustment, L is given by
                               ¯Ã          !¯
                               ¯ p −p       ¯     ³     ¯            ¯ ´
                               ¯  t     t−1 ¯           ¯            ¯
                  Lt = L0 It + ¯            ¯ L1 = L0 + ¯(1 + µ)J − 1¯L1 It ,              (13)
                               ¯    pt−1    ¯

where L0 and L1 are parameters and It is an indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if pt
differs from pt−1 . The assumption that this function is fully symmetric is made for simplicity.
   Results from simulating this model are reported in Figures 2-4. Each figure contains
four specifications for these costs, where these specifications differ both in L0 and L1 . What
the specifications in each figure have in common is the size of price changes at the baseline
inflation rate of 2.4%. Thus, the L0 ’s in each figure can be thought of as having been chosen
so that, for the L1 ’s being considered, each induces the same price changes when inflation is
2.4%. Since price changes are common at this baseline inflation rate, the figures allow one
to understand the implications of different L’s for the effect of inflation increases on price
changes. The baseline price increases used as illustrations in the figures have, in turn, been
chosen because they have been observed in empirical studies.
   Figure 2 considers specifications where price increases equal 23.5% when inflation equals
2.4%. This specification is inspired by Cecchetti’s (1986) study of magazine prices. His data
show that, on average, price increases for his sample of magazines equalled 23.5% in the
1960’s when inflation averaged 2.4%. Cecchetti (1986) reports that an average of 7 years
elapsed between price adjustments and that the size of the adjustments he observed matched
closely the aggregate inflation that took place since the last time these prices were adjusted.
This suggests that, if there were any price declines at all, they must have been extremely
rare. While this does not justify using a deterministic model to try to match his observations,
it at least suggests a benefit of trying to explain them with models that, like those in this
section, imply the absence of price declines.
   The costs of adjustment that are necessary to rationalize these large price increases


                                                11
are much larger than the costs that are contemplated in the other two figures. As Figure 2
indicates, one can explain the price rigidity of magazines with a fixed cost of price adjustment
equal to 35.6 times (daily) revenue.2 Since the price in question is the newstand price of
magazines, and magazines also receive revenue from subscriptions and advertisements, this
represents a much smaller fraction of total daily magazine revenue. Still, it represents a
substantial fraction of the expenditure on newstand magazines. With a λ equal to one,
consumers would have to suffer disappointment costs from price increases that are essentially
the same as the monthly price of a magazine, and these psychological costs need to be larger
still if λ is lower. One potential explanation for such large disappointment costs is that price
increases may lead consumers to regret not having obtained a subscription or not having
brought alternate reading material with them. While uncomfortably high, these costs may
be more believable than the administrative costs of changing prices. As Cecchetti (1986)
argues, these are likely to be low for magazines because their price is literally printed anew
in each issue.
       If one views these costs as fixed administrative costs, an additional problem emerges.
This is that the size of prices increases did not rise substantially in the 1970’s. The average
inflation rate in this period was 7.1%. According to the figure, price increases should thus
have risen to equal 35.9% if this model were valid with fixed costs of changing prices. Instead,
Cecchetti (1986) shows that price increases rose only to 25.3%. The figure also displays the
predicted changes in the size of price increases when costs of price adjustment depend on
the size of the price increase. The bottom-most line in the figure displays the prediction
of setting L1 equal to the value of 1000, and this parameter actually leads predicted price
increases to decline. The line with L1 = 800 predicts a price increase of 25.4% when inflation
is 7.1%, so a parameter in this range can explain the behavior of magazine price increases.
Still the implied level of regret costs are very sensitive to the size of price adjustments. The
particular functional form for regret costs in (13) implies that the elasticity of regret costs
   2
     This value does depend on the other parameters of the model. It is lower if the elasticity of demand θ
is lower, for example.



                                                    12
with respect to (1 + µ)J is L1 ((1 + µ)J /(L0 + L1 ((1 + µ)J − 1)). This expression equals about
4.6 for the line with L1 = 800 when these costs are evaluated at the 2.4% inflation rate.
      Figure 3 and 4 focuses on somewhat more flexible prices. The former studies environ-
ments where price increases equal 9.9% at the baseline inflation rate. This is the size of
price increases found by Wulfsberg (2008) in Norwegian CPI data from 1990 to 2004 (when
inflation in Norway equaled 2.4% on average). It is also close to the size of price increases
reported in Golosov and Lucas (2007). Given that the model involves no price declines, a
price increase of 9.9% still involves periods of rigid prices that last four years. Instead, Figure
4 considers parameters L0 and L1 that yield price changes once a year. Bils and Klenow
(2004) as well as Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) report more frequent changes when looking
at the full population of prices in the the US CPI, while Dhyne et al. (2006) report somewhat
less frequent adjustment in European CPI data.3 What is certain is that different sectors
behave quite differently with respect to price adjustment so that many prices are changed
more frequently than this while others are more rigid.
      One obvious implication of looking at prices that are adjusted more frequently is that
the fixed cost of adjustment that are needed to rationalize this rigidity is lower. A less
obvious result is that a smaller slope L1 is needed to rationalize declines in the size of price
increases when inflation rises. This is a useful result because Wulfsberg (2008) shows that
the size of typical price increases was about 2.3% lower in the period 1975-1989 when average
inflation in Norway was equal to 8.4%. As shown in the figure, one can obtain declines of
roughly this magnitude by letting L1 be equal to about 550. It should be noted, however,
that while this derivative of L with respect to (1 + µ)J is lower than what was needed
to rationalize Cecchetti’s (1986) finding, the elasticity of these regret costs with respect to
(1 + µ)J evaluated at an inflation of 2.4% is around 10.9 in this case.
  3
   Other studies that have found prices to be rigid for around a year include Blinder et al. (1988) and
Gopinath and Rigobon (2008).




                                                  13
2     Stochastic costs of production
As emphasized by Golosov and Lucas (2007) a model where positive inflation is the only
force leading firms to change prices cannot explain the behavior of all prices. The reason
is that one observes many price declines. So, at least some firms face cost declines rather
than cost increases. Golosov and Lucas (2007) propose to model this as a mean reverting
stochastic process for the technology of each individual firm, and this approach has been
followed, among others, by Midrigan (2008), Gagnon (2007) and Nakamura and Steinsson
(2008). In this section, I use a variant of this model to study two questions. The first concerns
how the connection between inflation and the mean size of price increases is affected by the
introduction of this random technology. The second is the effect of adjustment cost on other
aspects of the distribution of price changes.

2.1    The connection between inflation and the size of price in-
       creases with fixed costs

Gagnon (2007) shows that a model that is quite close to that of Golosov and Lucas (2007)
implies that the size of price increases rises only very slightly when inflation rises. Gagnon
(2007) corroborates this prediction with Mexican data. Unlike the Norwegian data of Wulfs-
berg (2008), Gagnon’s (2007) Mexican data does not show the size of price increases declining
with inflation. Still, the effect of inflation is much more modest than is implied by the de-
terministic model considered in the previous section and Gagnon (2007) rightly points out
that the capacity of explaining this fact is an impressive accomplishment for the model with
random technology.
    What this evidence shows is that the changes in the size of price increases are consistent
with a model where all firms have the same stochastic technology and fixed costs of changing
prices. One difficulty with this approach, however, is that it has been widely recognized that
firms differ a great deal in the extent to which their prices are rigid. For firms whose prices
are flexible, one does not need a model of price rigidity. One is then left with the question
whether the evidence is consistent with a model where the firms whose price is relatively

                                                14
rigid have fixed costs of changing prices (and stochastic technology). This section takes a
modest step towards answering this question. It shows that, even with stochastic technology,
firms that face substantial fixed costs of changing prices behave in a manner that is quite
similar to the firms considered in the previous section: their prices always increase and never
fall, and the size of their price increases is quite sensitive to inflation.
      Following Golosov and Lucas (2007), marginal cost is now assumed to equal c/at where
at is an index of technology that evolves according to

                                           log(at ) = δ log(at−1 ) + ²at ,                                          (14)

and ²at is an i.i.d. normal random variable with standard deviation σa while δ is a coefficient
smaller than 1. This implies that W , the one period payoff to the firm leaving outside
adjustment costs, is now equal to
                                   Ã         !      Ã         !1−θ            Ã         !−θ
                                       pt               pt             θ−1        pt
                              W            , at =                    −                        ,                     (15)
                                       pzt              pzt             θat       pzt

where this payoff has been written so that it incorporates the normalizations N = (θ −
1)/(θ + λ − 1 and c = (θ + λ − 1)/θ. The firm arrives at t with a pre-existing real price
pt−1 /pzt and its value function can be written as
                     Ã         !             "   Ã             !                    Ã                      !#
                         pt−1                        pt                                   pt
                 V            , at = max W               , at − Lt + Et ρV                        , at+1        .   (16)
                          pzt         pt             pzt                                pzt+1

where the cost Lt is given by (13) so that it equals zero if pt is set equal to pt−1 . This
optimization is solved by value function iteration on a grid. To keep the optimization problem
manageable, the length of the period is set equal to a month. Adjacent points on the (log)
grid for real prices differ by .002, which is the baseline deterministic inflation rate of pzt and
corresponds to an annual inflation rate of 2.4%.4
      Following Nakamura and Steinsson (2008), δ is set equal to .66. The parameters that still
need to be calibrated are then σa , L0 and L1 . To consider the case of fixed costs, I abstract
from L1 at first. I then set σa and L0 so that the model reproduces two key statistics.
  4
    The programs to carry out this optimization were adapted from those used by Nakamura and Steinsson
(2008).

                                                              15
These are the fraction of price changes that are increases, which is used in the Nakamura
and Steinsson’s (2008) calibration, and the average size of price increases, which is used in
the calibration of Golosov and Lucas (2007). The average size of price increases is set at
9.9% once again5 and the fraction of price changes that are increases is set to the value of
.65 found by Nakamura and Steinsson (2008). The resulting values of σa and L0 as well as
some additional statistics from this baseline simulation are reported in the first column of
Table 1. One additional dimension in which the simulation performs well is that prices are
predicted to change in 8.2% of the observations, which is close to the value of 8.4% found
by Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) in US CPI data.6
       The second column reports the effects of keeping all the parameters at their baseline
values and raising the annual inflation rate to 10%. Consistent with the findings of Gagnon
(2007), the average size of price increases rises only modestly. Here it rises by about 1%. By
contrast, there are more substantial increases in both the overall frequency of price changes
and the fraction of these changes that is made up of price increases. This result may suggest
that the implications of the deterministic model of section 1 are not relevant.
       Column 3 shows, however, that this result hinges a great deal on the fact that every
good is predicted to have both price increases and price declines. As suggested earlier, the
Cecchetti (1986) magazine price data appears to include few if any price declines. Similarly,
there appear to be effectively no declines in the restaurant data presented in Goette, Minsch
and Tyran (2005). Like magazines, these prices are quite rigid with an elapsed time between
price changes of around six quarters. In fact, the model with fixed costs of changing prices
that I have been studying does predict that, for a given stochastic process for at , price declines
should essentially disappear from sample paths if the cost of changing prices is sufficiently
high.
       This is demonstrated in columns 3 and 4 of Table 1, where I simulate a firm that is
   5
    Golosov and Lucas (2007) use 9.5%.
   6
    This match is not entirely surprising since Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) use this overall frequency
to calibrate their parameters and I use the δ from their study. The simulation statistics are obtained by
constructing a stochastic sample path of 10 million observations.



                                                   16
subject to the same stochastic process for a as the firms in columns 1 and 2 but whose L0 is
set equal to .125. This is a value that is close to the minimum one that ensures that prices
only rise whether yearly inflation equals 2.4 or 10%. Column 3 considers the case where this
firm faces a 2.4% inflation rate. While it never lowers its prices, the size of its average price
increases is essentially the same as that for firms in column 1, where the adjustment cost is
much smaller. As adjustment costs increase, the firm becomes more reluctant to lower prices
and this reduces its incentive to raise prices by more (because of the fear of being stuck with
a price that is too high if a rises).
       Column 4 then simulates the actions of firms with L0 = .125 in an environment where
pzt grows at 10% per year. This change in inflation raises the size of price increases from
9.9% to 15.9% very much in line with the deterministic results.7 Thus, Goette, Minsch and
Tyran’s (2005) evidence that Swiss restaurants (who rarely if ever cut prices) kept the size
of their price changes constant when inflation changed also constitutes evidence against this
stochastic version of a fixed cost of price adjustment model.8
       What keeps price increases from rising with inflation when L1 = 0 as in the specifications
in columns 1 and 2 appears to be the fact that the firm has the option of eliminating its price
reductions when inflation rises. This is shown more generally in Figure 5. This Figure depicts
the connection between a firm’s adjustment frequency, its fraction of price declines, and the
responsiveness of its price increases to inflation. The Figure is constructed by keeping the
demand and technology parameters the same and considering firms that differ only in their
L0 . Higher values of L0 lead to a lower frequency of price adjustment, and this frequency
(at 2.4% annual inflation) is used as the x-axis for the plots. The bottom plot shows that
firms with higher adjustment costs are less likely to cut their prices (again at 2.4% annual
inflation.) Since inflation is positive, they prefer letting their real prices erode by doing
nothing. The top plot, meanwhile shows that the change in the size of the price increase
   7
      In Figure 3 a change in inflation from 2.4 to 10% leads the size of price increases to go from 9.9% to
16.3%.
    8
      The same is true for the evidence in Kashyap (1995). Declines constitute only 8 percent of his sample
of price changes and yet he observes no difference between the size of price increases in the 1970’s and the
size of price increases in the 50’s, 60’s or 80’s.


                                                    17
induced by going for a 2.4 to a 10% annual inflation rate. The plot shows that firms that cut
their prices frequently have price increases that are nearly unaffected by inflation. For firms
that raise their prices between 50 and 65% of the time that they institute a price change,
the induced rise in the size of their price increases hovers between 0 and 1%.
   By contrast, the proportion of price decreases becomes more important as it falls below
around 35%, and firms with fewer price reductions let the size of their price increases be
affected more by inflation. The effect of inflation is particularly dramatic for firms with very
infrequent price adjustments. Given the convexity of this plot, it seems fair to conclude
that the average across firms of the increase in the size of price increases should exceed the
increase of a firm whose frequency of price adjustment is the average one. To determine the
exact prediction of the model one would have to know how many firms fall in each category.
   Unfortunately, we do not even know the behavior of firms whose prices are adjusted at the
average frequency. In the simulations of the calibrated model, the typical firm is assumed to
have the average frequency of price changes as well as the average fraction of price increases.
It is worth emphasizing, however, that the overall fraction of price changes that are decreases
(35%) is significantly influenced by firms whose prices are flexible, since their prices are more
likely to be observed changing. So, it is possible that a very large fraction of firms mostly
raise their prices but that they change their prices sufficiently rarely that they contribute a
disproportionately small amount to the overall volume of changes. In this case, the model
would predict very substantial increases in the average size of price when inflation rises.

2.2    Adjustment costs that rise with the size of the adjustment

This section reintroduces L1 > 0, this time into the model with stochastic a. I start by
considering the case where L1 = .5. Because this is a monthly model, the corresponding
values for a daily model like that of Section 1 would be around 15, which is still smaller than
most values considered in that section. The first column of Table 2 uses the parameters L0
and σa that fulfilled the two calibration criteria in the case where L1 was set to zero. I start
with these parameters because, by allowing for a simple comparison with the case where


                                               18
L1 = 0, they help provide intuition for the effect of L1
   The first column of Table 2 indicates that adding the cost L1 = .5 while keeping all
other parameters the same reduces the size of price increases while also reducing the overall
frequency of price adjustment. This combination of effects may seem surprising, so Figure 6
provides some intuition.
   This figure depicts slices of the policy functions that result from setting L1 equal to either
zero or .5. Both panels of this figure show the price that firms would charge as a function
of the price they inherit when log(a) is equal to .09. Recall that that overall mean of log(a)
is zero so these slices involves relatively favorable technology. Two differences are apparent
from this Figure. The first is that the model with L1 = .5 has two different reset prices
rather than one. A firm with L1 > 0 that is changing its price because it inherits a price
that is too low does not (unlike the case where L1 = 0) set the same price as a firm that finds
itself with a price that is too high. The reason, of course, is that such a firm suffers when
its price changes are large and is able to reduce these costs by making smaller adjustments.
   The second difference is that the band of inaction is somewhat longer in the case where
L1 = .5. In particular, firms with this L1 allow their price to climb higher before they
lower it. Particularly when a is temporarily high so that it is likely to fall (leading to a
higher desired price) small price reductions appear not to be that valuable. These firms thus
institute them only when their current price is further out of line from their desired price.
   The second of these features implies both that price decreases are less common (because
firms wait longer to institute them) and that price increases are less common (because it
is less likely that firms will use price increases to offset recent price reductions that were
followed by declines in technology). Price increases are also made less common by the fact
that price declines, when they occur, are smaller. On the other hand, the fact that price
increases are smaller means that a price increase is likely to be followed sooner by the need
to raise price again. This last effect, however, appears to be smaller than the other two since
the actual frequency of price increases also declines somewhat when L1 = .5.
   The net effect of all this is that the simulations in the first column of Table 2 do not satisfy


                                               19
the target criteria: the size of price increases is too small and the fraction of price increases
is too large. Keeping σa the same, one can fit the size of price increases by raising L0 . This
increase in the cost of changing prices leads firms to be even more unwilling to cut prices,
however, so that the fraction of price declines diminishes further. As already indicated, this
is not really drawback from an empirical point of view since sectors like magazines have
both infrequent price declines and large price increases. Still, if one wants all firms to have
the same parameters while keeping the fraction of price increases equal to 65%, one must
increase the variability of technology. The set of parameters σa and L0 that matches the two
target moments is displayed in column 2 of Table 2 and σa is now considerably larger.
      The need to increase σa as L1 is increased so as to keep the fraction of price increases
at 65% limits the possibility of conducting numerical exercises with large values of L1 . The
reason is that increases in L1 now require larger grids of prices, and the size of the resulting
grids quickly creates numerical problems. The result is that, for the values of L1 that I was
able to study, the effect of inflation on the size of price increases remains modest. This is
shown in column 3 of Table 2, which demonstrates that the size of price increases does not
change significantly when inflation is raised to 10% per annum.
      While the requirement that σa rise to ensure that prices decline when L1 > 0 limits the
scope of the analysis, it does have an interesting and potentially important consequence. This
is that the variability of the size of price changes is increased. This can be seen by comparing
column 2 of Table 2 with column 1 of Table 1, both of which fit the target moments when
inflation is 2.4%. The latter, however, exhibits a 15% larger standard deviation of price
increases and nearly a doubling in the (admittedly small) proportion of prices increases that
exceed 15%.
      Among the 12 products considered in Kashyap (1988), a substantial fraction had price
increases of less than 3% about 30% of the time while more than 10% of their increases
exceeded 15%. As he notes, the dispersion of price increases observed in his data represented
a challenge to models of fixed costs of changing prices.9 If firms sometimes raise their prices
  9
      See also Carlton (1986).


                                               20
by small amounts, and these small amounts represent the size of their bands of inaction,
then they should keep their prices constant only when they are subject to minuscule changes
in cost. This seems difficult to reconcile with the observation of large price changes, unless
costs are quite variable. But, if costs are so variable, why are prices typically constant
for such long periods of time. The fixed cost model thus seems inconsistent with long
periods of price rigidity that are interrupted by price changes of extremely variable size.
Some solutions have been offered, including that costs of adjustment vary randomly over
time (Dotsey, King and Wolman (1999)), that firms use a stochastic device to learn when
price adjustments might be appropriate (Woodford 2008), that customers’ tolerance of price
changes varies over time and firms know about this (Rotemberg (2005)), that some costs
of changing prices are “free” (Midrigan (2008)), or that costs of production are subject
to leptokurtic disturbances (Midrigan (2008) and also Gertler and Leahy (2006)). These
channels may well be necessary to explain the observations even after the role of L1 is taken
into account. Still, it is interesting that costs of adjustment that depend on the size of the
price adjustment can also contribute to the variability of price changes.10
       This effect is particularly stark in the case of the illustrative parameters considered in
column 4 of Table 2. By raising L1 so that it equals 1.0 and simultaneously raising σa to
the value of .19, one obtains significantly more volatile changes in the size of price increases.
In particular, the fraction of price increases smaller than 3% is now 13% while that over
15% equals 19%. Prices are now considerably less rigid, since they adjust on average every
3 months. While helpful in raising the variability of prices, this example does not succeed
in reproducing the findings of Kashyap (1988). In particular, Kashyap (1988) finds an even
larger proportion of small changes and longer durations of constant prices. Moreover, the
example in column 4 features many more price declines than are found by Kashyap (1988).
  10
    While this paper is concerned with price changes as opposed to with the response of output to nominal
disturbances, it is worth noting that these issues are closely linked, particularly in models like Golosov and
Lucas (2007). Midrigan (2008), in particular, shows a mechanism through which a higher variability of price
changes is connected with a higher response of output to monetary shocks. The idea is that the timing of
relatively large price changes is unaffected by monetary policy because these changes are due to idyosincratic
cost shocks. Thus, the observation of relatively large price changes suggests that, as in Calvo (1983), the
timing of many price changes is insensitive to monetary shocks.


                                                     21
    The role of L1 in this example can be clarified further by considering parameters that
allow a model with L1 = 0 to induce the same fraction of price increases under 3% and the
same fraction of price increases above 15% as those in column 4. The values of L0 and σa
that induce this, as well as the results of simulating a model with them, are displayed in
column 5 of Table 2. In some respects, these simulations turn out to be quite similar to
those obtained in column 4. In particular, the average size of price increases is the same and
the overall standard deviation of price changes is quite comparable.
    The two simulations do differ in one crucial respect, however, and this is the advantage
of considering a model with positive L1 : the simulation with L1 = 1 has prices that change
much less frequently. The reason for this is the (relative) reluctance of firms to lower prices
when L1 > 0. This cuts the frequency of price adjustment directly by reducing the number of
price reductions. It also cuts indirectly the number of price increases because price reductions
when L1 = 0 require subsequent price increases when a suddenly falls.


3     Preannouncing price increases
A rather different challenge to the idea that fixed administrative costs of changing prices
explain price rigidity is the prevalence of price preannouncements. In the case of non-
storable goods, preannouncements do not affect the volume of transactions and are thus a
matter of indifference to firms. Many goods are somewhat storable, however, and customers
who are informed that the price of a storable good will increase ought to attempt to purchase
in advance of this increase. Whether this is good or bad for firms depends on whether it
is more profitable to sell at the low price prevailing just before an price increase or at the
higher level prevailing thereafter.
    In Benabou’s (1989) model, selling at the high price is always more profitable because
demand has an inverse L shape so the firm’s reset price is also the profit maximum. In his
model, consumers benefit by buying in advance of price increases and firms dampen this
speculation by randomizing over the time at which they change their price. It follows that
firms would certainly be harmed by announcing this timing in advance.

                                              22
   In the Sheshinski-Weiss (1977) model, equation (7) with `0 = 0 implies that the firm has
a higher payoff at the price after the price increase than before. The reason is simple: if
increasing a price did not increase current profits, the firm would be better off postponing
the cost of changing prices until this does raise profits. Indeed, (7) implies that the profit
increase must be large enough to offset the benefits (in terms of the time value of money)
of postponing the increase slightly. This profit increase implies that the firm strictly prefers
selling at the new price to selling based on the same demand and the same cost at an earlier
price. Given a discount rate that equals the interest rate, the firm is also worse off selling
this quantity in advance.
   The Sheshinski-Weiss (1977) model is most easily interpreted as one where the good is
nonstorable. It can also be interpreted as one where the good is storable but consumers are
totally inattentive so they focus only on their purchases for current use and act as if they
had no idea what price will be charged next. Preannouncements can then be interpreted
as ways of telling consumers that it is in their interest to store the item. According to this
interpretation, preannouncements are bad for firms in the Sheshinski-Weiss model (1977).
   To gain some perspective on the features of actual preannouncements, I searched for
“price increases,” “announced” and “effective” in a publication that regularly carries such
notices, namely Business Wire. Confining myself to the period 10/02 to 10/04 and ignoring
the stories that matched my search criteria but were actually concerned with other issues,
I found 44 stories pertaining to companies who made announcements of price increases. Of
these, 14 (32%) announced price increases over one month in advance, 25 (57%) announced
them less than one month in advance but over 10 days in advance and only 5 announced
that these would affect shipments that would take place in the next ten days.
   Some of these preannouncements specify that the new prices will apply to shipments
beyond a certain date, so it is not entirely clear whether customers can place additional orders
and have these be shipped before the new price takes effect. Other stories are very specific
on this point, however. When Maxell, a large supplier of devices that store information on
magnetic media, announced on December 2, 2003 that the price of its main products would


                                              23
rise by about 10% in February 2004, it explicitly said it was giving advanced warning so that
Maxell customers would have “sufficient time to incorporate the pricing change into their
future business planning.” Similarly, the September 15, 2004 announcement by GrafTech
that it was increasing electrode prices explicitly stated this price increase would only apply
to orders received after October 1. More generally, announcements made with a large degree
of advance notice such as Kimberly-Clark’s announcement in March 2004 that it would
increase its Kleenex prices by midsummer give customers the capacity to respond.11
       I start by considering a simple variant of the model of Section 1 and show that, under
plausible circumstances, firms that act altruistically would indeed avail themselves of the
opportunity to preannounce price increases. This deterministic model also clarifies two
reasons why a firm with fixed administrative costs of changing prices is loathe to preannounce.
The first is the time value of money implies that consumer demand is reduced by buying
earlier. The second is that optimal pricing ensures that the price after adjustment is more
profitable than the one before. Nonetheless, there are conditions under which preannouncing
is desirable for firms whose adjustment costs are thereby reduced. After discussing these
conditions I turn to a model with random a, where the analysis is restricted to a calibrated
model based on Golosov and Lucas (2007). In particular, the analysis of stochastic a supposes
that costs of adjustment are fixed so that L1 = 0.
       Preannounced price increases are assumed to lead a fraction α of customers to consider
stocking up on the good one period before the actual price increases. Given that consumers
do not typically carry inventory and that future consumption is not substitutable for current
consumption, preannounced price reductions would not have an effect in this model, and are
thus ignored. Moreover, to simplify, I suppose that all customers act as if they are unaware
of impending price increases unless these are preannounced, so that a fraction α of customers
accumulates inventories in response to these announcements and the rest carry no inventory.
This is obviously an extreme assumption but provides a simple way to capture that not all
  11
     While the intertemporal substitutability of the purchase of prepared coffee might be subject to question,
it is interesting that Starbucks gave about 10 days notice before raising its prices in September 2004.



                                                     24
consumers respond to temporary price discounts.
   As suggested in Section 1, I now let the consumption of aware consumers at t, qt , be the
sum q̂t + q̃t where q̃t is purchased at t while q̂t is purchased at t − 1 for t. Since there are
no inventory holding costs, aware consumers buy at the time when it is cheaper to do so.
Their access to a perfect borrowing market at rate i implies that buying at t − 1 is cheaper
if pt−1 (1 + i) < pt . If this condition is met, they buy all their time t consumption in advance
and otherwise they buy it at t.
   In the model of section 1, prices are either constant or they change by a factor (1 + µ)J
where J is the period of price rigidity. Thus aware consumer only buy in advance in the
period right before a price increase and do so only if (1 + µ)J > (1 + µ)/ρ where I have
used (8) to substitute for (1 + i). This condition is fairly weak, however, so we would expect
consumers to want to stock up in this context. If consumers do purchase in advance, their
purchases for t, q̂t maximize

                                 θ (θ−1)/θ         q̂t pt−1 (1 + i)
                                    q̂t    + z̄t −                  .
                                θ−1                       pzt

Using (8), the condition linking the interest rate to inflation, this implies that aware con-
sumers buy
                                                  Ã              !−θ
                                                       pt−1
                                          q̂t =                        ,
                                                      ρpzt−1
and their welfare from buying the good is (pt−1 /ρpzt−1 )1−θ /(θ − 1).
   Ignoring costs of changing prices, a firm acting as if it were altruistic would behave as if
its real payoff at t − 1 from selling to these consumer were equal to
                                   Ã            !Ã             !−θ         Ã       !θ
                        θ−1+λ           pt−1          pt−1                 pt−1
                                                                       −c               .
                         θ−1            pzt−1        ρpzt−1               ρpzt−1

   Using the normalizations for N and c, the firm’s gain at t − 1 if it made all the sales for
t at t − 1 equals
                      Ã         !1−θ                Ã           !−θ         Ã      !
                         pt−1             θ−1            pt−1                   pt−1
                    ρθ                 −                             = ρθ W          ,    (17)
                         pzt−1             θ             pzt−1                  pzt−1


                                                       25
where the equality is based on (10). If, instead, it sells all its goods for t at time t, the
present value of its benefits as of t − 1 is ρW (pt /pzt ). Since ρθ < ρ, the expression in (17) is
lower when W (pt /pzt ) is equal to W (pt−1 /pzt−1 ). The reason is that, even if these W ’s were
the same, the firm would sell less in period t − 1 because consumers have to pay the real
interest rate to carry the goods forward in time. Moreover, in all the simulations I conducted
with the model of section 1, the value of W in the period before price adjustment was below
that in the period with the new price. Thus, if firms adjust their prices at t, W (pt−1 /pzt−1 )
is less than W (pt /pzt ). This is what one would expect given the analytic result in (7).
   This establishes that preannouncements that lead to advance purchases are not attractive
to firms that face administrative costs of changing prices (i.e. costs that are not reduced by
the preannouncement itself). The next step is to study whether a firm would be willing to
preannounce if it could thereby save some of its consumer’s, and thus indirectly its own,
regret costs. It seems reasonable to suppose that customers who are able to buy at the
earlier price should not experience any regret (and may instead experience additional utility
from having obtained better terms than less aware consumers). I thus focus on the case
where the preannouncement eliminates a fraction α of the regret costs (which are incurred
when the price changes at t, as before). In this case, preannouncing is worthwhile, so that
no equilibrium without preannouncements exists, if

                         ρ(W (S) − L(µJ − 1)) < ρθ W (S/(1 + µ)J−1 )                          (18)

   For the cases analyzed in Figures 2-4, this conditions is always satisfied. The reason is
that the adjustment costs L in these plots are depicted as fractions of revenue, which implies
that they are large relative to W . A key reason these adjustment costs appear so large is
that they are being compared to daily revenue. Because goods can only be inventoried for
one period, what is being studied here is whether firms would be willing to announce their
prices with enough advance warning to let people buy at the old price the goods that they
would consumer the next day. The cost of this is low relative to the cost of adjustment.
   It could also be argued that preannouncing price increases by one day would lead only


                                                26
a small number of customers to buy in advance so that α is small and the benefits of this
policy are small as well. Perhaps for this reason, preannouncements tend to involve somewhat
longer periods. To incorporate this into the model, I run it again while treating each period
as being a month long (i.e. by changing the period discount and inflation rates). For this
analysis, L1 is set equal to zero.
   In this monthly model (18) continues to be satisfied for products whose price changes
are equal to either 9.9 or 23.5%. On the other hand, the condition is violated for products
that change price every year so that their price change equals 2.4% when inflation is 2.4%.
The reason for these contrasting results is that L0 is substantially smaller when prices are
rigid for only one year. Once L0 is small, the firm has less to gain by preannouncing its price
increases.
   When condition (18) is satisfied, there is no equilibrium without preannouncements. This
means, however, that the equilibrium that does exist satisfies somewhat different equations.
The reason is that, when setting its new price, the firms has to recognize both that only a
fraction 1 − α of its customers buy in the first period and that a fraction α of its customers
buy in the last period for consumption one period hence. Thus, the firm’s present discounted
value of benefits from setting a price of S every J periods becomes

                                     D1 S 1−θ − D2 S −θ − ρJ (1 − α)L
                              U=                                                           (19)
                                                 1 − ρJ

where
                       J−1
                       X                         ³                                 ´
              D1 =           ρj (1 + µ)(θ−1)j − α 1 − ρ(J−1+θ) (1 + µ)(θ−1)(J−1)
                       j=0
                                                                                      
                     θ − 1 J−1
                            X                   ³                          ´
              D2   =            ρj (1 + µ)θj − α 1 − ρ(J−1+θ) (1 + µ)θ(J−1)  .
                       θ    j=0


   The optimization of U yields a reset price S equal to θD2 /(1 − θ)D1 and this can be
plugged back into (19) to obtain the optimal J. For small enough values of α, the resulting
optimum is very close to the one obtained without preannouncements, so that (18) continues
to hold and there are indeed preannouncements each time the price is changed.

                                                 27
   I now let technology be random once again and let at follows the process in (14). Prean-
nouncing price increases for t + 1 at t now has the obvious disadvantage that the firm knows
its marginal cost of production at t but does not know it for t + 1. To see that this is indeed
a disadvantage, imagine that the good is non-storable and that the cost of changing prices
for t + 1 is the same whether this is announced before or after the firm knows at+1 . It is then
obvious that the firm prefers to do it afterwards, where it still has the choice of charging the
price it would have chosen at t and will typically prefer to deviate from this choice.
   In spite of this disadvantage, consumer’s ability to store the good at t for consumption
at t + 1 can make preannouncing price increases more attractive when a is random. This is
true, in particular, when a firm expects its future costs to be higher than its current costs.
By preannouncing a price increase this firm induces more customers to buy while its costs
are relatively low, and this can be profitable. Notice that this preannouncement is only
attractive if a firm finds itself simultaneously with low costs and a desire to raise prices, a
combination which may not manifest itself very frequently. To obtain an estimate of this
frequency, I study how often this occurs in simulated settings.
   I focus, in particular, on firms whose environment is described by the model of section 2.
For these firms, I consider two issues. The first is whether they would like to deviate from the
equilibrium considered in Section 2 by announcing some future price increases in advance.
The second is the extent to which they do announce prices in advance in an equilibrium
model where this is possible.
   I first consider a deviation that is temporary in the sense that a firm considers making
one price preannouncement at t − 1 but plans to return to the optimal policy computed in
Section 2 thereafter. If the firm announces announces a price for t that exceeds (1 + i)pt−1 ,
                                               ³                    ´
                                                   pt−1
the firm increases its t − 1 payoff by αρθ W       pzt−1
                                                         , at−1         . In period, t, however, its one period
                                                     ³              ´                 ³              ´
                                                         pt                               pt
payoff ignoring adjustment costs falls from W            pzt
                                                             , at       to (1 − α)W       pzt
                                                                                              , at       . Then, in period
t + 1, the firm returns to the optimal policy and is free to make new price changes. This
means that the present value of its benefits as of t + 1 is V (pt /pzt+1 , at+1 ), where this value




                                                   28
is given by (16). This deviating firm thus announces a price pt that maximizes
                     Ã            !           (             Ã        !           Ã                    !)
                         pt                                     pt                    pt
             V̂t−1           , at−1 = Et−1 (1 − α)W                 , at + ρV                , at+1        ,
                         pzt                                    pzt                  pzt+1

where Et−1 takes expectations based on information available at t − 1. Equation (14) implies
that at−1 contains all available information at t − 1 about both at and at+1 , and this in turn
implies that V̂ depends on at−1 . Moreover, the value of pt /pzt that maximizes this expression,
which is denoted by Ŝt also depends exclusively on at−1 . Thus, deviating by preannouncing
a price is attractive relative to maintaining the plan implicit in (16) if
                           Ã              !                                  Ã                  !
                     θ         pt−1                                              pt−1
          (1 + αρ )W                 , at−1 + V̂t−1 (Ŝ(at−1 ), at−1 ) − V             , at−1 > ρL̂t .         (20)
                               pzt−1                                             pzt−1

where the adjustment cost L̂ for prices announced at t − 1 for t is paid at t. An equilib-
rium without preannouncements exists only (20) is violated for all combinations of at−1 and
pt−1 /pzt−1 that are reached in equilibrium. Figure 7 shows the left and right hand side values
of this inequality for several parameter values. Rather than depicting the left hand side for
all possible values of the relative price pt−1 /pzt−1 , it does so only for those relative prices
that make the left hand side as large as possible (for the given value of a). Not surprisingly,
this value obtains for relative prices pt−1 /pzt−1 that are close to the values that lead firms to
raise prices at t − 1 if preannouncements are impossible.
   Figure 7 draws the left hand side of (20) for the baseline parameters of Section 2 so that
L0 = .0285 and σa = .0528, and these are labeled as being the benefits of preannouncing
prices. The figure displays the effects of three illustrative values of α, namely 0, .065 and
.15. These benefits are upwards sloping in a because firms with low a face currently high
costs so they gain relatively more by instituting their price increases immediately rather than
postponing them, whereas the opposite is true for firms whose costs are temporarily low.
   The figure also shows several possible values of L̂0 . The simplest, of course, is L0 itself.
The line depicting this cost of adjustment is always above the benefit of preannouncement
when α = 0. This illustrates the result we have already discussed, namely that firms find it
costly to precommit to future prices when this does not reduce their costs of price adjustment

                                                       29
and when customers do not take advantage of such preannouncements. While the benefits
of preannouncement remain below ρL0 also when α = .065, this is no longer true for high
values of a when α = .15.
    This demonstrates the benefit of inducing consumers to stock up when a is temporarily
high. It is worth noting, however, that there was no actual equilibrium outcome where
firms would have gained from these preannouncements in repeated simulations of 10 million
observations. The reason is that firms very seldom, if ever, find themselves with prices that
are too low (so that they need to be raised) when a is high (so that costs are low).
    Figure 7 also considers the case where preannouncements eliminate the regret costs of
consumers who buy in advance, so that L̂ is equal to (1 − α)L0 . In this case, the maximum
benefits of deviating by preannouncing exceed the costs of doing so for a larger range of a’s.
Indeed, one can find such a’s even for α = .065, when such a’s do not exist if adjustment
costs are independent of whether prices are announced in advance or not. Also, combinations
of prices and a such that preannouncements are worthwhile are now observed in simulations
when α = .15. To understand how often firms would actually preannounce, one must
construct an equilibrium where this is explicitly possible, and I do so now.
    In such an equilibrium, pt−1 is no longer relevant at t if the firm has made a preannounce-
ment at t − 1. I thus use the notation pt− to denote the price that the firm has inherited at
t, where this equals pt−1 if the firm is free to change its price at t while it equals p̂t , the price
announced for t at t − 1 otherwise. The value function for the firm at t differs depending on
whether it is free to change its price for t or not. Let V u (pt−1 /pzt−1 , at ) denote the value in
the former case while V c (p̂t− /pzt−1 , at ) in the latter. If the firm does choose to preannounce
its price for t at t − 1 and if the size of preannouncement costs L̂t is independent of the size
of the announced price change, it announces the price that maximizes Et−1 V c (p̂t /pzt , at ). It
thus sets p̂t /pzt as a function of only at−1 , which contains all the information the firm has
at t − 1 about future a’s. Let Ŝ(at−1 ) denote this optimal real price. while V̂ c (at−1 ) is the
value of Et−1 V c (Ŝ(at−1 ), at ).




                                                 30
     At an optimum, V u and V c must satisfy
             Ã              !       Ã(                Ã     !                    )
         u       pt−            ∗            −θ  pt−
       V             , at
                       = max      (1 + αρ )W           , at + ρ(V̂ c (at ) − L̂t ) ,
                 pzt                              pzt
                                   (      Ã Ã           !            Ã              !      !)!
                                               pt                  u     pt
                                     max W         , at + ρEt V              , at+1 − Lt       (21)
                                      pt      pzt                      pzt+1
          Ã          !         Ã(                    Ã           !                     )
         c pt−               ∗               −θ          pt−              c
       V        , at   = max      (1 − α + αρ )W             , at + ρ(V̂ (at ) − L̂t ) ,
            pzt                                          pzt
                                   (          Ã           !            Ã              !)!
                                                pt−                  u    pt−
                                     (1 − α)W        , at + ρEt V              , at+1     .    (22)
                                                pzt                      pzt+1

In these equations, the max∗ operator gives the maximum of the two terms in braces except
when pt− /pzt is greater Ŝ(at )/(1 + i). When it is greater, this operator equals the second
element in braces so that the gains from preannouncing accrue only when consumers find
buying at pt− /pzt more attractive than waiting to buy at Ŝ. These equations can be solved
by value function iteration. This involves using the existing value of V c and V u at each
iteration, first to compute V̂ c , and then using (21) and (22) to compute the next round of
V c and V u .
     Once this procedure converges, one is left with two indicator functions I u (pt−1 /pzt , at ) and
I c (pt̂ /pzt , at ). The first takes the value of 1 when the maximum in (21) is the first expression
so that a firm that has not preannounced at t − 1 preannounces at t, and is otherwise
zero. Similarly, the second takes the value of 1 when the maximum in (22) is the first
expression so that a firm that has preannounced at t − 1 preannounces at t once again. One
is also left with the function F (pt−1 /pzt , at ), which gives the real price pt /pzt that maximizes
W (pt /pzt , at ) + ρEt V u (pt /pzt+1 , at+1 ) − Lt . Given these functions, it is straightforward to
simulate a sample path for pt .
     To carry out this simulation, one can use an indicator variable Ita which takes the value
of 1 if a price is preannounced at t − 1 and equals zero otherwise. The price pt is then given
by
                                    "    Ã        !        Ã        Ã           !!       Ã               !#
     pt                                     pt−1      pt−1          pt−1                     pt−1
         = Ita Ŝt (at−1 ) + (1 − Ita ) I u      , at      + 1 − Iu      , at        F            , at        ,
     pzt                                     pzt       pzt           pzt                      pzt


                                                  31
                     a
while the indicator It+1 is
                                                                                 Ã           !
                        a                                                            pt−1
                       It+1   =   Ita I c (Ŝ(at−1 ), at )   + (1 −   Ita )I u            , at .
                                                                                      pzt

   Using the same grid as in the case without preannouncements, the value and policy
functions for this problem were computed and used to simulate long sample paths for pt .
One key statistic that is informative about these sample paths is the ratio of the number of
times that Ita equals one (so that there is a preannouncement) to the number of times that
prices increase from t − 1 to t. This ratio is displayed for various parameter combinations in
Table 3.
   The first line shows that, consistent with the impression given by Figure 7, preannounce-
ments do take place in equilibrium for the baseline parameters with α = .15 when the costs
of adjustment are reduced by preannouncing the price. For these same parameters, there are
no observations with preannouncements when the costs of price adjustment are fixed. As α
is increased to .2 in the second line, even firms with fixed costs of adjustment preannounce
their price increases about one half of a percent of the time. Even then, the percent of
the time that price increases are announced is larger (about 2% of the time) if the costs of
adjustment is interpreted as a regret cost that is reduced by preannouncements.
   The third line continues to let α = .2 and considers the case where L0 = .125, the value
which eliminates price reductions in the analysis of Section 2. This higher L0 reduces prean-
nouncements both when adjustment costs are fixed and when they are variable. This result
stands in contrast to the results for constant a discussed above, where increases in adjust-
ment costs made preannouncements more likely when adjustment costs could be interpreted
as being the result of regret.
   One way of reconciling these apparently conflicting results is shown in lines 4 and 5 of
Table 3. This considers the case with a lower standard deviation of σa , which brings the
results closer to those of constant a. These lines show that, when σa = .03, an increase in L0
from .0528 to .125 raise preannouncements considerably (from half a percent to 2% of price
increases). The variability of a thus affects the dependence of preannouncements on the size


                                                         32
of adjustment costs.
    In the case where L0 is relatively low, preannouncements become more common as a
becomes more variable because firms are sometimes willing to raise prices when costs are
low, and it is attractive to preannounce such price increases. We saw earlier that, in spite of
a variable a, firms become unwilling to cut prices as costs of adjustment increase, and this
also makes them reluctant to raise prices when costs are low (since such price increases would
have a large chance of being followed by a desire to reduce prices). As costs of adjustment
increase, such price increases become less common, and the corresponding preannouncements
wane as well. Thus, the variability of a induces preannouncements with low Lo that become
less common as Lo rises.
    While this is not immediately apparent from line 3 in Table 3 the effects of increases in
L0 depend on the extent to which preannouncements reduce the size of adjustment costs.
In the case of regret costs that are reduced by preannouncements, it remains easy to find
parameters that lead firms to announce price increases in advance when L0 = .125. All
that is necessary is to increase α somewhat. Indeed, line 6 of Table 3 shows that such firms
preannounce about one third of their price increases if α is set equal to .3. By contrast, α
needs to be greater than or equal to .9 to induce any preannouncements by firms for whom
L0 is fixed, and the resulting fraction of price increases that are announced in advance is
infinitesimal. It equals .0001 for α = .9 and reaches .0003 for α = .999 (so that the firm
makes effectively no sales in the first month in which the preannounced price prevails).


4     Conclusions
When firm managers are asked why they keep their prices rigid, their predominant response
is that consumers react antagonistically to price changes (Blinder et al. (1988), Fabiani et
al. (2006)). At the same time, most of the formal literature deriving price rigidity from more
basic frictions has emphasized administrative menu costs that have no direct connection with
the psychological states of consumers. This paper suggests that this may be a mistake.
    Administrative menu costs have three implications that seem problematic, at least for

                                              33
firms whose prices are sufficiently rigid that they seldom lower them. These are that they
imply that the size of price increases should rise substantially when inflation rises, that
the volatility of price increases should be low and that firms would rarely if ever voluntarily
encourage their customers to stock up products by announcing the date of a price increase in
advance. By contrast, these three aspects of price adjustment seem easier to rationalize if one
interprets costs of adjustment as being due to the regret experienced by consumers as they
face price increases. Moreover, the notion that consumers suffer losses from price adjustment
fits well with the idea that consumers complain when they observe price increases. These
complaints are to be expected if, as in Rotemberg (2004), consumers regard it as unfair when
firms fail to act somewhat altruistically towards them.
   The model of consumer psychology considered here, and of the transmission of consumers’
psychological costs to firms, is still fairly crude. This reflects in part the lack of a consensus
on how to model social preferences and how to model emotions that are not directly related
to the amounts that people consume. Still, the suggestion that psychological considerations
of this sort may help explain empirical pricing practices will hopefully encourage further
research on these issues.




                                               34
5     References

    Benabou, Roland, “Optimal Price Dynamics and Speculation with a Storable Good,”
        Econometrica, 57, January 1989, 41-80.

    Bils, Marc, and Peter J. Klenow, “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,”
          Journal of Political Economy 112, 2004, 947-985.

    Blinder, Alan S., Elie R.D. Canetti, David E. Lebow and Jeremy B. Rudd Asking about
         prices: a new approach to understanding price stickiness, Russell Sage Foundation,
         New York, 1988.

    Calvo, Guillermo A., “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of
         Monetary Economics, 12, 1983, 383–398.

    Carlton, Dennis. W., “The Rigidity of Prices,” American Economic Review, 76, 1986,
          637–658.

    Cecchetti, Stephen G., “The Frequency of price Adjustment, A Study of Newsstand
         Prices of Magazines,” Journal of Econometrics, 31, 1986, 255-74.

    Dotsey, Michael, Robert King and Alexander Wolman, “State-Dependent Pricing and
         the General Equilibrium Dynamics of Money and Output,” Quarterly Journal of
         Economics, 114, 1999, 655–690.

    Dhyne, E., L.J. lvarez, H.L. Bihan, G. Veronese, D. Dias, J. Hoffmann, N. Jonker, P.
        Lunnemann, F. Rumler, and J. Vilmunen, “Price Setting in the Euro Area and
        the United States: Some Facts From Individual Consumer Price Data,” Journal of
        Economic Perspectives 20, 2006, 171-192.

    Fabiani, Silvia, Martine Druant, Ignacio Hernando, Claudia Kwapil, Bettina Landau,
         Claire Loupias, Fernando Martins, Thomas Mathä, Roberto Sabbatini, Harald
         Stahl and Ad Stockman, “What firms’ surveys tell us about price-setting behavior
         in the Euro area,” International Journal of Central Banking, 2, September 2006,
         3–48.

    Gagnon, Etienne, “Price Setting Under Low and High Inflation: Evidence from Mexico,”
        Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discus-
        sion Papers Number 896, 2007.

    Gertler, Mark and John Leahy, “A Phillips Curve with an Ss Foundation,” NBER Work-
          ing Paper 11971, 2006.

    Goette, Lorenz, Rudolf Minsch and Jean-Robert Tyran, “Micro evidence on the adjust-

                                            35
     ment of sticky-price goods: Its how often, not how much” Mimeo, 2005.

Golosov, Mikhail and Robert E. Lucas Jr., “Menu Costs and Phillips Curves,” Journal
     of Political Economy, 115, 2007, 171-199.

Gopinath, Gita, and Roberto Rigobon “Sticky Borders,” forthcoming, Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, 2008.

Heidhues, Paul and Botond Koszegi, “Competition and Price Variation When Consumers
     Are Loss Averse,” American Economic Review, 98, September 2008, 1245–68.

Kashyap, Anil K.,“Sticky Prices: New Evidence from Retail Catalogues,” Quarterly Jour-
     nal of Economics, 1995, 245-74.

Lach, Saul and Daniel Tsiddon, “The Behavior of Prices and Inflation: An Empirical
     Analysis of Disaggregated Price Data,” Journal of Political Economy, 100, April
     1992, 349-89.

Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reis, “Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A
    Proposal to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 117, November 2002, 1295–1328.

Midrigan, Virgiliu, “Menu Costs, Multi-Product Firms, and Aggregate Fluctuations,”
     mimeo, New York University, 2008.

Nakamura, Emi and Jon Steinsson, “Five Facts About Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu
    Cost Models,” Mimeo, Columbia University, 2008

Rotemberg, Julio J., “Customer Anger at Price Increases, Changes in the Frequency
     of Price Adjustment and Monetary Policy Rotemberg,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
     nomics, 52, May 2005, 829–52

—, “Fair Pricing,” NBER Working Paper 10915, November 2004.

—, “Behavioral Aspects of Price Setting, and Their Policy Implications,” NBER Working
     Paper 13754, January 2008.

Sheshinski, Eytan and Yoram Weiss, “Inflation and Costs of Price Adjustment,” Review
     of Economic Studies, 44, 1977, 287-303.

Woodford, Micahel, “Information-Constrained State-Dependent Pricing,” National Bu-
    reau of Economic Research Working Paper 14620, December 2008.

Wulfsberg, Fredrik, “Price Adjustments and InflationEvidence from Consumer Price Data

                                        36
in Norway 19752004,” mimeo 2008.




                               37
                             Table 1
          Inflation and fixed costs of price adjustment

                                      1       2       3      4
Inflation rate (% annual)            2.4     10.0    2.4    10.0
L0 (Fixed adjustment cost)          .0285   .0285   .125    .125
σa (S.D. of shocks)                 .0528   .0528   .0528   .0528
Overall adjustment frequency (%)     8.2     10.7    2.0     5.0
Fraction of increases                .65     .85     1.0     1.0
Mean price increase (%)              9.9     11.0    9.9    15.9
S.D. of price increases              .027    .024   .016    .027
Fraction increases < 3%               0       0       0      0
Fraction increases >15%              .04     .06    .002     .60




                               38
                                Table 2
Variable costs of price adjustment: the effect of varying the parameters

                                                1         2         3          4          5
Inflation rate (% annual)                      2.4       2.4       10.0       2.4        2.4
L0 (Fixed adjustment cost)                   .0285      .0390 .0390         .0017       6.2e−6
L1 (Slope of adjustment cost)                    .5       .5        .5        1.0         0
σa (S.D. of shocks)                          .0528       .097      .097       .19        .104
Overall adjustment frequency(%)                3.5       8.7       10.6      33.7        94.0
Fraction of increases                         .988       .65        .85       .61        .49
Mean price increase (%)                        5.8       9.9       10.6       9.5        9.5
S.D. of price increases                       .013       .031      .032      .072        .070
Fraction of increases < 3%                       0         0         0        .13        .13
Fraction of increases >15%                       0       .07        .12       .19        .19


                                 Table 3
          Proportion of price increases that are preannnounced

                       Parameters                       Proportion
                  α       L0      σa             with fixed with regret
                                                    cost         cost
           1 0.15        0.0285      0.0528          0          0.005
           2 0.2         0.0285      0.0528       0.0037         0.02
           3 0.2          0.125      0.0528          0           0.01
           4 0.2         0.0285       0.03           0          0.005
           5 0.2          0.125       0.03           0           0.83
           6 0.3          0.125      0.0528          0           0.32
           7 0.6          0.125      0.0528          0           0.91
           8 0.9          0.125      0.0528       0.0001           *
        Note: * denotes that convergence was not achieved in value function iteration




                                            39
               Figure 1: Continuous time model of fixed adjustment cost




                              Inflation in pz              Height=r l


                          W
Firm benefit




                    Se-   !           p*                   S              p/pz




                                           40
Figure 2: Size of price increases as one varies inflation and L1 . The case where prices are
raised 23.5% under 2.4% inflation




                                 50




                                 45

                                                                                    Cost= 35.6


                                 40
        Percent price increase




                                 35


                                                      Cost= 31.5+250*(µJ-1)

                                 30



                                                    Cost= 22.5+800*(µJ-1)
                                 25

                                                  Cost= 19.2+1000*(µJ-1)


                                 20
                                      2   4   6         8               10            12         14   16
                                                  Annual inflation rate (percent)




                                                             41
Figure 3: Size of price increases as one varies inflation and L1 . The case where prices are
raised 9.9% under 2.4% inflation




                                 20



                                 18



                                 16
                                                                   Cost= 3.23
        Percent price increase




                                 14



                                 12
                                                  Cost= 2.42+250*(µJ-1)

                                 10



                                 8                                              Cost= 1.44+550*(µJ-1)



                                 6                Cost= 0.63+800*(µJ-1)



                                 4
                                      2   4   6         8               10           12            14   16
                                                  Annual inflation rate (percent)




                                                             42
Figure 4: Size of price increases as one varies inflation and L1 . The case where prices are
raised 2.4% under 2.4% inflation




                                4.5




                                 4


                                                                    Cost= .051
                                3.5
       Percent price increase




                                 3                                         Cost= .041+50*(µJ-1)



                                              Cost= .031+100*(µJ-1)
                                2.5




                                 2




                                1.5           Cost= .011+200*(µJ-1)




                                 1
                                      2   4   6           8               10           12         14   16
                                                    Annual inflation rate (percent)




                                                               43
Figure 5: The effect of raising inflation from 2.4 to 10% on the size of price increases for
firms that differ in their frequency of adjustment at 2.4% inflation




                                                   8
                  Difference in price increases




                                                   6

                                                   4


                                                   2

                                                   0

                                                   -2
                                                        0   0.1   0.2   0.3      0.4       0.5       0.6      0.7   0.8   0.9   1
                                                                              Frequency of price adjustment


                                                   1

                                                  0.9
       Fraction of increases




                                                  0.8

                                                  0.7

                                                  0.6

                                                  0.5
                                                        0   0.1   0.2   0.3      0.4       0.5       0.6      0.7   0.8   0.9   1
                                                                              Frequency of price adjustment




                                                                                        44
                                 Figure 6: Policy functions with L1 = 0 and L1 = .5




                       0.1
Set price with L1=0




                         0



                       -0.1



                       -0.2
                         -0.2   -0.15   -0.1    -0.05           0           0.05   0.1   0.15   0.2
                                                    Inherited log real price


                       0.1
Set price with L1=.5




                         0




                       -0.1



                       -0.2
                         -0.2   -0.15   -0.1    -0.05           0           0.05   0.1   0.15   0.2
                                                    Inherited log real price




                                                            45
 Figure 7: Benefits and costs of deviating by preannouncing price increases




 0.04


0.035
                                                                           Benefits
                                                                          (α=0.15)
 0.03
              β L0
                               .935β L0
0.025         .85β L0
                                                                           Benefits
                                                                        (α=0.065)
 0.02
                                                             Benefits
                                                             (α=0)
0.015


 0.01


0.005


    0


-0.005


 -0.01
    -0.25   -0.2     -0.15   -0.1    -0.05     0      0.05        0.1   0.15      0.2   0.25
                                             log(a)




                                             46
