                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 THE DEMARCATION OF LAND AND THE ROLE OF COORDINATING INSTITUTIONS

                                           Gary D. Libecap
                                            Dean Lueck

                                        Working Paper 14942
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14942


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2009




Research support was provided by National Science Foundation through grants SES-0518572 and
0817249 and by the Cardon Endowment for Agricultural and Resource Economics at the University
of Arizona. We also acknowledge the exceptional research assistance of Trevor O’Grady, Adrian Lopes,
and Sarah McDonald and other research assistants Chris Brooks, Sean Small, Andrew Knauer, Maxim
Massenkoff, and Andrew Smithey, as well as the staff at the Ohio State Library. Helpful comments
were provided by Benito Arruada, Roger Bolton, Karen Clay, Robert Ellickson, Joe Ferrie, David
Haddock, Richard Hornbeck, Matt Kotchen, Sumner LaCroix, Anup Malani, Trevor O’Grady, Steve
Salant, Steve Shavell, Henry Smith, Peter Temin, and Ian Wills as well as participants in the NBER
(DAE) Summer Institute, 2008; the American Law and Economics Association Meetings, 2008; the
International Society for New Institutional Economics Meetings, 2008; ASSA Meetings, 2008; the
UCSB Occasional Conference on Environmental and Resource Economics, 2008; the Latin American
and Caribbean Economics Association meetings, and seminars at Yale, Stanford, Michigan, Hawaii,
UC Berkeley, UC Irvine, UCLA, Northwestern, Arizona, University of Chicago, Cornell, Oregon
State University, Hong Kong Polytechnic Institute, Peking University. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Gary D. Libecap and Dean Lueck. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Demarcation of Land and the Role of Coordinating Institutions
Gary D. Libecap and Dean Lueck
NBER Working Paper No. 14942
May 2009
JEL No. D02,D18,K11,K22,L23,L38,N51,N60,O13,O20,Q15,Q24,Q28,R14

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper examines the origins and economic effects of the two dominant land demarcation systems:
metes and bounds (MB) and the rectangular system (RS). Under MB property is demarcated by its
perimeter as indicated by natural features and human structures and linked to surveys within local
political jurisdictions. Under RS land demarcation is governed by a common grid with uniform square
shapes, sizes, alignment, and geographically-based addresses. In the U.S. MB largely is used in the
original 13 states, Kentucky, and Tennessee. The RS is found elsewhere under the Land Ordinance
of 1785 that divided federal lands into square-mile sections. We develop an economic framework for
examining land demarcation systems and draw predictions. Our empirical analysis focuses on a 39-county
area of Ohio where both MB and RS were used in adjacent areas as a result of exogenous historical
factors. The results indicate that topography influences parcel shape and size under a MB system;
that parcel shapes are aligned under the RS; and that the RS is associated with higher land values,
more roads, more land transactions, and fewer legal disputes than MB, all else equal. The comparative
limitations of MB appear to have had negative long-term effects on land values and economic activity
in the sample area.


Gary D. Libecap
Bren School of Environmental Science
and Management and Economics Department
University of California, Santa Barbara
Bren Hall 4412
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-5131
and NBER
glibecap@bren.ucsb.edu

Dean Lueck
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
Program on Economics, Law and the Environment
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721-0023
lueck@email.arizona.edu
“The beauty of the land survey…was that it made buying simple, whether by squatter, settler or
speculator. The system gave every parcel of virgin ground a unique identity, beginning with the
township. Within the township, the thirty-six sections were numbered …, beginning with section 1 in
the north-east corner, and continuing first westward then eastward, back and forth,….And long
before the United States Postal Service ever dreamed of zip codes, every one of these quarter-
quarter sections had its own address, as in ¼ South-West, ¼ Section North-West, Section 8,
Township 22 North, Range 4 West, Fifth Principal Meridian.” (Rectangular Survey in Linklater,
2002, 180-81)

“Beginning at a white oak in the fork of four mile run called the long branch & running No 88o Wt
three hundred thirty eight poles to the Line of Capt. Pearson, then with the line of Person No 34o Et
One hundred Eighty-eight poles to a Gum on the So Wt side of the run corner to persons red oak &
chestnut land.” (Metes and Bounds in C.W. Stetson, 1935, 90).

I. INTRODUCTION

        The demarcation of land is one of the earliest human activities. Demarcation began with

territories to hunting and gathering sites, as well as early urban settlements, and in modern societies

land is demarcated for residential and commercial use, for farmland, for offshore mineral

exploitation, for wilderness landscapes, and many other purposes. It is a fundamental institution for

defining property boundaries and location and in facilitating the market for land. While it seems

self-evident that a system of demarcating rights to land will have long-term effects on land use and

value, the literatures in economics and in law have not addressed these issues.1

        In this paper we examine the origins and effects of the two dominant land demarcation

systems: metes and bounds (MB) and the rectangular system (RS). MB has low initial setup costs,

but fails to provide coordination among agents, implying that there will be relatively higher

adjustment and transaction costs in the future. Under MB land is demarcated by local, natural

features (trees, streams, rocks) and relatively permanent human structures (walls, bridges,

monuments). Parcels are described independently by perimeter and linked to a specific survey within


1
  We find no legal or economic scholarship on this topic and even major property law treatises (e.g., Dukeminier and
Krier 2002, Merrill and Smith 2007) merely describe the dominant American system. Neither of the comprehensive
treatises on law and economics by Posner (2002) and Shavell (2007) mentions land demarcation. Holmes and Lee (2008,
2009) make reference to spatial issues regarding land use, but do not examine the underlying demarcation structure.


                                                         1
a local political jurisdiction. Individuals take little account of the spatial and temporal impacts of

their choices. Demarcation is vague and imprecise (“four paces from the most northerly rock

pile…”) and idiosyncratic. There are no uniform addresses, boundaries, shapes, sizes, or alignments.

        A centralized and coordinated RS is a network that has higher upfront costs of

implementation compared to MB because of systematic survey prior to occupancy. RS, however,

defines land ownership in a manner that reduces the subsequent costs of measurement, enforcement,

location, and exchange of parcels. Plots are described by a geographically-based address that is part

of a large, uniform grid of identical squares that define shape, size, and (directional) alignment. The

placement of each parcel is communicated by this network, even to those remote from the site.

Boundaries are positioned to avoid overlap and dispute and situated for the development of market

roads along property lines.

        The differences in the two demarcation systems are striking and visually apparent to even the

most casual observer. This can be seen in Figure 1 that shows aerial photographs of land along the

U.S. (RS) and Mexican (MB) border.2 The former reveals a uniform arrangement of plots and roads,

while the latter is characterized by a haphazard array of plots and fewer roads. What is also striking

is that these two systems persist as distinct regimes despite their establishment over two centuries

ago.

                                                 - FIGURE 1 HERE -

          The distinction between these two land demarcation systems illustrates basic, important

differences in how these institutions coordinate economic activity.3 Our analysis adds to the growing




2
 Thrower (1966) shows similar photographs and related schematic drawings.
3
Our analysis of coordinating institutions blends with Coase (1937, 1960) on bargaining, externalities and organization;
Williamson (1975) on internal organization to coordinate and avoid hold up instead of use of market transactions; and
Wiggins and Libecap (1985) on oil field unitization to coordinate development and avoid open-access losses.


                                                           2
literature on how institutions influence economic behavior and performance.4 We analyze parcel

demarcation effects in the 39 counties within and adjacent to the Virginia Military District (VMD) of

Ohio, controlling for soil quality, terrain, rivers, and individual age. The demarcation systems are

exogenous to the agents in the data. The VMD was granted to Virginia in 1784, prior to settlement of

the region and was governed by MB. The rest of Ohio was placed under RS following enactment of

the Federal Land Law of 1785. Ohio became a state in 1803.

        We find that as envisioned in the federal land law, the coordinated RS resulted in more

uniform parcel sizes, shapes, and alignment, relative to individualized MB, where the perimeters,

dimensions, and positioning of tracts of land were far more variable and haphazard. To illustrate, in

flat areas where terrain is not an issue we find that MB land parcels vary dramatically in shape, size

and positioning with respect to one another, as compared to parcels under the RS. The standard

deviation in the number of parcel sides, reflecting differences in shape, is almost 4 times greater; the

coefficient of variation of parcel size under MB is almost twice that found in RS where uniformity

was the objective, and the standard deviation of parcel alignment is an order of magnitude higher,

revealing the differences in the configuration of parcels under MB, compared to RS.

        Additionally, topography factored heavily into the demarcation process under individual,

uncoordinated claiming with MB relative to demarcation under the RS, where it played almost no

role. Further, with unsystematic parcel borders, property boundary and title disputes were much

more common under MB, with almost 18 times as many conflicts as in RS regions during the 19th

century. Lacking straight property boundaries for the coordinated placement of roads, MB also

retarded road investment. MB townships had over 24 percent lower road density than was found in

RS townships, all else equal.

4
 There is a large literature that we cannot cite completely but see Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson 2002; Acemoglu
and Johnson 2005; Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez-De-Silanes, and Shleifer 2004; Knack and Keefer, 1995;La Porta, Lopez-
De-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishney 2002; Platteau 2000; and North 1990.


                                                         3
        With regularly-shaped, sized, and aligned parcels as well as standardized property

descriptions and addresses, land markets were more active under RS. In our sample, there were 50

percent fewer conveyances in MB counties. All of this lowered land values per acre under the MB,

which were between 10 and 21 percent less than in the RS, depending on the sample and whether

township or parcel level data are used. And these value differences persisted for a long time,

suggesting important institutional path dependencies with long-term economic consequences.

        The paper is organized as follows. We begin in section II with a brief history of land

demarcation systems, focusing on the developments in the United States. In section III we develop

an economic framework for analyzing the demarcation of land under both metes and bounds and the

rectangular survey, and for analyzing the effects of the rectangular survey on land use, land markets,

property disputes and public land-based infrastructure. Section IV is an empirical analysis of land

demarcation, land markets, and property disputes. In Section V we summarize our findings and

discuss the implications of our findings --and their striking modern persistence – for economic

growth and its relationship to property institutions.

II.   A BRIEF HISTORY OF LAND DEMARCATION SYSTEMS

        Historically most land has been and is currently demarcated using indiscriminate or

unsystematic systems like MB (Brown 1996, Estopinal 1993, Gates 1968, Hubbard 2009, Linklater

2002, McEntyre 1978, Price 1995, Thrower 1966).5 The dominance of MB suggests that there are

substantive costs of establishing rectangular systems and capturing the broader gains made possible

by them.

        In the United States MB was inherited from England and is thus found in the 13 original

states. It also exists in Kentucky, Tennessee, parts of Maine, Vermont, West Virginia, and where

5
 An extensive discussion is found in Libecap and Lueck, forthcoming. The term ‘metes and bounds’ is primarily an
English term though we use it to describe an decentralized, topography-based demarcation system. Geographers (e.g.,
Thrower 1966) use the term ‘indiscriminant’ survey.


                                                          4
Spanish and Mexican land grants were prevalent in Texas, New Mexico, California, and Arizona.6

Louisiana recognized early French and Spanish descriptions, particularly in the southern part of the

state. Hawaii has a traditional indiscriminate system that can be classified as MB as well.

        MB in the United States ended with the enactment of the Land Ordinance of 1785 (Hubbard

2009).7 The law required that the federal public domain be surveyed prior to settlement and that it

follow a rectangular system. Land sales were to be the primary source of revenue for the federal

government, and the government bore the initial costs of survey to provide a uniform grid of

property boundaries that were standard regardless of location and terrain. The RS applied to most of

the U.S. west and north of the Ohio River and west of the Mississippi north of Texas as indicated in

Figure 2. Canada also adopted a rectangular system (called the Dominion Land Survey) for parts of

Ontario and the western Prairie Provinces, and it was introduced into sections of Australia (South

Australia), South Africa, and New Zealand (Powell 1970, Williams 1974).8

                                                 - FIGURE 2 HERE -

        The American rectangular system uses a network of meridians, baselines, townships, and

ranges to demarcate land.9 The survey begins with the establishment of an Initial Point with a

precise latitude and longitude. Next, a Principal Meridian (a true north-south line) and a Baseline

(an east-west line perpendicular to the meridian) are run through the Initial Point. On each side of

the Principal Meridian, land is divided into square (six miles by six miles) units called townships. A


6
  Texas was not carved out of federal land, in non Spanish land grant areas, the state has its own system of rectangular
surveys that are not linked to the U.S. system of meridians and baselines.
7
  Text at http://memory.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/r?ammem/bdsdcc:@field(DOCID+@lit(bdsdcc13201). It was replaced by
the Land Ordinance of 1787, the Northwest Ordinance that allowed for larger individual allotments. Text at
http://rs6.loc.gov/cgi-bin/ampage?collId=llsl&fileName=001/llsl001.db&recNum=173
8
  The Romans actually extensively used a rectangular system called the centuria quadrata that was started in the 2nd
Century BC. The Dutch also used rectangular systems in large drained areas. Both of these systems are still visible in
modern Europe. Libecap and Lueck, forthcoming, discuss these and other rectangular demarcation systems.
9
  Townships under the RS are grid locations. They are different from the political jurisdictions that are found in many
U.S. counties. The RS system is officially known as the Public Land Survey System or PLSS;
http://www.nationalatlas.gov/plssm.html.


                                                           5
tier of townships running north and south is called a “range.” Each township is divided into 36

sections; each section is one mile square and contains 640 acres. These sections are numbered 1 to

36 beginning in the northeast corner of the Township.10 Each section can be subdivided into halves

and quarters (or aliquot parts). Each quarter section (160 acres) is identified by a compass direction

(NE, SE, SW, NW). Each township is identified by its relation to the Principal Meridian and

Baseline.11 In this manner, properties are positioned relative to one another in a standardized way.

         There are 34 sets of Principal Meridians/Baselines—31 in the continental United States and 3

in Alaska, all shown in Figure 2. The rectangular system began with the first survey in eastern Ohio

on the Pennsylvania border at what is now called the Point of Beginning (Hubbard 2009, Linklater

2002). Proceeding westward across the federal domain, the system was made more uniform by

establishing one major north-south line (principal meridian) and one east-west (base) line that

control descriptions for an entire state or region. The meridians and baselines are defined by

longitude and latitude.12 The differences between MB and RS are summarized in Table 1.

                                                  - TABLE 1 HERE -

III. ECONOMICS OF LAND DEMARCATION SYSTEMS

         We develop an economic framework for a comparative analysis of RS and MB. We begin by

considering how patterns of land holdings would be generated under MB. We then consider the

potential gains from a centralized and coordinated land demarcation system that covers a large




10
   Some of the earliest surveys in the rectangular system had slightly different numbering systems but by the mid 1800s
this system was in place (see Thrower 1966). Canada’s system uses a slightly different numbering system but has 36
sections in a township (see Table 1).
11
   For example, the Seventh Township north of the baseline and Third Township west of the iTH Principal Meridian
would be T7N, R3W, iTH Principal Meridian.
12
   County lines frequently follow the survey, so most counties in the western two-thirds of the US that are highly linear
and often rectangular. Individual properties tend not to overlap county boundaries in order to designate administrative
jurisdiction and taxing authority See (Hubbard 2009, Libecap and Lueck, forthcoming, on political jurisdictions and
borders.


                                                            6
region. We analyze how the RS generates different ownership patterns and incentives for land use,

land markets, investment, and border disputes.

A. Individual Land Demarcation in a Decentralised System: Metes and Bounds

         To start we examine a case in which non-cooperative agents claim and enforce separate plots

in order to maximize the value of their land, net of demarcation and enforcement costs. Consider a

large tract of land available to numerous claimants, where the external boundary is enforced

collectively or otherwise, so that only internal and shared borders are considered by individual

decision makers. Each claimant can only choose and demarcate a single parcel. Within the external

borders, there is no coordination or contracting among claimants.13

         In this setting each potential claimant chooses the number of acres to claim and the length of

boundary to enforce in order to maximize profits net of enforcement costs.14 Formally each claimant

will solve

          max Vi = yi (ai , pi , ti ) − ci (ai , pi , ti )
           ai , pi
(1)
                     ∑
                         n
          s.t.           i =1
                                ai = A

where ai is the area claimed (e.g., acres); A is the total acres available to the n claimants; pi is the plot

perimeter (e.g., miles); ti is an indicator of the land’s topographical features (e.g., ruggedness) or

land quality; yi(ai,pi,ti) is the total value function that depends on the acres claimed, perimeter (and

implicitly, the parcel shape), and land characteristics; ci(ai,pi,ti) is a demarcation and enforcement



13
   We ignore the optimal time to claim under first possession rules which are associated with an open access resource
(Lueck 1995). Similarly we assume that a claimant obtains something akin to fee simple (perpetual) ownership of the
parcel and not just a one-time claim to a flow of output from the land asset. Also, it is likely that even with MB there are
legal and social rules (e.g., custom, norms) enforcing the right to claim and define rights to land using geographic and
topographic landmarks. So even here there is not complete decentralization but an institutional framework that supports
non-cooperative claiming as has been the case under most MB systems. In England and the United States, for example,
the common law courts developed doctrine on claiming and border demarcation.
14
   We lump demarcation and enforcement costs together though in practice there are likely to be distinctions such as
costs of surveying, costs of maintaining fences for livestock, costs of observing intruders, and so on. We also assume
that the claims are made simultaneously rather than sequentially.


                                                             7
cost function that also depends on a, p, and t. The non-cooperative Nash equilibrium solution to this

problem is the optimal size (a) and perimeter (p) pair -- ( ai* , pi* ) -- which implies a plot shape.

        Consider the simple case in which all claimants have the same productivity ( vi = v j , i ≠ j ) ,

the same enforcement costs ( ci = c j , i ≠ j ) , and value does not depend on topography or shape. In

this case the problem for each party is to simply minimize the border demarcation and enforcement

costs, constrained by the productivity of the land. If the land is perfectly flat, these costs might

simply be c = kpa where k is a parameter, so the question is what shape and by implication what

perimeter will minimize these costs for a give area? Alternatively the question is what shape

generates the largest area (and thus the lower enforcement costs per area) for a given perimeter. Put

this way, the question is the ancient and famous isoperimetric problem.15

1. Circles.

        The answer to the isoperimetric problem is that a circle will maximize the area for a given

perimeter, providing the lowest perimeter to area (p/a) ratio. Consider a circular plot with a four-

mile perimeter. The area will be 4 / π = 1.27 square miles and p / a = π .16 In contrast, a square parcel

with a four-mile perimeter will have an area of just one square mile and p / a = 4.0 .17 If enforcement

costs simply depend on the perimeter or the perimeter relative to area, we should see circular plots as

a Nash equilibrium, rather than squares.18 Panel A of Figure 3 shows the case where the total land

constraint is not binding and claimants demarcate identical circles. The ‘x’s in the figure denote a

valuable central point such as the water source or home site from which the circle emanates.

15
   See Dunham (1994) for history and analysis and http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isoperimetry for an overview of this
problem. In our notation the solution to the isoperimetric problem is the inequality 4πa ≤ p2 and only a circle will make
the equality hold. The literature on the economics of location (e.g., Lösch 1954) develops a similar model in which the
land owner’s objective is to minimize transportation costs to the central farm site.
16
   The area of a circle is a = πr2 and the perimeter is p =2πr where r is the radius.
17
   For a circle p/a = 2/r and for a square p/a = 4/s where s is the length of each side.
18
   To our knowledge circular parcels are rare. Libecap and Lueck, forthcoming, discuss circular plots used in Cuba which
created many problems of overlapping claims and boundary disputes.


                                                           8
                                                   - FIGURE 3 HERE -

         A more likely situation is that the total land constraint will be binding, and two plausible

circular patterns are seen in the remaining panels of Figure 3. Panel B shows the case where all the

land is demarcated in circles without any border overlap, with parcels only touching each other at

four tangency points. In this case a pattern of circular plots leave large areas of unclaimed land.19 In

fact the unclaimed corners in circular pattern amount to about 22 percent of the total tract.20 These

unclaimed open access areas would not only dissipate potential rents, but might create locales where

intruders could raise demarcation and enforcement costs. Another possible equilibrium with circular

parcels is shown in Panel C of Figure 3. It is possible that circles can lead to overlapping claims that

can lead to disputes and reduce incentives for optimal land use (Libecap and Lueck, forthcoming).

2. Regular Polygons.

         Regular polygons are a possible alternative to circles as equilibrium parcel shapes because

they have the potential to eliminate unenclosed waste between parcels (a problem for circles) and

because they are likely to be more valuable shapes because of their linear sides.21 Regular polygons

maximize the area enclosed by a given perimeter and thus have the lowest p/a ratio for any n-sided

polygon (Dunham 1994).22 In fact, only three regular polygons – triangles, rectangles (squares), and




19
   This type of pattern can be seen when flying over the western US and observing circular irrigated fields within the
rectangular system – the corners are dry and uncultivated (but of course not unclaimed).
20
   For a circle with a diameter of 1 mile the area is 0.785 square miles, or 21.5 percent less that a 1 mile square section.
If you count the corners as 4 separate plots then the total perimeter of the circular plot and the corner plots is 7.142 miles
compared to just 4 miles for a single square. This total is obtained from adding the perimeter of the circle (3.142 miles)
to that of the square.
21
   A polygon is a closed figure made from line segments joined together such that each line segment intersects exactly
two others. A regular polygon is a polygon with all sides the same length and all angles the same. The sum of the angles
of a polygon with n sides, where n is 3 or more, is 180(n - 2) degrees. A triangle comprises 180 degrees, a square 360
degrees, and so on.
22
   For example, a square (a regular polygon) has the smallest perimeter-to-area ratio of all 4-sided polygons (rectangles).


                                                              9
hexagons – that will create patterns, with a common vertex, that have no interstices (space) between

the parcels.23 These three shapes encompass the space and yield landscapes depicted in Figure 4.

                                                 - FIGURE 4 HERE -

         The choice among triangles, squares, and hexagons can be explored by further analysis of

parcel perimeter demarcation and enforcement costs. The perimeter to area ratio (p/a) generates the

following ranking from lowest to highest: hexagons, squares, triangles. Survey and fencing

(enclosure) costs are lower for plots with fewer angles and longer straight boundaries.24 This clearly

favors squares over triangles and hexagons. Finally, squares are more valuable for agriculture land

use because they allow for rectangular fields that produce more efficient by eliminating redundant

effort from excessive turns and travel in production and simplifying calculations for seeding and

harvest.25 The combination of these factors leads to our first prediction:

     Prediction 1: With homogeneous (flat) land and homogeneous parties (in both
     productive and enforcement ability) a decentralized (uncoordinated) metes and bounds
     system will yield a land ownership pattern of identical square parcels.

3. Non-planar Landscapes.

        Adding heterogeneous terrain and heterogeneous claimants (either in land use or in costs of

demarcation and enforcement) could yield a pattern of land ownership that would appear almost

random to an aerial observer. If demarcation and enforcement costs (surveying-fencing) and land

value depend on terrain, borders will roughly follow topography.26 We thus expect the non-

cooperative Nash equilibrium to yield a pattern of parcel sizes and shapes that depends on the

23
   Dunham (1994, pp. 108-111) discusses the proof of this proposition and notes that the Greek scholar Pappus sought to
explain the hexagon shape of bee’s honeycombs in terms of maximizing the area (volume actually) for honey storage.
24
   Fencing has always been costly. For discussion, see Johnson (1976, 160).
25
   Studies by Barnes (1935), Lee and Sallee (1974), and Amiama, Bueno, and Alvarez (2008) for example show
production advantages in rectangular fields where the operator works parallel to the longest sides of the field. Johnson
(1976, 153) describes early 19th century farming, illustrating why rectangular fields were optimal.
26
   Even if costs depend linearly on perimeter, a non-planar topography will increase these costs and alter shapes and
sizes. For example, consider a plot with a triangular ‘valley’ – 1 mile wide with a 90 degree angle in the bottom. Using
the Pythagorean Theorem (a2+b2=c2) this adds 0.41 miles (41 percent) more to the perimeter. Each side of the valley is
0.707 miles long for a total of 1.414 miles compared to 1.0 mile across the plain.


                                                           10
character of the land (e.g., topography, vegetation, soil quality) and of the potential claimants

(farming productivity, violence and monitoring productivity). Heterogeneity changes the cost

function and leads to non-linear parcel boundaries, multiple plots as agents enclose only the best

land, as well as unclaimed areas -- the so-called ‘gaps and gores’ described by many historians of

MB land systems. Thus we have a second prediction:

     Prediction 2: With heterogeneous land and parties (in both productivity and
     enforcement ability) a decentralized (uncoordinated) metes and bounds system will
     yield a land ownership pattern of parcels whose borders mimic the topography and
     vary in size with no particular alignment.

B. Land Demarcation a Centralized Rectangular System

1. Coordination and Collective Action.

        The previous analysis shows how land rights would be individually demarcated in an

indiscriminate system. Under MB there is no coordination among claimants beyond private

contracts. It is apparent, however, that there are potential gains from centralized demarcation

(Hubbard 2009). First, there can be enforcement cost savings from coordinating common borders,

eliminating gaps and gores. Second, matched surveys lead to similarly-aligned properties and avoid

oddly-shaped, unproductive parcels formed when unsynchronized parcels collide. Even with

homogeneous flat terrain and homogeneous claimants, where we predict square parcels, there is no

reason to expect these squares to be aligned in any particular direction without some sort of

convention or other coordinating device. Figure 5 shows a case where square parcels have different

alignments. As drawn, there is separate coordination within the two areas, as is often the case with

urban subdivisions. The problem of independent alignments, however, could be even more severe. A

north-south alignment requires either a strong social convention or centralized authority. 27

                                                - FIGURE 5 HERE –

27
  Sugden (1990) develops a theory of conventions (e.g., which side of the road to drive on) based on repeated game
theory which would be inapplicable in a MB system where claimants do not repeat the interaction.


                                                          11
        Third, a coordinated survey of heterogeneous land prior to allocation fixes individual parcel

borders and sizes, precluding the incentives of agents to “float” boundaries to cover the most

productive land. Such opportunistic border adjustments could result in costly, long-term boundary

disputes among adjacent properties as new information is revealed about land productivity.28

        Fourth, a common demarcation pattern provides information about the position of individual

parcels. This information reduces potential for overlapping, conflicting claims; allows for a common

address system and importantly, lowers transaction costs, promoting land markets. Hence,

coordinated demarcation is a public good network that will have greater value as it is spread over a

large region.

2. The Decision to Adopt a Rectangular System.

        The economic decision to adopt a centralized RS can be examined by comparing the total

value of land under both arrangements, which is the sum of parcel values less the costs of the

systems themselves. To do so, we assume the size of the region governed by a system is A acres,

split into n parcels, each of size a, so that A = na. In addition we incorporate a temporal dimension

to account for difference in system setup and continuation costs.

        Under MB the net value of the land is the sum of individual values and costs, less the

continuing costs associated with adjustments resulting from the lack of coordination, so that the total

present value of the land in the region is

                    T
                                                                                   
           V MB = ∫  ∑ ( viτ ( p*, a*; t ) ) − c0 (a*, p*; t ) − CτMB ( A, a*; t ) e− rτ dτ ,
                            n
(2)
                    0    i =1                                                      

where vi*τ = viτ ( p * , a * ; t ) is the optimal parcel value under MB at time τ, T is the time horizon, r is a

discount rate, c0(a*,p*;t) is the one-time demarcation cost function, and CτMB ( A, a *; t ) ≥ 0 are the

28
  Clay and Wright (2005) describe the process of moving or floating claims to mineral land during the early California
gold rush when the location of ore was uncertain. During this initial period mineral claims were uncoordinated under
MB.


                                                                12
continuing costs of MB as described above, including individual enforcement, border disputes, and

misaligned parcels. Under MB land demarcation and output begin immediately at time τ = 0 and the

continuing costs associated with MB are assumed to be increasing in the size of the region (A) and

rising over time (τ) as these problems accumulate.

          Unlike MB, RS is a coordinated framework, and the net value of land reflects its results.

Following Farrell and Klemperer (2007, 2009), we assume the network effects of RS are such that a

person’s or group’s use benefits others and that it further increases the incentive of others to use the

system.29 The network benefits are the public goods of common addresses, survey coordination, and

standardized, aligned and fixed parcel boundaries.

          These network and coordination benefits come, however, at the cost of a necessarily

extensive system. Under RS there are upfront costs of design, survey, and controlling access until

demarcation is completed. Because of these costs, collective action among independent agents is

unlikely to result in the network due to free riding and limited information regarding the size of the

subsequent benefits.30 It requires implementation by large land owners who then subdivide within

RS as we describe below.

          Individual land claimants within RS are assumed not to face demarcation costs as with MB.

There are only system costs to consider. Under these assumptions the total present value of the land

in the region governed by RS is

                                                 τ'
           T
                n                  
(3) V RS = ∫  ∑ viτ (a , p, n; t ) e − rτ dτ − ∫ ( CτRS ( A, a ; t ) )e − rτ dτ ,
           τ '  i =1                          τ =0




29
   Farrell and Klemperer (2007) use the term ‘adoption’ as they are concerned with a firm’s decision to choose a new
good with network effects. Baird, Gertner and Picker (1994) discuss how legal institutions (e.g., provide information,
coordinate agents) can solve collective action problems.
30
   Ranchers on the 19th century western frontier were able to coordinate herding and branding of livestock, but the
benefits were quite apparent, free riding could be policed, and the costs of describing pastures were less than the formal
demarcation of properties described here. See Libecap (2007).


                                                                   13
where viτ = viτ ( p , a , n; t ) is the optimal value for parcel i under RS at time τ where p / a = 4.0 under

the structure of squares; T is the time horizon, r is a discount rate; CτRS ( A, a ; t ) ≥ 0 is the cost of the

system that occurs prior to claiming and use. Network effects are incorporated into the parcel value

function, which is increasing in the number of parcels governed by the RS, where n = A / a .31 RS

system costs are increasing in A, but at a decreasing rate, revealing economies of size. These costs

are also increasing in topography.32 Because RS requires surveying before parcel selection, the time

horizon for generating value from the land begins at τ’ > 0.

         In this framework it is efficient to implement RS when V RS − V MB > 0. Comparison of these

two value functions is not easy, but some predictions can be generated under some simplifying

assumptions. First let V = ∑ i vi and V * = ∑ i vi* to simplify notation. Second, assume that the land
                                       n                     n




is flat (t = 0) and that the RS parcel shapes and sizes are the same as would be chosen under

decentralized MB ( a = a *, p = p*) then

                                                 τ'

                    ∫(                                (
                    T                                                            T
(4) V RS − V MB =        Vτ (n) − Vτ* )e− rτ dτ − ∫ Vτ* + CτRS )e− rτ dτ + c0 + ∫ C MB e− rτ dτ .
                    τ'                            0                              0




         This difference has four terms that illustrate the tradeoffs between RS and MB. The first

term comprises the network gains from RS over MB, beginning at the time the RS generates value

from more active land markets and improved production from rectangular fields. The second term is

comprised of the gains from MB that would be sacrificed during the period the RS is being

implemented, in terms of output under MB and RS setup costs. The third term is the foregone

individual demarcation costs under MB not required under RS, and the fourth term is the avoided

continued costs of MB over the time horizon. From (4) comparatives statics emerge: the net value

31
   We ignore the optimal choice of square parcel size and take it as a constraint that is consistent with our understanding
of the American RS.
32
   These effects are greater than with MB because squares are required.


                                                                 14
of RS will increase in the size of the governed land area (A), increase in the expected time horizon

(T), decrease in the time of RS implementation (τ). This leads to the following predictions:

         Prediction 3. A rectangular system is more likely to be adopted when a) agents (e.g.,
         national governments, land companies, suburban developers) can control large tracts of
         land, b) when the time horizon is longer, and c) when implementation can be rapid.

         These predictions can be further illuminated by considering forces likely to change the

parameters in the model. For instance, more rugged topography would reduce net gains from RS by

increasing the costs and time of RS implementation and perhaps even by reducing the losses of

suboptimal parcel shape.33 Similarly one might expect that a region where no incumbent demarcation

system existed would lower RS implementation costs.34 Finally, political authority and stability will

increase the expected time horizon and make RS adoption more likely.35

3. The Effects of a Rectangular System.

         The structure of the RS value function in (3) has economic implications once RS has been

adopted. Because parcel boundaries are standardized and aligned, there are fewer overlapping

borders and unclaimed gaps outside property descriptions. These factors imply another prediction:

         Prediction 4: There will be fewer legal disputes (and litigation) over boundaries and
         titles under the rectangular survey than under metes and bounds.

         RS should lower the costs of using the market, thus allowing plots to be reorganized as

market conditions change (Barzel, 1982). This should be observed as a greater number of

33
   It is possible, for example, that had the federal frontier been comprised of very mountainous terrain across the
continent rather than the Great Plains that the RS might not have been adopted in a broad scale. In areas of extremely
rugged terrain forcing a square grid on the landscape could lead to high costs for surveys, fence lines, and roads
(Johnson, 1976, 19). MB property boundaries tend to avoid such areas, thus reducing those costs. Indeed in some of the
most remote and rugged parts of the western United States the most obvious components of the rectangular survey
simply disappear from the landscape (Libecap and Lueck, forthcoming).
34
   Although we observe (and we are investigating) the purchase of agricultural lands for subdivision into suburban lots
we do not observe large scale reorganization of agricultural MB properties into RS. The value of the added gains may
not be sufficient to offset the uncertainty associated with the productivity of land to be included in any reconfigured
property. Agricultural lands typically are consolidated into larger holdings rather than subdivided as with urban lands.
35
   In the U.S. case, the federal government had sufficient authority to control entry prior to survey. Canada adopted a
similar system as we note earlier. But Australia, even with flat land, had limited RS. There may have been less ability to
constrain the movement of land claimants or as a colonial government aimed at convict placement, less concern about
capturing land value.


                                                           15
transactions, such as mortgages and conveyances per unit of land than under MB. This should also

increase the value of land and lead to more uniform sizes and shapes of parcels in a region. For

example, in a competitive market with access to a common technology, farms within homogeneous

regions should be similarly sized and shaped.36 This discussion leads to three related predictions:

        Prediction 5A: There will be less variance in the size and shape of parcels under RS
        than MB.

        Prediction 5B: There will be more land transactions under the rectangular survey than
        under metes and bounds.

        Prediction 5C: There will be higher (per acre) land values under the rectangular
        survey than under metes and bounds.

        The coordinated clarity of RS is also expected to have an impact on public infrastructure,

such as roads that require long rights-of-way. Contiguous linear borders should lower the cost of

assembling rights of way along parcel boundaries.37 This implies another prediction:

        Prediction 6: There will be more roads per unit of land under the rectangular
        system than under metes and bounds.

All of these predictions will be tested in the following section using a combination of statistical data

and historical accounts.

IV. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS

        In this section we test our predictions against a wide variety of data taken primarily from 19th

century Ohio where historical events created a landscape in which an area of MB demarcation is

surrounded by RS. The source of this exogenous institutional setting lies in the early history of

American public land policy. We begin by describing land demarcation in central Ohio where MB

is used in a region known at the Virginia Military District (VMD) and RS in the rest of Ohio. We

first examine the demarcation of land under MB in the VMD in order to test Predictions 1 and 2

36
   Even though the original plots are square, consolidation under RS might lead to unusual combinations of rectangles as
the plots are subdivided into quarter sections and so on.
37
   The value of straight roads and their benefits for surveyors and civil engineers is discussed by Johnson (1976, 167).


                                                           16
which posit a relationship between topography and parcel demarcation. Next we present a historical

analysis of the adoption of large rectangular systems as a test of Prediction 3. We then examine

legal disputes over property title and boundaries in the Ohio courts (Prediction 4). Next we examine

Predictions 5A-C that focus on the effects of land demarcation systems on land markets. The section

ends with estimates of how land demarcation systems affect road construction (Prediction 6).

A. Ohio and the Virginia Military District: Exogenous Land Demarcation Systems.38

           The state of Ohio was created in 1803 out of the Northwest Territory, the first part of an

extensive public domain held by the United States government. Prior to the creation of the federal

domain, colonies, and later states, had claims to these western lands. Virginia had one of the largest,

based on its 1609 colonial charter from England ranging to the Mississippi River and into the Great

Lakes region (Hubbard 2009). After the Revolutionary War, Virginia agreed to cede much of its

claims north of the Ohio River in return for retention of lands for its war veterans. Virginia reserved

a triangular-shaped region of 4.2 million acres land along the northern border of the Ohio River,

between the Scioto and Little Miami Rivers, known as the Virginia Military District (VMD). 39 This

area was administered under MB, following Virginia law beginning in 1784. In 1785, the federal

Land Ordinance created a rectangular system of land demarcation to be used on the rest of the

federal domain for conveying lands to individuals. As a result, the two major demarcation systems

came to govern adjacent and nearly identical lands in what clearly fits the definition of a ‘natural

experiment.’ The two maps in Figure 6 show the location of the VMD within Ohio, as well as the

adjacent counties included in the analysis.

                                                    - FIGURE 6 HERE -




38
     Hubbard (2009) provides a detailed history of this period and the demarcation of land.
39
     The state of Ohio comprises 26.5 million acres so the VMD is roughly 16 percent of the state’s area.


                                                             17
         Our primary region of analysis comprises 39 of Ohio’s 88 counties. 8 counties lie wholly

within the VMD and 5 additional counties have 50 percent or more of their territory in the region. Of

the 26 counties that surround them, 17 are completely outside the VMD, and 9 have less than 50

percent of their territory within it. Table 2 provides comparative statistics on various natural and

economic characteristics for the VMD and surrounding counties. In the table, VMD counties are

those with at least 50 percent of their area within the VMD and the remaining counties make up the

surrounding counties group. The table shows that the VMD and adjacent counties are virtually

identical except for their land demarcation systems. Indeed, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that

two areas have the same land characteristics (e.g., soil quality, terrain ruggedness) and initial

patterns of human settlement (e.g., place of birth, occupation).40

                                                  - TABLE 2HERE –

         Under MB within the VMD, Virginia’s military veterans secured warrants for land according

to a formula that gave larger acreages to those with higher rank and longer terms of service

(Hubbard 2009).41 Most warrants were subsequently sold to settlers, land developers, or

speculators.42 Warrant holders could claim the requisite amount of land by making an “entry” or

“location” and marking its perimeter on trees and other natural or human monuments (Thrower

1966, 43). The entry did not have to be contiguous, could be of virtually any shape, and could be

split into multiple plots to cover only the best lands. The parcel was then described in a “call” filed at

the local land office, often the county seat. Once the entry and call were recorded, the claimant hired




40
   Further, because Virginia chose the VMD prior to the implementation of the RS one could argue that the land was
perceived of higher quality than adjacent territory which Virginia might have alternatively chosen. This selection bias
would actually make estimates of the effects of land demarcation biased against the rectangular system.
41
   Once a certificate of rank and service was presented to a court of law in Virginia for authorization, a warrant was
issued by the Virginia Land Office in Richmond, either to the veteran or his heir or assignee.
42
   This meant that land was quickly transferred into the hands of those who had a comparative advantage in using the
land and not held by veterans who were often not familiar with the Ohio land or its use.


                                                           18
a surveyor to survey the parcel boundaries and calculate the size of the entry. Upon filing the survey

at the land office, title or patent was granted to the warrant holder.

        By contrast, the federal land surrounding the VMD was allocated and demarcated according

to RS. The system varied somewhat in its early years, but the general practice across Ohio was

consistent (Hubbard 2009, Pattison 1957, White 1983).43 An initial point was chosen and then two

controlling survey lines were established, a (principal) meridian and accompanying baseline. The

land was then surveyed, often marking out boundaries of the townships with monuments or notches

on trees to establish the grid. In Ohio the surveys were conducted both by private parties and

government surveyors, but later government surveyors dominated. Land was then sold to

individuals or firms, sometimes in large blocks, but typically in sections or quarter-section tracts. All

land in these square units was included in the sale, regardless of quality, making it impossible to

leave gaps and gores of unclaimed land under the RS as was done under MB.

B. Data and Empirical Strategy

        The data used in the analysis are described in the Data Appendix, available on request.

Observations include information on land use outcomes (e.g. land values, conveyances, roads),

demarcation systems (MB or RS), parcel characteristics (e.g. shape, size, alignment), natural

parameters (e.g., topography, soils, river distance), and economic parameters (e.g., market distance,

population, roads). The data are at the individual, parcel, township, and county levels and are from

the U.S. population and agricultural census schedules, various Ohio state records, and Ohio court

opinions for the 19th century, as well as contemporary USGS and USDA measurements. Our focus

on the early period of settlement allows us to examine land demarcation effects in a relatively simple

43
   After the initial survey of the Seven Ranges on the Pennsylvania border there was a lag in implementation because of
policy debates and Indian conflicts in the Ohio portion of the Northwest Territory. Some of the land was sold in large
blocks and surveyed by the new owner under federal guidelines and other lands were surveyed by government surveyors.
Hubbard (2009) discusses the evolution of the RS arguing that the system is not complete, and in its current form, until
the First Principle Meridian in 1819 is established on what is now the Ohio – Indiana border.


                                                          19
economic setting where the institutions differ at their points of origin. Table 3 shows the variable

definitions and summary statistics for the six different data sets used in our empirical analysis.

1. Data.

          Part A of Table 3 presents summary statistics for the 153 townships that are found within the

VMD. This sample is used to estimate the shape, size, and alignment of parcels demarcated under

MB. Parcel shape data come from a digitized a map of the initial land parcels in Ohio as chronicled

by Sherman (1922). We have two measures of shape, perimeter-area ratio and number of sides. The

perimeter-area ratio comes directly from our model and is measured as p/√a to keep units

comparable. A perfect square would have a value of 4.0 and the data show a township mean of 4.64,

and the minimum value of 4.06 is close to a square. Parcel sides (s) come from the same digitized

data base. The data show a mean of 5.97 and a minimum of 4.08, again close to a square. These data

indicate that even under MB some townships had parcels with shapes that on average are nearly

square.

          Alignment variation captures the effects of ruggedness in disrupting parcel placement when

individuals were free to position their property. Perfectly-aligned parcels imply a standard deviation

of alignment to equal zero. We see that this is generally not the case in VMD townships as the mean

of the sample shows a standard deviation of alignment of 10.5 degrees. This is slightly lower than

13, the value we would expect if the position of parcels was completely random.44 In contrast, the

maximum value of 18.3 is greater than 13. This suggests that some townships may have

homogenous parcel alignment within smaller groups, but a relatively sharp contrast in angles

between groups (see Figure 5). Turning to plot size, the dimensions of a parcel were determined by

the acreage granted by the land warrant. The size data in the table reveal that parcels were relatively


44
  Since we do not expect any one alignment angle to be more likely than another, we assume alignment angles follow a
continuous uniform random distribution with the range [0,45]. The standard deviation of this distribution is 12.99.


                                                         20
large in the VMD, ranging from 139 acres to nearly 2,500 acres. Finally, topography is measured by

RUGGEDNESS, an index measure of slope, varying from 0 (flat) to 1 (perpendicular cliff). As shown

by the values in the table, there is terrain variation, but the VMD is relatively flat.

                                                - TABLE 3 HERE –

       Part B summarizes data from 437 townships in the 39 county VMD region. We use these

data to estimate parcel alignment, shape, and size differences as well as road densities in the two

demarcation systems. In this dataset and most others, we measure demarcation as the percent of the

jurisdiction governed by MB (i.e., % VMD). The table shows on average 31 percent of township

area in the sample is under metes and bounds. RUGGEDNESS is used as well as various measures of

distance to markets.

       Part C summarizes a data sample from the 437 townships in the 39 county VMD region with

768 observations for individual farmers drawn from the 1850 and 1860 manuscript censuses. These

data are used to estimate land values and include all the township variables shown in part B as well

as variables on land quality (PRIME FARMLAND) and demographics (LANDOWNER AGE, VIRGINIA

BORN). All farmland value data are in 1860 dollars, and the mean value is $35.37 per acre.

       Part D summarizes a sample of data from 39 counties in the VMD region and is used to

estimate land transactions as measured by mortgages and conveyances, reported by the State of Ohio

in 1858 and 1859. We report the mean values for those two years by county, and on average there

were 678 mortgages and 288 conveyances. In 1860 Census reports an average of 1,925 farms per

county. In addition to demarcation and topography we also include data on the agricultural market

(e.g., number of farms, farm acreage, farm value).

       Part E summarizes a sample of data from 456 parcels (farms) from Warren County that is

used to estimate land values in a small, relatively homogenous area split into MB and RS. These data




                                                    21
are from 1867 parcel maps of Warren County matched with 1870 Census information to give the

most micro level information on the impact of demarcation on land value. Because we can determine

whether or not a parcel is in the VMD, a dummy variable is used for land demarcation. In our

sample 42 percent of the parcels are in the VMD and thus governed by MB. Most of the independent

variables are the same as in Part C although actual farm observations. RUGGEDNESS is the township

value where the farm is located.

2. Empirical Strategy.

       We follow a consistent empirical strategy to identify the determinants of parcel demarcation

under MB and to identify the effects of demarcation on economic outcomes.

       The estimating equation for analysis of the impact of terrain on demarcation in the VMD is

(5)    yi = αi + Riβ + εi,

where yi measures average shape, size, or standard deviation of alignment for parcels in the ith

township; Rs is township i RUGGEDNESS; β is an unknown coefficient; and εt is a random error term.

       For the estimates of land use outcomes we use various tests so the specific level of

aggregation and set of variables depend on the samples. For example, for township-level analysis

we use township averages and the percent of township land within the VMD to denote land

demarcation. The basic estimating equation is of the following form:

(6)     yi = αi + Xiβ + MBiθ + εi,


where yi is an outcome measure (e.g., land value, conveyance, road) for the ith observation (parcels,

townships, counties); Xi is a row vector of exogenous variables (e.g., land quality, topography,

market variables), and a slope coefficient β is a column vector of unknown values; MBi is the land


demarcation variable (VMD) for observation i, θ is an unknown coefficient; and εs is a random error

term. For market activities, our predictions imply that θ < 0, or that MB will reduce outcome values


                                                  22
such as land values, land transactions, and roads. We estimate (5) and (6) using both OLS and

techniques that correct the standard error for spatial dependence.45 When using aggregate data (e.g.,

townships) we weight the values by the number of parcels in the township or by percent farmland in

the relevant county.

C. Land Demarcation under Metes and Bounds in the Virginia Military District

         Individuals had the flexibility under MB to determine the shape, size, and alignment of their

properties. Predictions 1 and 2 state that under MB the demarcation of parcels will depend on the

topography of the land. In relatively flat, homogeneous terrain we predict squares, and in relatively

rugged terrain, where land is heterogeneous we predict that the parcel shapes, sizes, and alignment

will follow local features, such as ridges and rivers that influence the costs of demarcation c(p/a;t)

and the (productivity) value of the land v(p/a;t). We test these predictions by examining the

relationship between the topography of the land and the size, shape, and alignment of the original

MB-determined parcels in the VMD. For comparison with RS, we also expand the sample to

include townships in the adjacent counties. Absent the size, shape, and alignment constraints of the

RS, we anticipate greater variation in size, alignment, and shape in the VMD. These exercises test

the ability of the RS to force uniformity.

1. Size, Shape, and Alignment of Parcels within the VMD.

         We begin the analysis with visual inspection of topography and parcel size and shape within

the central VMD. Figure 7, Panel A shows a section of flat land in Highland and Clermont

counties.46 It is evident that the parcels are rectangular and even square as predicted. In the VMD

there were large sections of land that had been assembled by speculators who purchased warrants

45
   We use Conley’s (1999) cross-sectional model which corrects for spatial dependence of an unknown form. This
model assumes that spatial dependence will decline as the distances between observations increases. Without having
information on the nature and potential causes of spatial correlation in our study, Conley’s spatial error model appears
most appropriate.
46
   Mean RUGGEDNESS = .027, St. Dev. = .03 for Highland , and Mean = .034, St. Dev. = 0.43. for Clermont.


                                                            23
from veterans. The pattern shows evidence of coordinated surveying, where groups of tracts are

aligned in the same directions, but not typically north-south as in the RS. This pattern is consistent

with Prediction 3 regarding the incentives to provide systematic survey that existed when large tracts

of land were owned. Because we do not have original ownership information, we cannot directly test

that prediction for the VMD. Outside a particular large tract, however, surveys run in different

directions, and whenever groups of coordinated parcels abutted one another, the configurations

clashed, resulting in oddly-shaped and perhaps, unusable plots of land (see also Figure 5).

           In contrast Panel B shows a similarly sized area in Pike County (eastern VMD) where the

terrain is more rugged. 47 Here the parcels tend to have much more variation in parcel shape and

size, with the boundaries often following land contours and other natural features. There is no

evidence of coordinated parcel boundary alignment in some areas as seen in Panel A.

                                                   - FIGURE 7 HERE –

           Our model predicts that under MB parcel shape will tend to deviate more from a square,

adding more sides, and that the perimeter-area ratio will become larger as the land becomes more

rugged. To test these predictions 1 and 2 we estimate (5), the estimation results are presented in

Table 4 and use data from 153 townships in the VMD (Table 3, Part A).

                                                    - TABLE 4 HERE –

           As shown in all specifications terrain RUGGEDNESS has a statistically significant positive

effect on the average parcel perimeter-area ratio, number of sides, and standard deviation of

alignment within the VMD townships. RUGGEDNESS also has a significantly negative effect on

average parcel size. To illustrate, we compare the predicted parcel characteristics with RUGGEDNESS

at its mean and maximum values from our sample.48 Doing so increases the average number of


47
     Mean RUGGEDNESS = .088, St. Dev. = .067 for Pike County.
48
     In general, our sample is of rather flat terrain. The mean value is .025 and the maximum is .141. Even the maximum


                                                            24
parcel sides from 6.6 to 9.2; the perimeter-area ratio from 4.8 to 5.9; 49 the standard deviation of

alignment from 11.3 to 14.6; and reduces the average parcel size from 585 to 160 acres. These

results suggest that as predicted under MB, property boundaries and size are molded by topography.

Parcel shapes become less and less like squares; more haphazardly positioned; and more variable in

size. Panel B of Figure 7 illustrates these patterns.50

2. Size, Shape, and Alignment of Parcels: MB versus RS.

         To examine the effects of the two demarcation systems on parcel shape, alignment, and size

we modify (5) and estimate use the following equation:

(7)      yi = αi + Riβ1 + %VMDβ2 + (%VMD*R)iβ3+ εi

where yi is the standard deviation of parcel alignment, coefficient of variation of parcel size, or

standard deviation of our two parcel shape measures for the ith township; Ri is RUGGEDNESS for

township i; β is an unknown coefficient; VMD is the portion of the township area under MB, and εt is

a random error term. We use data from all 437 townships in the 39 counties within and adjacent to

the VMD (Table 3, part B). We anticipate that parcels under MB will have a larger standard

deviation of shape and alignment and a greater coefficient of variation of size compared to a

coordinated RS.51 We also expect RUGGEDNESS to amplify these effects within MB areas where

agents were not constrained in the configuration of their parcels as was the case within RS areas.

Accordingly, we include an interaction term. The estimates are reported in Table 5.

ruggedness found in our sample is only moderately sloped compared to other parts of the county.
49
   For an 841 acre parcel (the sample average), perimeter-area ratios of 4.8 and 5.4 translate into boundary perimeters of
about 5.5 and 6.2 miles respectively.
50
   The major scholar of Ohio lands, William Peters (1930, 30, 135) pointed to the many gaps of vacant land found
between parcels in the VMD. He noted that by 1852 when all military warrants had been used for land claiming, 76,735
acres of land remained unclaimed. To find some legal use of the properties, An Act of Congress transferred unlocated
and unsurveyed land in the VMD to the state of Ohio in 1871.
51
   We use the coefficient of variation instead of the standard deviation for the analysis of parcel size. As shown earlier
under individual claiming, more rugged terrain encourages substantially smaller plots on average. Scaled down plot
sizes in these areas likely lead to smaller standard deviations that reflect the decreasing mean values rather than an
increase in homogeneity. The coefficient of variation, however, is normalized by the mean and better isolates the effect
of our regressors on parcel size variation. This problem is less of concern for parcel alignment, parameter/area ratio and
number of parcel sides, where we use standard deviation..


                                                            25
                                                 -    TABLE 5    HERE –

        The coefficients on the VMD variable are positive and significant at the 1 percent level. By

setting RUGGEDNESS equal to zero we can interpret the impact demarcation systems have on shape,

alignment, and size in flat terrain.52 We find the standard deviation of the parcel perimeter-area ratio

is more than doubled under MB; the standard deviation of the number of parcel sides is almost 4

times greater; the standard deviation of parcel alignment is an order of magnitude higher; and the

coefficient of variation of parcel size under MB is almost twice that in RS.

        We also generally find a positive effect for the interaction term as predicted. Because an

interaction term is present, the effects of the demarcation system and RUGGEDNESS are conditional

on the value of the other variable. We can interpret the effect that RUGGEDNESS has on shape,

alignment, and size in the RS and MB by setting the VMD variable equal to zero and one

respectively. As the RS system would imply, RUGGEDNESS has no statistically-significant impact on

the variation of parcel shape or size under RS, although there is evidence that it did increase the

standard deviation of parcel alignment.53 In contrast, we find that the effect of RUGGEDNESS on

variation of parcel shape, however measured, is around an order of magnitude greater under MB;

that its impact on the variation in parcel alignment is about four times larger; and the effect of

topography on variation in parcel size is around seven times as large in the VMD compared to the

RS. These results reaffirm the claim that terrain factored heavily into the demarcation process under

individual, uncoordinated MB claiming relative to demarcation under the RS.




52
   If R = 0 then Y = α + %VMD β2 + ε
53
  The early RS surveying was not perfect in aligning with true north and as we point out above, there were several RS
efforts in Ohio as the new federal survey was put into place. Topography appears to have had some impact. For instance,
see McEntyre (1978, 49-50, 105-9) for discussion of early RS surveys in Ohio to adjust to true North and to
accommodate meanders of streams and other topographical barriers.


                                                          26
D. Large Land Owners and Incentives to Establish a Rectangular System

       Prediction 3 states that large landowners or sovereigns are more likely to adopt a centralized

rectangular system because it provides the public goods of systematic location of properties,

coordinated survey, reduced title conflict, and greater infrastructure investment. We also note that

there are higher initial costs than with the individualized MB. These notions suggest that the RS

would be adopted only when these benefits could be internalized to offset the costs of systematic

survey. Governments, large land grantees or land speculators who planned to subsequently subdivide

and sell, as well as suburban real estate developers are examples of cases where the RS would be

used. These owners would capture the resulting higher land values.

       In the case of the Land Ordinance of May 20, 1785 for disposing lands in the western

territory Thomas Jefferson and others in the Continental Congress pushed for the establishment of

the RS (Linklater, 2002, 116, 117; Ford, 1910, 55; Treat, 1910, 16; Pattison, 1957, 87; Webster,

1791, 493-95; White, 1983, 9). Congress rejected the pervasive Virginia method of MB and instead

called for survey before occupation with properties to be marked in squares, aligned with each other,

“so that no land would be left vacant,” to prevent overlapping claims, and to simplify registering

deeds (Linklater, 2002, 68-70; White, 1983, 9). Under this approach the U.S. could sell land to raise

money. Squares also reduced survey costs because only two sides of each township and smaller

parcels had to be surveyed (Burnett, 1934, 563). Alexander Hamilton emphasized: “The public lands

should continue to be surveyed and laid out as a grid before they were sold.” Prior survey was seen

as a means generating information about the value of federal lands before sale (Taylor, 1922, 12).

       Similar practices were followed by other large land owners. Although MB was common in

New York, in the northwestern part of the state large tracts of land were secured by land developers

who then divided their holdings into townships to be surveyed before sale. In subdivisions, such as




                                                  27
Cooper’s tract, a rectangular grid was used dividing the lands into 100 square lots of up to 600 acres

each (Price, 1995, 232-6). Additionally, the Holland land company bought 3.3 million acres and

used a grid to promote the rapid “lucrative” resale of subdivided properties. The chief surveyor ruled

out MB: "We admit of no zigzag lines on this purchase, where we can avoid it consistent with the

Interest of our Principals” (Wycoff, 1986, 142-3). The grid was simple and regular, and viewed as

the most efficient, least expensive way of selling large amounts of land (Linklater (2002, 81).54

           Finally, urban areas developed under land grants or subdivisions, like Philadelphia,

Charleston, and New York were placed into grids to promote commercial activity (Ford, 1910, 13).

By contrast, Washington D.C., which was supposed to be a city of political administration, rather

than of commerce, was designed with stars and circles (Linklater, 2002, 116-17,187).55

E. Property Disputes under the Two Demarcation Systems.

           We see that controlling for topography, properties demarcated under MB have greater

variation in shape, size, and alignment than those demarcated under RS. These conditions and the

claiming process described below suggests that there would be more legal disputes over property

boundaries and titles under MB than under RS (prediction 4). To test this prediction we examine

historical accounts and 19th century case law in Ohio courts.

1. Historical Accounts.

           The historical literature repeatedly references conflicts over boundaries and titles in MB

areas. Richard Anderson, who was a surveyor of military bounty or warrant lands in the VMD and

Kentucky in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, reported that the practice of using ‘perishable’ or

moveable landmarks such as trees and stones, allowed settlers to pick the best land by adjusting the




54
     Other examinations of land company practices are found in Ford (1910), Livermore (1968), and Price (1995).
55
     Linklater (2002, 116-17,187). See Libecap and Lueck, forthcoming, for a discussion of RS used around the world.


                                                            28
markers as necessary, often creating multiple claims to the same property and inviting disputes.56 In

his examination of Ohio lands, William Peters (1930, 26, 30, 135) concluded that there was more

litigation due to overlapping entries, uncertainty of location, unreliable local property markers, and

confusion of ownership in the 19th century in the VMD than in the rest of Ohio combined. During

1785 congressional debate over the land law, even southern delegates supported RS because of “the

thousands of boundary disputes in the courts” under MB in the South (White, 1983, 9).

           Lacking a coordinated framework for positioning and demarcating properties under MB,

properties in the VMD were delineated with respect to one another. If adjacent property corners

could not be verified conclusively, if that survey were found to cover too much land, or if the

surveys overlapped, then titles for each of the affected properties could be voided by the courts. An

1835 case, Porter v. Robb (7 O (Pt 1) 206, 211) points out the problem: “….Stephenson’s entry calls

for the upper line of Dandridge; Waters’ calls for the upper line of Stephenson; Crawford’s for that

which is the north line of Waters’….The return of the county surveyor shows that Dandridge’s upper

line is twenty poles too far up the creek….This twenty poles is on Stephenson’s entry…This threw

Stephenson twenty poles on Waters’ entry…. This caused Crawford, by having to begin at a corner

of Waters’, to be thrown a considerable distance farther from the Ohio….”

           Additionally, it was not uncommon for a survey registered with the local land office to have

property descriptions that were too unclear for a succeeding claimant to know exactly where the

property was situated in order to locate around it. Indeed, William Hutchinson (1927, 117) and Asa

Rubenstein (1986, 240) described a practice of surveyors in the VMD and in adjacent Kentucky of

recording claims very broadly and vaguely in an effort to preempt later claimants, who would be

challenged with assertions of superior equitable title.57


56
      http://www.library.uiuc.edu/ihx/rcanderson.htm, Richard Clough Anderson Papers, University of Illinois Library.
57
     This practice is similar to the use of so-called “submarine” patents. See Gallini (2002, 147).


                                                            29
2. Ohio Court Opinions.

         Ohio courts repeatedly noted the difficulty of titles in the VMD. A typical comment is found

in a 1840 property dispute in Nash v. Atherton (10 O 163, 167): “This case involves principles

which are important, and upon its correct decision must depend in some measure the security of

titles within the Virginia military district, which at the best, have been heretofore considered as

somewhat precarious, and have been, and still continue to be, subject to much litigation.”58 Indistinct

property boundaries resulted in competing land claims. For example, in an 1827 boundary case from

Warren County, McCoy’s Lessee v. Galloway (3O 282), adjacent entries covered the same land. The

dispute centered on the plaintiff’s corner monuments, which the court found to be too indefinite to

support: “They cannot change a sugar-tree to a hickory, or an ash to a beech.”

         Property conflicts under MB could linger for long periods of time with uncertain titles. For

example, in Morrison v. Balkins (6 Ohio Dec. Reprint 882), the Court of Common Pleas, Hardin

County in the VMD, in 1880 ruled on an effort to quiet title to some 120,000 acres of unpatented

lands, occupied for over 21 years by parties who could not trace title to the original holders.

3. Analysis of Ohio Supreme Court Cases.

         To more systematically examine the prediction of excessive litigation over property in MB

counties, we searched compendiums of 19th century Ohio court cases and then turned to Westlaw

and Lexis/Nexis for case reports (see available Appendix for details). The cases covered are those

argued before the Ohio Supreme Court. These had the greatest implications for case law, but leave




58
   See also Porter v Robb (7 O (Pt 1) 206, 210-211): “To relieve would shake more than half the titles between the
Scioto and Little Miami rivers….;” and Lessee of Cadwallader Wallace v Richard Seymour and H. Rennick (7 O 156,
158): “…a variety of questions are presented of more than ordinary difficulty, in consequence of the nature of the titles
in the Virginia military district…”.


                                                            30
out conflicts presented before the lower Courts of Common Pleas.59 Table 6 summarizes the results

of the analysis.

                                                 - TABLE 6 HERE –

        The second and third columns in Table 6 show the dispute rates per 1,000 parcels under MB

and RS respectively. The fourth column shows the ratio of these dispute rates: MB rates (for parcels

in the VMD) divided by RS rates (for parcels outside the VMD). It is clear that the rates are far

higher for MB land than RS land in all three categories of disputes. Overall, the data show that there

is nearly 18 times the dispute rate under MB for this period than in the rest of Ohio.

        Within the RS, boundary dispute cases seem to be more typical adverse possession cases.

They generally involve a conflict between adjacent landowners over a small strip of land located

along their common property boundary. The validity of title cases in RS generally involve failure to

comply with some procedural requirement for obtaining a patent or filing with county recorders or

land offices. Survey dispute rates are much less frequent under RS, reflecting the requirement that

individual surveys follow section lines, that parcels be squares, and the use of government-hired

surveyors to lay out sections, townships, and ranges in the grid prior to entry under the provisions of

the federal land law. This provision appears to have reduced error and the associated opportunistic

use of surveys by claimants that was prevalent under MB.60




59
   The effect of any bias in this sample is unclear. The Supreme Court might have addressed the higher valued cases, so
that we are missing smaller boarder disputes.
60
   Because agricultural land was the most valuable asset in 19th century Ohio, the heightened litigation over land
boundaries and titles under MB leads to a related prediction that there were more lawyers per capita in VMD counties
than elsewhere in the state. Using number of lawyers from the 1880 U.S. Population Census (provided by Joe Ferrie,
Department of Economics, Northwestern University) as the dependent variable and controlling for population density,
percentage of land in farms and manufacturing density we find a positive relationship between MB counties and the
number of lawyers per capita significant at the 5% level.


                                                           31
F. The Market for Land in and around the Virginia Military District.

           The empirical analysis in this section uses county, township, and parcel-level data to examine

how the land market and land values are affected by land demarcation systems (Predictions 5A-C).

In all cases we estimate various permutations of equation (6).

1. Market Transactions in Ohio Counties.

           To begin we analyze the impact of MB using Ohio county data on the mean number of

mortgages and conveyances in 1858 and 1859. The sample includes the 39 counties within and

adjacent to the VMD (Table 3, part E). We anticipate that market activity (largely for agricultural

land) as reflected in these measures will be positively affected by population, number of farms, total

county farm acreage, soil quality, and negatively affected by ruggedness and MB demarcation.61

                                                     - TABLE 7 HERE –

           As can be seen from estimates in Table 7, controlling for other factors, there are substantially

fewer land transactions in the VMD relative to adjacent RS counties. Conveyances are nearly 50

percent less in those counties governed by MB as compared to the RS. The other control variables

generally have the predicted signs. These results are suggestive of the negative impact of MB on

land markets due to boundary conflicts, lack of coordination in parcel alignment and shape, the

absence of a uniform system of coordinating addresses, and less transportation infrastructure. To

address these issues more directly, we turn to estimates of land values in the two institutional

regimes.

2. Land value estimates at the township level.

           To more precisely examine the impact of land demarcation on land markets we estimate land

values using individual farm data from the 1850 and 1860 censuses, averaged by township (Table 3,

part C). We estimates equation (6) in order to test Prediction 5C, that states land values will be
61
     We estimated the models also using value per acre as a control and the results were very similar.


                                                              32
higher under the RS. We thus expect the coefficient on the VMD variable to be negative. As (6)

implies we include controls for topographical, market, and demographic characteristics.62 Because

we predict that road density is determined in part by the demarcation system, we report results with

and without that variable. We anticipate that farmer age should raise land values reflecting

experience. The estimates are reported in Table 8 where we use the natural logarithm of land values

as the dependent variable.

                                                 - TABLE 8 HERE –

        Both estimated specifications show a significantly negative coefficient for the VMD variable,

which supports our hypothesis that the RS leads to higher land values compared to MB. We find

that land value per acre is about 10 percent lower in the VMD compared to RS when we control for

road density. As expected, road density has a significantly positive relationship with land value. In

specification 2, without controlling for road density, we find a difference in land value of 13 percent.

The 3 percentage increase on the VMD coefficient in specification 2 suggests an indirect effect of

the demarcation system on land value through increased road infrastructure.

3. Farm level estimates in Warren County, Ohio.

        To further test the prediction about land values we use parcel map data from Warren County

from 1867 (Table 3, Part F), where both MB and RS occur in a small relatively homogeneous area.

The parcels are matched to farm data from the 1870 census. Figure 8 shows the location of Warren

County with respect to the VMD as well as the townships found in the county. Table 9 provides

comparison data for the two parts of the county and shows that they are similar in terrain, percent



62
  Distance to Cincinnati is included as the major urban market as well as distance to local markets. Although land value
data are drawn from the 1850 and 1860 censuses, all values are in constant $1860, and we add a dummy variable for the
year 1860 to account for overall growth in land values between the census years. In addition to age, we experimented
with other individual control variables for percent born in Virginia and Ohio to see if these demographic settlement
factors might have affected the relationship between the demarcation system and observed land values, but we found no
such effects.


                                                          33
farmers, and farmer age. They differ statistically in soil quality and stream density, factors we

attempt to control for in the analysis. The results of estimating land value (6) in a manner similar to

that reported for the township-level analysis in Table 8 are presented in Table 10. Because we can

identify the location of each parcel, the VMD variable is now a MB dummy variable for each farm’s

demarcation.

                                          - FIGURE 8, TABLES 9 & 10        HERE -

        The estimates show that a farm governed by MB has a statistically-significant lower value

compared to land governed by rectangular demarcation. The reduction in land value under MB is

around 21 percent. The lower land value found in MB areas in this test using parcel observations as

compared to the results reported in Table 8 using township averages seems to be due to the greater

prevalence of low-valued swamplands in the VMD portion of Warren County that we cannot

adequately control for in the estimation.63 Accordingly, it is possible that actual land value

differences due to the demarcation system are less than indicated and closer to those estimated using

the township samples. The other control variables that have a significant impact on land values have

the expected signs.

G. Public Infrastructure: Roads.

        Prediction 6 states that investment in public roads will be more extensive under a rectangular

system where roads could run along defined, uniform property boundaries than under MB, where

boundaries were irregular and vague. Indeed, scholars of land demarcation have noted this

possibility. In his detailed study of the RS and MB in parts of four counties in northwestern Ohio in

1955 Thrower (1966, 86, 88-97, 123) stated that: “perhaps the most obvious difference between the




63
 This assessment is based on conversations between the authors and officials at the Warren County Soil and Water
Conservation District office, as well as surveyors and real estate attorneys in Lebanon, Warren County, Ohio.


                                                         34
systematic and the unsystematic surveys is the nature of the road network developed under these

contrasting types of land subdivision” with greater road density in the RS areas.

         We estimate equation (6) using a sample of 437 townships in the VMD region (Table 3, part

B). The dependent variable is the natural log of road density, which is the ratio of road length in a

township to the square root of township area. Controls include RUGGEDNESS and a variety of market

variables (e.g., distance from county seats, the city of Cincinnati, railroad, river). The part of a

township within the VMD measures MB demarcation. We expect a negative coefficient for the

variable. The results are in Table 11.

                                                       -TABLE 11 HERE -

         Consistent with our prediction, the estimations show a significantly negative coefficient on

the VMD variable. We find that road density was 24 percent lower under MB than in RS.64 This

result confirms the claims made above that MB demarcation made road construction more difficult.

V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION.

         This natural experiment in land demarcation systems in Ohio provides an unusual

opportunity to examine the effect of property rights institutions on economic performance. In this

paper we examine land demarcation systems that are fundamental institutions of property. Our study

focuses on the two dominant regimes – metes and bounds and the rectangular system or grid. MB,

the uncoordinated demarcation of land, is found worldwide, whereas coordinated RS demarcation is

more limited with adoption in the U.S., Canada, parts of Australia, as well as in ancient Rome and a

variety of other settings, including modern urban areas. We develop a framework to generate

hypotheses about the economic structure and effects of these two systems and test them against 19th



64
  Railroads, which were more capital intensive and designed to link major markets, may have been less affected by the
property survey system. Empirically, there are relatively few railroads at this time, and most of the townships in the 39
county analysis area have no railroads crossing their territory.


                                                            35
century Ohio data, in the Virginia Military District and adjacent counties, where both institutions

coexist as a result of exogenous political factors.

       We find that uncoordinated plot demarcation under MB is strongly correlated with

topography, as individuals adjusted land boundaries to meet the constraints of local terrain and soil

quality. Irregular plot shapes and small sizes dominate in areas of rugged topography, whereas in

relatively flat areas individual parcels tend to be square, reflecting the economic advantages of

square plots, but are not uniformly aligned as they would be in a coordinated rectangular survey.

Parcel boundaries collide, resulting in oddly-shaped, small areas with fewer economic production

options that are referred to in the historical literature as gaps or gores. Compared to RS, the standard

deviation in the number of parcel sides in MB is almost 4 times greater; the standard deviation of

parcel alignment is an order of magnitude higher; and the coefficient of variation of parcel size under

MB is almost twice that found in RS. We find that as envisioned in the federal land law, the

coordinated RS resulted in more uniform parcel sizes, shapes, and alignment, relative to

individualized MB, where the perimeters, dimensions, and positioning of tracts of land were far

more variable and haphazard.

        Our estimates of the economic outcomes of the two systems in our sample area show

dramatic differences. We find that there were far more legal disputes over land boundaries and titles

in the metes and bounds area (nearly 18 times the dispute rate) than in the rest of Ohio. The

associated title uncertainty arising from irregularly-shaped and overlapping boundaries under MB

was documented by contemporary observers and these and other effects of MB are reflected in land

markets. They were much less active in MB counties than in neighboring RS counties, with 50

percent fewer land conveyances in the former regions, holding land quality and other factors

constant.




                                                      36
       Examining both township level observations in the 39 counties adjacent to and within the

VMD and parcel observations within a specific county split by MB and the RS (Warren County), we

find that the land values per acre were between 10 and 21 percent lower under MB than RS,

depending on the sample used, controlling for farmer age, distance to markets, access to roads,

rivers, railroads, soil quality and topography. Investment in roads was promoted by the

standardization brought about by the RS with 24 percent lower road density in MB townships than

was found in the RS. Infrastructure could be built along property lines under the RS, but under MB

roads invariably cut across portions of irregularly-shaped parcels, likely raising transaction costs.

       Gains from this institutional innovation of the magnitude reported here raise important

questions about path dependence and institutional change. Figure 9 shows the path of land values

and population from 1850-1950 for the same 39 county VMD region studied above. To make

comparisons we group the counties into those with 0-49 percent of their territory in the VMD and

those with 50-100 percent in the VMD (see data appendix, available from authors). The differences

in value range from 6 to 33 percent over the 100-year period, with a mean value of 21 percent. These

are crude value differences, but they are consistent with those reported for 1860 and 1870 in the tests

performed above.

                                               -FIGURE 9 HERE -

       It is apparent in the data that the value differences persist. The lingering effects of fewer

roads, less effective parcel shapes, sizes, and addressing, along with land disputes that continued

through much of the 19th century appear to have contributed to the gradual decline in the economic

position of VMD counties relative to their adjacent RS counterparts, with much slower population

growth and far less industry. In 1850, VMD counties had 261,375 people, relative to the 339,725

who lived in the adjacent non-VMD counties. But by 1950, the latter group had a population of

1,126,778, as compared to only 392,807 in the VMD counties. No where within the VMD did a


                                                   37
major city develop, and the area also had much less manufacturing. The number of manufacturing

establishments in 1860, the first year these data are reported in the census was 1,271 in the VMD

counties and 3,073 in the non-VMD counties. By 1950, there were only 356 manufacturing

establishments in the VMD counties and 2,789 in the non-VMD counties, a difference of nearly 800

percent. It is plausible that the less attractive land demarcation institution in the VMD led

population, manufacturing, and land markets to alternative, but otherwise similar areas.

        Given the economic advantages of RS, one might expect that many previous metes and

bounds regions would be converted to the grid. But in agricultural areas, this has not been the case.

Indeed, the general division of land between MB and RS as reflected in Figure 2 in the U.S., for

example, has remained constant for two centuries. This institutional inertia suggests important costs

in redefining property rights to agricultural land from MB to RS. These costs likely arise from

uncertainty associated with the redefinition of boundaries. Those MB parcels that had included

areas of exceptional land might lose them with readjusted boundaries. Additional costs of re-fencing

and any adjustments in agricultural production would also play a role in limiting acceptance of the

imposition of a grid on metes and bounds. Further, as we have argued, the location and coordination

benefits of the RS are public goods that would not be internalized by individual land owners,

reducing their incentives to support institutional change.65

        In contrast, imposition of the grid in MB jurisdictions takes place for urban and suburban

land. Old, meandering streets and parcels under MB often are surrounded by uniform systems,

where developers have purchased agricultural land and carved out rectangular blocks bordered by a



65
  Indeed, the experience of the Parliamentary enclosures in England in the 17th and 18th centuries supports this
conjecture. The Parliamentary enclosures were aimed at placing irregular, scattered plots into larger, more consolidated,
uniform grids. State powers were used when tenant opposition led to the breakdown of private enclosure negotiations.
The benefits of implementing grids as part of enclosures are discussed by Yelling (1977, 120, 131). Opposition to
private enclosure that led to resort to Parliamentary intervention is discussed by Bradley (1918, 83). Once implemented,
the enclosures were credited with large increases in the output and value of English agriculture (Mingay (1997, 83-101).


                                                           38
network of straight streets with clear property addresses.66 The widespread conversion to

rectangular systems in metropolitan areas indicates that the economic benefits of coordination and

transforming land into a commodity to support urban land markets have been sufficiently large to

offset the costs involved. Moreover, developers have captured those gains in the value of the urban

subdivisions they have built. Because of economies of scale, agricultural parcels generally are

consolidated, not subdivided as with urban land, reducing the potential for benefits through the

purchase and partition of agricultural properties.

        Our findings are suggestive of the importance of land demarcation in influencing the use of

land and perhaps ultimately in economic growth more generally. Linklater (2002, 238-41),

commented on Stephen Austin’s decision to adopt the RS in much of Texas: “The advantages

inherent in the square-based federal land survey gave the state’s economy a vigor its neighbours

lacked.” Further, where the RS dominated in the U.S. capital gains from land sales were the largest

source of wealth creation in the 19th century (Stewart, 2009; Ferrie1994; Galenson and Pope, 1989).

        Although we do not have data on the costs of RS system, for large land owners the returns

were sufficient to offset higher initial expenses. In areas of more rugged terrain than in our Ohio

analysis, the added costs of the grid may reduce its net benefits. The lessons for contemporary

economic development, however, are twofold. First, a coordinating demarcation institution has the

potential to expand economic activity. Second, institutional path dependencies are real, with the

effects of metes and bounds persisting 100 years or more.




66
  Urban maps and GIS make these patterns clear and we are analyzing them elsewhere. For discussion of urban patterns,
see Libecap and Lueck , forthcoming.


                                                         39
                                           References

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, 2002,“Reversal of Fortune: Geography
        and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution,” Quarterly Journal
        of Economics 117(4): 1231-94.
Acemoglu, Daron and Simon Johnson, 2005, “Unbundling Institutions,” Journal of Political
        Economy 113 (5): 949-95.
Amiama, C., J. Bueno, and C.J. Alvarez, 2008, “Influence of the Physical Parameters of Fields and
        of Crop Yield on the Effective Field Capacity of a Self-propelled Forage Harvester,”
        Biosystems Engineering 100: 198–205.
Baird, Douglas C., Robert H. Gertner, and Randal C. Picker, 1994, Game Theory and the Law,
        Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Barnes, Carlton P., 1935, “Economies of the Long Lot Farm”, Geographical Review, 25 (April):
        298-301.
Barzel, Yoram, 1982, “Measurement Cost and the Organization of Markets,” Journal of Law and
        Economic 25:27-48.
Bradley, Harriett, 1918, The Enclosures in England. New York: Columbia University Series in the
        Social Sciences No186.
Brown, Curtis M. 1996, Boundary Control and Legal Principles 4th ed., New York: John Wiley and
        Sons.
Burnett, Edmund C., ed., 1934, Letters of the Members of the Continental Congress. Vol. 7.
        Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Institution of Washington.
Clay, Karen and Gavin Wright, 2005, “Order without Law? Property Rights during the California
        Gold Rush,” Explorations in Economic History 42 155-83.
Coase, Ronald H.,1937, “The Nature of the Firm,” Economica 4(16): 386-405.
Coase, Ronald H., 1960, “The Problem of Social Cost.” Journal of Law and Economics, 3: 1-44.
Douglas, David H. and Thomas K. Peucker, 1973, “Algorithms for the Reduction of the Number of
        Points Required to Represent a Digitized Line or Its Caricature,” Canadian Cartographer, 10
        (2): 112-22.
Dukeminier, Jesse and James E. Krier, 2002, Property 5th ed. New York: Aspen Law and Business
Dunham, William,1994, The Mathematical Universe: An Alphabetic Journey through the Great
        Proofs, Problems and Personalities, New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Estopinal, Stephen V., 1998, A Guide to Understanding Land Surveys 2nd ed. New York: John
          Wiley and Sons.
Estrich, Willis A., 1934, Ohio Jurisprudence: A Complete Statement of the Law and Practice of the
          State of Ohio, vol. 32, Rochester New York: The Lawyers Cooperative Publishing
          Company.
Farrell, Joseph, and Paul Klemperer, 2007, “Coordination and Lock-In: Competition with Switching
          Costs and Network Effects,” Handbook of Industrial Organization, Vol 3, Chapter 31,
          Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Ferrie, Joseph P., 1994, “The Wealth Accumulation of Antebellum European Immigrants to the U.S.,
          1840-60,” Journal of Economic History, 54 (1), 1-33.
Ford, Amelia Clewley, 1910, Colonial Precedents of Our National Land System As It Existed in
        1800: Bulletin of the University of Wisconsin No 352, Madison: Wisconsin University
        Press.




                                                40
Galenson, David and Clayne Pope, 1989, “Economic and Geographic Mobility on the Farming
         Frontier: Evidence from Appanoose County, Iowa, 1850-1870,” Journal of Economic
         History 49(1989): 5-55.
Gallini, Nancy T. 2002, “The Economics of Patents: Lessons from Recent U.S. Patent Reform,”
         Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16(2): 131-54.
Gates, Paul W., 1968, History of Public Land Law. Washington, D.C: Public Land Law Review
         Commission .
Glaeser, Edward L., Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer, 2004, “Do
        Institutions Cause Growth?” Journal of Economic Growth, 9: 271-303.
Holmes, Thomas J. and Sanghoon Lee, 2008, “Cities as Six-by-Six-Mile Squares: Zipf’s Law?”
        Working paper, University of Minnesota Department of Economics.
Holmes, Thomas J. and Sanghoon Lee, 2009, “Economies of Density versus Natural Advantage:
        Crop Choice on the Back Forty,” Working Paper 14704, Cambridge: National Bureau of
        Economic Research.
Hubbard, Bill Jr. 2009. American Boundaries: The Nation, The States and the Rectangular Survey,
        Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hutchinson, William Thomas, 1927, The Bounty Lands of the American Revolution in Ohio,
        University of Chicago PhD dissertation.
Johnson, Hildegard Binder, 1976, Order Upon the Land: The U.S. Rectangular Land Survey and the
        Upper Mississippi Country, New York: Oxford University Press.
Knack, Stephen and Philip Keefer, 1995, Institutions and Economic Performance: Cross-Country
        Tests Using Alternative Institutional Measures, Economics and Politics, 7: 207-27.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2002, “Investor
         Protection and Corporate Valuation”, Journal of Finance 62: 1147-65.
Lee, D. R., and G. T. Sallee, 1974, “Theoretical Patterns of Farm Shape and Central Place
         Location,” Journal of Regional Science, 14:3, pp. 423–30.
Libecap, Gary D. 2007, “The Assignment of Property Rights on the Western Frontier: Lessons for
         Contemporary Environmental and Resource Policy,” Journal of Economic History 67(2):
         257-91.
Libecap, Gary D. and Dean Lueck, forthcoming “Land Demarcation Systems” in Kenneth Ayotte
         and Henry E. Smith ed. Research Handbook on the Economics of Property Law, Research
         Handbooks in Law and Economics, Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Linklater, Andro. 2002, Measuring America London: Harper Collins.
Livermore, Shaw, 1968, Early American Land Companies. New York: Octagon Books.
Lösch, A. 1954, The Economics of Location New Haven: Yale University Press.
Lueck, Dean. 1995, “The Rule of First Possession and the Design of the Law,” Journal of Law and
        Economics 38: 393-436.
McDonald, James, Wells, J.G., Wright, J.W., Steck, C.D., Wickstrom, L.H., Gara, B.D., and Van
        Nguyen, Lap, 2006, Original land subdivisions of Ohio: MG-2, version 2.1, Columbus: Ohio
        Division of Geological Survey.
McEntyre, John G., 1978, Land Survey Systems, New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Merrill, Thomas and Henry Smith, 2007, Property: Principles and Policies, New York: Foundation
          Press
Mingay, G. E. 1997, Parliamentary Enclosure in England: An Introduction to Its Causes, Incidence,
        and Impact, 1750-1850. New York: Longman.




                                               41
North, Douglass, 1990, Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance, New York:
        Cambridge University Press.
Ohio Department of Natural Resources. “Shaded Elevation Map of Ohio.”
        http://www.ohiodnr.com/Portals/10/pdf/sem_spec.pdf (accessed 11/3/07)
Pattison, William D., 1957, Beginning of the American Rectangular Land Survey System, 1784-
        1800. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Peters, William E.1930, Ohio Lands and their History, 3rd Ed., Athens, Ohio: Lawhead Press.
Platteau, Jean-Philippe, Institutions, Social Norms, and Economic Growth, London: Routledge,
        2000.
Price, Edward T. 1995, Dividing the Land: Early American Beginnings of Our Private Property
        Mosaic, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Posner, Richard A. 2002, Economic Analysis of the Law, 6th ed. Boston: Little, Brown.
Powell, J.M., 1970, The Public Lands of Australia, London: Oxford University Press, 1970.
Rubenstein, Asa Lee, 1986, Richard Clough Anderson, Nathaniel Massie, and the Impact of
        Government on Western Land Speculation and Settlement, 1774-1830, University of Illinois,
        PhD Dissertation.
Shavell, Steven 2004. Foundations of Economic Analysis of Law Cambridge: Harvard University
        Press.
Sherman, C.E. 1922. Map of Ohio Showing Original Land Subdivisions to Accompany Volume III,
        Final Report: Ohio Topographic Survey. Columbus: State of Ohio Press.
Stetson, C.W. 1935. Four Mile Run Land Grants, Washington: D.C.: Mimeoform Press.
Stewart, James I., 2009, “Economic Opportunity or Hardship? The Causes of Geographic Mobility
        on the Agricultural Frontier, 1860-1880,” Journal of Economic History 69(1): 238-68.
Taylor, Howard C. 1922, The Educational Significance of the Early Federal Land Ordinances. New
        York: Teachers College, Columbia University.
Thrower, Norman W. 1966, Original Survey and Land Subdivision. Monograph Series of the
        American Association of Geographers, Chicago: Rand McNally and Company.
Treat, Payson J. 1910, The National Land System, 1785-1820. New York: E.B. Treat.
U.S. Census Bureau. “Non-Population Census Schedules for Ohio, 1850-1880.” Microfilm Rolls1-
        11; 16-27, 42. Washington D.C.: National Archives.
U.S. Census Bureau. “1850-1870, Federal Population Censuses of Ohio.” Ancestry.com
Webster, Pelatiah., 1791, Political Essays on the Nature and Operation of Money, Public Finances,
        and Other Subjects: Published During the American War, and Continued Up to the Present
        Year, 1791. Philadelphia: Joseph Crukshank. Early American Imprints. 11 July 2008
        <http://docs.newsbank.com.proxy.library.ucsb.edu:2048/openurl?ctx_ver=z39.88-
        2004&rft_id=info:sid/iw.newsbank.com:EVANL>.
White, C A., 1983, A History of the Rectangular Survey System. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of the
        Interior, Bureau of Land Management.
Wycoff, William, 1986 “Land Subdivision on the Holland Purchase in Western New York State,
        1797-1820,” Journal of Historical Geography 12 (2): 142-61.
Wiggins, Steven N. and Gary D. Libecap, 1985, “Oil Field Unitization: Contractual Failure in the
        Presence of Imperfect Information,” American Economic Review 75 (3): 368-85.
Williamson, Oliver E, 1975, Markets and Hierarchies, Analysis and Antitrust Implications: A Study
        in the Economics of Internal Organization, New York: Free Press.
Yelling, James, 1977, Common Field and Enclosure in England, 1450-1850 Hamden, Connecticut:
        Archon Books.



                                               42
Figure 1: Comparison of Metes and Bounds (Mexico – left half) and Rectangular Systems
(US – right half) along the lower Colorado River near Yuma, Arizona (32N, 114W).
Figure 2: The Rectangular System in the United States
Source: http://www.landprints.com/LpRectangularSurveySystem.htm
                                                   B) Perfect tangency




          A) No land constraint



                                                    C) Overlapping claims

Figure 3: Circular parcels with and without land constraints
A) Triangles                           B) Sqaures
       C) Hexagons

   A) Triangles                 B) Squares                      C) Hexagons

Figure 4: Regular polygon parcels without interstitial spaces
Figure 5: Claiming with Decentralized Alignment
Panel A- Map of VMD and Adjacent Counties                Panel B- Relief Map with VMD

Figure 6: The Virginia Military District (VMD) in Ohio
      Panel A -- Parcel boundaries in flat topography (Highland and Clermont counties)




      Panel B -- Parcel boundaries in rugged topography (Pike County)


Figure 7: Visual correlation between topography and original VMD parcel demarcation
`




Figure 8: Warren County, Ohio
                          Value per Acre of Farmland, $1860                                                                    County Population

70                                                                                                      3000000

60                                                                                                      2500000
50
                                                                                                        2000000
40                                                                                0-49 Percent in VMD                                              0-49 Percent in VMD
                                                                                                        1500000
30                                                                                50-100                                                           50-100
                                                                                                        1000000
20
                                                                                                         500000
10

0                                                                                                            0
     1850
            1860
                   1870
                          1880
                                 1890
                                        1900
                                               1910
                                                      1920
                                                             1930
                                                                    1940
                                                                           1950




                                                                                                              50

                                                                                                                    70

                                                                                                                          90


                                                                                                                                 10

                                                                                                                                       30

                                                                                                                                             50
                                                                                                             18

                                                                                                                   18

                                                                                                                         18


                                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                                                            19
Figure 9: VMD Counties and Adjacent Counties, 1850-1950
           Table 1—COMPARISON OF METES AND BOUNDS AND US RECTANGULAR SYSTEMS
            FEATURE                             Metes & Bounds                              Rectangular Survey
Legal institutions                              State, common law                                 Federal law
Parcel shape                                   Varies, idiosyncratic                Square (sections) – linked to chains,
                                                                                                   acres
Parcel description                        Perimeter – natural features                  Township location system
Survey before claim                                       No                                         Yes
Alignment                                                none                                    North-South
Information                                              local                                Nationwide system

           Table 2 -- A COMPARISON OF VMD AND ADJACENT COUNTIES
                                                            Surrounding
    CHARACTERISTIC                          Total  VMD
                                                              Counties
    Number of Counties                                                        39           13                  26
    Number of Townships                                                      437          139                  298
                                           2
    Average size of counties (miles )                                        468          488                  458
    Soil Quality (percent prime farmland)                                    24.5         26.8                23.3
    Terrain Ruggedness (0 = flat, 1 = vertical)                              .033         .031                .034
    Stream Density (miles/√miles)                                           12.30         11.4               12.74
    Average Age of Land Owner                                                 44           44                  44
    Percent Farmers                                                           94           94                  94
    Percent Born in Ohio                                                      37           44                  34
    Percent Born in Virginia                                                  17           23                  18
    Notes: Averages are reported for county size and natural characteristics. A two-sample t-test between the groups was
    performed for each natural feature. In each case the mean value from the VMD counties was not statistically
    different from the mean of the surrounding counties at the 5% level (Soil Quality: t = .81, df = 37, P = .23;
    Terrain Ruggedness: t = -.32, df = 37, P = .75; Stream Density: t = -.96, df = 37, P = .34; Average Age: t = -.03, df = 37;
    Percent Farmer: t = .06, df = 37; Percent Virginian: t = 1.76, df = 37.) The demographic variables are drawn from
    the 1850 and 1860 population census schedules.
  Table 3 – SUMMARY STATISTICS
 A. TOWNSHIP DATA FROM THE VIRGINIA MILITARY DISTRICT: PARCEL SIZE, SHAPE, AND ALIGNMENT ESTIMATES (N=153)
VARIABLE NAME                                               Definition                          Mean  Std. Dev.   Min     Max
PERIMETER-AREA RATIO             Ratio of parcel perimeter to sq. root of area (Township means)  4.64    0.32     4.06     5.52
PARCEL SIDES                     Number of parcel vertices (Township means)                       6.0     1.3     4.1      10.6
ALIGNMENT VARIATION              Standard deviation of parcel alignment (Township means)        10.5     4.3      0.6     18.3
PARCEL SIZE                      Size of parcel (acres) (Township means)                         841     432      139     2,448
RUGGEDNESS                       Slope measure with value range [0,1] where 0 is flat land       0.02    0.03     0.00     0.14
 B. TOWNSHIP DATA FROM THE VMD REGION: PARCEL SIZE AND ALIGNMENT, ROAD DENSITY ESTIMATES (N=437)
ROAD DENSITY                     Ratio road length in township to square root of township area   6.62    2.76     1.49    17.37
% VMD                            Percent of the township area lying within the VMD               0.31    0.46     0.00    1.00
DISTANCE TO RAILROAD             Distance, center of township to nearest railroad track (miles)  5.57    5.78     0.00    33.95
DISTANCE TO WATER                Distance from center of township to nearest waterway used for  16.36   12.45     0.01    52.26
                                 shipping and transportation (miles)
DISTANCE TO MARKET               Distance, center of township to nearest county seat (miles)     8.76    3.58      0.56    17.72
DISTANCE TO CINCINNATI           Distance from center of township to Cincinnati (miles)         90.33   36.04      1.30   154.72
RUGGEDNESS                       Slope measure with value range [0,1] where 0 is flat land       0.03    0.04      0.00    0.15
Std Dev PA-Ratio                 Designed to measure variation in parcel shape                   0.42    0.41       0       2.2
Std Dev # of Sides               Designed to measure variation in parcel shape                   1.17    1.04       0       5.7
Std Dev of Alignment             Designed to measure variation in parcel alignment/positioning  4.17    5.03       0.2     18.3
Coefficient of Variation of Size Designed to measure variation in parcel size                    0.49    0.47     0.007    2.40
 C. TOWNSHIP DATA FROM THE VMD REGION: ESTIMATES OF LAND VALUE 1850, 1860 ( N=768)
VALUE PER ACRE                   Average farmland value per acre in township (1860$)            35.37   35.42     2.03    540.73
% VMD                            Percent of township area lying within the VMD                   0.31    0.46     0.00     1.00
1860 DUMMY                       Dummy = 1 if year is 1860, = 0 otherwise                        0.47    0.50     0.00     1.00
PERCENT PRIME FARMLAND           Percent of land in county designated as prime farmland.        0.24    0.15      0.00     0.76
AVERAGE AGE OF OWNER             Average age of land owner in township (Township means)           44      5.7      23       72
VIRGINIA BORN                    Percentage of landowners born in Virginia (Township means)     0.16    0.18      0.00     1.00
AVERAGE FARM ACREAGE             Average acres of farmland in township                           143     156       24      3116
DISTANCE, RUGGEDNESS,            Same as part B.
ROAD DENSITY
    D. COUNTY DATA FOR THE VMD REGION (1858, 1859): ESTIMATES OF MARKET TRANSACTIONS (N=39)

MORTGAGES                  Number of farm mortgages recorded (1858, 1859 mean)                678      394       160     2280
CONVEYANCES                Number of property conveyances (1858-1859 mean)                    288      232       39      1228
% VMD                      Percent of county area lying within the VMD                       0.35      0.40     0.00      1.00
POPULATION                 Population of county in 1860                                     29,184   32,072    13,015   216,410
NUMBER OF FARMS            Total number of farms in county 1860                              1925      588      1045     3520
TOTAL FARM ACREAGE         Total acreage of farmland in county 1860                        242,017   52,002   140,352   388,823
FARM VALUE PER ACRE        Average value per acre in county 1860                            34.59     16.28    13.57     98.47
RUGGEDNESS                 Slope measure with value range [0,1] where 0 is flat land         0.03      0.03     0.01      0.12
     E. PARCEL DATA FROM WARREN COUNTY (1868, 1870): ESTIMATES OF LAND VALUES (N=456)
VALUE PER ACRE              Value of farm (parcel) divided by farm acreage                   89.36    61.68    12.43    766.36
VMD                         Dummy = 1 if parcel location is in VMD; = 0 otherwise             0.42     0.49     0.00     1.00
PERCENT PRIME FARMLAND      Percent of farm in Land Capability Class of prime farmland        0.51    0.19     0.03      0.96
DISTANCE TO ROAD            Distance from center of farm to the nearest road                  0.17     0.07     0.07     0.56
DISTANCE TO RAILROAD        Distance from center of farm to the nearest railroad track        2.21     1.77     0.07      6.57
DISTANCE TO WATER           Distance from center of farm to the nearest waterway used for     4.99     3.11     0.05     14.20
                            shipping and transportation
DISTANCE TO MARKET          Distance from center of farm to the county seat, Lebanon, Oh      8.88    2.94     1.63      14.99
STREAM DENSITY              miles/√miles per farm                                             3.63    4.92      0        33.32
RUGGEDNESS                  Township slope measure, value range [0,1] where 0 is flat land    0.03    0.01     0.00      0.09
AGE OF OWNER                Age of landowner in years                                           51     13       14         85
FARM ACREAGE                Total acres of farm                                                123    78.5      3         526
Sources: See Data Appendix
Table 4 -- ESTIMATES OF PARCEL SHAPE (VMD TOWNSHIPS ONLY)
                                                (1)                 (2)                (3)                (4)
                                           Perimeter-Area        Number of         Std. Dev of
INDEPENDENT VARIABLES                                                                                Parcel Size
                                               Ratio               Sides           Alignment

RUGGEDNESS                                      6.219***          25.45***          31.06***          -4060***
                                                 [0.537]           [2.114]           [7.227]           [695.4]

CONSTANT                                        4.572***          5.638***          10.20***          732.5***
                                                [0.0285]           [0.112]           [0.383]           [36.87]

Observations (townships)                          153                 153               153               153
R2                                               0.471               0.490             0.109             0.184
F-Statistic (1, 151)                             134.3               144.9             18.47             34.09
Notes: Results are reported from weighted regression models of parcel shape characteristics. The dependent variables
are labeled at the top of each column. The parameter estimates for the independent variables are reported with their
standard errors listed below in brackets (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Observations were weighted by the number
of parcels in a township. When using standard errors that are corrected for spatial dependence (not reported)
significance levels of the independent variables do not change.


Table 5 -- ESTIMATES OF VARIATION IN PARCEL SHAPE, SIZE, AND ALIGNMENT (VMD
AND ADJACENT TOWNSHIPS)
                            (1)             (2)            (3)        (4)
                                     Std. Dev.                Std. Dev.
INDEPENDENT                                                                      Std. Dev. of      Coeff. of Var.
                                  Perimeter-Area              Number
VARIABLES                                                                         Alignment         Parcel Size
                                       Ratio                  of Sides

% VMD                                0.456***                 1.757***             9.022***           0.334***
                                     [0.0511]                 [0.0930]              [0.365]           [0.0689]

RUGGEDNESS                              -0.343                  0.739              9.049**              -0.100
                                       [0.527]                 [0.959]             [3.761]             [0.711]

INTERACTION                          3.577***                 7.952***             23.76***           7.041***
                                      [0.867]                  [1.578]              [6.189]            [1.169]

CONSTANT                             0.331***                 0.615***             0.926***           0.470***
                                     [0.0263]                 [0.0479]              [0.188]           [0.0355]

Observations
(townships)                              437                     437                  437                437
R2                                      0.401                   0.702                0.777              0.335
F-Statistic (3, 433)                    96.0                    337.1                498.1              72.2
Notes: Results are reported from weighted regression models of parcel shape characteristics. The dependent variables
are labeled at the top of each column. The parameter estimates for the independent variables are reported with their
standard errors listed below in brackets (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Observations were weighted by the number
of parcels in a township.
         Table 6-- 19TH CENTURY OHIO SUPREME COURT PROPERTY DISPUTE RATES
Disputes                          VMD                         non-VMD                    Ratio of dispute rates:
(per 1,000 parcels)           metes & bounds              rectangular system                    MB/RS
Boundary                           1.46                          0.37                             3.95

Validity of                          8.61                         0.26                             33.12
Entry/patent

Validity of Survey                   2.48                         0.08                             31.00

TOTAL                               12.54                        0.71                           17.66
Notes: The Ohio Supreme Court data is normalized by dividing by the total number of parcels corresponding to each
group and multiplying by 1,000. Parcel source data comes from the geospatial dataset Ohio Original Land
Subdivisions (McDonald et al, Ohio Division of Geological Survey, Columbus, OH, 2002). Total number of parcels in
VMD = 6,856 and Non-VMD = 61,688.


Table 7 -- ESTIMATES OF LAND TRANSACTIONS IN VMD REGION (1860)
INDEPENDENT                   Mortgages                        Conveyances
                                                                Per 1,000                                             Per 1,000
VARIABLES                       Total            Per Acre        People             Total            Per Acre           People
%VMD                           -0.0862             -0.204         -0.117         -0.486***          -0.527***         -0.489***
                               [0.125]            [0.121]        [0.130]           [0.173]            [0.159]           [0.155]

SOIL QUALITY                   0.871*            0.823*            0.206            0.633              0.930           -0.0768
                               [0.458]           [0.422]          [0.477]          [0.631]            [0.553]          [0.569]

RUGGEDNESS                     -3.093*          -4.815***       -5.005***        -6.485***          -7.678***        -7.917***
                               [1.636]            [1.673]         [1.684]          [2.254]            [2.193]          [2.005]

POPULATION/1000              0.00407**         0.0061***             --         0.00757***         0.00862***              --
                             [0.00197]         [0.00195]             --          [0.00272]          [0.00255]              --

FARMS/1000                    0.533***          0.333***          -0.0787           0.344             0.297*           -0.0853
                               [0.148]           [0.118]          [0.111]          [0.204]            [0.154]          [0.132]

FARM ACRES/1000              -0.000410               --         0.000681          0.00199                --            0.00221
                             [0.00150]               --         [0.00148]        [0.00206]               --           [0.00176]

CONSTANT                      5.247***           -0.0911        3.334***          4.282***          -0.866***         2.316***
                               [0.247]           [0.226]         [0.256]           [0.340]            [0.296]          [0.305]

Observations
(counties)                        39                39              39                39                 39               39
R-squared                        0.76              0.72            0.28              0.73               0.72             0.46
F Statistic (6, 32)             16.77             17.27            2.54             14.12              17.11             5.64
Notes: Results are reported from regression models of market transactions. The parameter estimates for the independent variables are
reported with their standard errors listed below in brackets (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). When using standard errors that are
corrected for spatial dependence (not reported) significance levels of the independent variables do not change.
          Table 8 – ESTIMATES OF LAND VALUE PER ACRE (1860$)
INDEPENDENT VARIABLES                       (1)                                                           (2)
VMD                                                              -0.0992**                            -0.125***
                                                                  [0.0466]                             [0.0462]
1860 DUMMY                                                        0.512***                             0.507***
                                                                  [0.0302]                             [0.0304]
PERCENT PRIME FARMLAND                                            0.419***                             0.445***
                                                                   [0.139]                              [0.138]
RUGGEDNESS                                                       -2.492***                            -2.637***
                                                                   [0.544]                              [0.536]
AVERAGE FARM ACREAGE                                            -0.000410*                          -0.000411**
                                                                [0.000211]                           [0.000207]
ROAD DENSITY                                                      0.0162**
                                                                 [0.00677]
DISTANCE TO RAILROAD                                            -0.0209***                           -0.0218***
                                                                 [0.00321]                            [0.00326]
DISTANCE TO RIVER                                              -0.00597***                          -0.00653***
                                                                 [0.00141]                            [0.00139]
DISTANCE TO MARKET                                              -0.0135***                           -0.0137***
                                                                 [0.00470]                            [0.00474]
DISTANCE TO CINCINNATI                                         -0.00648***                          -0.00699***
                                                                [0.000732]                           [0.000723]
AVERAGE AGE                                                       0.0406*                              0.0411*
                                                                  [0.0226]                             [0.0227]
AVERAGE AGE SQUARED                                              -0.000399                           -0.000406*
                                                                [0.000245]                           [0.000245]
CONSTANT                                                          3.016***                            3.184***
                                                                   [0.553]                              [0.552]
Observations                                                         774                                  774
Adjusted R-squared                                                  0.534                                0.531
F Statistic (13, 754) (12, 755)                                     81.79                                86.93
 Notes: Results are from weighted regression models in which the dependent variable is the natural logarithm of
 average land value per acres from 1850 and 1860. Land values are in $1860. The parameter estimates for the
 independent variables are reported with their standard errors listed below in brackets (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
 Observations were weighted by percent farmland in the corresponding county.
     Table 9 -- WARREN COUNTY SAMPLE - COMPARISON OF MB AND RS PROPERTIES
  Characteristics                                                         RS                             MB
  AREA (miles2)                                                          234                             173
  NUMBER OF FARMS                                                        265                             191

  SOIL QUALITY (% prime farmland)                                         60                              38
                                                                         [15]                            [16]
  RUGGEDNESS (0 = flat, 1 = vertical)                                   0.025                           0.025
                                                                        [.014]                          [.015]
  STREAM DENSITY (miles/√miles)                                          1.44                            6.67
                                                                        [2.04]                          [6.02]
  AGE OF LAND OWNER                                                       51                              50
                                                                        [12.8]                          [13.2]
  FARMER (Dummy 1 = farmer, 0 = other)                                    .98                             .93
                                                                         [.12]                           [.25]
Notes: Sample mean values are reported with standard deviations in brackets. A two-sample t-test between groups was
performed on the variables with the exception of the Farmer Dummy Variable in which Fisher’s exact test was used. (Soil
Quality: t = 14.9, df = 454, P = .000; Ruggedness: t = .33, df = 454, P = .74; Stream Density: t = -13.14, df = 454, P = .000;
Age: t = 1.01, df = 454; Farmer: Obs = 451, P = .005.)
Table 10 – ESTIMATES OF FARM VALUE IN WARREN COUNTY, OHIO ($1870)
INDEPENDENT VARIABLES
                                                                     1                                 2
VMD                                                             -0.208***                         -0.221***
                                                                 [0.0691]                          [0.0695]
PERCENT PRIME FARMLAND                                          0.823***                           0.795***
                                                                  [0.141]                           [0.140]
RUGGEDNESS                                                       -5.028**                          -5.397**
                                                                  [2.182]                           [2.189]
STREAM DENSITY                                                   -0.00438                          -0.00302
                                                                [0.00591]                         [0.00574]
FARM ACREAGE                                                  -0.00117***                       -0.00117***
                                                               [0.000308]                        [0.000306]
ROAD DENSITY                                                     0.0317*                               --
                                                                 [0.0165]                              --
DISTANCE TO RAILROAD                                              -0.0216                           -0.0138
                                                                 [0.0173]                          [0.0166]
DISTANCE TO RIVER                                                0.00572                            0.00432
                                                                [0.00689]                         [0.00693]
DISTANCE TO MARKET                                               -0.0196*                         -0.0215**
                                                                 [0.0102]                          [0.0101]
AGE                                                              0.00372                            0.00308
                                                                [0.00936]                         [0.00925]
AGE SQUARED                                                      -0.00004                          -0.00003
                                                                 [.00009]                          [.00009]
CONSTANT                                                        4.071***                           4.469***
                                                                  [0.341]                           [0.277]

Observations                                                       456                               456
F Statistic (11, 444) (10, 445)                                   27.69                             30.19
Adjusted R-squared                                                0.312                             0.308
Notes: Results are reported from regression models of land value. The parameter estimates for the independent
variables are reported with robust standard errors in brackets (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). When using standard
errors corrected for spatial dependence (not reported) significance levels of the coefficient estimates generally do not
change with the exception of Road Density and Distance to Market. Road Density remains significant under most
choices of bandwidth but falls out of significance for a small range of bandwidths, similarly the significance of
Distance to Market weakens to the 10% range under certain choices of bandwidth.
    Table 11 – ESTIMATES OF ROAD DENSITY
INDEPENDENT VARIABLES
                                                                           Roads
VMD %                                                                   -0.243***
                                                                          [-5.078]
DISTANCE TO RAILROAD                                                    -0.00720*
                                                                          [-1.825]
DISTANCE TO RIVER                                                      -0.00454**
                                                                          [-2.471]
DISTANCE TO MARKET                                                       -0.00264
                                                                          [-0.500]
DISTANCE TO CINCINNATI                                                -0.00507***
                                                                          [-9.534]
RUGGEDNESS                                                              -2.722***
                                                                          [-4.631]
CONSTANT                                                                 2.559***
                                                                          [43.42]

Observations (townships)                                                    437
F Statistic (6, 430)                                                       34.54
Adjusted R-squared                                                         0.316
Notes: Results are reported from regression models in which the dependent variable is the natural log of road density
in a township. The dependent variables are labeled at the top of each column. The parameter estimates for the
independent variables are reported with their standard errors listed below in brackets (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
When using standard errors that are corrected for spatial dependence (not reported) significance levels of the
independent variables do not change.
