                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                       UNSTABLE BANKING

                                            Andrei Shleifer
                                           Robert W. Vishny

                                         Working Paper 14943
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14943


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2009




Harvard University and the University of Chicago, respectively. We are grateful to Shai Bernstein
and Josh Schwartzstein for excellent research assistance, and to Malcolm Baker, Effi Benmelech, Olivier
Blanchard, John Campbell, Douglas Diamond, Eugene Fama, Nicola Gennaioli, Francesco Giavazzi,
Jacob Goldfield, Oliver Hart, Steven Kaplan, Anil Kashyap, Stavros Panageas, Richard Posner, Raghuram
Rajan, Amit Seru, Jeremy Stein, Amir Sufi, Lawrence Summers, and Luigi Zingales for helpful conversations.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Unstable Banking
Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny
NBER Working Paper No. 14943
May 2009
JEL No. E32,G21,G33

                                             ABSTRACT

We propose a theory of financial intermediaries operating in markets influenced by investor sentiment.
In our model, banks make loans, securitize these loans, trade in them, or hold cash. They can also
borrow money, using their security holdings as collateral. We embed such banks in a stylized financial
market, in which securitized loans may be mispriced, and investigate how banks allocate limited capital
among the various activities, as well as how they choose their capital structure. Banks maximize profits,
and there are no conflicts of interest between bank shareholders and creditors. The theory explains
the cyclical behavior of credit and investment, but also accounts for the fundamental instability of
banks operating in financial markets, especially when banks use leverage.


Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-9
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu

Robert W. Vishny
Booth School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
vishny@ChicagoBooth.edu
1: Introduction

       We propose a theory of financial intermediaries operating in markets influenced

by investor sentiment. In our model, banks make loans, securitize these loans, trade in

them, or hold cash. They can also borrow money, using their security holdings as

collateral. We embed such banks in a stylized financial market, in which securitized

loans may be mispriced, and investigate how banks allocate limited capital among the

various activities, as well as how they choose their capital structure.   Banks maximize

profits, and there are no conflicts of interest between bank shareholders and creditors.

The theory explains the cyclical behavior of credit and investment, but also accounts for

the fundamental instability of banks operating in financial markets, especially when

banks use leverage.

       In this model, banks that cannot securitize loans smooth their lending over time.

When banks participate in financial markets, however, they respond to investor

sentiment. Banks use their scarce capital to co-invest in newly securitized loans when

asset prices are high, and to buy or hold onto distressed securities when asset prices are

low. Expanding the balance sheet to securitize is so profitable in good times, however,

that banks borrow short term and accept the risk of having to liquidate their portfolio

holdings at below fundamental values in bad times. Such liquidations further destabilize

security prices. By stretching their balance sheets to the limit in good times, banks give

up the opportunity to finance investment or buy distressed assets in bad times.

       Under these circumstances, bank profits and balance sheets, as well as real

investment, are highly cyclical. Investment is strictly higher with securitization than

without it, but may be distorted in favor of projects available for securitization during




                                                                                        2
bubbles. This can reduce efficiency even without any costs of cyclical fluctuations. The

central message is that financial intermediation transmits security market fluctuations into

the real economy; the volatility of sentiment turns into the volatility of real activity 2 .

         Our paper is related to three broad strands of research, including work on the

microfoundations of credit cyclicality begun by Bernanke and Gertler (1989) 3 , work on

asset liquidity, fire sales, and limited arbitrage starting with Shleifer and Vishny (1992,

1997), and work in behavioral corporate finance, initiated by DeLong et al. (1989) and

Stein (1996). We attempt to unify these three strands by focusing on the role of banks in

transmitting market fluctuations into the real economy.

         The literature on the microfoundations of credit cycles primarily focuses on the

magnification of shocks to the value of capital and their impact on credit through

collateral and incentive compatibility constraints 4 . This approach is taken in Bernanke-

Gertler (1989), Holmstrom-Tirole (1997), Kiyotaki-Moore (1997), and Fostel and

Geanakoplos (2008). Our emphasis on investor sentiment and the dynamic incentives of

financial intermediaries is quite different. Shleifer and Vishny (1992) show how asset

liquidity, high debt capacity, and easy credit are mutually reinforcing. Benmelech and

Bergman (2009) present a multiple equilibrium model in which high collateral values,

high liquidity, and high debt capacity go together. Adrian and Shin (2009) document the

pro-cyclicality of leverage empirically using data on broker-dealers. Allen and Gale

(2000) model an asset market bubble fueled by unexpectedly loose monetary policy.

         Adrian and Shin (2008) put forward a theory of procyclical leverage and credit

availability based on the optimizing behavior of financial intermediaries. In their model,

2
  A different view of the interaction of markets and financial intermediaries is Allen and Gale (1997).
3
  An older literature on cyclical credit includes Fisher (1933) and Minsky (1986).
4
  The foundational work on optimal debt contracts, first written in 1989, is Hart and Moore (1998).


                                                                                                          3
procyclical leverage comes from the focus of investment banks on Value-at-Risk. Adrian

and Shin argue that volatility is countercyclical, allowing banks to take more leveraged

bets when asset prices are high.      Rajan (2006) stresses the role of agency problems

within financial firms, distorted compensation structures, and the difficulty of

understanding the riskiness of complex financial instruments in generating procyclical

risk-taking. Unlike Adrian-Shin (2008) and Rajan (2006), we do not focus on the banks’

incentives for risk-taking, but rather address the ways that banks can profit from changes

in investor sentiment and their consequences for capital allocation over time.

       Our paper is also related to the literature on asset liquidity, fire sales and limited

arbitrage. Shleifer and Vishny (1992) show how asset illiquidity, defined as the inability

to sell an asset for its value in best use, results from the simultaneous debt overhang

facing all of the specialist buyers in a given industry. Shleifer and Vishny (1997) show

how asset prices fall below fundamental values when intermediaries involved in arbitrage

lose the capital of uninformed investors after poor performance. Arbitrageurs liquidate

their positions in a crisis, rather than stabilize prices. Gromb and Vayanos (2002) find

that arbitrageurs’ trades do not optimally stabilize asset prices.        Brunnermeier and

Pedersen (2009) show how declines in asset values lead to increases in margins and fire

sales of assets that cause further declines in asset values. They label these self-reinforcing

dynamics the margin and loss spirals. He and Krishnamurthy (2008) examine the asset

pricing implications of shocks to financial intermediaries.            Acharya, Gale, and

Yorulmazer (2009) describe how the market for rollover debt, such as asset-backed

commercial paper, may experience sudden freezes. Diamond and Rajan (2009) show

how the fear of future fire sales keeps banks from lending.




                                                                                            4
         Finally, our paper is related to the extensive literature on behavioral corporate

finance.    Baker and Wurgler (2002, 2004) show how firms cater to investor sentiment

through their dividend and capital structure policies. We use related ideas to understand

the behavior of banks.          Of particular relevance in this literature is the relationship

between the mispricing of assets and the real investment by firms, an issue made

prominent by Keynes (1936) and analyzed explicitly by Stein (1996). Baker, Ruback,

and Wurgler (2007) identify two strands of evidence on this issue. An earlier strand

investigated whether investment is sensitive to stock prices over and above the direct

measures of marginal product of capital. The results of these studies have been mixed. 5

The more recent empirical studies identify episodes of mispricing directly using proxies.

These papers find stronger evidence of the effect of mispricing on real investment. 6

         Another question is whether the impact of mispricing on real investment is good

or bad for efficiency (see De Long et al. 1989). Farhi and Panageas (2006) conclude that

while overvaluation can lead to negative NPV investments, it may also help overcome the

underinvestment problem stemming from financial constraints. Ventura (2003) and Farhi

and Tirole (2008) come to similar conclusions in models with rational bubbles.

         In reviewing all this research, we have not uncovered any work that focuses on

the specific role played by banks in transmitting the fluctuations in investor sentiment

into the real economy. Likewise, in the thorough survey of financial intermediation by

Gorton and Winton (2003), there is little discussion of the role of investor sentiment.




5
  Barro (1990) finds that stock prices exert a strong independent influence on investment. Morck, Shleifer,
and Vishny (1990) and Blanchard, Rhee, and Summers (1993) find that the effect of stock prices on
investment is small after controlling for fundamental determinants of marginal profitability of investment.
6
  See, e.g., Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003), Lamont and Stein (2006), and Polk and Sapienza (2009).


                                                                                                              5
       In Section 2, we present our model. Section 3 considers the case in which banks

can participate in financial markets by securitizing loans, but cannot borrow. Many of

our central results emerge in this simplified case. Section 4 examines what happens

when banks can borrow and further expand their balance sheets when they face good

opportunities.   Many of our findings on instability become more extreme.            Section 5

focuses on the endogenous determination of security prices. It shows that bank instability

is closely associated with financial market instability, and that the two reinforce each

other. Section 6 brings the findings together by considering the possible relevance of our

results for the current financial crisis, as well as for appropriate policy interventions.




2: The model

       We consider a model with three periods: 1, 2, and 3.             The model is highly

stylized, in that we do not derive optimal financial contracts, but rather rely on previous

work to assume a reduced form version of these contracts. We then investigate the

consequences of such contracts for market equilibrium. For stark focus, we examine the

model with no fundamental risk to investment, and the risk-free interest rate of zero.



Projects

       Real activity in the model consists of projects, which become available in periods

1 and 2, and all pay off in period 3. Each project costs $1 to undertake. Through most

of the paper, we consider identical projects. When started at t=1, these projects pay off a

known amount Z > 1 in t=3 for certain. When started at t=2, these projects pay off the




                                                                                             6
same known amount Z in the same t=3 for certain. The only reason to have both period

1 and period 2 projects pay off in period 3 is to avoid having period 4. Period 1 projects

are long term, and do not pay off until time 3.      The supply of projects costing $1 and

yielding Z > 1 is infinite, so their realization is only constrained by finance.

        Screening or monitoring by an informed intermediary is required to separate these

projects from the bad ones with Z < 1. All projects must therefore be financed by banks.

When a bank finances a $1 project, it collects an up-front fee f from the entrepreneur, and

a certain repayment of $1 at t=3. We assume that the entrepreneur and the bank split the

surplus from the project, so f = α ⋅ ( Z − 1) with 0 ≤ α ≤ 1 . For simplicity, we assume that

the entrepreneur pays the fee from his personal funds.

        We occasionally consider the case where, at both time 1 and time 2, the projects

are not all identical, but there are high (H) and low (L) projects, which all cost the same

$1, but pay off Z H and Z L with Z L < Z H and f L < f H . We assume that the number of high

projects is limited to N H each period, but that the supply of low projects is infinite.



Banks

        All financing in the model is done by banks. The representative bank comes into

period 1 with E0 in equity. We do not consider deposits, or bank runs by depositors as

in Diamond and Dybvig (1983), although these could be added. Let N t be the number

of new projects the bank finances at time t, with t=1, 2. Let Et be the bank’s equity at

the end of time t=1, 2, 3, where E0 is equity at the very start.




                                                                                           7
        The bank can use its resources in several ways. First, it can hold cash. We denote

by C the amount of cash it holds at the end of period 1. Under our assumptions, the bank

never chooses to hold cash at time 2 because there are no opportunities arising at time 3.

The bank can also purchase securities, as we discuss below. Finally, it can lend money

for projects, in which case it collects the fee up front and receives the repayment of $1 for

certain at time 3, since projects are assumed to be riskless and the interest rate is zero.

        The bank can do one of two things with these project loans. It can keep them on

its books, which we refer to as traditional lending. Or, alternatively, the bank can

securitize these loans and sell them off in the financial market 7 .                     In our model,

securitization is simply the sale in the market of cash flow claims that would otherwise be

held by banks. We do not model packaging and tranching as part of securitization, so in

our model securitization looks a lot like loan syndication. We simply assume that each

individual loan to a firm can be sold off in the market, and represents a claim to $1 for

certain at time 3. In our model, all loans are the same. Packaging and tranching would

amplify the effects modeled in our paper if they cater to investor demand and thereby

improve the terms on which banks can sell securities or borrow against them (because,

for example, engineered securities are rated AAA) 8 . Such securitization would allow the

bank to more profitably expand its balance sheet in response to market opportunities.

        Our central assumption about securitization is that when the bank sells off a loan

in the market, it must initially keep a fraction d of the loan on its own books. We can



7
  We do not allow banks to securitize commitments to make future loans.
8
  In our model, one role of the banks is to identify asset classes with abnormally high demand from
investors and then structure the loans to borrowers and the securitized cash flow claims on those loans to
cater to investor demand. Rather than delegate all their investment to the banks as in the model of
Diamond (1984), investors in our model have definite preferences over assets. Presumably, this is because
they are mostly institutions themselves and are run by professionals with investment expertise.


                                                                                                         8
think of d as the bank’s necessary initial skin in the game when it securitizes loans. If N

projects are financed and the corresponding loans are securitized, the bank must hold dN

of these securities on its balance sheet at the time of the underwriting. We assume that

the bank does not need to hold on to these securities for more than one period.

       We do not derive d from first principles, but a substantial literature justifies this

assumption. Gorton and Pennacchi (1995) ask: when would outside investors be willing

to buy loans from banks with presumably superior information? In their model, incentive

compatible contracts involve the bank retaining a portion of the loan or else guaranteeing

the loan against default. The authors then test this model using data on actual loan sales

contracts. They find that the most common arrangement involves the bank retaining a

portion of all loans that are sold to outside investors and that this portion is greater for

riskier categories of loans. Sufi (2007) provides more recent corroborative evidence for

the skin in the game assumption using data from the syndicated loan market. Holmstrom

and Tirole (1997) derive conditions under which outside investors will lend alongside

banks on more favorable terms than they would without bank participation. The optimal

incentive compatible contract involves the bank retaining a minimum fraction of the loan

so that it has sufficient incentive to monitor the borrower.

       These papers support our assumption that banks must have "skin in the game" by

retaining a minimum fraction of loans sold to outside investors. Of course, more

complex implicit contractual arrangements are also common, as discussed by Gorton and

Souleles (2007) in the case or credit card securitizations and by Brunnermeier (2009)

with respect to liquidity backstops provided by sponsors of Structured Investment

Vehicles (SIVs).     But d can serve as a summary measure of these arrangements.




                                                                                          9
Empirically, required skin in the game may be lower when asset prices are high, possibly

because investors are less cautious about information asymmetries and agency problems

when they are optimistic. This alternative assumption would only strengthen our results.

       When the bank securitizes a loan, it can sell the securities it does not retain in the

market. We denote by Pt with t= 1,2 the price of the securities are time t. In the case of

identical projects, all securities are obviously identical.      Even with heterogeneous

projects, we can assume that security prices are all identical, since each security

corresponds to a loan of $1 that pays off $1 for sure at time 3, regardless of the project.

       Prices of securitized debt can deviate from the rational price of 1 because of

investor sentiment. We assume that sentiment affects all securitized debt by the same

amount, but do not consider inefficiencies in other markets such as bank stocks.

Although sentiment here affects one particular asset class (securitized debt), it can come

from a variety of sources, such as shifts in psychology, regulatory rules, or otherwise

fundamental payoff-unrelated demand for a particular asset class. For example, if some

investors such as insurance companies or money market funds demand AAA-rated bonds

for reasons beyond the fundamental economics of payoffs, and are willing to pay

substantially more for such bonds than for almost equally safe bonds, we think of this as

investor sentiment. Such demand can be fueled by loose monetary policy, which lowers

risk-free rates and may cause investors seeking yields to overpay for higher yielding

securities still perceived to be safe. Demand can also be boosted by evidence of a

favorable recent default history, as when Drexel sold large amounts of high-yield

corporate bonds in the LBO boom of the 1980s (Kaplan and Stein 1993), or when house

price appreciation made mortgage defaults relatively rare.         At the other end of the



                                                                                              10
spectrum, bad fundamental news can cause investors to dump securities when they lose

confidence in their valuation models (Caballero and Krishnamurthy 2008).

        Until Section 5, we take security prices as exogenous, on the assumption that

arbitrage is limited and does not drive those prices to the fundamental value of 1

(DeLong et. al 1990, Shleifer and Vishny 1997).                We abstract from uncertainty about

future security prices because it is not central to our main points. Indeed, a bank

uncertain of when security prices will fall might be even more willing to originate loans

at time 1. For simplicity, we focus on the case in which P2 < P1 (and in particular P1 > 1

and P2 < 1), and the bank actually knows P2 . We are thus looking for conditions under

which the bank expands its balance sheet at time 1 even when it knows that good times

are about to end. We assume that the bank understands the model, including the fact that

the fundamental value of securities is 1 at all times (recall that the interest rate is zero) 9 .

        The bank has an incentive to securitize loans only if f > 1 - P1 , since it needs to

supply $1 to the entrepreneur. We assume that the banks collect nothing in fees from

security buyers, so that from the point of view of fee collection, securitization and

traditional lending are identical per loan. We also assume, to simplify matters, that when

the bank sells loans at a price P1 > 1, it collects profits ( P1 -1)(1-d) per loan from security

buyers, and immediately distributes these profits, as well as the fees obtained from the

entrepreneurs, as dividends or employee compensation.

        This is a strong assumption, since retaining profits would enable the bank to buy

underpriced securities, or avoid liquidation, at time 2.                Nonetheless, we think it is

9
  We can alternatively model banks as having adaptive expectations and learning quickly that loans can be
resold at prices at or above their face values. Such banks need not have perfect foresight, but simply not
expect to lose too much money should market conditions deteriorate. The banks in our model are much
more cautious, in that they both foresee the price decline at time 2, and recognize its economic effects.


                                                                                                        11
appropriate.   First, competitive pressures, in particular those for key employees, might

force the banks to distribute a large share of profits as compensation. Second, perhaps as

importantly, if the bank retains profits, its profit-maximizing policy, as we show below, is

not to keep them in cash, but instead to instantaneously recycle them to finance and

securitize additional projects. For tractability, we do not allow for such recycling of

profits within a period. The key point is that profit-maximizing banks will not retain

profits as a safety cushion in our model, which contributes to instability.

       Just as the bank can profitably underwrite and sell securities when prices are at

least equal to 1, the bank that has capital can buy securities. We are interested in the case

in which P2 < 1 , so it might be in the interest of the bank to buy securities at t=2, which

pay off $1 at t=3. We also need to consider, for this reason, the question of whether the

bank wants to hoard cash at time 1 so as to be able to buy securities in distressed markets.

       The final question is how the bank finances its operations, in addition to its equity

cushion (recall that we do not have deposits in the model). Our central assumption is that

the bank can borrow in financial markets using the securities it holds as collateral. We

denote by Lt the stock of short term borrowing by the bank from the market at time t=1,

2.   Because the lending is collateralized, we assume that the lenders always liquidate

collateral quickly enough to be left whole, so these loans are safe and bear the interest

rate of zero. To keep themselves safe, lenders to the bank insist that at all times it must

maintain a haircut h in the form of securities on its debt; that is, Lt = (1-h) ⋅ collateral .

We take h to be constant. If, as argued by Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) and Adrian

and Shin (2009), haircuts are countercyclical, the instability described in our paper

becomes more extreme.



                                                                                           12
       Our specification of h captures the kind of short-term collateralized borrowing

arrangements, such as asset-backed commercial paper and repo transactions, which have

become increasingly prevalent (see Adrian and Shin 2008, 2009 and Gorton 2008). In

these transactions, banks often borrow on a safe haircut that allows lenders to liquidate

the collateral before its value falls below the value of the loan. Consistent with

Williamson (1988) and Shleifer and Vishny (1992), securitization encourages this type of

borrowing by making the assets retained on bank balance sheets more liquid and

redeployable, thereby supporting higher leverage. Indeed, an important side benefit of

“true” securitization, with packaging and tranching, is that AAA securities can be used as

collateral with very low haircuts. Both security buyers such as leveraged hedge funds

and banks underwriting securities benefit from low haircuts.

       Because the market prices and liquidity of securities fluctuate over time, the

collateralized lending arrangements are typically short-term. Any borrower seeking to

make these loans longer term would presumably have to accept a higher haircut, thereby

decreasing its debt capacity (as well as pay higher interest rates if there is a risk of

default). Long term debt would thus be more expensive. An alternative view is that short

term debt is a disciplinary device against agency problems (Diamond and Rajan 2001).

We suggest instead that banks borrow short term because of redeployable mark-to-market

collateral created by securitization, and the profitability of borrowing and securitizing as

much as possible in the boom. We also assume, but do not model explicitly, that banks

choose not to raise equity at time 2, perhaps for the usual adverse selection reasons.

       The principal consequences of bank borrowing in our model is that, should the

price of securities fall at time 2, the bank might have to liquidate some of its portfolio of




                                                                                          13
securities to maintain the haircut. We denote by S the number of securities the bank sells

at time 2. Of course, we also need to consider the case in which the bank chooses to buy

more securities at time 2, in which case S < 0. Security liquidations can quickly wipe out

the bank’s equity (remember the lenders to the bank never lose money), but also create

downward price spirals in securities. As we show below, although securitization makes

banking highly cyclical even without leverage, leverage exacerbates the volatility.



Organization of the paper

       In section 3, we consider the case of h=1, so L1 = L2 = 0 ; the bank cannot borrow

in the market.    We compare d=1, which corresponds to traditional lending where the

bank keeps the loans on its books, with d<1, which refers to securitization. We ask when

it pays the bank to finance everything it can at t=1 and save no cash, even when more

high projects become available at t=2. We start with P1 = 1 , but then turn to P1 > 1 .

       In section 4, we consider the case of h<1, so the bank can borrow in the market to

expand its activities. In this case, we examine the liquidation of the securities portfolio at

t=2 when P2 < 1 . We again look at both P1 = 1 and the bubble, with P1 > 1. In section 5,

we examine the endogenous determination of P2 .

       Throughout the paper, we use a numerical example with d = .2, h = .2, P1 = 1.1,

P2 = .9, f = f H = .09, f L = .08. We assume a relatively high h because we are thinking

of relatively long periods and lending against risky securities, such as mortgages.




                                                                                           14
3: Securitization without Bank Leverage

       In this section, we consider the case of no bank leverage: h = 1 , L = 0 . We first

deal with the case of P1 = 1 , so there are no speculative gains to the bank from

underwriting securities. To illustrate the main ideas, we also assume that the bank knows

that security prices will fall below 1 at t=2, and even knows the exact value of P2 < 1.

We are interested in understanding under what circumstances the bank uses its balance

sheet to finance securitization even when it knows that the good times will not last and

the market will shortly crash.


Traditional lending: d=1.

       To fix ideas, we begin with the case of traditional lending, in which the bank

cannot sell off project loans in the market. Suppose all projects available at t=1 and t=2

are identical. If the bank uses all of its balance sheet in period 1, it lends out all of E0 to

finance N = E0 projects, and keeps all of them on its books. The bank collects E0 f as

fees, and distributes these profits as dividends (or employee compensation). Since the

interest rate is equal to zero, however, it costs the bank nothing to save up half of its

capital until t=2, finance half of the projects, and collect half of the fees, in period 2.

Regardless of how the bank spreads out its financing, it gets its money back at t=3. The

central point is that, as we have set up the model, there is no reason for cyclicality of

traditional lending. If we assume (as we do a bit later) that there is a limited number of

high projects each period, the bank has an incentive to smooth its lending over time.


Securitization d<1




                                                                                            15
         Now suppose that the bank can securitize its loans. Then, if it uses up all of its

                                             E0
capital at t=1, it can finance N =              projects, and keep dN = E0 in securities on its
                                             d

                                                  E0
books as skin in the game. Obviously,                > E0 , so the number of projects financed, and
                                                  d

                                                                        E0
the balance sheet, expand. Also, profits at t=1 are now f                  > fE0 . The bank has greatly
                                                                        d

increased its profitability through securitization. At time 2, security holders and the bank

suffer capital losses if P2 < 1 .            But these losses lead to no liquidation and are

economically irrelevant. Everyone can wait until t=3, to collect $1 per loan. The bank

suffers equity erosion at t=2, but it is inconsequential.

         We need three additional conditions. First, the bank must not want to securitize at

t=2 when P2 < 1 . Second, the bank must not want to sell its securities at P2 and use the

proceeds for lending to new projects. The condition for the bank not to sell at t=2 is

1 − P2
       > f , which means that keeping securities for capital gains at t=3 is more profitable
  P2

than selling them and collecting fees from new firms 10 . Note that f < 1 − P2 is sufficient

for both of these to hold, and they hold in our example. Third, we need to check that the

bank does not wish to hoard cash at t=1 to invest in undervalued securities at t=2; we

work out the condition for this to be the case below.

         If the bank does not want to wait when it expects securitization opportunities to

evaporate, it uses – even in this simple example – all of its balance sheet to make

securitized loans in period 1. Indeed, there is no new investment at time 2. As a

10
  It may even be the case that, due to the scarcity of capital, f in period 2 is higher than in period 1, and
involves giving the bank all of the surplus. This would make the sufficient condition be f =Z-1 < 1 - P2 .


                                                                                                                16
consequence, the bank earns all of its fees at time 1, and none at time 2. In the model as

we have specified it so far, such extremely cyclical activity is efficient, since projects add

social value, and the more of them are financed, the better. Securitization makes the

bank’s profits, as well as real investment, more cyclical than traditional lending, but the

benefit of such cyclicality is more activity.       Below we show that this efficiency

conclusion is not general, however.

       With the bank holding on to its securities at t=2, its balance sheet is cyclical in so

far as security prices fluctuate, and the portfolio is marked to market. But there is no

particular economic reason to mark the portfolio to market, since the value of the

portfolio serves no economic function without bank leverage.          We next consider the

robustness of this simple example to several perturbations.



Heterogeneous Projects:

       With identical projects, there is no reason for the bank to smooth its financing, so

securitization creates strong pressures for cyclicality. Suppose, alternatively, that the

bank has access to some high payoff projects every period, but not enough so it can stick

to only funding those at time 1. Will it pay the bank to wait with some cash until t=2

when more high payoff projects become available?

       When d=1 and there is no securitization, the bank will smooth its investments to

benefit from good projects that become available for financing in period 2. Recall that

N H is the number of high payoff projects per period. If E0 ≤ 2 N H , the bank will finance

E0
   high projects each period – complete smoothing. If E0 > 2 N H , the bank will finance
2

all high projects, and some low projects, each period, again complete smoothing. (More


                                                                                           17
accurately for the second case, the bank will always smooth high projects and is

indifferent to smoothing low projects.)

       Suppose d<1 and there is securitization at t=1, E0 > 2 N H , and P2 < 1 - f H , so the

bank does not want to securitize at t=2.          If the bank does not save N H until t=2 and

instead finances and securitizes everything it can at t=1, then its profits are given by:


                                                      ⎛E           ⎞
                              π no save = N H ⋅ f H + ⎜ 0 − N H ⎟ f L                       (1)
                                                      ⎝ d       ⎠


If the bank saves N H and finances new high projects at t=2, its profits become:


                                      ⎛ E0 − N H      ⎞
                              π save = ⎜         − NH ⎟ fL + 2NH fH                         (2)
                                      ⎝    d          ⎠


       The condition for the bank using all of its balance sheet to lend to projects at t=1,

and saving up nothing for t=2, becomes:


                                                           fL
                                  π no save > π save iff      > fH .                        (3)
                                                           d


Unless high projects are hugely better than low ones, this condition is likely to hold. The

benefits from funding more projects through securitization are so high that the bank

foregoes funding some good ones in bad times.

       The bank’s policy obviously makes investment more cyclical than with d=1, but

                                     ZL
this is still efficient as long as      > Z H . So if f L = Z L − 1 and f H = Z H − 1 (bank
                                     d

extracts all surplus from firms), cyclical investment is efficient. It is true that some high

projects are given up at time 2, but so many more low projects are financed at time 1,


                                                                                            18
when securitization opportunities are available, that the cyclicality is efficient. The

efficiency result comes from the alignment of the bank’s profitability and social

efficiency, which is special to the case of P1 = 1 and breaks down when P1 > 1 , as we

discuss below. With cyclical investment, the profits of the bank are enormously cyclical,

since it collects all its fees in the first period, and none in the second. The balance sheet

of the bank is, as before, cyclical because prices of securities fluctuate and fall in the

second period. However, without leverage, the number of securities on the bank’s books

could as well be constant over time, so there is no cycle there.


Saving for Tomorrow

       A key question to address to complete the description of equilibrium is whether

banks would hoard some cash for the future at t=1 when they expect security prices to

fall, so that they can buy undervalued securities.        Continue to assume that the bank

knows that P2 < 1 , and ask under what conditions it nonetheless commits all capital to

securitization at t=1. We go back to the case of homogeneous projects.

                                                                                          E0
       If the bank uses all its capital at t=1 for securitization, its profits are Nf =      f .
                                                                                          d

If the bank saves cash C for the second period and invests it in undervalued securities,

                       E0 − C    C
then its profits are          f + (1 − P2 ) . The condition for the bank not to hoard any
                         d       P2

cash, then, is given by

                                E0 f E0 f Cf     1 − P2
                                    >    −   + C(       ) or                                   (4)
                                 d    d    d       P2

                                          f 1 − P2
                                            >      .                                           (5)
                                          d   P2



                                                                                               19
The profit function in this model is linear in C, so the bank is always at a corner, with

either C=0 or C= E0 . It either saves everything or nothing.

        In our model, the condition for not hoarding cash is likely to hold, since d is small

and P2 is only slightly below 1. So if, as in our numerical example, P2 =.9, f=.09, d=.2,

       f           1 − P2
then     = .45 and        ≈ .11 . There is a strict preference for not holding cash as long
       d             P2

as prices are not expected to crash. The bank takes full advantage of securitization and

does not leave any gunpowder dry.        Putting this and the previous results together, the

model suggests that because securitization profits are so high, the bank does not save

money for the future to either finance projects or to invest in undervalued securities. It

extends itself to the maximum and uses its balance sheet for securitization. This is not a

consequence of herding or irrationality, but rather of enormous liquidity in the market.

The times are so good that the bank wants to expand its balance sheet to the maximum,

and fund as many projects as it can as fast as it can.

        This analysis has a number of implications.          First, it shows how investor

sentiment, through securitization, infects banking and leads to cyclicality of profits, of

investment, and at least of the market value of the balance sheet. Banks use up all their

capital in booms knowing full well that a crisis will come and that they will suffer (at

least book) losses. But they realize that there is so much money to be made during

booms that they should nonetheless extend themselves fully.

        Second, we can ask what happens if an unanticipated $1 of equity is injected into

the bank at t=2, so it all of a sudden has $1 of spare capacity. In this case, the return from

                                                                           1 − P2
project finance is f, while the return from buying traded securities is           . The bank
                                                                             P2


                                                                                           20
will commit the extra dollar to whichever one is more profitable, and we have assumed

that it is more profitable in bad times to invest in securities than to lend directly.

        This observation has a major implication: if the dislocation of asset prices is

severe enough, the bank allocates the capital windfall to buying underpriced securities –

no capital flows to new investment. This will continue happening until security prices

stabilize. When the markets are dislocated, the rational strategy of the bank is to engage

in proprietary trading rather than to finance real investment.



Bubbles

        We finally consider what happens when P1 > 1 . Suppose that the bank finances

and securitizes all the projects it can. It must keep Nd securities as skin in the game, so

Nd = E0 . Without leverage, the bank makes no gains from high security prices in terms

of expanding its balance sheet. However, period 1 distributed profits are now given by:

( P1 − 1)(1 − d ) N + Nf , which is higher than Nf when P1 ≥ 1 .

        The incentives to save cash for undervalued assets, or to wait for the next round of

good projects, are now even weaker than before. There is even more cyclicality of profits

and balance sheet because of the greater fluctuation in prices over time. There are still no

economic consequences of the decline in the balance sheet at time 2, however.

        Perhaps the most interesting change in the model with bubbles concerns the

efficiency of investment. Suppose that there are two kinds of projects each period: high

ones with Z H > 1 (and a positive fee) and low ones with Z L = 1 (and a zero fee), and that

the high ones are in limited supply. The assumption that low projects are zero net present

value is made only to illustrate the point starkly. Suppose that all loans – for both high


                                                                                              21
and low projects -- can be securitized at t=1 and sold off at P1 > 1 , but that the price falls

below 1 at time 2. So long as P1 is high enough, it pays the bank to use all of its balance

sheet for securitization at time 1, including funding the low projects, and to make no

loans at time 2, including to the high projects.      This is clearly less efficient from the

social viewpoint than smoothing the financing over time, at least to the point where all

the high projects are financed. In this model, bubbles break the link between social

efficiency and bank profits, and hence create an inter-temporal distortion in favor of

excessive financing of less attractive projects during booms.

       This distortion becomes even larger if projects vary by the amount of skin in the

game they require for securitization, and if some efficient projects also happen to have

high d’s.   For example, some corporate loans, while financing particularly socially

desirable investments, might be harder to securitize than some more homogeneous loans.

In this case, bubbles again create a bias toward financing securitizable investments, and

hence can lead to distortions. Indeed, with a shortage of securitizable projects, we can

have Z < 1 and still the project is financed when P1 is sufficiently above 1. This would

require a rebate to borrowers ( f < 0), as when banks offer homeowners teaser rates.



Summary

       The analysis without bank leverage yields five significant conclusions:


   1) Relative to direct lending, securitization raises the level of investment, but also its

       cyclicality, as well as that of balance sheets and profits. It transmits fluctuations

       in investor sentiment into the real economy through the banking sector.




                                                                                            22
    2) There is a built in bias toward funding projects that can be securitized at favorable

        prices, and away from projects that cannot be securitized as easily (either because

        they come up in bad times or because they require the banks to hold more skin in

        the game). With bubbles, this leads to inefficiencies in what is being financed.

        These inefficiencies may outweigh the welfare gains from securitization.


    3) Banks rationally pursue profits in booms, and accept book losses in busts, because

        money making opportunities in booms are so attractive.


    4) In busts, banks hold on to securities because of expected capital gains, rather than

        liquidate them and make fresh loans to new projects.


    5) Attempts to help out banks in bad times may help stabilize asset prices, but not

        real investment. Banks will engage in proprietary trading, not lending, until the

        price of distressed assets comes close enough to fundamental value.




4: Securitization and Investment with Leveraged Banks

        Suppose that the bank holding securities can borrow in the market using them as

collateral. We assume that the debt is short term, and security prices do not move too

fast, so lenders can always liquidate the collateral fast enough to be repaid in full. In this

case, the interest rate on the debt is zero. The mechanism of making the debt safe is the

haircut h which the borrower must meet for the loan to stay in place. When the bank

commits all of its resources, i.e., all of its debt and equity, at time 1 to security holdings

(to be used as collateral), the definition of the haircut implies that:



                                                                                           23
                                E1      E2
                                     =        = h as long as Li > 0 .                    (6)
                              E1 + L1 E2 + L2

When the period 2 price falls, securities must be liquidated to maintain the haircut.

       We begin with P1 = 1 again, and consider what happens if the bank expands its

balance sheet to the maximum, i.e., does not hoard any cash for t=2. We later provide

the conditions for this to be the profit-maximizing policy for the bank.

       If the bank uses up its entire balance sheet, which now consists of both equity and

short term debt, for securitization purposes, the skin in the game condition with P1 = 1 is:

                                        E0 + L1 = Nd                                     (7)

The condition for the bank not to exceed its borrowing capacity at t=1 is:

                                             E1
                                                   =h                                    (8)
                                           E1 + L1

Solving for the equilibrium number of projects, we obtain:


                                                E0
                                           N=                                            (9)
                                                dh


                          E1
Here collateral is Nd =      and the loan is L1 = (1 − h)icollateral .
                          h

       Equation (9) captures the fundamental mechanisms of balance sheet expansion in

our model. The bank finances 1/dh times its equity in projects. To use our numerical

example, if h = .2 and d = .2, then the bank finances 25 times its equity value in projects,

has a balance sheet of 5 times its equity value, and has the debt equity ratio of 4. With a

lower h, these numbers become higher.




                                                                                         24
        Consider next what happens at t=2, when prices fall and P2 < 1 - f. The bank

obviously cannot finance loans by issuing securities. Indeed, to maintain the haircut, the

bank now needs to sell securities. Suppose it sells S securities, so it holds Nd − S

securities valued at ( Nd − S ) P2 at the end of period 2. It uses the proceeds from selling

securities to repay P2 S of its loan, so it still owes L2 = L1 − P2 S to the lenders. Since all

the losses on the securities come from the bank’s equity (lenders are at no risk), we can

compute the resulting equity and haircut:


                           E2 = ( Nd − S ) P2 − ( L1 − P2 S ) = NdP2 − L1                  (10)


                                           E2        NdP2 − L1
                                    h=           =                                         (11)
                                         E2 + L2   ( Nd − S ) P2


                     E1 (1 − h)         E
If we plug in L1 =              and Nd = 1 , we obtain hNdP2 − hSP2 = NdP2 − L1 , so
                         h               h


                                          E1 ⎡1 − P2 1 − h ⎤
                                     S=      ⎢      ⋅      ⎥                               (12)
                                          h ⎣ P2       h ⎦

                                          1 − P2 1 − h
The bank must liquidate the fraction            ⋅      of its portfolio. When h=1, there is no
                                            P2     h

liquidation. When P2 = 1 − h , the bank must liquidate everything, so assume P2 ≥ 1 − h ,

i.e. the creditors have not yet liquidated the entire portfolio.

        There are several points to notice about the expression for S. The bank unwinds

its portfolio very rapidly as the price falls. If h rises in bad times, it unwinds the portfolio

even more rapidly. We can compute some comparative statics on liquidation. First,




                                                                                             25
                           dS      ⎛ 1-P ⎞ ⎛ h(-2+h) ⎞
                              = E1 ⎜ 2 ⎟ ⎜           ⎟ <0                               (13)
                                   ⎝ P2 ⎠ ⎝ h        ⎠
                                                 4
                           dh


When the haircut h is smaller, liquidation proceeds more quickly because leverage is

higher. So if period 1 was one of very liquid markets, with low haircuts, we expect to

see quick liquidations of bank portfolios even without rising haircuts. Second,


                            dS E1 ⎛ 1 − h ⎞ ⎛ 1 − 2 P2 ⎞
                               = ⎜        ⎟⎜           ⎟<0                              (14)
                            dP2 h ⎝ h ⎠ ⎝ P2 2 ⎠

The larger is the price shock at time 2, the faster is the liquidation. Recall that we are

only looking at modest price shocks, and do not consider large (unanticipated) shocks

that precipitate complete liquidation and might even entail losses to the lenders.

       Leverage changes the situation dramatically relative to the case with no leverage.

So long as the full commitment of the balance sheet is an equilibrium, which it is under

conditions discussed below, leverage only increases the cyclicality of real investment.

But now, the bank actually liquidates a part of its portfolio when security prices fall. This

means that banks destabilize security prices by selling into a falling market. Moreover,

the smaller is the haircut, the bigger is liquidation and this destabilizing role. In section

5, we consider the endogenous determination of security prices.

       The model illustrates the crucial maturity mismatch. Banks borrow short term to

underwrite securities that finance long term projects. With mark to market accounting,

they might not be able to maintain those investments on their books should the sentiment

decline. Banks wish to hold on to these undervalued securities, but they are forced to

liquidate by creditors. Recall that the efficient thing to do would be for the banks to sell




                                                                                          26
their security holdings and finance new investments. But securities are underpriced, and

the banks would rather own more than they can; they surely do not want to lend to firms.

       We next need to establish the conditions under which full commitment of capital

to securitization is equilibrium. We continue to assume that P2 > 1 − h , so liquidation

keeps the loan safe. The first question is what happens with heterogeneous projects, and

in particular whether good projects at t=2 are sacrificed to securitization. To get at that,

we compare the profit generated by using a dollar to make securitized loans to low

projects at t=1 to the profit generated by using that dollar to make unsecuritized loans to

high projects at t=2.

       If the bank spends $1 to make securitized loans to low projects at t=1, it finances

1                 1                                                      f
   projects, holds of these projects on its books, and collects a fee of L . At t=2, it
dh                h                                                     dh

                         1− h 1− P 2
must sell the fraction               of its portfolio at a loss (1 − P 2 ) to meet the haircut,
                          h     P2

                                 1 ⎛ 1− h 1− P 2 ⎞
which leads to a total loss of     ⎜             ⎟ (1 − P2 ) . On net, its profit is:
                                 h⎝ h       P2 ⎠
                                         S




                                    fL 1 ⎛ 1− h 1− P 2 ⎞
                                      − ⎜              ⎟ (1 − P2 )                        (15)
                                    dh h ⎝ h      P2 ⎠
                                                  S




If the bank instead uses the dollar to make unsecuritized loans to high projects at t=2,

                   1                                               f                    f
then it finances     such projects and collects an up front fee of H , so its profit is H .
                   h                                               h                    h


Comparing the two profit levels yields the no waiting condition:




                                                                                              27
                                 fL        1 − h 1 − P2
                                    > fH +              (1 − P2 )                              (16)
                                 d           h     P2
                                               cost of maintaining haircut


        The advantage of doing everything right away now diminishes by the term in

curly brackets. The reason is that the bank might not be able to sustain its position

through the price decline, and have to liquidate it at disadvantageous prices before the

loan is paid off for certain at time 3. Because the bank might have to liquidate some or

all of its position, it is now more attractive to wait even though the benefit of financing

new good projects is unchanged at time 2. We can try to calibrate this equation. If the

price does not fall too much, this additional term is small, and so it is still likely that there

are strong incentives to go all the way at t=1. In particular, this equation holds for our

parameter values. Bank borrowing thus leads to an even greater expansion of balance

sheet at time 1 than before, and even more extreme volatility of investment.

        We also need to check whether banks hoard cash so they could invest it during the

slump. To do this, we compare the profit generated by using a dollar to make securitized

loans to finance projects at t=1 to the profit generated by using that dollar to buy

                                                                                                1
underpriced securities at t=2. If the bank makes securitized loans at t=1, it finances
                                                                                                dh

                  1                                                                  f
projects, holds     of these projects on its books, and collects an up front fee of    . At
                  h                                                                 dh

                             1− h 1− P 2
t=2, it must sell fraction               of its portfolio at loss (1 − P2 ) to meet the haircut,
                              h     P2

                                 1 ⎛ 1− h 1− P 2 ⎞
which leads to a total loss of     ⎜             ⎟ (1 − P2 ) . Thus, on net, it generates a profit
                                 h⎝ h       P2 ⎠
                                         S




                                                                                                28
                                    f 1 ⎛ 1− h 1− P 2 ⎞
                                     − ⎜              ⎟ (1 − P2 )                        (17)
                                   dh h ⎝ h      P2 ⎠
                                                 S



                                                              ⎛ 1 ⎞⎛ 1 ⎞
        If the bank instead saves the dollar, then it can buy ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟ underpriced
                                                              ⎝ h ⎠ ⎝ P2 ⎠

securities, yielding a profit

                                      ⎛ 1 ⎞⎛ 1 ⎞
                                      ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟ (1 − P2 )                                  (18)
                                      ⎝ h ⎠ ⎝ P2 ⎠

Comparing the two levels of profits yields the no hoarding cash condition:

                                f             1 − h 1 − P2 1 − P2
                                  − (1 − P2 )             >                              (19)
                                d               h     P2     P2
                                     cost of maintaining haircut


        This is a very similar condition to the one before. It is now more attractive than

before to retain cash, because while the benefit of cash is the same, the cost of investing

fully at t=1 is higher since the position might not be carried to full maturity. Nonetheless,

to the extent that the incremental term is small, the bank might still retain no cash.     In

particular, the condition holds for our parameter values.

        Are these conditions plausible? Recall that the bank’s profit function is linear in

retained cash, so it always retains everything or nothing, i.e., is at a corner. As long as

the bank does not expect a massive price collapse, it keeps no cash. The benefits of

committing the entire balance sheet to securitization in terms of immediate profits are

only enhanced by leverage.

        These conditions also shed light on the reason why banks oppose mark to market

accounting. In this model, banks are forced to liquidate their positions by creditors when

they cannot meet collateral requirements even though the securities are perfectly sound if



                                                                                          29
held to maturity. The only reason for liquidation is the under-pricing of collateral in an

inefficient market. If there were no mark to market and collateral was never liquidated,

banks could use their balance sheets to underwrite even more securities without fear of

portfolio liquidation. Absence of mark to market accounting is equivalent to extending

the maturity of debt. As a consequence, absence of mark to market accounting would

generally be associated with higher leverage. Holding haircuts constant, mark to market

deters banks from leveraging too much, because they want to avoid liquidating collateral.

Eliminate mark to market, banks would say, and we will finance more investment.

       This reasoning is very partial, however. In a more general model, haircuts and

interest rates would have to be higher when there is no mark to market collateral whose

liquidation protects creditors. As a consequence, banks would in fact be able to borrow

less and finance fewer projects. Put differently, bank leverage on good terms is only

possible when creditors are protected by mark to market accounting. Banks cannot have

it both ways: they cannot simultaneously be able to borrow to expand their balance

sheets, and rely on non-transparent accounting to hide losses. Indeed, hedge funds can

borrow precisely because they post liquid collateral to their lenders, and mark it to market

so lenders can at all times ascertain the funds’ borrowing capacity.




Bubbles with Leverage


       We now consider how leverage interacts with bubbles, i.e., what happens with

P1 > 1 ? The skin in the game condition and the haircut conditions now become:


                                      Nd = E0 + L1                                     (20)



                                                                                         30
                                                E1 (1 − h)
                                         L1 =              ,                             (21)
                                                    h


                                                               E1
where E1 = P1 Nd − L1 . Combining equations yields                = P1 Nd , so
                                                               h


                                                     E1
                                             Nd =                                        (22)
                                                     hP1


               E1        E (1 − h)              E0 Ph
In addition,       = E0 + 1        , so E1 =          1
                                                            .
               hP1          h                1 − P1 (1 − h)


Plugging back into (22), we obtain


                                             E1       E0
                                      Nd =      =               .                        (23)
                                             hP1 1 − P1 (1 − h)

       This equation explains how the balance sheet of the bank further expands in a

bubble. (Note that this condition reduces to the earlier one for P1 = 1 .) With leverage,

                                          dN
unlike without leverage, we have              > 0 . The reason is that the bank retains some
                                          dP1

securities on its balance sheet as skin in the game, but in a bubble these securities are

more valuable than their cost, so the bank’s equity rises. Higher equity in turn allows the

bank to borrow more and to finance more projects than it could with P1 = 1 .

       Going back to our example with h=.2, d=.2, and P1 = 1.1, the number of projects

being financed is now 40 times the initial equity, the collateral is about 8 times the initial

equity, the short term borrowing is about 7 times the initial equity, the debt equity ratio

with mark to market accounting is 4, and the debt equity ratio with book value accounting




                                                                                           31
is 7. These numbers can be blown up substantially with a lower h. Bubbles thus further

increase the leverage and the balance sheet of the bank.

       Not surprisingly, the profitability of the bank now becomes even higher during

the boom. The bank has two types of profits at t=1. It collects Nf as fees from firms

regardless of the mode of financing and it collects ( P1 − 1)(1 − d ) N from security buyers

when P1 > 1 . If the bank distributes these profits as dividends and compensation to

employees, it will show enormous profitability in good times. As before, bubbles make

it only more likely that the bank uses all of its balance sheet to finance securitization at

t=1, even if it anticipates that some or all of its portfolio will need to be liquidated later.

And, as before, bubbles create distortions in the financing of investments in favor of

projects that are available for financing in booms and that are easier to securitize.

       A final question to ask is what happens to liquidation at t=2 after the bubble

collapses. As before

                                             E2      NdP2 − L1
                                     h=           =                                           (24)
                                           E2 + L2 ( Nd − S ) P2



                   E1 (1 − h)         E
Plugging in L1 =              and Nd = 1 yields
                       h              hP1

                                             E1 (1 − h) P1 − P2
                                       S=                                                     (25)
                                             hP1 h         P2


so the bank must liquidate fraction
                                             (1 − h ) P1 − P 2    of its portfolio at t=2. Finally,
                                                h       P2

                      E0 Ph
plugging in E1 =            1
                                  yields
                   1 − P1 (1 − h)




                                                                                                32
                                        E0       (1 − h) P1 − P2
                                                                                         (26)
                                   1 − P1 (1 − h) h         P2

and all of the previous comparative statics go through (h smaller, sell more; P2 lower, sell

more). Also,

                                               ∂S
                                                   >0                                    (27)
                                               ∂P1

so, fixing P2 , the greater the bubble at t=1 the greater the liquidation at t=2.




Summary


    1) Leverage promotes a further expansion of balance sheets in boom times, and

        generally increases the cyclicality of investment and profits.


    2) Leverage leads to liquidations of bank portfolios at prices below fundamental

        values in bad times.


    3) The principal source of instability is securitization. Short term borrowing makes

        it worse, and may lead to much higher price volatility (section 5). But the

        mechanism of transmission of investor sentiment into commercial banking and

        the real economy is securitization.


    4) The result that equity injections will not lead to any new real investment might

        only become stronger if prices fall further with leverage, as banks use fresh

        capital to pay down debt and avoid liquidating their portfolios at fire sale prices.




                                                                                           33
5: Determination of P2

         Until now, we have discussed bank instability in light of exogenous volatility of

security prices. But of course, bank instability and the sharp declines in security prices

are often seen as mutually reinforcing. To deal with this issue, we need to endogenize P2 .

In this section, we use a variant of the “limits of arbitrage” model of Shleifer and Vishny

(1997) to endogenize prices with the banks playing the role of arbitrageurs. The key

assumption of that model is that there is a downward sloping demand curve for a given

security coming from the noise traders.         The equilibrium price is determined by

aggregating noise trader and bank demands for each security with outstanding supply.

         We focus on period 2. We assume that there is only one type of project, and

focus again on the equilibrium in which the bank holds no cash at the end of time 1. We

make a stability assumption that h > d (Shleifer-Vishny 1997 have a similar assumption),

and continue to assume that the banks do not fully liquidate their positions at time 2:

                                       1 – f > P2 ≥ 1 − h .                               (28)

         To model noise trader demand, we follow Shleifer and Vishny (1997) and assume

that noise traders have unlimited aggregate resources, but that their demands for

individual securities are unit elastic. So when noise traders have valuations given by

1 − σ , where σ is noise trader shock, their total demand for a given security is given by

1−σ                                                                               S
    = n2 ( P2 ) .   From (12), banks’ demand for a given security is d −            , where
 P2                                                                               N

         1 − h 1 − P2
S = dN                is the number of securities the bank sells at time 2. The condition for
           h     P2

noise trader shock being mild enough that (28) holds is:




                                                                                           34
                                          f (h − d )
                                   d+                <σ < h                           (29)
                                              h



       When this condition holds, the bank’s demand is:


                                            ⎡ 1 − h 1 − P2 ⎤
                              b2 ( P2 ) = d ⎢1 −           ⎥                          (30)
                                            ⎣    h    P2 ⎦


       The price of each security is determined by equating the total demand of the

banks and the noise traders with the total supply of each security, which is 1:


                                    n2 ( P2 ) + b2 ( P2 ) = 1                         (31)


       We can now substitute from the demands of noise traders and banks to obtain:


                               1−σ     ⎡ 1 − h 1 − P2 ⎤
                                   + d ⎢1 −           ⎥ = 1.                          (32)
                                P2     ⎣    h    P2 ⎦


Solving for P2 , we obtain


                                          h [1 + d ] − d − σ h
                                   P2 =                                               (33)
                                                 h−d


       Equation (33) is the expression for the endogenous equilibrium price at time 2.

The sensitivity of P2 with respect to the noise trader shock is given by:


                                           dP2   −h
                                               =                                      (34)
                                           dσ h − d




                                                                                       35
        P2 is more responsive to shocks when d is large and h is small. When haircuts are

small and therefore leverage is high, prices are extremely sensitive to shocks. Leverage

is destabilizing in this very precise sense. Indeed, when h is close to d, as it is in our

example, the market falls sharply in response to noise trader shocks and there is extreme

instability. In equilibrium, the banks will actually get out of the market. In addition, the

derivative of P2 with respect to h is positive, which means that, with more leverage

(lower h), for a given shock, P2 is lower. Leverage is destabilizing in this sense as well.



Relationship to parameter a in SV:

       As a final step in the analysis of the model with endogenous prices, we compare

our results to those in Shleifer and Vishny (1997). In that model, we did not focus on

leverage, but rather modeled the idea that the arbitrageurs’ funds under management at

time 2 are an increasing function of their performance between time 1 and time 2. As a

consequence, when noise trader pessimism deepened at time 2, arbitrageurs lost funds

under management precisely when noise trader sentiment deteriorated.

       Shleifer and Vishny modeled the responsiveness of funds under management to

past performance using a parameter a, which, in the notation of our current model would

be defined as follows (thinking of banks as arbitrageurs):


                                  P2b2 ( P2 ) = d (1 − a(1 − P2 )) , or                (35)


                                                 d (1 − a (1 − P2 ) )
                                   b2 ( P2 ) =                                         (36)
                                                         P2


For comparison, recall that, in our model, the demand from banks is given by:


                                                                                         36
                                                  ⎡ 1 − h 1 − P2 ⎤
                                    b2 ( P2 ) = d ⎢1 −           ⎥                        (37)
                                                  ⎣    h    P2 ⎦


Equating these two expressions yields:


                                    1 − a (1 − P2 )      1 − h 1 − P2
                                                    = 1−                                  (38)
                                          P2               h     P2


From this, we can calculate that:


                                                     1− h
                                            a = 1+                                        (39)
                                                      h

       This calculation offers a useful comparison of our model with Shleifer-Vishny

(1997). It shows that leverage, particularly with thin haircuts, leads to massively more

instability than there was in the original model.             Recall that “a” is the parameter

reflecting the sensitivity of funds under management to performance, with the idea that it

was a number like 1.1 or 1.2. If h = .2, as we assumed in our example, then the implied

“a” in the present model becomes equal to 5, which means that liquidation spirals of

assets are much more dramatic than in Shleifer-Vishny (1997).



6: The financial crisis and economic policy

       In broad terms, the financial crisis of 2007-2009 can be easily outlined. The

proximate cause of the crisis is the collapse of the housing bubble in the United States.

The US home prices tripled between mid 1990s and 2006, and then fell spectacularly by

perhaps some thirty percent in the last two years (Case 2008, Mayer et al. 2009).         The

housing bubble was accompanied by a major credit expansion, particularly in the



                                                                                           37
residential mortgage area, but also in corporate loans, commercial mortgages, and credit

card finance. Mortgages and other loans were to a very significant extent securitized, by

pooling portfolios of loans together, tranching them into securities with different risks,

and then selling them off (Coval et al. 2009).      Securitization was a major financial

innovation driven largely by huge demand for AAA securities by insurance companies,

money market funds, and other investors (Benmelech and Dlugosz 2009). The enormous

demand for mortgage-related securities also led to some decline in lending standards, and

perhaps to misleading ratings of these securities by the rating agencies (Keys et al. 2008,

Mian and Sufi 2009).      Banks were intimately involved in both underwriting these

securities, and holding large inventories on their own books. Banks financed these

inventories of mortgage-related securities, at least in part, through short term borrowing.

Thanks to these activities, bank profits and employee compensation grew spectacularly

between 2002 and 2007.

       As the housing bubble collapsed, mortgages began to default. Starting in the

summer of 2007, we saw rapid declines in prices of mortgage-related securities, including

AAA-rated bonds often used as collateral against short term loans. This price collapse

effectively ended new securitization. With rapidly falling prices, banks sold off their

inventories of securities very slowly. Some banks may have even increased credit risk

exposure through derivatives such as credit default swaps and indices such as ABX. As

the banks maintained their exposure to mortgage-related debt, real lending declined in

nearly all categories, and not just in areas where securitization was prevalent (Ivashina

and Scharfstein 2008).    In 2008, the Federal Reserve Bank and then the US Treasury

stepped into the crisis by first lending massively to banks against collateral, and then




                                                                                        38
moving to equity injections (Veronesi and Zingales 2008). These expensive rescue

attempts did not at least initially unfreeze bank lending to businesses. Rather, banks

hoarded cash (in the form of deposits at the Federal Reserve) and tried to hold on to their

inventories of securities.

       Our model does not have anything to say about the housing bubble, but it does

speak to every remaining key aspect of the narrative. Perhaps most important, the model

suggests that the banks got themselves into so much trouble not by their irrationality or

herding instincts, but by taking advantage of extraordinary temporary profit opportunities

afforded by securitization. This is not to say that the banks correctly anticipated the

depth of the crisis, and the troubles that were about to beset them (Gerardi et al 2008).

Rather, the model suggests that liquid markets created tremendous opportunities for

banks, and profit maximization pushed banks to take them. This is our interpretation of

the now-famous quote of Chuck Prince, then Chairman of Citigroup: “When the music

stops, in terms of liquidity, things will be complicated.    But, as long as the music is

playing, you’ve got to get up and dance. We are still dancing.” (Financial Times,7/9/07).

       From the point of view of policy analysis, the model suggests two broad themes.

First, the model identifies a fundamental instability of universal banking. Many

economists have recognized the cyclicality of credit/risk-taking and the use of short-term

debt as key factors contributing to the financial crisis. Some have attributed this behavior

to agency problems within firms, inadequate monitoring or unhealthy competitive

pressures to herd within the banking sector. We show that with modern banking the

forces pushing toward cyclical credit expansion financed by short-term debt are much




                                                                                         39
stronger than previously recognized. It will be difficult to wean the system of this

behavior through better governance or improved regulatory capital measures.

       Second, getting the economy out of trouble is likely to require addressing not just

the liabilities of the banks, such as long term debt, but also their assets. So long as the

banks continue to hold, and can choose to invest, in undervalued securities, the lending

mechanisms will be blocked or weakened by the banks’ own choice. This is true so long

as securities trade at prices below their fundamental values. Unlocking the lending

channel will require dealing directly with bank assets and not just their liabilities.




                                                                                         40
                                          References

Acharya,V., D. Gale and T. Yorulmazer, 2009. “Rollover Risk and Market Freezes,”

       Mimeo.

Adrian, T. and H. Shin, 2008. “Financial Intermediary Leverage and Value at Risk.”

       Federal Reserve Bank Staff Reports, 338.

Adrian, T. and H. Shin, 2009. “Money, Liquidity and Monetary Policy.”     AER        Papers

       and Proceedings, forthcoming.

Allen, F. and D. Gale, 1994. “Limited Market Participation and Volatility of Asset

       Prices.” American Economic Review, 84, 933-55.

Allen, F. and D. Gale, 1997. “Financial Markets, Intermediaries, and Intertemporal

       Smoothing,” Journal of Political Economy, 105, 523-546.

Allen, F. and D. Gale, 2000. “Bubbles and Crises.” Economic Journal, 110, 236-56.

Baker, M., and J. Wurgler, 2002. “Market Timing and Capital Strucutre.” Journal of

       Finance, 57, 1-32.

Baker, M., and J. Wurgler, 2004. “A Catering Theory of Dividends.” Journal of Finance

       59, 1125-1165.

Baker, M., R. Ruback and J. Wurgler, 2007. “Behavioral Corporate Finance: A Survey.”

       Handbook in Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance, E. Eckbo (ed.)

Baker, M., J. Stein, and J. Wurgler, 2003. “When does the Market Matter? Stock Prices

       and Equity-Dependent Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 969-1005.

Barro, R.,1990. “The Stock Market and Investment.” Review of Financial Studies,3, 115

       -132.

Benmelech, E. and N. Bergman, 2009. “Credit Traps.” Mimeo.




                                                                                        41
Benmelech, E. and J. Dlugosz, 2008. “The Alchemy of CDO Ratings.” Journal of

       Monetary Economics, forthcoming

Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler, 1989. “Agency Costs, Net Worth and Business

       Fluctuations.” American Economic Review, 79, 14-31.

Blanchard, O., C. Rhee, and L. Summers, 1993. “The Stock Market, Profit, and

       Investment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 115-136.

Brunnermeier, M., 2009. “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007-2008.”

       Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23, 77-100.

Brunnermeier, M. and L. Pedersen, 2009. “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity.”

        Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Caballero, R. and A. Krishnamurthy, 2008. “Collective Risk Management in a Flight to

       Quality Episode,” Journal of Finance, 63, 2195-2230.

Case, K., 2008. “The Central Role of House Prices in the Current Financial Crisis: How

    Will the Market Clear?,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, forthcoming.

Coval, J., J. Jurek, and E. Stafford, 2009. “The Economics of Structured Finance.”

       Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23, 3-26.

De Long, J.B., A. Shleifer, L. Summers, and R. Waldmann, 1989, “The Size and

       Incidence of the Losses from Noise Trading.” Journal of Finance, 44, 681-96.

De Long, A. Shleifer, L. Summers and, R. Waldmann, 1990. “Noise Trader Risk in

       Financial Markets.” Journal of Political Economy, 98, 703-38.

Diamond, D., 1984, “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring,” Review of

       Economic Studies, 51, 393-414.

Diamond, D. and P. Dybvig, 1983. “ Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance and Liquidity.”




                                                                                      42
       Journal of Political Economy, 91, 401-419.

Diamond, D. and R. Rajan, 2001. “Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation and Financial

       Fragility: A Theory of Banking,” Journal of Political Economy, 109, 287-327.

Diamond, D. and R. Rajan, 2009. “The Credit Crisis: Conjectures About Causes and

       Remedies.” AER Papers and Proceedings, forthcoming.

Diamond, D. and R. Rajan, 2009b, “Fear of Fire Sales and the Credit Squeeze,” Mimeo.

Farhi, E. and S. Panageas, 2006. “The Real Effects of Stock Market Mispricing at the

       Aggregate: Theory and Empirical Evidence.” Mimeo.

Farhi, E. and J. Tirole, 2008. “Competing Liquidities: Corporate Securities, Real Bonds

       and Bubbles.” Mimeo.

Fisher, I., 1933. “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions.” Econometrica.

Fostel, A., and J. Geanakoplos, 2008. “Leverage Cycles and the Anxious Economy.”

       American Economic Review, 98, 1211-1244.

Gerardi, K, A. Lehnert, P. Willen, and S. Sherland, 2008. “Making Sense of the

       Subprime Crisis,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, forthcoming.

Gorton, G., 2008. “The Subprime Panic.” Mimeo.

Gorton, G. and G. Pennacchi, 1995. “Banks and Loan Sales: Marketing Non-Marketable

       Assets.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 35, 389-411.

Gorton, G. and N. Souleles, 2006. “Special Purpose Vehicles and Securitization.” In

       The Risks of Financial Institutions, R. Stulz and M. Carey (eds.).

Gorton, G. and A. Winton, 2003. “Financial Intermediation: A Survey.” in Handbook of

       the Economics of Finance, G. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz (eds.).

Gromb, D. and D. Vayanos, 2002. “Equilibrium and Welfare in Markets with Financially




                                                                                       43
       Constrained Arbitrageurs.” Journal of Financial Economics, 66, 361-407.

Hart, O., and J. Moore. 1998. “Default and Renegotiation: A Dynamic Model of Debt,”

       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 1-41.

He, Z., and A. Krishnamurthy, 2008. “A Model of Capital and Crises,” Mimeo.

Holmstrom, B. and J. Tirole, 1997. “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the

       Real Sector.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 35-52.

Ivashina, V. and D. Scharfstein, 2008. “Bank Lending During the Financial Crisis

       of 2008.” Mimeo.

Kaplan, S. and J. Stein, 1993. “ The Evolution of Buyout Pricing and Financial Structure

       in the 1980s.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 313-358.

Kashyap, A., R. Rajan and J. Stein, 2002. “Banks as Liquidity Providers: An Explanation

       for the Co-Existence of Lending and Deposit-Taking.” Journal of Finance, 57,

       33-73.

Keynes, J.M., 1936. The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money.

       London: Macmillan.

Keys, B., T. Mukherjee, A. Seru, and V. Vig, 2008. “ Did Securitization Lead to Lax

       Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans.” Mimeo.

Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore, 1997. “ Credit Cycles.” Journal of Political Economy,

       105, 211-248.

Lamont, O. and J. Stein, 2006. “Investor Sentiment and Corporate Finance: Micro and

       Macro.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 96, 147-151.

Mayer, C., K. Pence, and S. Sherlund, 2009. “The Rise in Mortgage Defaults.” Journal

       of Economic Perspectives, 23, 27-50.




                                                                                        44
Mian, A. and A. Sufi, 2009. “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion:

       Evidence from the US Mortgage Default Crisis.” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics, forthcoming.

Minsky, H., 1986. Stabilizing an Unstable Economy.

Morck, R., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1990. “The Stock Market and Investment: Is

       the Market a Sideshow?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 157-215.

Polk, C. and P. Sapienza, 2009. “The Stock Market and Corporate Investment: A Test

       of Catering Theory.” Review of Financial Studies, 22, 187-217.

Rajan, R., 2006. “Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?” European

       Financial Management, 12.

Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny, 1992. “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market

       Equilibrium Approach.” Journal of Finance, 47, 1343-66.

Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny, 1997. “ The Limits of Arbitrage.” Journal of Finance,

       52, 35-55.

Stein, J., 1996. “Rational Capital Budgeting in an Irrational World.” Journal of Business,

       69, 429-55.

Sufi, A., 2007. “Information Asymmetry and Financing Arrangements: Evidence from

       Syndicated Loans.” Journal of Finance, 62, 629-668.

Ventura, J., 2003. “Economic Growth with Bubbles.” Mimeo.

Veronesi, P. and L. Zingales, 2008. “Paulson’s Gift.” Mimeo.

Williamson, O., 1988. “Corporate Finance and Corporate Governance.” Journal of

     Finance, 43, 567-92.




                                                                                       45
