                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              SEX AND SCIENCE:
              HOW PROFESSOR GENDER PERPETUATES THE GENDER GAP

                                           Scott E. Carrell
                                          Marianne E. Page
                                           James E. West

                                        Working Paper 14959
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14959


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2009




Thanks go to USAFA personnel: J. Putnam, D. Stockburger, R. Schreiner, K. Carson and P. Egleston
for assistance in obtaining the data, and to Deb West for data entry. Thanks also go to Charlie Brown,
Charles Clotfelter, Caroline Hoxby, Deborah Niemeier, Kim Shauman, Catherine Weinberger and
seminar participants at NBER Higher Education Working Group, PPIC, SDSU, UC Davis, UC Irvine,
and UC Santa Cruz for their helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed in this article
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of the USAF, DoD,
the U.S. Government, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Scott E. Carrell, Marianne E. Page, and James E. West. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Sex and Science: How Professor Gender Perpetuates the Gender Gap
Scott E. Carrell, Marianne E. Page, and James E. West
NBER Working Paper No. 14959
May 2009
JEL No. I20,J24

                                             ABSTRACT

Why aren’t there more women in science? Female college students are currently 37 percent less likely
than males to obtain a bachelor’s degree in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM), and
comprise only 25 percent of the STEM workforce. This paper begins to shed light on this issue by
exploiting a unique dataset of college students who have been randomly assigned to professors over
a wide variety of mandatory standardized courses. We focus on the role of professor gender. Our results
suggest that while professor gender has little impact on male students, it has a powerful effect on female
students’ performance in math and science classes, their likelihood of taking future math and science
courses, and their likelihood of graduating with a STEM degree. The estimates are largest for female
students with very strong math skills, who are arguably the students who are most suited to careers
in science. Indeed, the gender gap in course grades and STEM majors is eradicated when high performing
female students’ introductory math and science classes are taught by female professors. In contrast,
the gender of humanities professors has only minimal impact on student outcomes. We believe that
these results are indicative of important environmental influences at work.


Scott E. Carrell                                    James E. West
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics and Geosciences
University of California, Davis                     U.S. Air Force Acdemy
One Shields Avenue                                  2354 Fairchild Dr. #6K100
Davis, CA 95616                                     USAF Academy, CO 80840
and NBER                                            Jim.West@usafa.edu
secarrell@ucdavis.edu

Marianne E. Page
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616-8578
and NBER
mepage@ucdavis.edu
          “The inferior sex has got a new exterior. We got doctors, lawyers, politicians too...”

          (Annie Lennox, Sisters are doing it for Themselves)



1        Introduction

Why aren’t there more women in science? During the past forty years, women have infiltrated many
prestigious careers that were formerly dominated by men, and today the number of graduate degrees
in medicine, business and law are almost equally divided across the sexes. In contrast, female
college students are currently 37 percent less likely than males to obtain science and engineering
BA’s,1 and comprise only 25 percent of the science, technology, engineering and math (STEM)
workforce.2 What is the source of this discrepancy and why does it continue to exist when women
have successfully infiltrated so many other corners of the labor market? This question has spurred
hundreds of academic studies, widely publicized conferences, and government reports, but the
answers are still not well understood. As summarized in Xie and Shauman (2003), Women in
Science


          “Scholars have examined a variety of questions about women’s participation in, ex-
          clusion from, and contributions to the fields of science and engineering. Despite the
          significant breadth and depth of this research, much of it suffers from conceptual and
          methodological limitations that restrict the significance and usefulness of its findings.
          As a consequence, we have only limited knowledge of the processes that produce the
          gender differences in science participation and attainment.”


        The exact manner in which cognitive and behavioral differences intertwine with social forces to
produce differences in career outcomes is a subject of spirited debate. What we do know is that
through 12th grade, the gender gap in math and science achievement tests is very small, and that
it has been declining over the past 20 years.3 The small differences that do exist are not predictive
of men’s higher likelihood of choosing a STEM career or major in college (Xie and Shauman 2003).
Conditional on ability, the gender gap in the probability of completing a STEM degree is between
50 and 70 percent (Weinberger 1998, Weinberger 2001). Nor are the nearly non-existent differences
    1
        National Bureau of Economic Research (2006)
    2
        National Science Foundation (2006)
    3
        Feingold (1988) Friedman (1989) Goldin, Katz, and Kuziemko (2006) Hyde (1981) Hyde, Fennema, and Lamon
(1990) Leahey and Guo (2001) Linn and Hyde (1989) National Science Foundation (1904) Nowell and Hedges (1998)
and Xie and Shauman (2003).


                                                        2
in college preparatory math and science courses predictive of gender differences in college major
(Xie and Shauman 2003). Since aptitude and preparedness of the two sexes seem roughly equal
upon entering college, an important key to understanding the broader question of why men and
women’s representation in STEM careers is so different is understanding what happens to them
during college.

   This paper begins to shed light on this issue by exploiting a unique dataset of college students
who have been randomly assigned to professors over a wide variety of mandatory standardized
courses. We focus on the role of professor gender. Why might professor gender affect female
students’ propensity to persist in STEM? Role model effects are frequently cited as potentially
important factors affecting educational outcomes (Stake and Granger 1978, Kahle and Matyas
1987, Jacobs 1996, DiPrete and Buchmann 2006). Other factors might include gender differences
in the academic expectations of teachers, differences in teaching styles, or differences in the extent
to which teachers provide advice and encouragement.

   Randomized student placement, together with mandatory math and science courses at the
particular school we study, allow us to investigate how professor gender influences student outcomes
free of self-selection problems that plague existing research. At most universities students have a
large degree of freedom in choosing both their courses and their professors, even in their first year,
making it difficult to identify professors’ causal impact. Students at our institution are required
to take specific math and science courses in both their first year and in subsequent years, so it is
possible for us to examine the long-term effects of professor gender on female students’ success in
STEM without worrying about attrition bias. To our knowledge, we are the only study that is able
to address either the self-selection or attrition problems inherent in existing research.

   It is important to point out that if professor gender impacts female students, then these in-
fluences occur at a critical juncture in the life-cycle. Decisions about choosing a STEM major
are likely to have a substantial effect on future labor market opportunities. Furthermore, Xie and
Shauman (2003) show that most women with a STEM bachelor’s degree had initially planned on
majoring in a non-STEM field. This suggests that the path towards a career in science is not
primarily determined by the influence of social forces prior to college entry.

   Our results suggest that while professor gender has only limited impact on male students, it
has a powerful effect on female students’ performance in math and science classes, their likelihood
of taking future math and science courses, and their likelihood of graduating with a STEM degree.
The estimates are robust to the inclusion of controls for students’ initial ability, and they are
substantively largest for students with high SAT math scores. Indeed, among these students, the


                                                  3
gender gap in course grades and college major is eradicated when female students are assigned to
introductory math and science professors who are female. The fact that professor gender effects
are largest among women with strong math skills and a predisposition towards math and science is
important because this group of women is, arguably, most suited to science and engineering careers.
If we want to reduce the gender gap, these are precisely the women whom policies should target.

    We also attempt to distinguish the role of professor gender itself from the role of other (un-
observable) professor characteristics that are correlated with gender. We do this by estimating
each professor’s average “value-added” separately for male and female students and then looking
at the value-added distributions. We find that some male professors are very effective at teaching
female students — even more effective than they are at teaching male students. We also find the
reverse—that some female professors are more effective at teaching male students. This suggests
that the gender differences we observe are more likely to be driven by the manner in which the
course is taught, than by the presence of female role models. Among the highest ability female stu-
dents, however, the gender of introductory math and science professors continues to exert a positive
influence on the choice of a STEM major, even after controlling for professors’ value-added.

    The remainder of the paper unfolds as follows: Section 2 briefly describes the literature on this
important topic. Section 3 describes our dataset, and Section 4 discusses the statistical methods
we will employ. In Sections 5 and 6 we present our main results and estimates based on alternative
specifications. Section 7 discusses mechanisms. Section 8 concludes.



2    Background

There are many reasons that social scientists should care about understanding womens’ under-
representation in STEM careers. First, gender differences in entry into STEM careers explain a
substantial portion of the gender pay differential among college graduates (Eide 1994, Brown and
Corcoran 1997, Weinberger 1998, Weinberger 1999, Weinberger 2001, Weinberger 2006). Sociol-
ogists also argue that STEM is one of the most prestigious segments of the labor force (Hodge,
Siegel, and Rossi 1964) and that compared to men, women’s relatively low rates of participation in
STEM careers contributes to their relatively lower social status (Jacobs 1996, Reskin 1984, Reskin,
Hartmann, National Research Council Committee on Womens Employment and Related Social Is-
sues, on Behavioral, Sciences, and Education 1986). Another concern is that the low representation
of women in STEM careers leads to lower aggregate productivity than could be achieved if many
of the women who choose non-STEM careers would have been qualified scientists and engineers


                                                  4
(Xie and Shauman 2003, Weinberger 1998). Finally, Margolis and Fisher (2002) maintain that
the direction of future technology development will depend on the interests and life experiences of
STEM professionals. Taken together, these arguments suggest that the gender composition of the
STEM workforce may affect both the level and types of production that takes place in the United
States.

      Most social scientists agree that gender differences in the labor market are likely attributable
to a myriad of individual, familial, and social factors. Economists typically focus on the potential
effects of discrimination and on differences in preferences (Black and Strahan 2001, Blau and Kahn
2000, Goldin and Rouse 2000, Altonji and Blank 1999, Blakemore and Low 1984, Polachek 1978)
but a rich psychological literature suggests that equally skilled men and women may exhibit im-
portant differences that affect their labor market decisions. Beyer (1997) and Beyer and Bowden
(1997), for example, find that there are gender differences in individuals’ self perceptions of ability.
Further research suggests that these perceptions are linked to individuals’ expectations, aspirations,
and preferences for taking on difficult tasks.4 Women tend to have lower expectations about their
future performance than men (Beyer 1997, Elliot and Harackiewicz 1994), and they are more risk
averse (e.g. Eckel and Grossman (2008)). If STEM classes or careers are considered to be particu-
larly challenging then these gender differences may lead men and women to perform differently or
make different choices about which college majors and/or careers to pursue even when they have
comparable skills. Recent surveys of college students suggest that, indeed, women differentially
avoid these fields because they either lack interest, believe that they will be unwelcome, or have
concerns about the difficulty associated with relevant coursework (Weinberger 2006).

      At the same time, evidence suggests that the gender gap in outcomes that arises from these
psychological differences is mutable. For example, a growing body of experimental work shows that
the phenomenon of “stereotype threat,” can have substantive effects on individuals’ test perfor-
mance (Steele 1997, Spencer, Steele, and Quinn 1999), and that simply telling women that a math
test does not show gender differences leads to improved test scores. Stereotype threat effects are
observed even among women with high levels of proficiency and confidence (Weinberger 1998, Steele
and Aronson 1995, Steele 1997, Spencer, Steele, and Quinn 1999, Aronson, Lustina, Good, Keough,
Steele, and Brown 1999). Similarly, experimental research by Niederle and Yestrumskas (2008) finds
that men take on challenging tasks 50 percent more often than comparably performing women, but
that changes in institutional design that provide more flexible choices eliminates the gender gap
among high performers. Numerous researchers have suggested that relatively few college women
  4
      See Boggiano, Main, and Katz (1988), Cutrona, Cole, Colangelo, Assouline, and Russell (1994), Elliott and
Dweck (1988) and Harackiewicz and Elliot (1993).


                                                       5
choose STEM majors because they face social pressures to conform to gender norms.5 If these
claims are true, then they provide further evidence that women’s career choices are mutable.

       There are numerous ways in which students’ experiences in the classroom might lead to gender
differences in orientation towards science and math. Teachers may have different academic expec-
tations of boys and girls; they may employ different teaching styles, or provide different levels of
attention, advice, and encouragement. The presence of female role models teaching STEM could
also be influential. Thus, there is ample reason to believe that female college students’ interest and
ability in pursuing the initial steps towards a STEM career (e.g. doing well in math and science
courses, choosing a STEM major) might be influenced by their learning environment.

       Many studies have investigated the effects of teacher gender at the elementary and secondary
school level6 but only a handful have considered the post-secondary level(Canes and Rosen 1995,
Neumark and Gardecki 1998, Rothstein 1995, Bettinger and Long 2005, Hoffmann and Oreopoulos
2007). Most of these studies do not focus on STEM per se, and all of them face self-selection
problems because the traditional university path enables students to choose their schools, courses,
and/or professors. This has made it impossible for previous researchers to cleanly identify the
estimated relationship between professor gender and student outcomes.

       The data used in this paper are unique because the institution under study has a mandatory
course of study in the first year, and employs class random assignment. Thus, neither the set of
courses, nor the professor’s gender is under the student’s control. A further advantage of our dataset
is that course grades are not determined by an individual student’s professor. Instead, all faculty
members teaching the same course use an identical syllabus and give the same exams during a
common testing period.7 As a result, we can circumvent the selection and attrition problems
inherent in previous studies, and provide the cleanest evidence to-date.
   5
       See Arnold (1995), Badgett and Folbre (2003), Betz (1997), Betz and Hackett (1981), Betz and Hackett (1983),
Eccles (1987), Hyde (1997), Hall and Sandler (1982), Hanson (1996), Lapan, Shaughnessy, and Boggs (1996), Leslie,
McClure, and Oaxaca (1998), Lunneborg (1982), Seymour and Hewitt (2000), Tobias (1993), Tobias and Lin (1991)
and Ware and Lee (1988).
   6
       See Nixon and Robinson (1999), Ehrenberg, Goldhaber, and Brewer (1995), Dee (2005), Dee (2007), Holmlund
and Sund (2007), Carrington, Tymms, and Merrell (2005), Carrington, Tymms, and Merrell (2008), Lahelma (2000)
and Lavy and Schlosser (2007)
   7
       While the students in Hoffman and Oreopoulos’s dataset are not randomly assigned and do not take mandatory
STEM courses, their dataset has one similarity to ours, which is that course grades are determined by a general exam
that is given to all students enrolled in the course, regardless of which professor they have taken the course from.




                                                          6
3         Data

Our data come from the United States Air Force Academy (USAFA). The Air Force Academy
is a fully accredited undergraduate institution of higher education with an approximate annual
enrollment of 4, 500 students. All students attending the USAFA receive 100 percent scholarship
to cover their tuition, room, and board. Additionally, each student receives a monthly stipend of
$845 to cover books, uniforms, computer, and other living expenses. All students are required to
graduate within four years8 and typically serve a minimum five-year commitment as a commissioned
officer in the United States Air Force following graduation.

         Despite the military setting, in many ways the USAFA is comparable to other selective post-
secondary institutions in the United States. Similar to most selective universities and liberal arts
colleges, USAFA faculty have earned their graduate degrees from a broad sample of high qual-
ity programs in their respective fields. Approximately 40 percent of classroom instructors have
terminal degrees, as one might find at a university where introductory coursework is taught by
graduate student teaching assistants. On the other hand, the number of students per section in
any given course rarely exceeds 25, and student interaction with faculty members in and outside
of the classroom is encouraged. In this respect, students’ learning experiences at USAFA more
closely resemble those of students who attend small liberal arts colleges. There are approximately
32 academic majors offered at USAFA across the humanities, social sciences, basic sciences, and
engineering.

         Students at USAFA are high achievers, with average math and verbal SAT scores at the 88th and
85th percentiles of the nationwide SAT distribution.9 Students are drawn from each Congressional
district in the US by a highly competitive process, insuring geographic diversity. Fourteen-percent
of applicants were admitted to USAFA in 2007.10 Approximately 17 percent of the students are
female, five percent are black, seven percent are Hispanic and six percent are Asian. Seven percent
of students at USAFA have a parent who graduated from a service academy and 17 percent have
a parent who previously served in the military.

         Table 1 presents statistics for USAFA and a set of comparison schools. We show the 25th and
75th percentiles of each school’s verbal and SAT math scores, undergraduate enrollment, acceptance
    8
         Special exceptions are given for religious missions, medical “set-backs”, and other instances beyond the control
of the individual.
    9
         See http://professionals.collegeboard.com/profdownload/sat percentile ranks 2008.pdf for a SAT score distribu-
tions.
    10
         See the National Center for Education Statistics: http://nces.ed.gov/globallocator/


                                                              7
rates, and percent female for selected universities. SAT scores at USAFA are comparable to the
SAT scores of students at top ranked public universities such as UCLA and UNC Chapel Hill,
but, unlike these schools, only nineteen percent of USAFA students are female. This characteristic
makes USAFA most comparable to selective universities that have strong traditions in science and
technology, such as the Georgia Institute of Technology, or Renssaleur Polytechnical Institute. Our
results are thus most salient for women who enter college with strong math skills, are already
interested in science, and who are comfortable in a predominantly male environment. This group is
not representative of all female college students, but it is a group that is highly salient . One could
argue that students with strong math skills and an interest in science are precisely the types of
students whom efforts to reduce the gender gap in STEM careers should target. Put differently, we
think that our estimates speak most directly to the issue of women’s persistence in STEM, rather
the question of what causes women to enter STEM majors.


3.1       The Dataset

Our dataset includes 9, 481 students who comprise the USAFA graduating classes of 2000 through
2008. Data for each student’s high school (pre-treatment) characteristics and their achievement
while at the USAFA were provided by USAFA Institutional Research and Assessment and were
stripped of individual identifiers by the USAFA Institutional Review Board. Student-level pre-
treatment data includes whether students were recruited as athletes, whether they attended a
military preparatory school, and measures of their academic, athletic and leadership aptitude.
Academic aptitude is measured through SAT verbal and SAT math scores and an academic com-
posite computed by the USAFA admissions office, which is a weighted average of an individual’s
high school GPA, class rank, and the quality of the high school attended. The measure of pre-
treatment athletic aptitude is a score on a fitness test required by all applicants prior to entrance.11
The measure of pre-treatment leadership aptitude is a leadership composite computed by the US-
AFA admissions office, which is a weighted average of high school and community activities (e.g.,
student council offices, Eagle Scout, captain of sports team).

       Table 2 provides summary statistics and Figure 1 plots the distribution of pre-treatment aca-
demic variables by gender. As in nationally representative samples, the upper tail of the math score
distribution is somewhat thicker for male than it is for female students. Since our estimation strat-
  11
       Barron, Ewing, and Waddell (2000) found a positive correlation between athletic participation and educational
attainment and Carrell, Fullerton, and West (2008) found a positive correlation between fitness scores and academic
achievement.



                                                          8
egy is based on random assignment and includes pre-treatment characteristics as controls, small
differences in the distribution will not contaminate the analysis.

       Our academic performance measures consist of final grades in core courses for each individual
student by course and section-semester-year. Students at USAFA are required to take a core
set of approximately 30 courses in mathematics, basic sciences, social sciences, humanities, and
engineering, but we focus only on mandatory introductory and follow-on courses in mathematics,
physics, chemistry, engineering, history, and English.12 A distinct advantage of our dataset is that
all students are required to take a follow-on related curriculum. Grades are determined on an A,
A-, B+, B · · · C-, D, F scale where an A is worth 4 grade points, an A- is 3.7 grade points, a B+ is
3.3 grade points, etc. The sample grade point average in core science courses is 2.72 among females
and 2.85 among males. The grade point average in core humanities courses is 2.81 among females
and 2.73 among males. We standardize these course grades to have a mean of zero and a variance
of one.

       We also examine students’ decisions to enroll in optional follow-on math and science classes,
whether they graduate with a bachelor’s degree, and their choice of academic major. In our sample,
female students are less likely than males to take higher level elective math courses (34 percent of
females vs. 50 percent of males) and less likely to major in STEM (24 vs. 40 percent13 ), but are
more likely to graduate (84 vs. 81 percent).

       Individual professor-level data were obtained from USAFA historical archives and the USAFA
Center for Education Excellence and were matched to the student achievement data for each course
taught, by section-semester-year.14 We have information on each professor’s academic rank, gender,
education level (M.A. or Ph.D.), and years of teaching experience at USAFA. During the period we
study, there were 251 different faculty members who taught introductory mathematics, chemistry,
or physics courses. Nineteen-percent (47 of 251) of these faculty were female and taught 23-percent
(289 of 1, 244) of the introductory math and science course-sections. 112 different faculty members
taught humanities courses, of which 21-percent (24) were female.
  12
       Course descriptions for Math 130, 141, 142; Physics 110, 221; Chemistry 141, 142; History 101, 202; English
111, 211; and the required engineering courses (aeronautical, astronautical, electrical, mechanical, civil, and thermo
dynamics) can be found at: http://www.usafa.edu/df/dfr/curriculum/CHB.pdf
  13
       Figures exclude the biological sciences, which require less mathematics and have historically higher rates of female
participation. When including biological sciences the gender difference is smaller (40 vs. 45 percent).
  14
       Due to the sensitivity of the data we were only able to obtain the professor observable data for the mathematics,
chemistry, physics, English, and history departments. Due to the large number of faculty in these departments, a set
of demographic characteristics (e.g., female assistant professor, PhD with 3 years of experience) does not uniquely
identify an individual faculty member.


                                                              9
3.2       Student Assignment to Courses and Professors

Prior to the beginning of the freshman year, students take placement exams in mathematics, chem-
istry, and select foreign languages, and the scores on these exams are used to place students into the
appropriate beginning core courses (i.e., remedial math, Calculus I, Calculus II, etc.). Conditional
on course placement, the USAFA Registrar randomly assigns students to core course sections.15
Thus, throughout their four years of study, students have no ability to choose their required core
course professors. Since faculty members teaching the same course use an identical syllabus and
give the same exams during a common testing period, grades in core courses are a consistent mea-
sure of relative achievement across all students.16 These institutional characteristics assure there
is no self-selection of students into (or out of) courses or towards certain professors.

       Table 2 indicates that the types of students assigned to female faculty are nearly indistinguish-
able from those assigned to male faculty. In math and science courses, the average class size for
female faculty is 19.2 compared to 18.9 for males. In addition, male and female professors have
a similar numbers of female students per section, and similar average scores on SAT verbal, SAT
math, academic composite, and algebra/trigonometry tests.

       To formally test whether course assignment is random with respect to student and faculty gen-
der, we have regressed student gender on faculty gender, by course type. The results of this analysis
are shown in specifications 1 and 2 of Table 3, where we see that the correlation between student
and faculty gender is always small and statistically insignificant. In Specifications 3 through 5
we examine whether there are any differences in the types of female students who are assigned to
female professors by regressing student attributes on an indicator variable for whether the student
was assigned a female professor. Our estimates indicate that there is no sizeable or systematic cor-
relation between professor gender and students’ SAT and academic composite scores. For example,
female students who are assigned to female math and science professors have slightly lower SAT
math and verbal scores but slightly higher academic composite scores. The differences are of trivial
magnitude, and most are not significantly different from zero. Specification 7, which combines the
SAT and academic composite into one measure also produces an estimate of the relationship that
is small, positive, and statistically insignificant. Carrell and West (2008) also show that student
assignment to core courses at USAFA is random with respect to peer characteristics and faculty
academic rank, experience, and terminal degree status.
  15
       The one exception is introductory chemistry, where the 92 lowest ability freshman students each year are ability
grouped into four separate sections and are taught by the most experienced professors.
  16
       The one exception is that in some core courses at USAFA, 5 to 10-percent of the overall course grade is earned
by professor/section specific quizzes and/or class participation.


                                                           10
4      Statistical Methods

We begin by estimating the following linear regression model:

    Yicjst = φ1 + β1 F emalei + β2 F emalej + β3 F emalei F emalej + φ2 Xicst + φ3 Pj + γct + icjst (1)

where Yicjst is the outcome measure for student i in course c with professor j in section s in
semester-year t. For academic performance outcomes, we normalize grades within each course and
semester to have a mean of zero and variance of one. F emalei is an indicator for whether student
i is female and F emalej is an indicator for whether professor j is female. The β coefficients are
the primary coefficients of interest in our study. β1 represents the difference in mean performance
between female and male students. β2 is the value added from having a female professor, and,
β3 indicates the extent to which having a female professor differentially affects female vs. male
students. Because students are randomly assigned, estimates of the β coefficients will be unbiased.

     The vector Xicst includes the following student characteristics: SAT math and SAT verbal
test scores, academic and leadership composites, algebra/trigonometry placement test score, fitness
score, race, whether the student was recruited as an athlete, and whether he/she attended a military
preparatory school. Pj is the academic rank of professor j. γct are course by semester-year fixed
effects, which control for unobserved mean differences in academic achievement or grading standards
across courses and time. The inclusion of these fixed effects ensures that the model identifies
professor quality using only the within course by semester-year variation in student achievement.
icjst is the error term. Standard error estimates are clustered by professor.

     We implement a slightly modified version of (1) to estimate the effect of professor gender in
initial courses on performance in follow-on related courses:
                               P                         P
                                  F emalejt                  F emalejt
                                     j                             j
 Yic0 js0 t0 = φ1 +β1 F emalei +β2             +β3 F emalei                   +φ2 Xicst +γc0 s0 t0 +ic0 js0 t0 (2)
                                         nit                           nit
whereYic0 jks0 t0 is performance in the follow-onPcourse, c0 in section s0 and semester-year t0 , having
                                                      F emalejt0
                                                  j
taken professor j in the initial coursework.           nit0        is the proportion of introductory course
faculty j who were female for student i at time        t0 .   To adjust for any possible professor, section,
or year effects in the follow-on course, we include a section by course by semester-year fixed effect,
γc0 s0 t0 . As in (1), we are primarily interested in the β’s, which measure the average differences
across male and female students, the effect of having more female professors in the introductory
STEM courses, and the differential effect across male and female students of being assigned more
female professors in introductory courses.

                                                      11
         To estimate the effect of professor gender on longer term outcomes, such as choosing to take
higher level math or graduating with a technical degree, we estimate a variation of (2):
                                   P                          P
                                      F emalejt                  F emalejt
                                                  j                                j
              Dit0 = φ1 + β1 F emalei + β2                       + β3 F emalei                    + φ2 Xit + ijt0        (3)
                                                       nit                              nit
Where Dit0 is a dummy variable that indicates whether student i at time t0 chose to take a higher
level math course or chose a STEM major. As before, the β coefficients are the coefficients of
interest.



5         Estimated Effects of Introductory Course Professor Gender in
          Science and Math Classes

5.1         Estimated Effects on Course Performance in the Professor’s Own Course

Figure 4 provides unconditional mean estimates by student and professor gender. The pattern of
estimates shown in the figure are quantitatively and qualitatively similar to those produced by
equation (1), which include all of the covariates discussed in the previous section and are shown
in Table 4. The first two columns of Table 4 show the estimated effects for all students, while
the remaining columns focus on students with increasingly strong math skills. We include detailed
student-level control variables in Column 1; Column 2 replaces the control variables with individual-
student fixed effects.

         For the full sample, our estimates on the female faculty dummy variable indicate that when
male students are taught by female professors they end up with somewhat lower course grades
than when they are taught by males.17 The coefficient on the female professor dummy is between
−0.04 (Column 2) and −0.05 (Column 1), which suggests that female professors lower male students’
course grades by about 4 to 5 percent of a standard deviation. The magnitude of the teacher gender
effects is swamped, however, by the estimated coefficient on the female student dummy (Column 1,
Row 2), which indicates that women, on average, score 16 percent of a standard deviation lower than
men whose math skills were comparable upon entry into the USAFA. Given that we are controlling
for initial skills, this is a dramatic discrepancy, which can only be documented because of the
unique, randomized, nature of our study. In most university settings, the possibility of differential
selection into courses would make it impossible to detect this phenomenon.
    17
         The estimated effect is not statistically significant across all of the subsamples indicated in Columns 3-6 or across
all of the robustness checks in Table 5


                                                               12
   The third row of Table 4 displays the estimated coefficient on the female student×female pro-
fessor interaction. Focusing first on Column 1, we see that the estimate is of substantive magnitude
(10 percent of a standard deviation) and positive, indicating that female students’ performance in
math and science courses improves substantially when the course is taught by a female professor.
In fact, taken together with the estimates in rows 1 and 2, the estimated coefficient on the inter-
action term suggests that having a female professor reduces the gender gap in course grades by
approximately two thirds. This finding reflects both the fact that male students do worse when
they have a female professor, and that female students do significantly better. The absolute gain
to women from having a female professor is 5 percent of a standard deviation (−0.049 + 0.100).

   The estimates shown in Column 1 are based on regressions that control for ability by including
observables, and they provide information about the relative gains to men and women from having
a male vs. female professor in first year math and science classes. The next column replaces the
student control variables with an individual fixed effect. In this regression, the coefficient on the
interaction term indicates how much better female students do when they have female professors,
compared to their own performance in other mandatory first year math and science courses. When
the estimated coefficients on the female professor dummy and interaction term are added together
(−.041 + 0.139) the resulting estimate indicates that, conditional on own ability, female students’
performance improves by 10 percent of a standard deviation.

   Columns 3 - 6 focus on women who entered college with very high math skills. Columns 3 and
4 show the regression estimates for students whose SAT math score was above 660 and Columns
5 and 6 show the same results for students who scored above 700 on the SAT math. These scores
correspond to the median and 75th percentile of the distribution at USAFA, and to the 90th and
95th percentiles of the national SAT Math distribution. Although not statistically different from
one another, the pattern of the estimated coefficients provides suggestive evidence that the gender
gap in course grades grows with math ability. Since we control for initial SAT math scores and
math placement test scores in our regressions, this is unlikely to reflect men’s higher likelihood
of scoring at the very top of the distribution prior to college, rather, it suggests that either 1)
there are gender differences in math/science ability that are not captured by the initial controls,
or 2) something about the college experience has a particularly detrimental effect on the math and
science performance of highly skilled women.

   The most striking pattern in Table 4 is that as female students’ initial math skills increase,
the relative importance of professor gender also increases. In fact, at the top of the distribution
(Column 5), having a female professor completely closes the gender gap (−0.169 + 0.177). Notably,
at higher skill levels, the evidence that professor gender matters to male students also weakens.

                                                 13
We speculate that something about the classroom environment created by female math and science
professors has a powerful effect on the performance of women with very strong math skills — with
virtually no expense incurred by their comparable male peers. This is a particularly important
result as men and women with strong math skills are arguably those whom we would most like to
see entering STEM careers .


5.2       Longer-term Effects of Professor Gender

Our main finding is that female students perform substantively better in their math and science
courses when they are taught by a woman. Since we are interested in understanding why the
prevalence of women in science careers is lower than that of men, our next task is to examine whether
these effects extend into longer-term outcomes; course performance itself is only interesting to the
extent that it affects pathways into STEM careers. Table 5 provides the results from estimating the
effect of professor gender (as measured by the proportion of introductory courses taught by female
faculty) on longer-term outcomes. We look at four outcomes: whether the student withdraws from
the USAFA,18 the student’s performance in all required follow-on STEM coursework,19 whether the
student chooses to take higher level math courses beyond those that are required for graduation
with a non-STEM degree, and whether she graduates with a STEM degree. All four of these
outcomes are correlated with future career choices. Columns 1-5 show that, conditional on entering
math skills, women and men are equally likely to withdraw from the USAFA. However, female
students perform significantly worse in follow-on STEM coursework, are less likely to take higher
level math courses, and are less likely to graduate with a STEM degree compared to male students.
It is also clear that gender differences in college major are much larger when we exclude biological
sciences (Columns 4 vs. 3), which typically require less math, and have higher rates of female
participation.20

       The estimated effect of professor gender on these long-term outcomes varies across the sub-
samples, with the biggest effects, by far, accruing to women with high entering math ability.
Across the full sample, there is no statistically significant evidence that having a higher proportion
of female professors affects a woman’s likelihood of withdrawing, her performance in follow-on
coursework, her probability of taking higher level math courses, or her probability of graduating
  18
       The results we present in Table 5 show attrition after the second year; however, results are qualitatively similar
for 1-year and 4-year attrition.
  19
       See footnote 12 for a list of these courses
  20
       We find qualitatively similar results when we also exclude environmental engineering, a field with a relatively
higher rate of female participation.


                                                            14
with a STEM major. However, as the sample narrows to include increasingly high skilled women
(as approximated by their SAT math score), the estimated effects of professor gender become much
larger and statistically significant. Among the top quartile of female students, and for each long-
term outcome, higher proportions of female professors in introductory math and science courses
are associated with reductions in the gender gap. In fact, the estimates suggest that increasing
the fraction of female professors from 0 to 100 percent would completely eliminate the gender gap
in math and science majors. For example, Column 5 of Panel C indicates that among the highest
ability women, those whose introductory math and science professors are exclusively female are
26 percentage points more likely to major in STEM than those who are exclusively assigned to
male faculty. For this high ability group, the male/female gap in the probability of completing a
STEM major is 27-percent. At the same time, there is no evidence that having a female professor
affects a female student’s likelihood of dropping out, regardless of her ability level. This suggests
that whatever it is about female professors that affects women in their first year math and science
courses, it is not something that changes retention rates, but rather something that changes their
preferences for math and science. This interpretation is consistent with Zafar (2009) who finds
evidence at Northwestern University that the gender gap in academic majors is “due to differences
in beliefs about enjoying coursework and differences in preferences.”



6     Robustness Checks

6.1   Alternative Specifications

In Table 6, we examine our estimates’ robustness to changes in model specification that either 1)
exclude individual controls, or 2) increase flexibility. Differences between our main estimates and
the results from the first exercise might indicate that our estimates are somehow driven by an unob-
served correlation between student ability and professor assignment. The second exercise addresses
the possibility that the relationship between entry level characteristics and student outcomes might
vary with student gender. The estimates that are produced by these specifications are very similar
to the estimates produced by (1).

    We have also explored the possibility that our estimates are driven by a few female professors
whose approach to teaching differs substantially from the rest of the faculty. In order to address this
concern, we have run regressions that replace the female professor dummy in (1) with professor-level
fixed effects, and looked at the distribution of the estimated fixed effects. We find that over 2/3 of
the female professor fixed effects are positive and statistically significant, which suggests that our

                                                  15
estimated professor gender effects are pervasive, rather than driven by a handful of teachers.


6.2       Estimated Effects of Professor Gender in English and History Classes

Next, we consider the role of professor gender in humanities courses. Table 7 shows the estimated
effects of professor gender when we estimate equation (1) for introductory English and history
courses instead of math and science. The estimates are strikingly different. There is no observable
gender gap in course performance, and there is no evidence that female students’ course grades
are improved when they have a female professor. As in Tables 4 and 5, we find weak evidence
that both men and women have lower humanities grades when the course is taught by a female
professor, but most of the coefficient estimates on the female professor dummy are barely significant
at the 10 percent level.21 Specifications 3-6 carry forward our analyses for longer-term outcomes.
We look at the effect of professor gender in initial humanities courses on later course selection
and choice of major. All of the estimated female professor coefficients are small, and none are
statistically significant. This indicates that the gender of professors in initial humanities courses
has no effect on male students’ longer-term choices. Similarly, most of the estimated coefficients
on the interaction term are small, and only one is statistically different from zero, suggesting that
female students’ long run choices are also unrelated to the sex of the professor who teaches their
humanities courses.

       These results stand in direct contrast to our estimated professor effects in math and science,
where it appears that female students with strong math skills are very strongly affected by the
gender of their introductory course professors. The differences in results across science and the
humanities also suggests that our math/science estimates are not likely driven by the general
(military) culture of the institution we study.
  21
       We have also estimated a fixed effects model analogous to the specification that is employed in Columns 2,4, and
6 of Table 4. The results from this specification suggest that when male students are taught by women, their grades
are about 20 percent of a standard deviation lower than their grades in similar classes not taught by women. Among
female students, however, course performance seems to be unrelated to professor gender. Results are available upon
request from the authors.




                                                           16
7         Mechanisms

7.1         Is it All About Professor Gender?

Table 4 suggests that female students’ initial math and science grades are substantively higher when
they are taught by female professors. The estimated effects are particularly large among female
students in the upper quartile of the SAT math distribution. In this section, we investigate whether
gender differences in student performance are driven by professor gender per se, or whether they
might be driven by some other professor characteristic that is correlated with professor gender. For
example, male and female students may respond differently to different teaching styles and teaching
styles may be correlated with, but not exclusive to, professor gender. In order to investigate this
possibility, we implement a two-step process: first, we estimate a student-gender-specific random
effect for each professor.22 This provides us with estimates of each professor’s “value added” for
both female and male students. Specifically, we estimate the following equation:

              Yicjst = φ1 + β1 F emalei + φ2 Xicst + (1 − F emalei )ξmj + F emalei ξf j + γct + icjst          (4)

where ξmj is the random effect measuring the value added of professor j for male students and ξf j
is the random effect measuring the value added of professor j for female students. All other terms
are defined as in equation (1).

                                                                                          ˆ As expected,
         Figure 5 shows the distribution of the gender-specific estimated random effects, ξ.
the distribution of the female-student-female-teacher effects (middle column) is to the right of the
distribution of female-student-male-teacher effects. These results reconfirm our previous finding
that, on average, female students perform better when their math and science courses are taught
by female faculty, but also make clear that many male professors are very effective at teaching
female students. In other words, student performance is correlated with professor gender, but not
exclusively. This pattern suggests that the mechanism through which professor gender operates is
more likely to be something like teaching style rather than “role modeling”.

         Our next step is to re-estimate the long-term outcome regressions, (equations (2) and (3)) while
    22
         For recent work estimating teacher value-added models see Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2005), Kane, Rockoff,
and Staiger (2008), Kane and Staiger (2008), Hoffmann and Oreopoulos (2009), and Carrell and West (2008).




                                                           17
                                                       ˆ as explanatory variables.
including the average of the estimated random effects, ξ,
                                          Pˆ                  Pˆ                   P
                                            ξf j                 ξmj                 F emalejt
                                                   j                           j                          j
  Yic0 js0 t0 = φ1 + β1 F emalei + β2 F emalei           + β3 F emalei                  + β4 F emalei
                                               nit                     nit                                     nit
                                   Pˆ                            Pˆ                                       P
                                      ξf j                         ξmj                                        F emalejt
                                       j                             j                                    j
            + β5 (1 − F emalei )              + β6 (1 − F emalei )                 + β7 (1 − F emalei )
                                        nit                              nit                                   nit
            + φ2 Xicst + γc0 s0 t0 + ic0 js0 t0
                                                                                                                          (5)

This equation allows us to investigate whether students’ long term outcomes are affected by profes-
sors who have high “male or female value-added,” conditional on professor gender. In other words,
we can separately estimate the impact of professor “quality” from the impact of professor gender
itself. We present results for this analysis in Table 8. Column 1 shows that the male and female
“value-added” variables are strong predictors of student performance in mandatory follow-on STEM
courses even though we control for professor gender. Furthermore, the sign of the value-added es-
timates depend on the gender of the student. Among female students, the estimates suggest that
a 1-standard deviation increase in initial course female-student professor value-added results in a
0.110 (0.110 = 2.554 ∗ 0.043) standard deviation increase in follow-on course grades. Conversely,
female students appear to respond negatively to professors with high male-student professor value-
added. A 1-standard deviation increase in the initial course male-student professor value-added
effect results in a 0.030 (−0.030 = −0.492 ∗ 0.060) standard deviation decrease in follow-on course
grades.

   What these results tell us is that, on average, male and female students respond differently to
introductory math and science instruction, regardless of the professor’s gender. The estimates in
Columns 4 and 7 indicate that the relationship between initial course value-added and follow-on
course performance is just as strong among high ability students. In addition, when the value-added
estimates are included, the magnitude of the estimated coefficient on the proportion female faculty
variable is much smaller (for female students) than the estimated coefficients shown in Table 5.
Thus, it appears that the influence of female professors on their female students’ future math and
science performance operates largely through environmental factors (rather than role models) that
affect students’ initial class performance. These factors are correlated with, but are not exclusive
to, professor gender.

   The remaining columns in Table 8 show how teacher value-added affects students’ future deci-
sions. Our main finding is that these measures strongly predict high ability students’ (both male
and female) probability of graduating with a STEM degree. Column 9, for example, indicates

                                                        18
that a 1-standard deviation increase in female-student value-added increases the probability that
a female student graduates with a STEM degree by 6.3 percentage points (0.063 = 1.704 ∗ 0.037).
At the same time, including the teacher value-added variables reduces, but does not eliminate, the
estimated importance of professor gender. Thus the gender of the introductory course professor
continues to have a marginally significant effect on high ability female students’ longer-run STEM
trajectories.


7.2    The Influence of Professor Gender in Follow-on Courses

We have seen evidence that female students’ paths into math and science careers are influenced by
the sex of the professors who teach their initial math and science courses. Table 4 shows that at least
part of the mechanism through which the influence of professor gender operates is through its effect
on female students’ initial course performance. Table 9, however, shows that it is only the gender
of professors in introductory courses that matter. When we estimate the effect of professor gender
in mandatory follow-on math and science courses on own course grades, whether the student takes
higher level math, and whether the student graduates with a degree in STEM, we find that none of
the estimated interaction terms are statistically different from zero, most are small in magnitude,
and a few are in the opposite direction from our earlier estimates. This suggests that classroom
environment has its strongest influence early in the college career.



8     Conclusion

Why aren’t there more women in science careers? If we want to know the answer to this question
then we need to understand what happens to women in college. College is a critical juncture in
the life-cycle, and in spite of the fact that men and women enter college with similar levels of math
preparation, women have substantially lower probabilities of majoring in science or engineering than
their male counterparts. This, in turn, closes the door to many careers in science and technology.

    The goal of this paper has been to shed light on how women’s paths towards science are affected
by the college environment, focusing on the role of professor gender. Unlike previous research on this
topic, we are blessed with experimental conditions that ensure our estimates are uncontaminated by
self-selection and attrition problems. This is possible because the campus that we study randomly
assigns students to professors over a wide variety of mandatory standardized courses. A further
advantage of our data is that course grades are not determined by an individual student’s professor.



                                                  19
   The unique nature of our data allows us to document a number of interesting patterns. First,
we find that compared to men with the same entering math ability, female students perform sub-
stantially less well in their introductory math and science courses. This is a new fact that is only
knowable because of the mandatory nature of introductory math and science courses at the USAFA.
We document a gender gap in most other dimensions of STEM success, as well. Second, we find that
the gender gap is mitigated considerably when female students have female professors. Conversely,
professor gender seems to be irrelevant in the humanities. Third, we find that the effect of female
professors on female students is largest among students with high math ability. In particular, we
find that among students in the upper quartile of the SAT math distribution, being assigned to a
female professor eliminates the gender gap in introductory course grades and science majors. This
is and important finding because these are precisely the women whom we would like to keep in
science. We also find that professor gender has minimal effects on male students’ outcomes.

   This research raises a number of interesting questions about why professor gender is important,
particularly at the top of the ability distribution. Do female professors serve as role models? Do
they teach in ways that female students find more accessible? Are they more encouraging of their
female students? We have begun to investigate these questions by looking at the distribution of each
professor’s gender-specific, average value-added. We find that professor value-added is correlated
with professor gender, but is not exclusive to it. This suggests that role model effects are unlikely
to be the primary reason that professor gender matters. In future research, we hope to investigate
whether there are observable characteristics of male and female teachers that can help explain
this phenomenon. While this is not possible with our current data, it would provide invaluable
information to policymakers who seek to improve women’s representation in science.



References

Altonji, J. B., and R. Blank (1999): “Race and Gender in the Labor Market,” in Handbook of
  Labor Economics, ed. by O. Ashenfelter, and D. Card, vol. 3c, pp. 3144–3259. Elsevier.

Arnold, K. (1995): Lives of Promise: What Becomes of High School Valedictorians: A Fourteen-
  year Study of Achievement and Life Choices. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA.

Aronson, J., M. J. Lustina, C. Good, K. Keough, C. M. Steele, and J. Brown (1999):
  “When White Men Can’t Do Math: Necessary and Sufficient Factors in Stereotype Threat,”
  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 35(1), 29 46.



                                                 20
Badgett, M. V. L., and N. Folbre (2003): “Job Gendering: Occupational Choice and the
  Marriage Market,” Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society, 42(2), 270–298.

Barron, J. M., B. T. Ewing, and G. R. Waddell (2000): “The Effects of High School Par-
  ticipation on Education and Labor Market Outcomes,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
  82(3), 409–421.

Bettinger, E., and B. T. Long (2005): “Do Faculty Serve as Role Models? The Impact of
  Instructor Gender on Female Students,” American Economic Review, 95(2), 152–157.

Betz, N. (1997): “What Stops Women and Minorities from Choosing and Completing Majors
  in Science and Engineering?,” in Minorities and Girls in School: Effects on Achievement and
  Performance, ed. by D. Johnson, and D. H. Johnson, pp. 105–140. Sage Publications.

Betz, N. E., and G. Hackett (1981): “The Relationship of Career-Related Self-Efficacy Ex-
  pectations to Perceived Career Options in College Women and Men,” Journal of Counseling
  Psychology, 28(5), 399–410.

         (1983): “The Relationship of Mathematics Self-Efficacy Expectations to the Selection of
  Science-Based College Majors,” Journal of Vocational Behavior, 23(3), 329–345.

Beyer, S. (1997): “Gender Differences in the Accuracy of Self-Evaluations of Performance,” Per-
  sonality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23(1), 960–970.

Beyer, S., and E. M. Bowden (1997): “Gender Differences in Self-Perceptions: Convergent Ev-
  idence from Three Measures of Accuracy and Bias,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
  23(1), 157–172.

Black, S. L., and P. E. Strahan (2001): “The Division of Spoils: Rent-sharing and discrimi-
  nation in a regulated industry,” American Economic Review, 91(4), 814–831.

Blakemore, A. E., and S. A. Low (1984): “Sex Differences in Occupational Selection: The
  Case of College Majors,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 66(1), 157–163.

Blau, F. D., and L. M. Kahn (2000): “Gender Differences in Pay,” The Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 14(4), 75–99.

Boggiano, A. K., D. S. Main, and P. A. Katz (1988): “Children’s Preference for Challenge:
  The Role of Perceived Competence and Control,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
  54(1), 134–141.


                                               21
Brown, C., and M. Corcoran (1997): “Sex-Based Differences in School Content and the Male-
  Female Wage Gap,” Journal of Labor Economics, 15(3), 431–465.

Canes, B., and H. Rosen (1995): “Following in Her Footsteps? Faculty Gender Composition
  and Womens Choices of College Majors,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 48(3), 486–504.

Carrell, S. E., R. L. Fullerton, and J. E. West (2008): “Does Your Cohort Matter?
  Estimating Peer Effects in College Achievement,” Working Paper 14032, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Carrell, S. E., and J. E. West (2008): “Does Professor Quality Matter? Evidence from Ran-
  dom Assignment of Students to Professors,” Working Paper 14081, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Carrington, B., P. Tymms, and C. Merrell (2005): “Forget Gender: Whether a Teacher
  is Male or Female Doesn’t Matter,” in Teacher, vol. 11. Australian Council for Educational
  Research.

         (2008): “Role Models, School Improvement and the ’Gender Gap’: Do Men Bring Out
  the Best in Boys and Women the Best in Girls?,” British Educational Research Journal, 34(3),
  315–327.

Cutrona, C. E., V. Cole, N. Colangelo, S. G. Assouline, and D. W. Russell (1994):
  “Perceived Parental Social Support and Academic Achievement: An Attachment Theory Per-
  spective,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66(2), 369–378.

Dee, T. S. (2005): “A Teacher Like Me: Does Race, Ethnicity, or Gender Matter?,” American
  Economic Review, 95(2), 158–165.

         (2007): “Teachers and the Gender Gaps in Student Achievement,” J. Human Resources,
  42(3), 528–554.

DiPrete, T. A., and C. Buchmann (2006): “Gender-Specific Trends in the Value of Education
  and the Emerging Gender Gap in College Completion,” Demography, 43(1), 1–24.

Eccles, J. S. (1987): “Gender Roles and Women’s Achievement-Related Decisions,” Psychology
  of Women Quarterly, 11(2), 135–172.

Eckel, C. C., and P. J. Grossman (2008): “The Difference in the Economic Decisions of Men
  and Women: Experimental Evidence,” in Handbook of Experimental Economics Results, ed. by
  C. Plott, and V. Smith, vol. 1. Elsevier.

                                               22
Ehrenberg, R. G., D. D. Goldhaber, and D. J. Brewer (1995): “Do Teachers’ Race, Gender,
  and Ethnicity Matter? Evidence from the National Educational Longitudinal Study of 1988,”
  Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 48(3), 547–561.

Eide, E. (1994): “College Major Choice and Changes in the Gender Wage Gap,” Contemporary
  Economic Policy, 12(2), 55–64.

Elliot, A. J., and J. M. Harackiewicz (1994): “Goal Setting, Achievement Orientation, and
  Intrinsic Motivation: A Mediational Analysis,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
  66(5), 968–980.

Elliott, E. S., and C. S. Dweck (1988): “Goals: An approach to motivation and achievement,”
  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54(1), 5–12.

Feingold, A. (1988): “Does Cognitive Gender Differences are Disappearing,” American Psychol-
  ogist, 43(2), 95–103.

Friedman, L. (1989): “Mathematics and the Gender Gap: A Meta-Analysis of Recent Studies on
  Sex Differences in Mathematical Tasks,” Review of Educational Research, 59(2), 185–213.

Goldin, C., L. Katz, and I. Kuziemko (2006): “The Homecoming of American College Women:
  The Reversal of the College Gender Gap,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(4), 133–156.

Goldin, C., and C. Rouse (2000): “Orchestrating Impartiality: The Impact of “Blind Auditions
  on Female Musicians,” American Economic Review, 90(4), 715–742.

Hall, R. M., and B. R. Sandler (1982): “The Classroom Climate: A Chilly One for Women?,”
  Report 1982-02-00, Association of American Colleges.

Hanson, S. L. (1996): “Lost Talent: Women in the Sciences,” Report, Temple University Press.

Harackiewicz, J. M., and A. J. Elliot (1993): “Achievement Goals and Intrinsic Motivation,”
  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65(5), 904–915.

Hodge, R. W., P. M. Siegel, and P. H. Rossi (1964): “Occupational Prestige in the United
  States, 1925-63,” American Journal of Sociology, 70(3), 286.

Hoffmann, F., and P. Oreopoulos (2007): “A Professor Like Me: The Influence of Instructor
  Gender on College Achievement,” Working Paper 13182, National Bureau of Economic Research.

         (2009): “Professor Qualities and Student Achievement,” Review of Economics and Statis-
  tics, 91(1), 83–92.

                                               23
Holmlund, H., and K. Sund (2007): “Is the Gender Gap in School Performance Affected by the
  Sex of the Teacher,” Labour Economics, 15(1), 37–53.

Hyde, J. S. (1981): “How Large are Cognitive Gender Differences? A Meta-Analysis using !w2
  and d,” American Psychologist, 36(8), 892–901.

Hyde, J. S. (1997): “Gender Differences in Math Performance: Not Big, Not Biological,” in
  Women, Men, and Gender: Ongoing Debates, ed. by M. R. Walsh, pp. 283–287. Yale University
  Press.

Hyde, J. S., E. Fennema, and S. J. Lamon (1990): “Gender Differences in Mathematics
  Performance: A Meta-Analysis,” Psychological Bulletin, 107(2), 139–155.

Jacobs, J. A. (1996): “Gender Inequality and Higher Education,” Annual Review of Sociology,
  22(1), 153–185.

Kahle, J. B., and M. L. Matyas (1987): “Equitable Science and Mathematics Education: A
  Discrepancy Model,” in Women: Their Underrepresentation and Career Differentials in Science
  and Engineering, ed. by L. S. Dix, vol. 3c. National Academy Press.

Kane, T. J., J. E. Rockoff, and D. O. Staiger (2008): “What does certification tell us about
  teacher effectiveness? Evidence from New York City,” Economics of Education Review, 27(6),
  615 631.

Kane, T. J., and D. O. Staiger (2008): “Estimating Teacher Impacts on Student Achievement:
  An Experimental Evaluation,” Working Paper 14607, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lahelma, E. (2000): “Lack of Male Teachers: A Problem for Students or Teachers?,” Pedagogy,
  Culture and Society, 8(2), 173–186.

Lapan, R. T., P. Shaughnessy, and K. Boggs (1996): “Efficacy Expectations and Vocational
  Interests as Mediators between Sex and Choice of Math/Science College Majors: A Longitudinal
  Study,” Journal of Vocational Behavior, 49(3), 277 291.

Lavy, V., and A. Schlosser (2007): “Does Being with More Girls in School Improve Students
  Human Capital Outcomes and Behavior? Evidence on Effects and Mechanisms,” unpublished
  manuscript.

Leahey, E., and G. Guo (2001): “Gender Differences in Mathematical Trajectories,” Social
  Forces, 80(2), 713–732.


                                              24
Leslie, L. L., G. T. McClure, and R. L. Oaxaca (1998): “Women and Minorities in Science
  and Engineering. A Life Sequence Analysis,” Journal of Higher Education, 69(3), 239–276.

Linn, M. C., and J. S. Hyde (1989): “Gender, Mathematics, and Science,” Educational Re-
  searcher, 18(8), 17–27.

Lunneborg, P. W. (1982): “Role Model Influences of Nontraditional Professional Women,” Jour-
  nal of Vocational Behavior, 20(3), 276–281.

Margolis, J., and A. Fisher (2002): Unlocking the Clubhouse: Women in Computing. The MIT
  Press, Cambridge, MA.

National Bureau of Economic Research (2006): “Diversifying the Science and Engineering
  Workforce: Women, Underrepresented Minorities, and Their Science and Engineering Careers,”
  http://www.nber.org/sewp/events/2005.01.14/Agenda-1-14-05-WEB.htm.

National Science Foundation (1904): “Women, Minorities, and Persons with Disabilities in
  Science and Engineering: 1994,” Discussion Paper NSF 94-333, National Science Foundation,
  Division of Science Resources Studies.

         (2006): “Science and Engineering Degrees: 1966-2004,” Discussion Paper NSF 07-307,
  National Science Foundation, Division of Science Resources Statistics.

Neumark, D., and R. Gardecki (1998): “Women Helping Women? Role Model and Mentoring
  Effects on Female Ph.D. Students in Economics,” Journal of Human Resources, 33(1), 220–46.

Niederle, M., and A. H. Yestrumskas (2008): “Gender Differences in Seeking Challenges:
  The Role of Institutions,” Working Paper 13922, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Nixon, L. A., and M. D. Robinson (1999): “The Educational Attainment of Young Women:
  Role Model Effects of Female High School Faculty,” Demography, 36(2), 185–194.

Nowell, A., and L. V. Hedges (1998): “Trends in Gender Differences in Academic Achievement
  from 1960 to 1994: An Analysis of Differences in Mean, Variance, and Extreme Scores,” Sex
  Roles: A Journal of Research, 39(1-2), 21–43.

Polachek, S. W. (1978): “Sex differences in college major,” Industrial and Labor Relations
  Review, 31(4), 498–508.

Reskin, B. F. (1984): Sex Segregation in the Workplace: Trends, Explanations, Remedies. National
  Academy Press.

                                                25
Reskin, B. F., H. I. Hartmann, National Research Council Committee on Womens
  Employment and Related Social Issues, N. R. C. C. on Behavioral, S. Sciences, and
  Education (1986): Womens Work, Mens Work: Sex Segregation on the Job. National Academy
  Press.

Rivkin, S. G., E. A. Hanushek, and J. F. Kain (2005): “Teachers, Schools and Academic
  Achievement,” Econometrica, 73(2), 417–58.

Rothstein, D. S. (1995): “Do Female Faculty Influence Female Students Educational and Labor
  Market Attainments?,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 48(3), 515–30.

Seymour, E., and N. M. Hewitt (2000): Talking About Leaving: Why Undergraduates Leave
  the Sciences. Westview Press, 2 edn.

Spencer, S. J., C. M. Steele, and D. M. Quinn (1999): “Stereotype Threat and Womens
  Math Performance,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 35(1), 4–28.

Stake, J. E., and C. R. Granger (1978): “Same-Sex and Opposite-Sex Teacher Model Influ-
  ences on Science Career Commitment Among High School Students,” Journal of Educational
  Psychology, 70(2), 180–186.

Steele, C. M. (1997): “A Threat in the Air: How Stereotypes Shape Intellectual Identity and
  Performance,” American Psychologist, 52(6), 613–629.

Steele, C. M., and J. Aronson (1995): “Stereotype Threat and the Intellectual Test Perfor-
  mance of African Americans,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69(5), 797–811.

Tobias, S. (1993): Overcoming Math Anxiety. W. W. Norton and Company, New York, NY.

Tobias, S., and H. Lin (1991): “They’re Not Dumb, They’re Different: Stalking the Second
  Tier,” American Journal of Physics, 59(12), 1155–1157.

Ware, N. C., and V. E. Lee (1988): “Sex Differences in Choice of College Science Majors,”
  American Educational Research Journal, 25(4), 593–614.

Weinberger, C. J. (1998): “Race and Gender Wage Gaps in the Market for Recent College
  Graduates,” Industrial Relations, 37(1), 67–84.

           (1999): “Mathematical College Majors and the Gender Gap in Wages,” Industrial Rela-
  tions, 38(3), 407–413.



                                               26
        (2001): “Is Teaching More Girls More Math the Key to Higher Wages?,” in Squaring Up:
  Policy Strategies to Raise Womens Incomes in the U.S., ed. by M. C. King. The University of
  Michigan Press.

        (2006): “Economists’ Perspective on College Educated Women in the Information Tech-
  nology Workforce,” in Encyclopedia of Gender and Information Technology, ed. by E. M. Trauth.
  Idea Group Publishing.

Xie, Y., and K. A. Shauman (2003): Women in Science: Career Processes and Outcomes.
  Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Zafar, B. (2009): “College Major Choice and the Gender Gap,” Working Paper.




                                              27
Figure 1: Distribution of Academic Pre-treatment Measures by Gender




                                28
Figure 2: Math and Science Courses: Distribution of Female Student Pre-treatment Characteristics
by Professor Gender




                                              29
Figure 3: Humanities Courses: Distribution of Female Student Pre-treatment Characteristics by
Professor Gender




                                             30
             Figure 4: Unconditional Mean Performance by Student and Professor Gender
                                                Section A: Math & Science Introductory Course Grades
                    Full Sample                                                SAT Math > 660                                             SAT Math > 700
0.05                                                       0.4                                                          0.60            Text

   0                                        0.021
                                   0.012                                                                                       0.501                       0.504
        -0.072   -0.151                                    0.3      0.326                              0.316            0.45                                       0.485
                                                                                             0.309
-0.05                                                                                                                                    0.380
                                                           0.2              0.221                                       0.30
-0.10

                                                           0.1                                                          0.15
-0.15


-0.20                                                       0                                                             0
        Female Students            Male Students                   Female Students           Male Students                     Female Students             Male Students

                                                                 Female Professors                   Male Professors


                                                    Section B: Math & Science Follow-on Course Grades
                   Full Sample                                                SAT Math > 660                                              SAT Math > 700
   0                                                      0.4                                                          0.470            Text
        -0.021   -0.072           -0.015    -0.005                                                                             0.461
                                                                                                                                                       0.417       0.421
                                                                   0.342
-0.02                                                     0.3                                                          0.353             0.382

                                                                                          0.255        0.257
-0.04                                                     0.2               0.226                                      0.235


-0.06                                                     0.1                                                          0.118


-0.08                                                       0                                                             0
        Female Students            Male Students                   Female Students           Male Students                     Female Students             Male Students

                                                                 Female Professors                   Male Professors


                                                           Section C: Take Higher Level Math
                    Full Sample                                             SAT Math > 660
                                                         0.700                                                                            SAT Math > 700
0.500                                                                                                                    0.8            Text

                                   0.447                                                     0.604     0.619                                                       0.707
                                            0.436                                                                                                          0.686
0.375                                                    0.525                                                           0.6
                                                                    0.505
                                                                            0.456                                               0.534
         0.309                                           0.350                                                                           0.471
0.250            0.278                                                                                                   0.4


0.125                                                    0.175                                                           0.2


    0                                                        0                                                             0
        Female Students            Male Students                   Female Students           Male Students                     Female Students             Male Students

                                                                 Female Professors                   Male Professors



                                           Section D: Graduate with a Math, Science, or Engineering Major
                    Full Sample                                               SAT Math > 660                                              SAT Math > 700
  0.4                                                    0.500                                                          0.60            Text
                                                                                             0.476     0.489
                                   0.359                                                                                                                   0.549   0.551
                                            0.346
  0.3                                                    0.375                                                          0.45
                                                                    0.385
                                                                                                                                0.420
                                                                            0.323
  0.2    0.213                                           0.250                                                          0.30
                 0.196                                                                                                                   0.305


  0.1                                                    0.125                                                          0.15


    0                                                        0                                                             0
        Female Students            Male Students                   Female Students           Male Students                     Female Students             Male Students

                                                                 Female Professors                   Male Professors




                                                                                31
Figure 5: Distribution of Professor Value-Added by Student and Professor Gender




                                      32
                                               Table 1: Comparison Schools
                                              Percent       SAT Verbal               SAT Math             2007      Percent
                                                                                                      Undergraduate
                                              Female      25th         75th     25th       75th                     Admitted
                                                                                                       Enrollment
Kettering University                              14.9       510         630         600        690           2,178     23.0
Air Force Academy                                 18.6       590         670         620        700           4,461     14.0
Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology               20.6       560         680         630        710           1,936     69.7
Rennselaer Polytechnic Institute                  26.6       600         690         650        730           5,146     49.4
Georgia Tech                                      28.6       590         690         650        730          17,936     28.0
California Institute of Technology                30.6       700         780         770        800             913     16.9
Virginia Tech                                     41.6       530         630         570        670          23,041     67.1
Case-Western Reserve University                   42.3       580         690         620        720           4,207     74.7
UCLA                                              44.7       570         680         610        720          25,928     25.8
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign        46.9       550         670         640        740          31,472     71.0
University of Michigan                            50.3       590         690         630        730          25,555     50.3
UC San Diego                                      52.6       540         660         600        700          22,048     45.6
University of Virginia                            55.8       590         700         610        720          15,078     35.2
UNC Chapel Hill                                   58.7       590         690         610        700          17,628     34.1
Notes: Data originally from National Center for Education Statistics (2007 - 2008)




                                                                  33
                                                     Table 2: Summary Statistics
                                                                     Female Students                     Male Students
Student-Level Variables                                      Observations Mean Std. Dev.       Observations    Mean Std. Dev.
Total Course Hours                                                 1,595     25.00   6.45             7,886     24.96    6.59
Math and Science Core Course Grades
                                                                   7,825      -0.10     0.99         37,949      0.02     1.00
(normalized course by semester)
English and History Core Course Grades
                                                                   5,680       0.08     0.99         28,882     -0.02     1.00
(normalized by course by semester)
Withdraw in First Year                                             1,595       0.05     0.23          7,886      0.06     0.24
Withdraw in First or Second Year                                   1,595       0.13     0.34          7,886      0.15     0.36
Take Higher Level Math Elective                                    1,595       0.34     0.47          7,886      0.50     0.50
Take Higher Level Humanities Elective                              1,595       0.26     0.44          7,886      0.23     0.42
Graduate                                                           1,595       0.84     0.36          7,886      0.81     0.39
Graduate with a Math, Science or Engineering Degree                1,595       0.40     0.49          7,886      0.45     0.50
Graduate with a Math, Science or Engineering Degree
                                                                   1,595       0.24     0.43          7,886      0.40     0.49
(excludes biological sciences)
Graduate with a Humanities Degree                                  1,595       0.10     0.30          7,886      0.07     0.26
Proportion Female Professors (Introductory Math & Science)         1,576       0.23     0.28          7,757      0.23     0.28
Proportion Female Professors (Introductory Humanities)             1,502       0.16     0.28          7,514      0.15     0.27
SAT Verbal                                                         1,595     636.51    66.67          7,886    629.22    64.39
SAT Math                                                           1,595     648.45    59.71          7,886    664.90    61.14
Academic Composite                                                 1,595    1306.96   196.97          7,885   1258.61   216.70
Algebra/Trigonometry Placement Score                               1,586      59.34    19.24          7,832     62.36    19.39
Leadership Composite                                               1,594      17.67     1.92          7,878     17.25     1.83
Fitness Score                                                      1,593       4.70     0.92          7,884      4.88     0.95
Black                                                              1,595       0.07     0.26          7,886      0.05     0.22
Hispanic                                                           1,595       0.08     0.27          7,886      0.07     0.25
Asian                                                              1,595       0.07     0.26          7,886      0.04     0.20
Recruited Athlete                                                  1,595       0.32     0.47          7,886      0.26     0.44
Attended Preparatory School                                        1,595       0.16     0.37          7,886      0.21     0.41

Math, Physics, and Chemistry Courses                                Female Professors                   Male Professors
Professor-Level Variables                                    Observations Mean Std. Dev.       Observations    Mean Std. Dev.
Number of Sections Per Instructor                                      47     6.15    4.51              204      4.68    3.37
Instructor is a Lecturer                                               47     0.57    0.50              202      0.42    0.49
Instructor is an Assistant Professor                                   47     0.30    0.46              202      0.37    0.48
Instructor is an Associate Professor                                   47     0.09    0.28              202      0.09    0.29
Instructor is a Full Professor                                         47     0.04    0.20              202      0.12    0.33
Instructor has a Terminal Degree                                       47     0.28    0.45              202      0.42    0.50
Instructor's Teaching Experience                                       47     3.17    3.16              202      4.77    6.03
Class-Level Variables                                        Observations   Mean Std. Dev.     Observations   Mean Std. Dev.
Class Size                                                           289     19.17    3.10              955    18.94    3.92
Average Number of Female Students                                    289      3.32    1.83              955     3.26    1.98
Average Class SAT Verbal                                             289    625.03   22.48              955   625.38   26.86
Average Class SAT Math                                               289    653.07   28.71              955   650.62   32.38
Average Class Academic Composite                                     289     12.47    0.88              955    12.38    1.02
Average Class Algebra/Trig Score                                     289     57.90   11.96              955    56.42   12.09

English and History Courses                                         Female Professors                   Male Professors
Professor-Level Variables                                    Observations Mean Std. Dev.       Observations    Mean Std. Dev.
Number of Sections Per Instructor                                      24     6.96    5.74               88      8.95    7.43
Instructor is a Lecturer                                               24     0.54    0.51               88      0.52    0.50
Instructor is an Assistant Professor                                   24     0.42    0.50               88      0.33    0.47
Instructor is an Associate Professor                                   24     0.00    0.00               88      0.07    0.25
Instructor is a Full Professor                                         24     0.04    0.20               88      0.08    0.27
Instructor has a Terminal Degree                                       24     0.17    0.38               88      0.32    0.47
Instructor's Teaching Experience                                       24     3.35    3.31               88      4.42    5.04
Class-Level Variables                                        Observations   Mean Std. Dev.     Observations   Mean Std. Dev.
Class Size                                                           167     15.17    4.83              788    16.15    3.87
Average Number of Female Students                                    167      2.58    1.82              788     2.59    1.73
Average Class SAT Verbal                                             167    622.88   28.28              788   627.68   27.91
Average Class SAT Math                                               167    658.89   28.39              788   662.11   27.20
Average Class Academic Composite                                     167     12.75    0.94              788    12.64    0.96
Average Class Algebra/Trig Score                                     167     61.67    8.54              788    61.90    8.03




                                                                       34
      Table 3: Randomness Check Regressions of Faculty Gender on Student Characteristics
Sample                               All Students                      Female Students
                                  Female Female             SAT        SAT       Academic      Total = Algebra/Trig
Dependent Variable
                                  Student Student           Math      Verbal Composite SAT +AC Placement
Specification                         1          2            3          4            5            6            7
                                   0.006      0.005        -1.462    -4.688*        9.682       3.532         0.405
Math and Science Courses
                                  (0.006) (0.006)         (2.393) (2.784)          (8.281)     (10.61)       (0.679)
 Observations                     23,630     23,455        4,076      4,076         4,076       4,076         4,056
                                   0.015      0.012        -0.679 -8.626** 24.250**            14.944         1.273
Humanities Courses
                                  (0.009) (0.009)         (3.484) (3.601)         (11.432)    (14.355)       (1.136)
 Observations                     15,261     15,132        2,471      2,471         2,471       2,471         2,458
Mean and Std Dev of                      0.168              642.3     630.5        1,292.9     2,565.6
                                                                                                         56.6 (18.9)
Dependent Variable                      (0.374)            (58.4)     (65.4)       (197.2)     (243.6)
Individual Control Variables         No         Yes          No         No           No           No           No
Notes: Each cell represents results for separate regression where the independent variable is an indicator variable
for female faculty and the dependent variable is listed above. All specifications include a course by semester by
year fixed effect. Individual control variables in Specification 2 include SAT verbal, SAT math, academic
composite, algebra/trig placement score, leadership composite, fitness score, and indicator variables for black,
Hispanic, Asian, recruited athlete, and attended a preparatory school. Standard errors are clustered at the course
by semester by section level. * Significant at the 0.10 level, ** Significant at the 0.05 level, *** Significant at the
0.01 level.




                                                               35
Table 4: Math and Science Introductory Course Professor Gender Effects on Initial Course Perfor-
mance
                                                                                  SAT Math > 660                 SAT Math > 700
Sample                                               All Students
                                                                                      (median)                      (75th pctile)
Specification                                      1              2                3             4                5               6
                                               -0.049*        -0.041**          -0.049        -0.015           -0.021           0.032
Female Professor
                                               (0.028)         (0.021)         (0.035)       (0.026)          (0.037)         (0.034)
                                              -0.156***                      -0.160***                      -0.169***
Female Student                                                   NA                             NA                               NA
                                               (0.021)                        (0.032)                        (0.043)
                                               0.100**         0.139**         0.125*          0.079         0.177**          0.169**
Female Student * Female Professor
                                               (0.045)         (0.034)        (0.071)        (0.058)         (0.079)          (0.069)
Observations                                    23,383          23,557          9,255          9,317           4,070            4,105
R2                                              0.2756          0.7586         0.2497        0.7685           0.2484           0.7746
Individual Fixed Effect                           No              Yes             No            Yes              No              Yes
Individual Controls                               Yes             No             Yes            No              Yes              No
Course by Semester Fixed Effects                  Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes
Graduation Class Fixed Effects                    Yes             No             Yes            No              Yes              No
Time of Day Dummies                               Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes
Notes: * Significant at the 0.10 level, ** Significant at the 0.05 level, *** Significant at the 0.01 level. Robust standard errors in
parentheses are clustered by instructor. All specifications control for the academic rank of the professor. Individual-level controls
include: SAT verbal, SAT math, academic composite, leadership composite, fitness score, algebra/trig placement score and
indicator variables for students who are black, Hispanic, Asian, female, recruited athlete, and attended a preparatory school.




                                                                 36
Table 5: Math and Science Introductory Course Professor Gender Effects on Longer Term Outcomes
Panel A. All Students
Specification                                  1                2                3              4              5
                                                           Follow-on                         Graduate with STEM
                                        Withdraw in                        Take Higher
Outcome                                                  STEM Course
                                        First 2-Years                      Level Math               Degree+
                                                          Performance
Proportion of Professors Female             0.013           -0.046*           -0.006          0.011          0.003
(Introductory Courses)                     (0.014)          (0.027)          (0.018)        (0.019)         (0.018)
                                            0.001          -0.058***        -0.136***      -0.034***       -0.129***
Female Student
                                           (0.013)          (0.023)          (0.016)        (0.017)         (0.016)
Female Student * Proportion of              -0.054            0.055            0.064         0.041           0.020
Professors Female                          (0.035)          (0.061)          (0.043)        (0.045)         (0.043)
Observations                                9,258            61,125            9,258         9,258           9,258
R2                                         0.0394            0.3179           0.2420         0.1716          0.1825

Panel B. SAT Math > 660 (median)
Specification                                  1                2                3              4               5
Proportion of Professors Female             0.003           -0.070**          -0.038         -0.004          -0.035
(Introductory Courses)                     (0.018)           (0.033)         (0.025)        (0.026)         (0.026)
                                            0.006           -0.075**        -0.166***      -0.059***       -0.174***
Female Student
                                           (0.019)           (0.033)         (0.026)        (0.027)         (0.027)
Female Student * Proportion of              -0.077          0.185**          0.127**        0.161**         0.143**
Professors Female                          (0.048)           (0.078)         (0.065)        (0.069)         (0.070)
Observations                                4,255            27,826            4,255         4,255           4,255
R2                                         0.0251            0.3415           0.1458         0.1066          0.1141

Panel C. SAT Math > 700 (75th pctile)
Specification                                  1                2                 3              4               5
Proportion of Professors Female             -0.011          -0.096**           -0.034          0.026           0.009
(Introductory Courses)                     (0.025)           (0.046)          (0.033)         (0.036)         (0.036)
                                             0.030          -0.112**        -0.239***       -0.079***      -0.269***
Female Student
                                           (0.028)           (0.051)          (0.037)         (0.041)         (0.041)
Female Student * Proportion of              -0.095          0.236**          0.204**           0.122        0.264***
Professors Female                          (0.068)           (0.116)          (0.090)         (0.098)         (0.100)
Observations                                 2,069           13,250            2,069           2,069           2,069
R 2                                         0.0123           0.4251           0.1226          0.0896          0.1033
Individual Controls                           Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
Graduation Class Fixed Effects                Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
Notes: * Significant at the 0.10 level, ** Significant at the 0.05 level, *** Significant at the 0.01 level. Individual-
level controls include: SAT verbal, SAT math, academic composite, leadership composite, fitness score,
algebra/trig placement score and indicator variables for students who are black, Hispanic, Asian, female, recruited
athlete, and attended a preparatory school. For Specification 2 standard errors are clustered by student and
include contemporaneous course section fixed effects.
+
  Specification 5 excludes biological sciences.




                                                          37
 Table 6: Robustness Checks: Math and Science Introductory Course Professor Gender Effects
Panel A. All Students
Specification/Dependent Variable          1           2          3
                                       0.100**     0.089**   0.092**
Initial Course Performance
                                       (0.045)     (0.045)    (0.042)
                                        0.055       0.076      0.060
Follow-on STEM Course Performance
                                       (0.061)     (0.073)    (0.061)
                                        0.064       0.044      0.070
Take Higher Level Math
                                       (0.043)     (0.049)    (0.044)
                                        0.020       0.004      0.027
Graduate with STEM Degree+             (0.043)     (0.047)    (0.044)

Panel B. SAT Math > 660 (median)
Specification/Dependent Variable                    1             2             3
                                                 0.125*        0.135*       0.135**
Initial Course Performance
                                                (0.071)       (0.081)       (0.067)
                                                0.185**        0.187*      0.221***
Follow-on STEM Course Performance
                                                (0.078)       (0.096)       (0.084)
                                                0.127**        0.124*        0.038*
Take Higher Level Math
                                                (0.065)       (0.070)       (0.073)
                                                0.143**       0.139**       0.150**
Graduate with STEM Degree+                      (0.070)       (0.066)       (0.070)

Panel C. SAT Math > 700 (75th pctile)
Specification/Dependent Variable                      1             2             3
                                                  0.177**         0.115       0.191**
Initial Course Performance
                                                  (0.079)        (0.092)      (0.081)
                                                  0.236**         0.101       0.271**
Follow-on STEM Course Performance
                                                  (0.116)        (0.132)      (0.122)
                                                  0.204**        0.156*       0.206**
Take Higher Level Math
                                                  (0.090)        (0.094)      (0.093)
                                                 0.264***        0.196*      0.268***
Graduate with STEM Degree+                        (0.100)        (0.104)      (0.104)
Individual Fixed Effect                              No            No            No
Individual Controls                                 Yes            No           Yes
Individual Controls * Female Student                 No            No           Yes
Notes: Each cell represent the coefficient for the Female Student * Female
Professor interaction variables as shown in Table 3-5. * Significant at the 0.10
level, ** Significant at the 0.05 level, *** Significant at the 0.01 level. Robust
standard errors in parentheses are clustered by instructor for course performance
outcomes.
+
  Excludes biological sciences.




                                                      38
              Table 7: English and History Introductory Course Professor Gender Effects
                                                                 Follow-on      Take Higher    Graduate with                    Graduate with
                                               Initial Course                                                   Take Higher        STEM
Outcome                                                           Course           Level        Humanities
                                                Performance                                                     Level Math
                                                                Performance     Humanities        Degree                           Degree+
 Panel A. All Students                                1               2               3               4               5                6
Proportion of Professors Female                   -0.128*          -0.038          -0.008          -0.008          0.015            -0.008
(Introductory Courses)                            (0.071)         (0.029)         (0.008)         (0.026)         (0.044)          (0.019)
                                                   -0.018          0.020           0.019          0.019**        -0.109***        -0.123***
Female Student
                                                  (0.037)         (0.047)         (0.013)         (0.009)         (0.014)          (0.015)
Female Student * Proportion of Professors          0.029           0.013           0.025            0.002         -0.086*           -0.035
Female                                            (0.073)         (0.112)         (0.041)         (0.017)         (0.044)          (0.044)
Observations                                      15,132          13,745           8,943            8,943          8,943             8,943
R2                                                0.1741          0.2874          0.0621           0.0276          0.2436           0.1849

  Panel B. SAT Math > 660 (Median)                   1                2              3                 4              5                6
Proportion of Professors Female                   -0.127*          -0.031          0.001            -0.009         -0.013           0.026
(Introductory Courses)                            (0.071)         (0.036)         (0.022)          (0.015)        (0.027)          (0.029)
                                                   0.053           0.043           0.008            0.018        -0.133***        -0.146***
Female Student
                                                  (0.046)         (0.054)         (0.019)          (0.012)        (0.023)          (0.024)
Female Student * Proportion of Professors          0.079           0.085           0.046            -0.022         -0.040           0.009
Female                                            (0.083)         (0.121)         (0.057)          (0.037)        (0.069)          (0.073)
Observations                                       6,998           6,441           4,252            4,252          4,252            4,252
R2                                                0.1948          0.3458          0.0351           0.0225          0.1439           0.1158

  Panel C. SAT Math > 700 (75th pctile)                1                2                3                4               5                6
Proportion of Professors Female                     -0.106            0.007           -0.002           -0.006          -0.010           -0.027
(Introductory Courses)                             (0.102)           (0.053)         (0.029)          (0.018)         (0.036)          (0.040)
                                                    0.028             0.049           0.003            -0.001       -0.174***         -0.205***
Female Student
                                                   (0.053)           (0.075)         (0.026)          (0.016)         (0.032)          (0.036)
Female Student * Proportion of Professors           0.075             0.185           0.104            0.045           -0.021           0.060
Female                                             (0.103)           (0.152)         (0.077)          (0.046)         (0.094)          (0.106)
Observations                                        3,407             3,165           2,106            2,106           2,106             2,106
R2                                                  0.2226           0.4661          0.0343           0.0171           0.1154           0.0992
Individual Fixed Effects                              No               No               No               No              No               No
Individual Controls                                   Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Notes: * Significant at the 0.10 level, ** Significant at the 0.05 level, *** Significant at the 0.01 level. For Specifications in column 1 & 2
the proportion female professor variable is an indicator for whether the professor is in the course is female. Columns 1 & 2 control for the
academic rank of the professor. Individual-level controls include: SAT verbal, SAT math, academic composite, leadership composite,
fitness score, algebra/trig placement score and indicator variables for students who are black, Hispanic, Asian, female, recruited athlete, and
attended a preparatory school.
+
  Excludes biological sciences.




                                                                    39
     Sample                                                                        All Students                          SAT Math > 660 (median)          SAT Math > 700 (75th pctile)
                                                                     Follow-on                         Follow-on                         Follow-on
                                                                                             Graduate                          Graduate                          Graduate
                                                                       STEM     Take Higher              STEM     Take Higher              STEM     Take Higher
     Outcome                                                                                with STEM                         with STEM                         with STEM
                                                                      Course    Level Math              Course    Level Math              Course    Level Math
                                                                                              Degree                            Degree                            Degree
                                                                    Performance                       Performance                       Performance
     Specification                                                        1              2             3             4              5              6             7             8              9
     Female Student Coefficients
                                                                      -0.056**      -0.133***     -0.128***      -0.065**       -0.171***     -0.179***       -0.082*      -0.266***     -0.293***
      Female Student
                                                                       (0.022)        (0.016)       (0.016)       (0.033)         (0.027)       (0.028)       (0.049)        (0.043)       (0.048)
                                                                      -0.492**         0.069         0.167         -0.465         -0.281         0.078         -0.448         0.524         0.892
      Initial Course Professor Value-Added for Male Students
                                                                       (0.244)       (0.186)       (0.186)        (0.311)        (0.266)       (0.282)        (0.543)       (0.517)       (0.573)
                                                                      2.554***        -0.135         0.272       2.355***          0.561       0.965**       2.844***         0.852      1.704***
      Initial Course Professor Value-Added for Female Students
                                                                       (0.359)       (0.271)       (0.272)        (0.423)        (0.376)       (0.398)        (0.999)       (0.818)       (0.907)
                                                                        0.009          0.060         0.026        0.125*          0.103*        0.129*        0.190*          0.110      0.321***
      Proportion of Professors Female
                                                                       (0.055)       (0.040)       (0.040)        (0.073)        (0.063)       (0.067)        (0.114)       (0.101)        (0.112)
     Male Student Coefficients
                                                                      0.451***      0.291***       0.276***      0.897***       0.393***      0.378***       1.490***      0.607***       0.371*
      Initial Course Professor Value-Added for Male Students
                                                                       (0.127)       (0.088)        (0.088)       (0.138)        (0.108)       (0.114)        (0.239)       (0.194)       (0.216)
                                                                        -0.148        -0.066       -0.252**        -0.325         -0.014        -0.213         -0.625        0.128         -0.195
      Initial Course Professor Value-Added for Female Students
                                                                       (0.182)       (0.126)        (0.126)       (0.198)        (0.150)       (0.159)        (0.424)       (0.342)       (0.379)
                                                                        -0.038        -0.001         0.009        -0.064*         -0.039        -0.026        -0.085*      -0.082**        -0.019
      Proportion of Professors Female
                                                                       (0.026)       (0.018)        (0.018)       (0.034)        (0.026)       (0.027)        (0.051)       (0.041)       (0.045)
     Observations                                                      60,863         9,207          9,207        26,049          3,940         3,940          9,472         1,451         1,451
     R2                                                                0.3190        0.2414         0.1822        0.3473         0.1484        0.1172         0.4787        0.1457        0.1232




40
     Notes: * Significant at the 0.10 level, ** Significant at the 0.05 level, *** Significant at the 0.01 level. Individual-level controls include: SAT verbal, SAT math, academic composite,
     leadership composite, fitness score, algebra/trig placement score and indicator variables for students who are black, Hispanic, Asian, female, recruited athlete, and attended a preparatory
     school. For Specification 1,4, and 7 standard errors are clustered by student and include contemporaneous course section fixed effects.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Table 8: Math and Science Introductory Course Professor Value-Added Effects by Student Gender
Table 9: Math and Science Follow-on Course Professor Gender Effects on Subsequent Course Taking
and Choice of Major
Panel A. All Students
Specification                                      1                 2                 3
                                                               Take Higher      Graduate with
Outcome                                    Grade in Course
                                                               Level Math       STEM Degree    +



                                                0.020              0.015            0.006
Female Professor
                                               (0.030)           (0.007)           (0.009)
                                              -0.057***         -0.128***         -0.130***
Female Student
                                               (0.022)            (0.011)          (0.009)
                                                 0.011            -0.004            -0.010
Female Student * Female Professor
                                               (0.041)           (0.019)           (0.018)
Observations                                    20,952            20,952            20,952
R2                                              0.2528            0.2316            0.1860

Panel B. SAT Math > 660 (median)
Specification                                      1                  2                3
                                                               Take Higher      Graduate with
Outcome                                    Grade in Course
                                                               Level Math       STEM Degree    +



                                                 0.024             0.009           -0.0001
Female Professor
                                                (0.032)           (0.011)          (0.014)
                                               -0.088**         -0.134***         -0146***
Female Student
                                                (0.034)          (0.019)           (0.016)
                                                 0.077             -0.011           -0.022
Female Student * Female Professor
                                                (0.064)          (0.044)           (0.041)
Observations                                     8,759             8,759            8,759
R2                                              0.2334            0.1589           0.1372

Panel C. SAT Math > 700 (75th pctile)
Specification                                      1                   2                 3
                                                                Take Higher      Graduate with
Outcome                                    Grade in Course
                                                                 Level Math      STEM Degree   +



                                                 0.016              -0.002            -0.013
Female Professor
                                                (0.037)            (0.015)           (0.018)
                                               -0.095**          -0.198***         -0.208***
Female Student
                                                (0.048)            (0.029)           (0.028)
                                                 -0.001             -0.017            -0.062
Female Student * Female Professor
                                                (0.077)            (0.044)           (0.046)
Observations                                     3,951              3,951             3,951
R2                                              0.2349             0.1539            0.1436
Individual Fixed Effect                            No                 No                No
Individual Controls                               Yes                Yes               Yes
Course by Semester Fixed Effects                  Yes                Yes               Yes
Graduation Class Fixed Effects                    Yes                Yes               Yes
Time of Day Dummies                               Yes                Yes               Yes
Notes: * Significant at the 0.10 level, ** Significant at the 0.05 level, *** Significant at the
0.01 level. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by instructor. All
specifications control for the academic rank of the professor. Individual-level controls
include: SAT verbal, SAT math, academic composite, leadership composite, fitness score,
algebra/trig placement score and indicator variables for students who are black, Hispanic,
Asian, female, recruited athlete, and attended a preparatory school.
+
  Excludes biological sciences.



                                                                   41
